HR 2511 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2511
To direct the President to develop a comprehensive safety program to ensure the
quality and wholesomeness of all fish products intended for human consumption
in the United States.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
May 25, 1989
Mr. STUDDS (for himself and Mr. YOUNG of Alaska) introduced the following
bill; which was referred to the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries
A BILL
To direct the President to develop a comprehensive safety program to ensure the
quality and wholesomeness of all fish products intended for human consumption
in the United States.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Consumer Seafood Safety Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds and declares the following:
 (1) Seafood constitutes an important component of the Nation's food
 supply. Domestic and imported fish products are consumed throughout the
 Nation, and are harvested and marketed by a large, diverse commercial
 industry.
 (2) Heightened awareness of the health benefits associated with seafood
 and greater diversity of fish products have raised consumption rates and
 increased the demand for wholesome, high quality seafood.
 (3) The sale of poor quality, unwholesome, contaminated, adulterated,
 mislabeled, or deceptively packaged products is hazardous to the consumer
 and detrimental to the commercial fishing industry and interstate and
 foreign commerce.
 (4) Current systems of inspection and monitoring are insufficient to
 ensure public confidence in the wholesomeness, safety, and quality of all
 fish products.
 (5) Existing Federal standards are inadequate to maintain good seafood
 handling and manufacturing practices, to ensure consistent fish product
 packaging and labeling procedures, or to detect hazardous levels of
 contaminants in fish products.
 (6) More information on the safety, wholesomeness, and health risks of
 seafood would benefit the consumer and the commercial seafood industry.
 (7) The Federal Government has the responsibility of ensuring the safety
 and quality of all fish products sold in interstate commerce for consumption
 in the United States.
 (b) PURPOSES- It is declared to be the purposes of the Congress in this Act--
 (1) to ensure the safety of all fish products in the United States; and
 (2) to maximize the health benefits of consuming seafood, enhance public
 confidence in the wholesomeness and safety of fish products, and protect
 the seafood market by requiring the development of a comprehensive safety
 program, including--
 (A) the mandatory inspection of all fish products;
 (B) the establishment and enforcement of safety standards for fish products;
 (C) the evaluation and monitoring of fish product safety and consumer
 health risks; and
 (D) the design of consumer education programs.
SEC. 3. ESTABLISHMENT OF SEAFOOD SAFETY PROGRAM.
 Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act,
 the President shall establish a seafood safety program for all fish
 products sold in interstate commerce in accordance with this Act which
 is designed in consultation with the National Marine Fisheries Service,
 other appropriate Federal agencies, and representatives of the seafood
 industry and national consumer organizations.
SEC. 4. PROGRAM FEATURES.
 The seafood safety program established pursuant to this Act shall include
 the following:
 (1) MANDATORY INSPECTION- Mandatory inspection of each fish product covered
 by the program in accordance with the Hazard Analysis Critical Control
 Point method under procedures which--
 (A) are specifically designed for each fish product;
 (B) take into account the recommendations of the National Marine Fisheries
 Service Model Seafood Surveillance Project; and
 (C) encompass the harvesting, processing, storing, transportation, and
 marketing of each fish product subject to such inspection.
 (2) FEDERAL STANDARDS- Establishment of Federal seafood standards,
 including--
 (A) standards for maintaining sanitary conditions and good harvesting and
 manufacturing practices on fishing vessels and in processing plants;
 (B) minimum standards for wholesomeness, grading, packaging, and labeling
 of seafood, including the use of designated common names for various fish
 products; and
 (C) standards for acceptable levels of contaminants in fish products.
 (3) ENFORCEMENT AND MONITORING- Establishment and implementation of methods
 for enforcing the program, including--
 (A) procedures for enforcing the program, including product detention
 and embargo;
 (B) designation of enforcement officers who shall have the authority to
 enter any seafood processing or manufacturing facility for the purposes
 of conducting inspections, including taking fish product samples and
 accessing records;
 (C) establishment of Federal fish product monitoring systems to provide
 reliable records on fish products (including incorporation of existing
 State systems), including the documentation of fish product origin,
 transportation, and processing history;
 (D) establishment of a Federal monitoring system to provide reliable
 data on seafood-related consumer health risks, including collection and
 dissemination of data on the number, causes, and geographic location of
 seafood-related illnesses; and
 (E) establishment of a sampling program to monitor and regulate contaminant
 levels in fish products, including adequate sampling, reporting, and
 recordkeeping to ensure the effective tracing of contamination sources.
 (4) RESEARCH- Establishment of priorities for seafood safety research, such
 as test methodology for biological and chemical contaminants, and directing
 appropriate Federal agencies to fund research regarding those priorities.
 (5) EDUCATION- Design and implementation of national programs for seafood
 safety education, including designation of regional and national seafood
 safety centers which shall conduct, support, and foster research,
 investigation, experimentation, education, and training in seafood
 safety-related areas.
SEC. 5. INTERACTION OF STATE, FEDERAL, AND FOREIGN SAFETY PROGRAMS.
 (a) CONSISTENCY WITH OTHER PROGRAMS- A seafood safety program established
 pursuant to this Act shall be designed and implemented, to the extent
 practicable, to be consistent with existing Federal and State programs
 for ensuring the safety and wholesomeness of seafood.
 (b) NO PREEMPTION- Nothing in this Act may be construed to preempt or
 supersede any program relating to fish product promotion established and
 operated under existing Federal or State law.
 (c) ARRANGEMENTS WITH FOREIGN NATIONS- The President shall encourage
 appropriate technical arrangements with foreign nations to ensure mutual
 acceptance of seafood standards and inspection services.
SEC. 6. DEFINITIONS.
 In this Act--
 (1) the term `contaminant' means any substance which is hazardous to human
 health when ingested, and includes--
 (A) such chemicals as heavy metals, pesticides, and polychlorinated
 biphenyls;
 (B) such parasitic organisms as bacteria and viruses; and
 (C) such natural microbiological toxins as ciguatoxin and scombrotoxin;
 (2) the term `fish' includes all finfish, mollusks, crustaceans, and other
 forms of aquatic animal and plant life, whether from wild or cultured
 sources, except birds and mammals;
 (3) the term `fish product' means any food product intended for human
 consumption in the United States and derived in whole or in part from fish,
 including unprocessed fish;
 (4) the term `interstate commerce' includes--
 (A) the transportation into any State of any fish product from outside
 that State; and
 (B) receipt of any fish product from a vessel located in the exclusive
 economic zone;
 (5) the term `Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point method' means the system
 of food inspection described and endorsed by the National Research Council
 in the article entitled `An Evaluation of the Role of Microbiological
 Criteria for Foods and Food Ingredients', as published in May, 1985 by
 the National Academy Press; and
 (6) the term `seafood' includes all domestic and imported marine and
 freshwater fish products intended for human consumption in the United States.
SEC. 7. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There are authorized to be appropriated $90,000,000 to carry out this Act
 for each of the fiscal years 1990, 1991, 1992, and 1993.