HR 2538 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2538
To amend the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
June 4, 1991
Mr. PETERSON of Florida introduced the following bill; which was referred
jointly to the Committees on Public Works and Transportation and Merchant
Marine and Fisheries
A BILL
To amend the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. EFFLUENT LIMITATIONS.
 Section 301(b) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1311(b))
 is amended in paragraph (1)(C) by striking `any State law or regulations
 (under authority preserved by section 510)' and inserting the following:
 `the laws or regulations (under authority preserved by section 510) of any
 State within which water quality degradation or impairment of designated
 uses recognized under the laws of such State occurs'.
SEC. 2. WATER QUALITY STANDARDS AND IMPLEMENTATION PLANS.
 Section 303(c) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1313(c))
 is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(5) For any pollutant for which the Administrator has developed and published
 criteria under section 304(a) of this Act, those criteria shall be the
 presumptively applicable standard for that pollutant in any State that has
 not adopted water quality standards applicable to that pollutant, or that
 has adopted a standard that is less stringent than such criteria. Different
 criteria for a pollutant designed to protect different uses or different
 water bodies shall be deemed to be separate criteria.'.
SEC. 3. CERTIFICATION.
 Section 401(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1341(a))
 is amended as follows:
 (1) The first sentence of paragraph (1) is amended to read as follows:
 `Any Federal agency proposing to conduct or sponsor, or any applicant for
 a Federal license or permit to conduct, any activity including, but not
 limited to, the construction or operation of facilities, which may result
 in any discharge into the navigable waters or the contiguous zone, or may,
 with respect to such waters, result in any water quality degradation or
 impairment of existing uses or designated uses recognized under Federal or
 State law, shall provide the licensing or permitting agency a certification
 from the State in which, or nearest to the point at which, the discharge
 originates or will originate, or the activity occurs or will occur, or,
 if appropriate, from any interstate water pollution control agency having
 jurisdiction over the waters at the point where the discharge originates
 or will originate, that any such discharge will comply with the applicable
 provisions of sections 301, 302, 303, 306, and 307, and all other enforceable
 provisions, of this Act, and in the case of any such activity which may
 result in any such water quality degradation or impairment of existing uses
 or designated uses recognized under Federal or State laws, shall provide
 the licensing or permitting agency a certification from such affected
 State that such activity will not result in any water quality degradation
 or impairment of existing uses or designated uses recognized under the
 Federal or State laws, and that any such activity will comply with water
 quality standards issued under such section 303 and allow for protection,
 achievement, and maintenance of designated uses included in such standards.'.
 (2) The fifth sentence of paragraph (1) is amended by striking `requirements
 of this subsection' and all that follows through the period at the end
 and inserting `shall be deemed to have been denied.'.
 (3) The sixth sentence of paragraph (1) is amended by striking `or has
 been waived'.
 (4) Paragraph (3)(B) is amended by inserting after the comma at the end
 the following: `or the waters affected by such quality degradation or
 impairment,'.
 (5) The first sentence of paragraph (4) is amended by inserting after
 `navigable waters' the following: `or the contiguous zone, or which may
 result in degradation or impairment,'.
SEC. 4. STATE OCEAN DUMPING REQUIREMENTS.
 Section 106(d) of the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1416(d)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(d) STATE PROGRAMS- (1) Any State may adopt criteria, rules, or
 regulations relating to dumping of materials into ocean waters within
 its jurisdiction, only if such criteria, rules, or regulations are more
 stringent and protective of such waters and sediment than the criteria,
 rules, or regulations adopted pursuant to this Act.
 `(2) Any criteria, rules, or regulations adopted pursuant to paragraph
 (1) of this subsection shall be transmitted to the Administrator and to
 the Secretary and, upon receipt, the Administrator and the Secretary shall
 assure compliance with such criteria, rules, and regulations.'.
SEC. 5. ENFORCEMENT OF CERTIFICATION PROVISIONS.
 Section 309(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1319(a))
 is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(7) Whenever, on the basis of information available to the Administrator,
 the Administrator finds that any person has failed to apply for, or to
 obtain, a certification required under section 401 of this Act, or that
 any person has obtained such a certification but has violated or failed
 to observe any limitation or condition imposed upon that certification,
 the Administrator shall enforce the requirement to obtain a certification,
 or a limitation or condition imposed upon a certification--
 `(A) by issuing an order to the person to cease all activities until that
 person complies with such requirement, limitation or condition, or
 `(B) by bringing a civil action under subsection (b) of this section.'.
SEC. 6. OCEAN DISCHARGE CRITERIA.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Section 403(c) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1343(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(3) No permit shall be issued under section 402 of this Act for any
 discharge into the waters of the territorial sea or the contiguous zone
 until the Administrator--
 `(A) provides any State whose waters may be affected by the discharge
 a minimum of 60 days from the date the permit application is filed to
 review and comment on the permit application, and to object to issuance
 of the permit, or propose any conditions or limitations on the permit
 that the State considers necessary to ensure that the discharge will not
 cause a violation of water quality standards, degradation of the quality
 of the navigable waters within the State's jurisdiction, or impairment of
 existing uses or designated uses of those waters identified in the State's
 water quality standards; and
 `(B) agrees that the permit will only be issued subject to any conditions
 or limitations the State has proposed.'.
 (b) NULLIFICATION OF REGULATION- The Congress finds that the regulation
 promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency as
 set forth in section 125.123(c) of title 40, Code of Federal Regulations,
 has created an exception to the prohibition in subsection (c)(2) of section
 403 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, and that such exception
 exceeds the authority granted to the Administrator by such subsection. The
 Congress therefore declares that, as of the date of the enactment of this
 Act, such regulation is null and void.