S 3224 IS
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 3224
To amend the Public Health Service Act to establish the authority for the
regulation of mammography services and radiological equipment, and for
other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
OCTOBER 20 (legislative day, OCTOBER 2), 1990
Mr. ADAMS (for himself and Ms. MIKULSKI) introduced the following bill;
which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources
A BILL
To amend the Public Health Service Act to establish the authority for the
regulation of mammography services and radiological equipment, and for
other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `The Breast Cancer Screening Safety Act
 of 1990'.
SEC. 2. CERTIFICATION OF MAMMOGRAPHY FACILITIES.
 The Public Health Service Act is amended by inserting after section 353
 (42 U.S.C. 263a) the following new section:
`SEC. 353A. CERTIFICATION OF MAMMOGRAPHY FACILITIES.
 `(a) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section:
 `(1) CERTIFICATE- The term `certificate' means the certificate described
 in subsection (b).
 `(2) CERTIFIED FACILITY- The term `certified facility' means a facility to
 which the Secretary has issued and, if appropriate, renewed a certificate
 in accordance with subsection (c).
 `(3) FACILITY- The term `facility' means a hospital outpatient department,
 clinic, radiology practice, or mobile unit, an office of a physician,
 or other facility, as determined by the Secretary, that conducts breast
 cancer screening through mammography for the diagnosis or treatment of
 cancerous or potentially cancerous breast tissue.
 `(4) MAMMOGRAM- The term `mammogram' means a radiographic image produced
 through mammography.
 `(5) MAMMOGRAPHY- The term `mammography' means radiography of the breast
 for the purpose of enabling a physician to determine the presence, size,
 location, and extent of cancerous or potentially cancerous breast tissue.
 `(6) MAMMOGRAPHY SERVICE- The term `mammography service' means a physical
 examination accompanying a mammogram, a referral for or the provision of
 followup care after a mammogram, or the maintenance of patient records
 relating to a mammogram.
 `(b) CERTIFICATE REQUIREMENT- No facility may operate a radiation machine to
 conduct an examination or procedure related to mammography or a mammography
 service after December 31, 1992, unless the facility obtains a certificate--
 `(1) that is issued and, if applicable, renewed by, the Secretary in
 accordance with subsection (c); and
 `(2) that is applicable to the category of examination or procedure to
 be conducted.
 `(c) Issuance and Renewal of Certificates--
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may issue or renew a certificate for a
 facility that meets the requirements described in subsection (d).
 `(2) TERM- The Secretary may issue or renew a certificate under this
 section for not more than 2 years.
 `(d) REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTIFICATE- In order to obtain a certificate for
 a facility, the person who owns or leases the facility or an authorized
 agent of the person shall submit to the Secretary, in such form and manner
 as the Secretary shall prescribe, an application that contains--
 `(1) a description of the characteristics and type of each radiation
 machine operated at the facility;
 `(2) a description of the procedures currently used to provide mammography
 or mammography services at the facility, including--
 `(A) the number and types of procedures performed;
 `(B) the methodologies for mammography; and
 `(C) the qualifications (educational background, training, and experience)
 of the personnel performing radiological procedures, and the physicians
 reading and interpreting the results from the procedures;
 `(3)(A) a satisfactory assurance that the facility will be operated in
 accordance with standards issued by the Secretary under subsection (f); or
 `(B) proof of accreditation under subsection (e) and a satisfactory
 assurance that the facility will be operated in accordance with the
 standards of the accreditation body;
 `(4) a satisfactory assurance that the facility will--
 `(A) permit inspections by the Secretary under subsection (g);
 `(B) make such records and information available, and submit such reports,
 to the Secretary as the Secretary may reasonably require; and
 `(C) update the information submitted under paragraph (1) or (2) not
 later than 6 months after the date the information becomes incomplete or
 inaccurate; and
 `(5) such other information as the Secretary may require.
 `(e) ACCREDITATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may accredit a facility for purposes of
 subsection (d)(3)(B) if the facility--
 `(A) meets the standards of an approved accreditation body; and
 `(B) authorizes the accreditation body to submit to the Secretary (or
 such State agency as the Secretary may designate) such information as the
 Secretary may require.
 `(2) APPROVAL OF ACCREDITATION BODIES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may approve a private nonprofit organization
 to be an accreditation body for purposes of paragraph (1) if the
 accreditation body provides satisfactory assurances that the body will--
 `(i) comply with the requirements described in paragraphs (4) and (5);
 `(ii) submit to the Secretary the name of any facility for which the
 accreditation body denies, suspends, withdraws, or revokes accreditation, or
 against which the body takes any other action, within 30 days of the action;
 `(iii) notify the Secretary at least 30 days before the accreditation body
 changes the standards of the body; and
 `(iv) notify each facility accredited by the accreditation body if the
 Secretary withdraws approval of the accreditation body under paragraph
 (6), within 10 days of the withdrawal.
 `(B) CRITERIA AND PROCEDURES- The Secretary shall promulgate regulations
 under which the Secretary may approve an accreditation body.
 `(3) WITHDRAWAL OF APPROVAL-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall promulgate standards under which
 the Secretary may withdraw the approval of an accreditation body if
 the Secretary determines that the accreditation body does not meet the
 requirements of clauses (i) through (iv) of paragraph (2)(A).
 `(B) EFFECT OF WITHDRAWAL- If the Secretary withdraws the approval of
 an accreditation body under subparagraph (A), the certificate of any
 facility accredited by the body shall continue in effect for a period
 of 60 days after the facility receives notification of the withdrawal
 of the approval. The Secretary may extend the period for a facility if
 the Secretary determines that the facility submitted an application for
 accreditation or a certificate in a timely manner after receipt of the
 notification of the withdrawal of approval.
 `(4) ACCREDITATION- In determining whether or not to accredit a facility,
 an approved accreditation body shall--
 `(A) inspect facilities using inspectors who the Secretary determines are
 qualified to evaluate the equipment used by the facilities in performing
 mammograms;
 `(B) inspect facilities with such frequency as the Secretary may determine
 to be necessary; and
 `(C) apply standards equal to or more stringent than the standards issued
 by the Secretary under subsection (f).
 `(5) COMPLIANCE- An approved accreditation body shall take measures to
 ensure that facilities accredited by the body will continue to meet the
 standards of the accreditation body.
 `(6) REVOCATION OF ACCREDITATION- If an accreditation body withdraws or
 revokes the accreditation of a facility, the certificate of the facility
 shall continue in effect until the later of--
 `(A) 45 days after the facility receives notice of the withdrawal or
 revocation of the accreditation; or
 `(B) the effective date of any action taken by the Secretary under subsection
 (h) or (i).
 `(7) EVALUATION AND REPORT-
 `(A) EVALUATION- The Secretary shall evaluate annually the performance of
 each approved accreditation body by--
 `(i) inspecting under subsection (g) a sufficient number of the facilities
 accredited by the body to allow a reasonable estimate of the performance
 of the body; and
 `(ii) such additional means as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
 `(B) REPORT- The Secretary shall annually prepare and submit to Congress,
 a report that describes the results of the evaluation conducted in accordance
 with subparagraph (A).
 `(f) QUALITY STANDARDS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall establish standards for facilities
 to assure the safety and accuracy of mammography, including--
 `(A) standards that require establishment and maintenance of a quality
 assurance and quality control program that is adequate and appropriate
 to ensure--
 `(i) the reliability, clarity, and accurate interpretation of radiologic
 images; and
 `(ii) the reliability of other procedures in the delivery of mammography
 services;
 `(B) standards that require use of radiological equipment specifically
 designed for mammography, including radiologic standards;
 `(C) a requirement that personnel who perform mammograms be--
 `(i) licensed by a State to perform radiological procedures; or
 `(ii) certified as qualified to perform radiological procedures by an
 organization described in paragraph (3)(A);
 `(D) minimum training and performance standards for personnel who perform
 mammograms;
 `(E) a requirement that mammograms be interpreted by a physician who is
 certified as qualified to interpret screening mammography procedures by--
 `(i) a board described in paragraph (3)(B); or
 `(ii) a program that complies with the standards described in paragraph
 (3)(C); and
 `(F) a requirement that the facility maintain the results of the first
 screening mammogram performed on a woman in the permanent medical records
 of the woman.
 `(2) CONSIDERATIONS- In developing standards under paragraph (1), the
 Secretary shall consider--
 `(A) the examinations and procedures performed and the methodologies
 employed by facilities, including--
 `(i) monitoring repeat mammograms;
 `(ii) submitting mammograms to peer review panels for second readings;
 `(iii) performing a second reading within the facility; and
 `(iv) following up patient biopsies;
 `(B) the complexity of the process for performing mammograms;
 `(C) the degree of independent judgment involved in performing mammograms
 and providing mammography services;
 `(D) the calibration and quality control requirements of the radiological
 equipment used, including image quality and dose;
 `(E) the difficulty in reading and interpreting mammogram results; and
 `(F) such other factors as the Secretary considers relevant.
 `(3) APPROVAL OF CERTIFICATION ORGANIZATIONS- The Secretary shall by
 regulation--
 `(A) specify organizations eligible to certify individuals to perform
 radiological procedures;
 `(B) specify boards eligible to certify individuals to interpret screening
 mammograms; and
 `(C) establish standards regarding the qualifications for individuals
 described in subparagraph (B) for programs certifying the individuals.
 `(g) INSPECTIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may enter and inspect certified facilities
 to determine compliance with the standards issued under subsection (f).
 `(2) TIMING- The Secretary may conduct announced or unannounced inspections
 during the regular hours of operation of the facilities.
 `(3) IDENTIFICATION- The Secretary may conduct inspections only on presenting
 identification to the owner, operator, or agent in charge of the facility
 to be inspected.
 `(4) SCOPE OF INSPECTION- In conducting inspections, the Secretary--
 `(A) shall have access to all equipment, materials, records, and information
 that the Secretary considers necessary to determine whether the facility
 is being operated in accordance with this section; and
 `(B) may copy, or require the facility to submit to the Secretary, any of
 the materials, records, or information.
 `(5) ELEMENTS OF INSPECTION- All inspections shall include an inspection
 of the beam quality, average glandular dose, and phantom image quality of
 the mammography system, and other features as determined by the Secretary.
 `(6) QUALIFICATIONS OF INSPECTORS- Qualified radiological physicists shall
 conduct all inspections. The Secretary may designate a Federal officer or
 employee to conduct inspections.
 `(7) FREQUENCY- The Secretary shall conduct inspections of certified
 facilities not less often than annually.
 `(8) RECORDS OF INSPECTIONS- Each facility must maintain records of an
 inspection for not less than 7 years after the date of the inspection.
 `(h) INTERMEDIATE SANCTIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- If the Secretary determines that a certified facility fails
 to substantially comply with the requirements described in subparagraphs (A)
 through (C) of subsection (d)(4) or the standards issued under subsection
 (g), the Secretary may impose sanctions under this subsection in lieu of
 the actions authorized by subsection (i).
 `(2) TYPES OF SANCTIONS- The Secretary may impose sanctions under this
 subsection consisting of--
 `(A) directed plans of correction;
 `(B) civil money penalties in an amount not to exceed $10,000 for each
 failure to substantially comply with, or each day on which a facility fails
 to substantially comply with, the requirements described in subparagraphs
 (A) through (C) of subsection (d)(4) or the standards issued under subsection
 (g); or
 `(C) payment for the cost of onsite monitoring.
 `(3) PROCEDURES- The Secretary shall develop and implement procedures
 under which the Secretary may impose intermediate sanctions under this
 subsection. The procedures shall--
 `(A) specify the time and the manner in which the Secretary may impose
 sanctions;
 `(B) provide for notice to the owner or operator of the facility;
 `(C) provide a reasonable opportunity for the owner or operator to respond
 to the proposed sanction; and
 `(D) include appropriate procedures for appealing determinations relating
 to the imposition of intermediate sanctions.
 `(i) SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, AND LIMITATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), the certificate of a
 facility issued under this section may be suspended, revoked, or limited if
 the Secretary finds, after providing reasonable notice and an opportunity
 for a hearing to the owner or operator of the facility, that the owner,
 operator, or any employee of the facility--
 `(A) has been guilty of misrepresentation in obtaining the certificate;
 `(B) has performed, or represented the facility as entitled to perform,
 a mammogram or other mammography services that are outside the scope of
 the certificate;
 `(C) has failed to comply with the requirements of subsection (d)(4)(C)
 or the standards prescribed by the Secretary under subsection (f);
 `(D) has failed to comply with reasonable requests of the Secretary for
 any record, information, report, or material that the Secretary concludes
 is necessary to determine the continued eligibility of the facility for
 a certificate or continued compliance with the standards prescribed under
 subsection (f);
 `(E) has refused a reasonable request of the Secretary, or any Federal
 officer or employee duly designated by the Secretary, for permission
 to inspect the facility or the operations and pertinent records of the
 facility in accordance with subsection (g);
 `(F) has violated or aided and abetted in the violation of any provision
 of, or regulation promulgated under, this section; or
 `(G) has failed to comply with an intermediate sanction imposed under
 subsection (h).
 `(2) ACTION BEFORE A HEARING-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may suspend or limit the certificate of
 the facility before holding a hearing under paragraph (1) if the Secretary
 determines that--
 `(i) the failure of a facility to comply with the standards of the
 Secretary under subsection (f) presents an imminent and serious risk to
 human health; or
 `(ii) a facility has engaged in an action described in subparagraph (D)
 or (E) of paragraph (1).
 `(B) HEARING- If the Secretary suspends or limits a certificate under
 subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall provide an opportunity for a
 hearing to the owner or operator of the facility not later than 60 days
 from the effective date of the suspension or limitation. The suspension
 or limitation shall remain in effect until the decision of the Secretary
 made after the hearing.
 `(3) INELIGIBILITY TO OWN OR OPERATE FACILITIES AFTER REVOCATION- If the
 Secretary revokes the certificate of a facility on the basis of an act
 described in paragraph (1), no person who owned or operated the facility at
 the time of the act may, within 2 years of the revocation of the certificate,
 own or operate a facility that requires a certificate under this section.
 `(j) INJUNCTIONS- If the Secretary determines that continuation of any
 activity related to the provision of mammography or mammograph services
 by a facility would constitute a significant hazard to the public health,
 the Secretary may bring suit in the district court of the United States
 for the district in which the facility is situated to enjoin continuation
 of the activity. Upon a proper showing, the district court shall grant
 a temporary injunction or restraining order against continuation of the
 activity without requiring the Secretary to post a bond, pending issuance
 of a final order under this subsection.
 `(k) JUDICIAL REVIEW-
 `(1) PETITION- If the Secretary imposes an intermediate sanction on a
 facility under subsection (i) or suspends, revokes, or limits the certificate
 of a facility under subsection (i), the owner or operator of the facility
 may, not later than 60 days after the date the action of the Secretary
 becomes final, file a petition with the United States court of appeals for
 the circuit in which the facility is situated for judicial review of the
 action. As soon as practicable after receipt of the petition, the clerk of
 the court shall transmit a copy of the petition to the Secretary or other
 officer designated by the Secretary. As soon as practicable after receipt
 of the copy, the Secretary shall file in the court the record on which the
 action of the Secretary is based, as provided in section 2112 of title 28,
 United States Code.
 `(2) ADDITIONAL EVIDENCE- If the petitioner applies to the court for leave
 to adduce additional evidence, and shows to the satisfaction of the court
 that the additional evidence is material and that there were reasonable
 grounds for the failure to adduce such evidence in the proceeding before
 the Secretary, the court may order the additional evidence (and evidence
 in rebuttal of the additional evidence) to be taken before the Secretary,
 and to be adduced upon the hearing in such manner and upon such terms
 and conditions as the court may determine to be proper. The Secretary may
 modify the findings of the Secretary as to the facts, or make new findings,
 by reason of the additional evidence so taken, and the Secretary shall file
 the modified or new findings, and the recommendations of the Secretary,
 if any for, the modification or setting aside of the original action of
 the Secretary with the return of the additional evidence.
 `(3) JUDGMENT OF COURT- Upon the filing of the petition referred to in
 paragraph (1), the court shall have jurisdiction to affirm the action, or to
 set the action aside in whole or in part, temporarily or permanently. The
 findings of the Secretary as to the facts, if supported by substantial
 evidence, shall be conclusive.
 `(4) FINALITY OF JUDGMENT- The judgment of the court affirming or setting
 aside, in whole or in part, any action of the Secretary shall be final,
 subject to review by the Supreme Court of the United States upon certiorari
 or certification, as provided in section 1254 of title 28, United States
 Code.
 `(l) SANCTIONS- Any person who intentionally violates any requirement of
 this section or any regulation promulgated under this section--
 `(1) shall be imprisoned for not more than 1 year or fined under title 18,
 United States Code, or both; and
 `(2) for a second or subsequent offense shall be imprisoned for not more than
 3 years or fined in accordance with title 18, United States Code, or both.
 `(m) FEES-
 `(1) CERTIFICATE FEES- The Secretary shall require payment of fees for
 the issuance and renewal of certificates.
 `(2) ADDITIONAL FEES- The Secretary shall require the payment of fees for
 inspections of facilities that are not accredited.
 `(3) CRITERIA-
 `(A) CERTIFICATE FEES- Fees imposed under paragraph (1) shall be sufficient
 to cover the general costs of administering this section except for costs
 described in subparagraph (B), including--
 (i) evaluating and monitoring quality assurance and quality control programs;
 (ii) excluding and monitoring accrediting bodies, and establishing; and
 (iii) monitoring compliance with the requirements of this section.
 `(B) ADDITIONAL FEES- Fees imposed under paragraph (2) shall be sufficient
 to cover the cost of the Secretary in carrying out the inspections.
 `(n) INFORMATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- On April 1, 1990, and annually thereafter, the Secretary
 shall compile and make available to physicians and the general public
 information that the Secretary determines is useful in evaluating the
 performance of a facility, including a list of facilities--
 `(A) that have been convicted under Federal or State laws relating to
 fraud and abuse, false billings, or kickbacks;
 `(B) that have had their certificates revoked, suspended, or limited under
 subsection (i), together with a statement of the reasons for the revocation,
 suspension, or limitation;
 `(C) that have been the subject of a sanction under subsection (l),
 together with a statement of the reasons for the sanction;
 `(D) that have been subject to intermediate sanctions under subsection
 (h) together with a statement of the reasons for the sanctions;
 `(E) whose accreditation has been withdrawn or revoked, together with a
 statement of the reasons of the withdrawal or revocation; and
 `(F) against which the Secretary has taken action under subsection (j)
 together with a statement of the reasons for the action.
 `(2) DATE- The information to be compiled under paragraph (1) shall be
 information for the calendar year preceding the date the information is
 to be made available to the public.
 `(3) EXPLANATORY INFORMATION- The information to be compiled under
 paragraph (1) shall be accompanied by such explanatory information as may
 be appropriate to assist in the interpretation of the information compiled
 under the paragraph.
 `(o) DELEGATION- In carrying out this section, the Secretary may enter into
 an agreement with a Federal, State, or local public agency or nonprofit
 private organization, use the services or facilities of the agency
 or nonprofit private organization, and pay for the services or use of
 facilities in advance or by way of reimbursement, and in such installments,
 as the Secretary may determine.
 `(p) STATE LAWS-
 `(1) CONSISTENT LAWS- Except as provided in paragraph (2), nothing in this
 section shall be construed as affecting the power of any State to enact
 and enforce laws relating to the matters covered by this section to the
 extent that the laws are not inconsistent with this section or with the
 regulations issued under this section.
 `(2) MORE STRINGENT LAWS- If a State enacts laws relating to matters
 covered by this section which provide for requirements equal to or more
 stringent than the requirements of this section or than the regulations
 issued under this section, the Secretary may exempt facilities in that
 State from compliance with this section.
 `(q) MAMMOGRAPHY REGISTRY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall establish a Mammography Registry that
 shall maintain information on the former mammograms of women, including
 the number and results of the examinations and the facility where the
 mammography was performed.
 `(2) INFORMATION- The Secretary may require that facilities provide other
 relevant data that could help in the research of the causes, characteristics,
 and prevelance of, and potential treatments for, breast cancer. This data
 may include information on patients relating to age, race, geographic
 location, type of breast cancer, family history, occupational hazards,
 drug history, social history, other medical conditions, uses of estrogen
 replacement, use of oral contraception, number of conceptions or births,
 and age of the patient at each conception or birth.
 `(3) STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES- The Secretary shall establish standards and
 procedures for the Mammography Registry, including procedures to maintain
 confidentiality of patient records.'.