HR 3554 SC
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 3554
To amend the Toxic Substances Control Act to reduce the levels of lead in
the environment, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
OCTOBER 11, 1991
Mr. SWIFT introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Energy and Commerce
February 24, 1992
Additional sponsors: Mr. SIKORSKI, Mr. YATES, Mr. MFUME, Mr. MCNULTY,
Ms. NORTON, Mr. FOGLIETTA, Mr. WOLPE, Mr. JEFFERSON, Mr. KOSTMAYER,
Mr. TORRES, Mr. DWYER of New Jersey, Mr. RANGEL, Mr. JONTZ, Mr. HUGHES,
Mrs. LLOYD, Mr. BROWN, and Mr. Espy
A BILL
To amend the Toxic Substances Control Act to reduce the levels of lead in
the environment, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION. 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. AMENDMENT OF THE TOXIC SUBSTANCES CONTROL ACT.
 (a) AMENDMENT OF THE TOXIC SUBSTANCES CONTROL ACT- The Toxic Substances
 Control Act (15 U.S.C. 2601 et seq.) is amended by adding after title III
 the following new title:
`TITLE IV--LEAD EXPOSURE REDUCTION
`SEC. 401. FINDINGS AND POLICY.
 `(a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 `(1) lead poisoning is the most prevalent disease of environmental origin
 among American children today, and children under seven years of age are
 at special risk because of their susceptibility to the potency of lead as
 a neurologic toxin;
 `(2) the effects of lead on children may include permanent, significant
 neurologic and physiologic impairment, and additional health effects occur
 in adults exposed to similar exposure levels;
 `(3) because of the practical difficulties of removing lead already
 dispersed into the environment, children and adults will continue to be
 exposed to such lead for years;
 `(4) as a result of decades of highly dispersive uses of lead in a variety
 of products, contamination of the environment with unacceptable levels of
 lead is widespread;
 `(5) the continued manufacture, import, processing, use, and disposal
 of lead-containing products may cause further releases of lead to the
 environment, and such releases contribute to further environmental
 contamination and resultant exposure to lead; and
 `(6) methods to reduce existing lead exposure levels must be improved,
 especially through the development of more effective and affordable
 methods for abating lead-based paint, which continues to be a major cause
 of childhood lead poisoning.
 `(b) POLICY- It is the policy of the United States that further releases of
 lead to the environment should be minimized, and means should be developed
 and implemented to reduce sources of lead that result in adverse human or
 environmental exposures.
`SEC. 402. RESTRICTIONS ON CONTINUING USES OF CERTAIN LEAD-CONTAINING PRODUCTS.
 `(a) GENERAL RESTRICTIONS- Except as otherwise provided in this title,
 beginning on the date that is one year after the enactment of the Lead
 Exposure Reduction Act of 1991, no person may import, manufacture or process
 a product in any of the following product categories, and beginning on the
 date that is 2 years after the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction
 Act of 1991, no person may distribute in commerce, a product in any of
 the following product categories:
 `(1) PAINT- Paint containing more than 0.06 percent lead by dry weight,
 other than the following:
 `(2) PESTICIDES- Pesticides (as defined in section 2(u) of the Federal
 Insecticide, Rodenticide, and Fungicide Act (7 U.S.C. 136(u)) containing
 more than 0.1 percent lead by dry weight.
 `(3) TOYS- Toys and recreational game pieces containing more than 0.1
 percent lead by dry weight.
 `(4) CURTAIN WEIGHTS- Curtain weights containing more than 0.1 percent
 lead by dry weight.
 `(5) PLASTIC ADDITIVES- Plastic additives containing more than 0.1 percent
 lead by dry weight.
 `(6) INKS AND PIGMENTS- Inks and pigments containing more than 0.1 percent
 lead by dry weight used in printing newspapers, newspaper supplements,
 or magazines published more than once per month.
 `(7) CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS- Construction materials containing more than
 0.1 percent lead by dry weight, including but not limited to roofing,
 siding, and soundproofing materials, other than construction materials
 used as radiation shielding.
 `(8) STAINED-GLASS CAME- Stained-glass came containing more than 0.1
 percent lead by dry weight.
For the purposes of this subsection and subsection (d), the term `processed'
shall not include the recycling (for use as a raw material or for processing),
the recovery, or the reuse of metal, glass, plastic, or textiles.
 `(b) MODIFICATION OF RESTRICTIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Administrator may, after public notice and opportunity
 for comment, promulgate regulations to modify, pursuant to paragraphs (2)
 and (3) of this subsection, the percentage of the allowable lead content
 for a product, or a group of products, within a product category described
 in paragraphs (1) through (9) of subsection (a).
 `(2) LESSER PERCENTAGE- The Administrator may, pursuant to paragraph
 (1), establish by regulation a percentage of the allowable lead
 content that is less than the percentage specified under subsection (a)
 (including nondetectable levels) for a product, or a group of products,
 within any product category described in paragraphs (1) through (9) of
 such subsection if the Administrator determines that a reduction in the
 percentage of allowable lead content is necessary to protect human health
 or the environment.
 `(3) GREATER PERCENTAGE- (A) The Administrator may, pursuant to paragraph
 (1), establish by regulation a percentage by dry weight of the allowable
 lead content for a product, or a group of products, within any product
 category described in paragraphs (1) through (9) of subsection (a) that is
 greater than the percentage specified for the product category under such
 subsection if the Administrator determines that increasing the percentage
 of the allowable lead content for a product, or a group of products,
 within the product category will promote the protection of human health
 or the environment.
 `(B) If the Administrator establishes by regulation an increased percentage
 of the allowable lead content for a product, or a group of products, within
 a product category pursuant to this paragraph, the regulation establishing
 such percentage shall terminate on the date that is 6 years after the date
 such regulation becomes final.
 `(C) Not later than 180 days prior to the termination of a regulation
 promulgated under this paragraph, the Administrator shall review the
 regulation. If, on or after the termination date of such regulation,
 the Administrator determines pursuant to subparagraph (A), that the
 promulgation of a regulation is appropriate, the Administrator may promulgate
 a regulation which shall terminate on the date that is 6 years after the
 date such regulation becomes final.
 `(4) STATEMENTS BY ADMINISTRATOR RELATING TO MODIFICATIONS OF RESTRICTIONS-
 In promulgating any regulation under this subsection with respect to the
 allowable lead content for a product, or a group of products under a product
 category, the Administrator shall, prior to the promulgation of a final
 regulation, consider and publish a statement that describes the effects
 of the proposed allowable lead content level for a product, or a group of
 products, within the product category on human health and the environment.
 `(c) EXEMPTIONS AND WAIVERS FROM LEAD CONTENT REQUIREMENTS-
 `(1) GENERAL EXEMPTION AUTHORITY- The Administrator shall, by regulation,
 exempt from the restrictions on lead content under this section any product,
 or group of products, within a product category used--
 `(A) for medical purposes (as defined by the Administrator, in consultation
 with the Secretary of Health and Human Services);
 `(B) for purposes in the paramount interest of the United States (as
 determined by the Administrator, in consultation with the Secretary of
 Defense);
 `(C) for radiation protection (as jointly defined by the Administrator
 and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission), including any product or product
 category used in connection with the national security programs of the
 Department of Energy;
 `(D) in the mining industry to determine the presence of noble metals in
 geological materials; or
 `(E) as radiation shielding in electronic devices and in specialized
 electronics uses where the Administrator has determined that no appropriate
 substitutes for lead are available.
 `(2) ADDITIONAL EXEMPTIONS- Subsection (a) shall not apply to the following:
 `(A) Paint-
 `(i) CORROSION INHIBITIVE COATINGS- Corrosion inhibitive coatings (including
 electrocoats and electrodeposition primers) applied by original equipment
 manufacturers to motor vehicle parts and containing no more than 1.9
 percent lead by weight in dry film.
 `(ii) INDUSTRIAL PAINT- For the first 60 months after the date of the
 enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1991, industrial paint in
 which the incidental presence of lead does not exceed 0.12 percent lead
 by dry weight.
 `(iii) ARTIST PAINT- Any paint for use by an artist in a work of art if
 such paint is sold or otherwise distributed in packages labeled as follows:
 `CONTAINS LEAD--FOR USE BY ADULT ARTISTS ONLY. DO NOT USE AROUND CHILDREN
 OR IN AREAS ACCESSIBLE TO CHILDREN'.
 `(B) TOYS- Toys and recreational game pieces that are collectible items
 and scale models intended for adult acquisition which are sold or otherwise
 distributed in packages labeled as follows:
`COLLECTIBLE ITEM, CONTAINS LEAD, NOT SUITABLE FOR CHILDREN'.
 `(C) PLASTIC ADDITIVES- Additives in polyvinyl chloride insulating sheathing
 for electrical wiring, or to additives in other materials subject to
 this subsection.
 `(D) STAINED-GLASS CAME- Stained-glass came that is sold or otherwise
 distributed in packages labeled as follows:
`CONTAINS LEAD--FOR USE BY ADULT ARTISTS ONLY. DO NOT USE AROUND CHILDREN
OR IN AREAS ACCESSIBLE TO CHILDREN'.
 `(3) Labels-
 `(A) SIZE AND PLACEMENT- Unless the Administrator promulgates regulations
 specifying alternate type size and placement of the wording for labels
 referred to in paragraph (2) within 12 months of the date of enactment
 of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1991, that wording shall be placed
 prominently on the package in letters the same size as the largest letter
 otherwise affixed to the label or packaging of the product.
 `(B) OTHER LABELING REQUIREMENTS- Compliance with the labeling provisions
 of paragraph (2) shall not constitute, in whole or in part, a defense to
 liability or a cause for reduction in damages in any suit, whether civil
 or criminal, brought under any law, whether Federal or State, other than
 a suit for failure to comply with the labeling requirements of this section.
 `(d) SPECIAL PROVISIONS REGARDING PRIMER PAINTS SUITABLE FOR USE AS AN
 ELECTROCOAT OR ELECTRODEPOSITION PRIMER (OR BOTH) ON MOTOR VEHICLE PARTS-
 (1) 5 years after the date of the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction
 Act of 1991, and every 5 years thereafter until the Administrator makes
 a determination under paragraph (2), the Administrator shall determine,
 following public notice and opportunity for comment, whether there are 1 or
 more primer paints suitable for use as an electrocoat or electrodeposition
 primer (or both) on motor vehicle parts that--
 `(A) contain less than 0.06 percent lead by weight in dry film,
 `(B) have corrosion inhibition and related performance characteristics
 substantially equivalent to primer paints in use for corrosion inhibition,
 as of the date of enactment of this section, and
 `(C) do not pose a greater risk to human health and the environment than
 primer paints already in use for such corrosion inhibition.
 `(2) If the Administrator determines pursuant to paragraph (1) that one
 or more such primer paints exist, and that use of any such primer paint is
 economically feasible at the time of such determination, he shall identify
 the lead content of such primer paint. 3 years after the Administrator
 makes such a determination, no person shall import, manufacture, or process
 any electrocoat or electrodeposition primer paint with a lead content
 that exceeds the level identified by the Administrator. 4 years after
 the Administrator makes such a determination, no person shall distribute
 in commerce any electrocoat or electrodeposition primer paint (or import,
 manufacture, or process any motor vehicle or motor vehicle part coated with
 such primer paint) with a lead content that exceeds the level identified
 by the Administrator.
 `(3) If the Administrator determines pursuant to subparagraph (A) that
 there does not exist a primer paint suitable for use as an electrocoat
 or electrodeposition primer (or both) on motor vehicle parts with a lead
 content of less than 0.06 percent lead by weight in dry film or that the use
 of all such primer paints is not economically feasible at the time of such
 determination, 13 years after the date of the enactment of the Lead Exposure
 Reduction Act of 1991, no person shall import, manufacture, or process any
 electrocoat or electrodeposition primer paint with a lead content of 0.06
 percent or more lead by weight in dry film, and 14 years after the date
 of such enactment, no person shall distribute in commerce any electrocoat
 or electrodeposition primer paint (or import, manufacture, or process
 any motor vehicle or motor vehicle part coated with such primer paint)
 with a lead content of 0.06 percent or more lead by weight in dry film.
`SEC. 403. RESTRICTION ON LEAD-CONTAINING PACKAGES.
 `(a) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section:
 `(1) PACKAGE- The term `package' means a container providing a means of
 marketing, protecting, or handling a product, and includes a unit package,
 an intermediate package, crate, pail, rigid foil, unsealed receptacle
 such as a carrying case, cup, and such other trays, wrappers and wrapping
 films, bags, tubs, and shipping or other containers, as the Administrator by
 regulation, may define (except that such term shall not include (A) ceramic
 ware or crystal, (B) a container used for radiation shielding, (C) a foil
 on an alcohol beverage bottle, or (D) any casing for a lead-acid battery,
 the lead content of which is regulated under other authority of Federal law).
 `(2) DISTRIBUTOR- The term `distributor' means any individual, firm,
 corporation, or other entity which takes title to goods purchased for resale.
 `(3) PACKAGING COMPONENT- The term `packaging component' means any
 individual assembled part of a package such as any interior or exterior
 blocking, bracing, cushioning, weatherproofing, exterior strapping,
 coatings, closures, inks, and labels. For the purposes of this section,
 tin-plated steel that meets the American Society for Testing and Materials
 (ASTM) Specification A-623 shall be deemed an individual packaging component.
 `(b) PROHIBITION ON INTENTIONAL INTRODUCTION OF LEAD- Beginning on the
 date that is 48 months after the date of the enactment of the Lead Exposure
 Reduction Act of 1991--
 `(1) no package or packaging component shall be offered for sale or for
 promotional purposes by a manufacturer or distributor, which includes,
 in the package, or in any packaging component, any ink, dye, pigment,
 adhesive, stabilizer, or other additive to which lead has been intentionally
 introduced as an element during manufacturing or distribution as opposed
 to the incidental presence of lead; and
 `(2) no product shall be offered for sale or for promotional purposes
 by its manufacturer or distributor in a package which includes, in
 the package itself or in any of its packaging components, any ink, dye,
 pigment, adhesive, stabilizer, or other additive to which any lead has been
 intentionally introduced as an element during manufacturing or distribution
 as opposed to the incidental presence of lead.
 `(c) PROHIBITION ON INCIDENTAL PRESENCE OF LEAD- Notwithstanding subsection
 (b), no package or packaging component shall be offered for sale or for
 promotional purposes by a manufacturer or distributor, and no product
 shall be offered for sale for promotional purposes by a manufacturer or
 distributor in a package, if the aggregate of the concentration levels,
 from any incidental presence of lead present in any package or packaging
 component exceeds--
 `(1) for the fifth 12-month period following the date of the enactment of
 the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1991, 600 parts per million by weight
 (0.06 percent);
 `(2) for the sixth 12-month period following the date of the enactment of
 the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1991, 250 parts per million by weight
 (0.025 percent); and
 `(3) for the seventh 12-month period following the date of the enactment
 of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1991, and for each 12-month period
 thereafter, 100 parts per million by weight (0.01 percent).
 `(d) EXEMPTION FROM PACKAGING REQUIREMENTS- Prior to the expiration of the
 84-month period following the date of the enactment of the Lead Exposure
 Reduction Act of 1991, upon receipt of an application (in such form and
 containing such information as the Administrator may prescribe by regulation)
 the Administrator may exempt from the requirements of subsections (b), or
 (c)--
 `(1) a package or packaging component manufactured prior to the date of
 the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1991, as determined
 by the Administrator; and
 `(2) a package or packaging component to which lead has been added in
 the manufacturing, forming, printing, or distribution process in order
 to comply with health or safety requirements of Federal law or the law of
 any State or political subdivision of a State.
 `(e) CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE- (1) A certificate of compliance stating that
 a package or packaging component is in compliance with the requirements
 of this section shall be retained by its manufacturer or distributor and
 made available to the purchaser or intended purchaser of the package or
 packaging component.
 `(2) In any case in which compliance is achieved because of an exemption
 under subsection (d), such certificate shall state the specific basis upon
 which the exemption is claimed.
 `(3) A certificate of compliance shall be signed by an authorized official
 of the manufacturer or distributor, as the case may be.
`SEC. 404. INVENTORY OF LEAD-CONTAINING PRODUCTS.
 `(a) INVENTORY OF LEAD-CONTAINING PRODUCTS- (1) Not later than 18 months
 after the date of the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1991,
 each person who manufactures, processes, or imports any product that contains
 more than 0.1 percent lead by dry weight shall notify the Administrator
 of such manufacture, processing, or importing. Such notification shall be
 in writing and shall specify the following inventory information:
 `(A) The type of product manufactured, processed, or imported.
 `(B) The quantity of such product manufactured, processed, or imported.
 `(C) The amount and percentage of lead used in the manufacturing or
 processing of the product, or the amount and percentage of lead contained
 in the imported product.
 `(D) Such other information as the Administrator determines, by order,
 is necessary to meet the purposes of this section.
 `(2) The owner or operator of any automotive dismantler or recycling facility
 for post-consumer metal, glass, plastic, paper, or textiles regulated by
 a State or by the Administrator shall not be subject to the notification
 requirements described in paragraph (1) with respect to such dismantler
 or recycling facility.
 `(3) Not later than 12 months after the date of the enactment of the Lead
 Exposure Reduction Act of 1991, the Administrator shall publish in the
 Federal Register notice of the requirements under paragraph (1) of this
 subsection and other related information that the Administrator determines
 to be appropriate.
 `(4) To the extent feasible, the Administrator shall utilize existing
 product classification codes such as the harmonized export-import codes
 compiled by the Department of Commerce.
 `(5) The Administrator shall, by administrative order, define the terms
 `product' and `product category'.
 `(b) PROHIBITION- Beginning on the date 27 months after the date of the
 enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1991, it shall be unlawful
 for any person to manufacture, import, or process a product identified
 in subsection (a)(1) unless such person has, at least 90 days prior to
 the manufacture, processing, or importation of such product, submitted to
 the Administrator a notification meeting the requirements of subsection
 (a)(1). Any violation of such prohibition shall for purposes of section
 16 be treated as a violation of section 15.
 `(c) COMPILATION OF INVENTORY INFORMATION- (1) Not later than 24 months
 after the date of enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1991,
 and every 5 years thereafter, the Administrator shall publish a compilation
 of the inventory information reported under paragraph (1) of subsection
 (a). In compiling such information the Administrator may, to the extent
 consistent with the purpose of this section, in lieu of listing a product
 individually, list a category of products in which such product is included.
 `(2) Not later than 30 months after the date of enactment of the Lead
 Exposure Reduction Act of 1991, the Administrator shall report to Congress
 a summary of inventory information and recommendations for minimizing the
 release of lead into the environment and preventing human exposure to lead.
 `(d) CONFIDENTIALITY OF INVENTORY INFORMATION- (1) A person who is
 required to submit written notification under subsection (a) may submit
 an application to the Administrator to claim information included in such
 written notification as confidential information, for the purposes of
 this section.
 `(2) A person may claim the information described in paragraph (1) as
 confidential if such person--
 `(A) meets the requirements of paragraph (3);
 `(B) includes in the application submitted under paragraph (1)--
 `(i) a detailed explanation of the reasons why such information meets the
 criteria for confidentiality described in subparagraphs (A) through (D)
 of paragraph (3);
 `(ii) written designation of the information claimed as confidential, in such
 manner and in such form as the Administrator may prescribe by regulation;
 `(iii) a copy of the written notification required under subsection (a)
 that contains all information claimed as confidential; and
 `(iv) a copy of the written notification that excludes such information
 claimed as confidential.
 `(3) The Administrator may approve an application for claiming information as
 confidential, as described in paragraph (1), if the Administrator determines
 that the application meets the requirements of this subsection and that--
 `(A) the applicant has not disclosed the information to any person other
 than--
 `(i) an officer or employee of the Federal Government or of a State
 government or the government of a political subdivision of a State;
 `(ii) an employee of the applicant; or
 `(iii) a person who has entered into an agreement with the applicant to
 ensure the confidentiality of the information; and
 `(B) the applicant has taken reasonable measures to protect the
 confidentiality of the information, and demonstrates, to the satisfaction
 of the Administrator, the intent to continue to protect the confidentiality
 of the information;
 `(C) public disclosure of the information is not required under any other
 Federal or State law;
 `(D) no Federal or State law requires that the information shall be
 otherwise made available to the public;
 `(E) disclosure of the information would likely cause substantial economic
 harm to the competitive position of such applicant or the information has
 been determined to constitute national security information under Federal
 law; and
 `(F) the information is not readily discoverable through reverse engineering
 or the examination of data sources available to the public.
 `(4) Any information submitted to the Administrator under paragraph (1) or
 (2), or in response to inquiries by the Administrator concerning information
 submitted under paragraph (2), shall be available to the public, except that
 upon a showing satisfactory to the Administrator that the requirements
 of paragraph (3) have been met, such information shall be considered
 confidential for purposes of this section and section 14, except that the
 Administrator may disclose such information as provided in section 14(a).
 `(5) Notwithstanding paragraph (4), upon a request by the Governor of
 a State, the Administrator shall provide to the State the application
 information described in paragraphs (1) and (2).
 `(6) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, upon receipt of a request
 by a committee of Congress authorized by the Congress to receive such
 information, or the General Accounting Office, the Administrator shall
 make available to such committee, or the General Accounting Office, any
 information obtained under this subsection.
 `(7) If the Administrator determines that--
 `(A) an applicant has not made a sufficient showing that the information
 it sought to protect meets the criteria described in paragraph (3)(B); and
 `(B) the claim of confidentiality in the application was frivolous,
the applicant may be deemed liable for a civil penalty described in section
16(a).
 `(8)(A) Any officer or employee of the United States or former officer or
 employee of the United States, who by virtue of such employment or official
 position has obtained possession of, or has access to, information that
 the Administrator has determined to be entitled to protection under this
 subsection who knowingly and willfully discloses the information in any
 manner to any person not entitled to receive it, shall be guilty of a
 misdemeanor and fined not more than $5,000 or imprisoned for not more
 than one year, or both. Section 1905 of title 18, United States Code,
 does not apply with respect to the publishing, divulging, disclosure,
 making know of, or making available, information reported or otherwise
 obtained under this subsection.
 `(B) For the purposes of subparagraph (A), any contractor with the United
 States who is furnished information as authorized by section 14(a)(2),
 and any employee of any such contractor, and any officer or employee of
 any State (or former officer or employee of any State) who is furnished
 information as authorized by this subsection, shall be considered to be
 an employee of the United States.
`SEC. 405. PRODUCT LABELING.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- (1) Not later than 12 months after the date of the
 enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1991, the Administrator
 shall promulgate regulations that provide for the labeling of products
 (other than lead-acid batteries the lead content of which is regulated
 under other authority of Federal law) and products regulated under the
 Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act)--
 `(A) to which any lead has been intentionally introduced as an element
 during manufacturing, processing or distribution (as opposed to the
 incidental presence of lead); or
 `(B) in which the incidental presence of lead exceeds 0.01 percent lead
 by dry weight (100 parts per million).
 `(2) The regulations promulgated pursuant to paragraph (1) shall take
 effect not later than 24 months after the date of enactment of the Lead
 Exposure Reduction Act of 1991.
 `(b) CONTENT OF REGULATIONS- The regulations described in subsection (a)
 shall specify the wording, type size, and placement of the labels described
 in such subsection.
 `(c) OTHER LABELING REQUIREMENTS- Compliance with the labeling provisions
 of this section shall not constitute, in whole or in part, a defense to
 liability or a cause for reduction in damages in any suit, whether civil
 or criminal, brought under any law, whether Federal or State, other than
 a suit for failure to comply with the labeling requirements of this section.
 `(d) PRODUCTS EXEMPT FROM LEAD CONTENT REQUIREMENTS- For additional
 requirements relating to the labeling of certain exempt articles and of
 packages containing certain exempt articles, see section 402(c).
`SEC. 406. LEAD ABATEMENT AND MEASUREMENT.
 `(a) PROGRAM TO PROMOTE LEAD EXPOSURE ABATEMENT- (1) The Administrator,
 in cooperation with other appropriate Federal departments and agencies,
 shall conduct a comprehensive program to promote safe, effective, and
 affordable monitoring, detection and abatement of lead-based paint and
 other lead exposure hazards.
 `(2) The Administrator shall chair an Interagency Coordinating Committee
 on Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention (hereinafter in this paragraph `the
 Committee') comprised of the Administrator, and the heads of such other
 Federal agencies and departments deemed appropriate by the Administrator. The
 Committee shall--
 `(A) identify obstacles to effective program implementation and priority
 research needs;
 `(B) coordinate responsibilities of each agency and department to prevent
 duplication of effort and to assure that critical actions are taken in a
 timely manner;
 `(C) review and coordinate agency budget requests to assure a coordinated,
 effective and comprehensive federal lead poisoning prevention program;
 `(D) make specific recommendations for the implementation of comprehensive,
 effective and enforceable lead poisoning prevention programs at the Federal,
 State and local levels (including recommendations concerning the feasibility
 of developing minimum uniform standards and procedures for incorporation
 into State and local programs);
 `(E) actively solicit the participation of State and local lead poisoning
 prevention programs, nationally respected experts, and community-based
 lead poisoning education programs.
 `(b) STANDARDS FOR ENVIRONMENTAL SAMPLING LABORATORIES- (1) The Administrator
 shall establish protocols, criteria, and minimum performance standards for
 laboratory analysis of lead in paint films, soil and dust. Not more than 18
 months after the date of the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of
 1991, the Secretary or Administrator shall establish certification programs
 to assure the quality and consistency of laboratory analyses, unless the
 Administrator determines, by the date specified in this subsection, that
 effective voluntary accreditation programs are in place and operating on
 a nationwide basis at the time of such determination.
 `(2) Not later than 24 months after the date of the enactment of the Lead
 Exposure Reduction Act of 1991, and annually thereafter, the Administrator
 shall publish and make available to the public a list of certified or
 accredited environmental sampling laboratories.
 `(3) If the Administrator determines under paragraph (1) that effective
 voluntary accreditation programs are in place for environmental sampling
 laboratories, he shall review the performance and effectiveness of
 such programs every three years thereafter. If, upon such review, the
 Administrator determines that the voluntary accreditation programs are not
 effective in assuring the quality and consistency of laboratory analyses,
 the Administrator shall not more than twelve months thereafter establish
 a certification program that meets the requirements of paragraph (1).
 `(c) DETECTION TECHNOLOGIES- (1) The Administrator shall evaluate emerging
 products and emerging techniques for detecting lead in paint films and
 dust, including x-ray fluorescence devices, on-site chemical spot testers,
 and laboratory methods.
 `(2) Not later than 24 months after the date of the enactment of the Lead
 Exposure Reduction Act of 1991, the Administrator shall develop criteria,
 standards, and testing protocols to assure reliable, accurate, and effective
 detection technologies.
 `(d) EVALUATION OF ABATEMENT AND IN-PLACE MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES TO REDUCE
 LEAD DUST LEVELS- (1) Not later than 36 months after the date of the
 enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1991, the Administrator shall
 submit a report to the Congress concerning the short-term and long-term
 efficacy and effectiveness of various abatement and in-place management
 techniques in reducing lead dust levels. The assessment of such in-place
 management techniques shall be based on resultant and subsequent levels
 of lead dust.
 `(2) The report described in paragraph (1) shall review the feasibility of
 State standards for post-abatement lead dust levels in effect immediately
 preceding the date of the issuance of such report.
 `(e) EVALUATION OF EMERGING ABATEMENT TECHNOLOGIES- (1) The Administrator
 shall establish a program for the evaluation of existing and new products
 and procedures for encapsulating or removing lead-based paint.
 `(2) The products and procedures described in paragraph (1) shall be
 evaluated for safety, effectiveness, durability, and other relevant
 performance characteristics as determined by the Administrator and based
 on written performance criteria and standards that the Administrator
 shall develop.
 `(3) Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of the
 Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1991, the Administrator shall publish
 in the Federal Register a list of the products and procedures that the
 Administrator has determined to meet the performance standards and criteria
 developed by the Administrator.
 `(4) The Administrator shall update and publish the list described in
 paragraph (3)--
 `(A) on the date that is 30 months after the date of the enactment of the
 Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1991;
 `(B) on the date that is 42 months after the date of the enactment of such
 Act; and
 `(C) at any time subsequent to the date under subparagraph (B), as the
 Administrator determines to be appropriate.
 `(f) CLASSIFICATION OF ABATEMENT WASTES- Not later than 6 months after
 the date of the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1991,
 the Administrator shall issue guidelines for the management of lead-based
 paint abatement debris. Such guidelines shall describe steps for segregating
 wastes from lead-based paint abatement projects in order to minimize the
 volume of material qualifying as hazardous solid waste.
 `(g) EXPOSURE STUDIES- (1) The Administrator, in consultation with the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services (hereafter in this subsection
 referred to as the `Secretary'), acting through the Director of the Centers
 for Disease Control, shall conduct a long-term research project to study
 the sources of lead exposure in children who have elevated blood lead
 levels (or other indicators of elevated lead body burden), as defined by
 the Administrator, in consultation with the Director of the Centers for
 Disease Control.
 `(2) The Administrator shall conduct a comprehensive research program to
 study means to reduce hazardous occupational lead abatement exposures. This
 research program shall include, at a minimum, the following--
 `(A) development of surveillance and intervention capability in the States
 to identify and prevent hazardous exposures to lead abatement workers;
 `(B) development and demonstration of lead abatement control technologies
 and work practices to identify and prevent hazardous lead exposures in
 the workplace;
 `(C) evaluation of health effects of low and high levels of occupational lead
 exposures on reproductive, neurological, renal, and cardiovascular health;
 `(D) identification of high risk occupational settings to which prevention
 activities and resources should be targeted; and
 `(E) a study assessing the potential exposures and risks from lead to
 janitorial and custodial workers.
 `(3) The research projects described in paragraphs (1) and (2) shall
 examine the relative contributions to lead body burden from the following:
 `(A) Drinking water.
 `(B) Food.
 `(C) Lead-based paint and dust from lead-based paint.
 `(D) Exterior sources such as ambient air and lead in soil.
 `(E) Occupational exposures, and other exposures that the Administrator
 determines to be appropriate.
 `(4) The Administrator shall consult with the Secretary of Health and Human
 Services in conducting the research activities related to the contribution
 of lead from food to lead body burden.
 `(5) Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of the
 Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1991, and every 12 months thereafter,
 the Administrator shall submit a report to the Congress concerning the
 research projects described in paragraphs (1) and (2).
 `(h) PUBLIC EDUCATION- (1) The Administrator in conjunction with the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the Administrator
 of the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, shall sponsor
 public education and outreach activities to increase public awareness of--
 `(A) the scope and severity of lead poisoning from household sources;
 `(B) potential exposure to sources of lead in schools and childhood day
 care centers;
 `(C) the implications of exposures for men and women, particularly those
 of childbearing age;
 `(D) the need for careful, quality, abatement and management actions;
 `(E) the need for universal screening of children; and
 `(F) other components of a lead poisoning prevention program.
 `(2) The activities described in paragraph (1) shall be designed to provide
 educational services and information to--
 `(A) health professionals;
 `(B) other groups that the Administrator and the Secretary of Health and
 Human Services determine to be appropriate; and
 `(C) the general public.
 `(i) SOIL LEAD GUIDELINES- Not later than 24 months after the date of the
 enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1991, the Administrator
 shall issue guidelines concerning the action levels for lead in soil and
 abatement recommendations.
 `(j) COORDINATOR FOR LEAD ACTIVITIES- Not later than 30 days after the
 date of the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1991, the
 Administrator shall appoint, from among the employees of the Environmental
 Protection Agency, a Coordinator for Lead Activities to coordinate the
 activities conducted by the Agency (or in conjunction with the Agency)
 relating to the prevention of lead poisoning, the reduction of lead exposure,
 and lead abatement.
`SEC. 407. LEAD ABATEMENT TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION.
 `(a) REGULATIONS- (1) Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment
 of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1991, the Administrator shall, in
 consultation with other appropriate Federal departments and agencies,
 promulgate final regulations governing lead-based paint abatement
 activities. The provisions of this section shall supersede the provisions
 set forth under the heading `Lead Abatement Training and Certification' and
 under the heading `Training Grants' in title III of the Act entitled `An Act
 making appropriations for the Departments of Veterans Affairs and Housing
 and Urban Development, and for sundry independent agencies, commissions,
 corporations, and offices for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1992,
 and for other purposes', Public Law 102- , and upon the enactment of this
 section the provisions set forth in such public law under such headings
 shall cease to have any force and effect.
 `(2) Final regulations promulgated under paragraph (1) shall contain
 specific requirements for the accreditation of lead abatement training
 programs for lead abatement workers, supervisors, contractors, inspectors,
 and planners, including but not limited to--
 `(A) minimum requirements for the accreditation of training providers;
 `(B) minimum training curriculum requirements;
 `(C) minimum training hour requirements;
 `(D) minimum hands-on training requirements;
 `(E) minimum trainee competency and proficiency requirements;
 `(F) minimum requirements for training program quality control; and
 `(G) procedures for approving State accreditation programs.
 `(3) The regulations promulgated under paragraph (1) shall also contain
 specific requirements for the training of lead abatement workers,
 supervisors, contractors, inspectors, and planners, including but not
 limited to--
 `(A) health effects of lead and sources of exposures;
 `(B) worker protection practices and procedures;
 `(C) abatement methods;
 `(D) prohibited abatement methods and practices;
 `(E) lead-based paint abatement waste clean-up and disposal requirements;
 `(F) testing and monitoring;
 `(G) medical monitoring of abatement personnel;
 `(H) lead-based paint encapsulation and maintenance practices;
 `(I) recordkeeping;
 `(J) worker rights and responsibilities; and
 `(K) insurance and bonding requirements.
 `(4) The regulations promulgated under paragraph (1) shall also include
 specific requirements for the certification of lead abatement contractors.
 `(5) Not later than 6 months after the enactment of the Lead Contamination
 Reduction Act of 1991, the Administrator shall issue interim regulations
 governing lead abatement activities that are at least as comprehensive in
 scope and specificity as the guidelines issued by the Department of Housing
 and Urban Development published at Federal Register 55, page 14556 (April
 18, 1990) and following and the revised chapter 8 published at Federal
 Register 55, page 38973 (September 28, 1990).
 `(b) ADMINISTRATION- (1) The Administrator shall delegate to the respective
 States the administration of the regulations promulgated in accordance
 with subsection (a).
 `(2) The Administrator may, through appropriate formal agreements, delegate
 to other Federal agencies the enforcement of specific regulations promulgated
 in accordance with section 1. Such agreements shall be subject to public
 view and comment prior to their implementation.
 `(3) The Administrator shall consult with other agencies of the Federal
 Government with respect to the promulgation and enforcement of regulations
 required in subsection (a).
 `(c) TRAINING GRANT PROGRAM- (1) Grants for the training and education of
 workers who are or may be directly engaged in lead abatement activities
 shall be administered by the Administrator.
 `(2) Grants made under this section shall be awarded to nonprofit
 organizations engaged in lead-based paint abatement activities with
 demonstrated experience in implementing and operating worker health and
 safety lead-based paint abatement training and education programs and with
 a demonstrated ability to reach and involve in lead-based paint training
 programs target populations of workers who are or will be engaged in
 lead-based paint abatement activities. Grants shall be awarded only to
 those organizations that fund at least 30 percent of their lead-based
 paint abatement training programs from non-Federal sources, excluding
 in-kind contributions.
 `(3) For the purposes of paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection,
 lead-based paint abatement activities means activities engaged in by workers,
 supervisors, contractors, inspectors, and planners who are engaged in the
 inspection, removal, handling, transportation, and disposal of lead-based
 paint and materials containing lead-based paint from public and private
 dwellings, public and commercial buildings, bridges, and other structures
 or superstructures where lead-based paint presents or may present an
 unreasonable risk to health or the environment.
`SEC. 408. PROHIBITED ACTS.
 `It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with a
 provision of this title or with any rule or order issued under this title.'.
SEC. 3. TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
 The Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. 2610) is amended as follows:
 (1) In the first sentence of subsection (a) of section 11:
 (A) Strike `or mixtures' before `are manufactured' and insert `, mixtures,
 or products subject to title IV'.
 (B) Insert `such products,' before `or such articles'.
 (2) In paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of section 11, strike `or mixtures'
 and insert `, mixtures, or products subject to title IV'.
 (3) In section 16, insert `or 408' after `section 15' each place it appears.
 (4) In section 17 amend subsection (a) to read as follows:
 `(a) SPECIFIC ENFORCEMENT- (1) The district courts of the United States
 shall have jurisdiction over civil actions to--
 `(A) restrain any violation of section 15 or 408,
 `(B) restrain any person from taking any action prohibited by section 5,
 6, or 402, or by a rule or order under section 5, 6, or 402,
 `(C) compel the taking of any action required by or under this Act, or
 `(D) direct any manufacturer or processor of a chemical substance,
 mixture, or product subject to title IV manufactured or processed in
 violation of section 5, 6, or 402, or a rule or order under section 5,
 6, or 402, and distributed in commerce, (i) to give notice of such fact
 to distributors in commerce of such substance, mixture, or product and,
 to the extent reasonably ascertainable, to other persons in possession of
 such substance, mixture, or product or exposed to such substance, mixture,
 or product, (ii) to give public notice of such risk of injury, and (iii)
 to either replace or repurchase such substance, mixture, or product,
 whichever the person to which the requirement is directed elects.'.
 (5) In the first sentence of subsection (b) of section 17--
 (A) strike `or mixture' after `Any chemical substance' and inserting `,
 mixture, or product subject to title IV'; and
 (B) insert `product,' before `or article' in each place that it appears.
 (6) Add at the end of the table of contents in section 1 the following:
`TITLE IV--LEAD EXPOSURE REDUCTION
`Sec. 401. Findings and policy.
`Sec. 402. Restrictions on continuing uses of certain lead-containing products.
`Sec. 403. Restriction on lead-containing packages.
`Sec. 404. Inventory of lead-containing products.
`Sec. 405. Product labeling.
`Sec. 406. Lead abatement and measurement.
`Sec. 407. Lead abatement training and certification.
`Sec. 408. Prohibited acts.'
SEC. 4. ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL CENTERS FOR THE PREVENTION OF LEAD POISONING.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT AND RESPONSIBILITIES- (1) There is established a
 grant program to establish one or more Centers for the Prevention of Lead
 Poisoning. (Each such Center is hereinafter in this section referred to as a
 `Center'.)
 (2) The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency (hereinafter
 in this section referred to as the `Administrator') shall award grants
 to one or more institutions of higher education in the United States for
 the purpose of establishing and funding a Center. Each such Center shall
 assist the Administrator in carrying out the functions of this title. Such
 functions shall include providing for the transfer of technology and
 serving as a source of information to the general public.
 (b) APPLICATIONS- The Administrator shall solicit applications from any
 institution of higher education in the United States for the designation as
 a Center. The application shall be in such form and contain such information
 as the Administrator may require by regulation.
 (c) SELECTION CRITERIA- The Administrator shall select grant recipients
 from the applicants in accordance with the following criteria:
 (1) The capability of the applicant institution to provide leadership in
 making national contributions to the prevention of lead poisoning.
 (2) The demonstrated capacity of applicant institution to conduct relevant
 research.
 (3) The appropriateness of the projects proposed to be carried out by the
 applicant institution.
 (4) The assurance of the applicant institution of a commitment of at least
 $100,000 in budgeted institutional funds to relevant research upon receipt
 of such grant.
 (5) The presence at the applicant institution of an interdisciplinary
 staff with demonstrated expertise in lead poisoning prevention.
 (6) The demonstrated ability of the applicant institution to disseminate
 results of relevant research and educational programs through an
 interdisciplinary continuing education program.
 (7) Any other criteria that the Administrator determines to be appropriate.
 (d) FEDERAL SHARE AND DURATION OF GRANT- (1) The Federal share of a grant
 under this section shall not exceed 95 percent of the costs of establishing
 and operating a Center and related research activities carried out by
 the Center.
 (2) A grant under this section shall be for a period of time not to exceed
 2 years.
SEC. 5. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out the purposes of
 this Act--
 (1) $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1992.
 (2) $24,000,000 for fiscal year 1993.
 (3) $24,000,000 for fiscal year 1994.
 (4) $22,000,000 for fiscal year 1995.