S 1068 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1068
To require actions to improve competition in the delivery of television
programming, to prohibit discrimination by cable programmers, and to permit
telephone companies to provide video programming.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
May 18 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. GORE (for himself, Mr. GORTON, and Mr. FORD) introduced the following
bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation
A BILL
To require actions to improve competition in the delivery of television
programming, to prohibit discrimination by cable programmers, and to permit
telephone companies to provide video programming.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Cable Competition Act'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) the elimination of regulation of the cable television industry has
 resulted in significantly higher consumer rates, without providing consumers
 the benefits of competition;
 (2) it is in the public interest to establish a competitive market for
 the provision of cable television services;
 (3) the growth of and increasing concentration within the cable television
 industry has diminished the need to protect that industry from competition
 from other potential providers of cable television services;
 (4) competing new program distribution technologies, such as private home
 satellite television receivers, wireless cable, and other alternative
 distribution systems, offer substantial benefits to consumers, especially
 in rural areas, but new policies are required to provide these competing
 distributors with fair access to program services;
 (5) cable consumers would now benefit from increased competition made
 possible by permitting telephone companies to provide cable television
 services, with adequate protections against cross-subsidization from
 telephone customers;
 (6) while the goal of universal service stated in section 1 of the
 Communications Act of 1934 clearly encompasses the electronic delivery of
 information in any form, that goal has not been sufficiently pursued as
 it relates to the delivery of television programming;
 (7) the goal of universal service remains an important, if not the primary,
 objective of United States communications policy, and that goal extends
 to, and should be aggressively pursued as it relates to, the delivery of
 television programming and advanced communications services; and
 (8) universal service can and should mean that video services and advanced
 communications services are as readily available in rural areas as they
 are in urban areas.
SEC. 3. RATE REGULATION OF LIFELINE TELEVISION SERVICES.
 Section 623 of the Communications Act of 1934 is amended by adding at the
 end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(i)(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, for any
 franchising area which is not provided with cable service by two or more
 cable operators, a State or franchising authority may, in accordance with
 State law, regulate the rates that a cable operator may charge for the
 provision of lifeline television services.
 `(2) For purposes of paragraph (1) of this subsection, the term `lifeline
 television services' means--
 `(A) a service tier that provides a minimum of (i) three channels carrying
 the broadcasts of affiliates of the three national television networks,
 (ii) one channel carrying a public television station, (iii) one channel
 carrying each local independent television station; or
 `(B) if no service tier contains each of the minimum channels described
 in subparagraph (A), the two or more service tiers required to provide
 such minimum.'.
SEC. 4. PROVISION OF VIDEO PROGRAMMING BY TELEPHONE COMPANIES.
 Section 613 of the Communications Act of 1934 is amended by striking
 subsection (b) and inserting the following:
 `(b)(1) Subject to the requirements of this Act, a common carrier subject
 in whole or in part to title II of this Act may--
 `(A) provide video programming directly to subscribers, either through its
 own facilities or through an affiliate owned, operated, or controlled by,
 or under common control with, the common carrier; and
 `(B) provide channels of communication or pole line conduit space, or other
 rental arrangements, to any entity which is directly or indirectly owned,
 operated, or controlled by, or under common control with, the common carrier,
 if the facilities or arrangements are to be used for, or in connection with,
 the provision of video programming directly to subscribers.
 `(2) Within 60 days after the date of enactment of the Cable Competition
 Act, the Commission shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary
 to ensure that--
 `(A) the economic risks of any line of business authorized by this
 subsection are not borne by telephone service ratepayers and, in the event
 of a business failure, investment assigned to the line of business shall
 not be reassigned to the telephone service, except upon a showing that
 the customers of telephone service will benefit from such reassignment; and
 `(B) any common carrier providing video services allocates costs in a
 manner which protects basic telephone ratepayers from subsidizing the
 provision of cable service.
 `(3) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to permit any telephone
 company to have any ownership interest in any video programming service
 which it provides to subscribers, if such telephone company is otherwise
 restricted from owning such an interest pursuant to the antitrust laws of
 the United States.'.
SEC. 5. ADDITIONAL CARRIAGE REQUIREMENTS FOR CABLE SYSTEMS.
 Section 612 of the Communications Act of 1934 is amended by adding at the
 end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(h)(1) In addition to the other requirements of this section, a cable
 operator (including a common carrier who provides cable service) shall--
 `(A) provide access to the cable system to any program service, except in
 those instances where the cable system lacks available capacity or where
 a determination is made that the content of the program service is not
 suitable under local community standards;
 `(B) provide access to the cable system to any unaffiliated program service
 on the same rates, terms, and conditions that it provides such access to
 an affiliated program service;
 `(C) comply with the regulations prescribed by the Commission for the
 purposes of ensuring such access.
 `(2) The regulations prescribed by the Commission under paragraph (1)
 of this subsection shall not relieve a common carrier who provides cable
 service of the obligation to comply with--
 `(A) the requirements of title II of this Act;
 `(B) the order of the Commission entitled `Filing and Review of Open Network
 Architecture Plans,' CC Docket 88-2, Phase I, released December 22, 1988,
 and any amendment or revision thereof; and
 `(C) such additional regulations and orders as the Commission may from
 time to time prescribe concerning open network architecture plans and
 related requirements.'.
SEC. 6. EQUAL ACCESS TO PROGRAMMING.
 Part IV of title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 is amended by adding
 at the end thereof the following new section:
`PROGRAM DISTRIBUTION DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED
 `SEC. 640. (a) As used in this section--
 `(1) the term `affiliated person' means--
 `(A) any cable operator, and
 `(B) any person that, directly or indirectly, owns or controls, is owned
 or controlled by, or under common ownership or control with, any cable
 operator; and
 `(2) each person who is the beneficial owner of 5 percent or more of the
 equitable securities (or equivalent thereof) of a person shall be considered
 to own or control that person.
 `(b) Except as provided in subsection (c), it shall be unlawful for any
 affiliated person who, directly or indirectly, provides programming to any
 cable operator for carriage on a cable system, to engage in any unjust or
 unreasonable discrimination in charges, practices, regulations, facilities,
 or services against any person seeking to obtain such programming for
 distribution over another cable system or over any other medium capable
 of making the programming available for private viewing.
 `(c) Subsection (b) shall not apply to programming that is carried as a
 secondary transmission of a signal broadcast by a television station.
 `(d) The Commission shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary
 to implement and enforce subsection (b).
SEC. 7. STUDIES BY FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION.
 (a) REVIEW OF OWNERSHIP PATTERNS REQUIRED- (1) The Federal Trade Commission
 shall, within 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, initiate
 a proceeding to investigate--
 (A) the extent to which affiliated persons (as that term is defined in
 section 640(a)(1) of the Communications Act of 1934 as amended by this Act)
 are engaged in the business of producing and distributing video programming
 for carriage on cable television systems;
 (B) the degree to which such operations result in--
 (i) higher rates and charges for cable television service, or
 (ii) unfair or anticompetitive acts or practices with respect to other
 producers or distributors of such programming; and
 (C) the extent to which multiple-system operators of cable franchises have
 engaged in acquisitions of cable systems--
 (i) at purchase prices in excess of national averages for similar systems,
 (ii) where resulting basic service rate increases have failed to produce
 commensurate consumer benefits arising from such acquisitions, or
 (iii) where accelerated turnover of franchises has created an upward spiral
 of basic rate increases as franchises are sold.
 (2) The Federal Trade Commission shall submit to the Congress not later than
 one year after the date of enactment of this Act a report on the results
 of the investigation required by this subsection and shall include in such
 report such recommendations for legislative or administrative action as
 the Commission considers necessary or appropriate in the public interest.
 (b) EVALUATION OF DELIVERY OF VIDEO PROGRAMMING TO RURAL AREAS- (1) The
 Federal Communications Commission shall, within 30 days after the date of
 enactment of this Act, initiate a proceeding to investigate--
 (A) the extent to which video programming is being delivered to residents
 of rural areas by means of cable television systems and other media;
 (B) methods which might be used to improve and extend the delivery of
 such programming by cable television systems and other media, which shall
 include--
 (i) methods of assuring the provision of cable television services in
 rural areas through a universal service fund or related mechanism; and
 (ii) methods of providing finances for the construction of cable television
 systems in rural areas under the auspices of Federal, State, and local
 rural development agencies.
 (2) The Federal Communications Commission shall submit to the Congress not
 later than one year after the date of enactment of this Act a report on the
 results of the investigation required by this subsection and shall include
 in such report such recommendations for legislative or administrative action
 as the Commission considers necessary or appropriate in the public interest
 to improve and extend the delivery of such programming in rural areas.