HR 4012 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 4012
To protect employees who report violations of Federal laws and regulations.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
February 20, 1990
Mrs. BOXER introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Education and Labor
A BILL
To protect employees who report violations of Federal laws and regulations.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. PROHIBITION OF RETALIATORY PERSONNEL PRACTICES.
 No person may take (or threaten to take) an unfavorable personnel action,
 withhold (or threaten to withhold) a favorable personnel action, or in
 any other manner discriminate against an employee for--
 (1) making or demonstrating an intent to make a protected disclosure;
 (2) assisting or demonstrating an intent to assist in achieving compliance
 with any Federal law, rule, or regulation, or
 (3) refusing to violate any Federal law, rule, or regulation.
SEC. 2. COMPLAINT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Any employee who believes that the employee has been the
 subject of a prohibited personnel practice described in section 1 may file
 a complaint with the Secretary of Labor.
 (b) STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS- The statute of limitations for filing a complaint
 under subsection (a) shall be one year after the later of the date--
 (1) an alleged violation occurs,
 (2) the discharge or other discrimination has taken effect, or
 (3) the employee first becomes aware of the violation or the prohibited
 personnel action.
SEC. 3. INVESTIGATION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of Labor shall investigate the complaint
 of a prohibited personnel action filed by an employee under section
 2(a). The Secretary of Labor shall also request the Inspector General
 or comparable investigative body of the Federal agency with respect to
 which such employee took an action described in section 1 to conduct an
 investigation of such action.
 (b) TIME- The Secretary of Labor shall have 90 days after the receipt
 of a complaint alleging a prohibited personnel action to complete the
 investigation.
 (c) REPORT- The Secretary of Labor's report of an investigation shall
 determine whether there is reasonable cause to believe the complaint has
 merit and shall make findings of fact. If there is reasonable cause to
 believe a violation of section 1 has occurred, the report shall include
 an order providing appropriate interim relief, pending a final order. Any
 order providing interim relief shall be enforceable as if it were the
 final order of the Secretary.
 (d) HEARING- The parties involved shall have the right to a hearing before
 an administrative law judge of the Department of Labor if they choose to
 appeal the Secretary's decision from the report of an investigation. The
 hearing shall be subject to the requirements of section 554 of title 5,
 United States Code. Filing for such hearing must occur within 60 days
 of receipt of the Secretary of Labor's investigative report. The judge
 shall issue a decision within 180 days of the time the application for
 the hearing is filed. If the judge fails to make a decision within that
 time, the employee has the right to file a civil action within 60 days for
 damages and declaratory and equitable relief in any district court of the
 United States having jurisdiction over the parties and will be deemed to
 have exhausted administrative remedies provided in the Act. Within 60 days
 of the court's order, the Secretary of Labor shall issue a final order,
 based on the record and the decision of the administrative law judge. If
 the Secretary does not issue a final order, within 60 days, the decision of
 the administrative law judge shall become the final order of the Secretary.
 (e) BURDEN OF PROOF- Once an employee has established by a preponderance
 of the evidence that an activity protected by section 1 was a contributing
 factor in the alleged prohibited personnel action, the burden of proof in
 the hearing under subsection (d) shall be on the employee's employer to prove
 by clear and convincing evidence that the alleged action would have occurred
 even if the employee had not engaged in activities protected by section 1.
 (f) JUDICIAL REVIEW- Any employee adversely affected by a final order of
 the Secretary may obtain review of the order in the United States court
 of appeals for the circuit in which the violation allegedly occurred.
SEC. 4. REMEDY.
 If the judge or the Secretary of Labor determines that there has been a
 violation of section 1, action shall be taken to remedy the injustice done
 to the employee and make the employee whole, including reinstatement with
 the same seniority status as the employee enjoyed prior to the onset of
 the prohibited action, back pay, interest on the back pay, compensation
 for any special damages sustained as a result of the discrimination,
 including litigation costs and reasonable attorney's fees, and may include
 punitive damages.
SEC. 5. EFFECT ON OTHER RIGHTS AND REMEDIES.
 (a) FEDERAL RIGHTS AND REMEDIES- The rights and remedies provided to
 employees by this Act supersede, and are in lieu of, any other rights
 and remedies provided under any existing Federal laws with respect to any
 discharge or discrimination based on conduct protected by section 1.
 (b) STATE RIGHTS AND REMEDIES- The rights and remedies provided to employees
 by this Act and Federal law are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any
 other rights and remedies of employees provided under State law and are
 not intended to alter or affect such rights and remedies.
SEC. 6. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act:
 (1) The term `employee' means any person who is employed by an employer,
 including any employee of a State or a political subdivision of a State
 or any political entity within a State, including a county, city, town,
 or parish.
 (2) The term `protected disclosure' means a communication that discloses,
 or demonstrates an intention to disclose, information that the employee
 reasonably believes constitutes--
 (A) evidence of a violation of a Federal law or regulation, or
 (B) evidence of--
 (i) mismanagement,
 (ii) gross waste of funds,
 (iii) an abuse of authority, or
 (iv) a substantial and specific danger to public health or safety,
in connection with any Federal program, the exercise of any Federal authority,
or the execution of any Federal contract.