HR 3559 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3559
To amend the National Housing Act to provide for accountability of lenders
making mortgage loans under the Act.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
October 31, 1989
Mr. RIDGE (for himself and Ms. OAKAR) introduced the following bill; which
was referred to the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs
A BILL
To amend the National Housing Act to provide for accountability of lenders
making mortgage loans under the Act.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Neighborhood Mortgage Lenders Accountability
 Act'.
SEC. 2. PROHIBITION ON BASING MORTGAGE COSTS AND INTEREST ON AMOUNT OF LOAN.
 Section 203 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1709) is amended by
 adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(s) No mortgagee may make or hold mortgages insured under this section
 if the customary lending practices of such mortgagee, as determined by the
 Secretary, provide for variations in the interest rate, level of discount
 points, loan origination fee, or any other amount charged to a mortgagor
 with respect to a mortgage on the basis of the initial principal amount
 of the insured loan made by such mortgagee.'.
SEC. 3. EXAMINATION OF MORTGAGEES.
 Title V of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) is amended
 by adding at the end the following new sections:
`EXAMINATION OF MORTGAGEES
 `SEC. 536. (a)(1) In connection with any examination of any mortgagee
 approved by the Secretary pursuant to this Act, the Secretary shall assess
 the performance of the mortgagee in meeting the lending needs of the
 community in which it does business with respect to residential housing
 lending (including neighborhoods of predominantly low- and moderate-income
 families), the consistency of the lending programs of the mortgagee with
 safe and sound lending practices, as determined by the Secretary, and the
 record of defaults on insured mortgage loans originated and serviced by
 the mortgagee.
 `(2) The Secretary shall consider any information acquired pursuant to
 paragraph (1) in determining whether to permit such mortgagee to continue
 in its status as an approved mortgagee for purposes of this Act and to
 otherwise participate in programs involving mortgage insurance administered
 by the Secretary.
 `(b)(1) If any examination of an approved mortgagee by the Secretary
 (including an examination under subsection (d)) discloses that the mortgagee
 has failed, in the determination of the Secretary, to meet the lending needs
 of the community served by the mortgage (as determined by the Secretary
 under subsection (a)(1)) with respect to residential housing lending,
 the Secretary may, in the discretion of the Secretary, require that the
 mortgagee, for continued status as an approved mortgagee for purposes of
 this Act, develop and submit a plan for remedying such deficiencies.
 `(2) A plan under paragraph (1) shall be filed with the Secretary and the
 Secretary shall cause the plan to be published in the Federal Register. The
 mortgagee shall cause the plan to be published in at least one newspaper of
 general circulation in each community in which the approved mortgagee engages
 in the solicitation, origination, or servicing of residential mortgage loans.
 `(3) The Secretary shall provide for not less than a 60-day period of
 public comment concerning the adequacy of the plan under this subsection,
 such period beginning on the latter of the publication of the plan in a
 newspaper or the Federal Register.
 `(4) If the Secretary approves the plan, the mortgagee shall be consider
 a mortgagee approved for participation in the mortgage insurance programs
 under this Act, subject to compliance with the terms of the plan as approved
 by the Secretary.
 `(c) If any approved mortgagee fails to comply with the provisions of any
 plan approved by the Secretary in accordance with subsection (b) with respect
 to the mortgagee, the Secretary may withdraw the approval of the mortgagee
 for participation in mortgage insurance programs under this Act or limit
 the participation of the mortgagee in such programs and may prohibit the
 mortgagee from engaging in any direct endorsement or similar program.
 `(d) Not later than the expiration of the 90-day period beginning on the
 date of the enactment of the Neighborhood Mortgage Lenders Accountability
 Act, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations to establish a procedure
 by which any person may file a request for an examination of the extent to
 which a mortgagee approved by the Secretary for participation in mortgage
 insurance programs under this Act is meeting the lending needs of the
 community (as described in subsection (a)(1), with respect to residential
 housing lending. Such regulations shall provide for an expedited procedure
 by which persons requesting a review may obtain a written report of the
 results of any such requested examination, or of the results of any other
 examination of an approved mortgagee by the Secretary to the extent that
 such examination concerns the matters described in subsection (a)(1).
 `(e) The Secretary shall submit to the Congress, not less than annually,
 a report regarding any actions taken to carry out this section. The report
 shall include a list of all requests filed pursuant to subsection (d)
 and any action taken pursuant to such requests.'.
SEC. 4. STANDARDIZATION OF MORTGAGE SERVICING FEES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 306 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1721)
 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(h)(1)(A) The issuer of trust certificates or other securities guaranteed
 by the Association pursuant to this section, or any other entity servicing
 mortgages included in a trust or pool on which such certificates or
 securities are based, shall be entitled to receive compensation for
 servicing any such mortgages in accordance with this subsection.
 `(B) For purposes of this subsection, the term `servicing' means the
 receiving of payments required of the mortgagor pursuant to the terms of
 the mortgage and includes the making of payments of principal and interest
 and such other payments with respect to amounts required of the mortgagor
 as may be required pursuant to the terms of the mortgage.
 `(2) The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall determine annually,
 not later than a date that the Secretary shall establish by regulation
 (in this subsection referred to as the `determination date'), the average
 balance (for the periods described in paragraph (3)) of the outstanding
 principal with respect to all mortgage loans comprising trusts or pools
 upon which securities guaranteed by the Association are based.
 `(3) For each determination date, the average outstanding principal
 balance referred to in paragraph (2) shall be calculated with respect to
 the following period:
 `(A) For the 1st determination date following the date of the enactment of
 the Neighborhood Mortgage Lenders Accountability Act, the 12-month period
 ending on such determination date.
 `(B) For the 2d determination date, the 24-month period ending on such
 determination date.
 `(C) For the 3rd determination date, the 36-month period ending on such
 determination date.
 `(D) For the 4th determination date, the 48-month period ending on such
 determination date.
 `(E) For the 5th determination date and all determination dates thereafter,
 the 60-month period ending on each such determination date.
 `(4) With respect to each mortgage serviced during the 12-month period
 beginning on each determination date, the servicing fee referred to
 in paragraph (1)(A) for such period shall be an amount, determined by
 the Secretary, that is equal to 44/100 of 1 percent of the average
 outstanding principal balance determined by the Secretary under paragraph
 (2). The average outstanding principal balance and servicing fee shall be
 published by the Secretary in the Federal Register.
 `(5) With respect to each such mortgage serviced by such issuer or other
 servicer, the issuer or servicer may retain for compensation for servicing of
 the mortgage out of each payment of principal and interest an amount equal
 to 1/12 of 44/100 of 1 percent of the outstanding principal amount
 of such mortgage. If the aggregate amount retained from all mortgages
 serviced by the issuer or servicer during any year exceeds the product of
 (A) the total number of mortgages serviced during such 12-month period,
 and (B) the servicing fee determined by the Secretary under paragraph (4),
 the issuer or servicer shall remit the excess amount to the Association.
 `(6) If the aggregate amount retained by the issuer or servicer is less
 than the product determined under paragraph (5), the Association shall,
 subject to amounts provided in appropriations Acts, remit the difference
 to such issuer or servicer.
 `(7) They are authorized to be appropriated sums as may be necessary to
 carry out this subsection, which shall constitute a revolving fund to be
 used by the Association to carry out this subsection. Any amounts collected
 by the Association under paragraph (5) shall be deposited in the fund. The
 fund shall be available to the extent provided in appropriations Acts for
 the purpose of making payments under paragraph (6).
 `(8) The Secretary shall issue any regulations necessary to carry out
 this subsection.'.
 (b) APPLICABILITY- The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply with
 respect to mortgages originated after the date of the enactment of this Act.