HR 2834 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2834
To enhance the operation of the Steel Import Stabilization Act.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
June 29, 1989
Mr. OWENS of Utah introduced the following bill; which was referred to the
Committee on Ways and Means
A BILL
To enhance the operation of the Steel Import Stabilization Act.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Steel Import Stabilization Enhancement Act'.
SEC. 2. EXTENSION OF THE STEEL IMPORT STABILIZATION ACT.
 Section 806(a) of the Steel Import Stabilization Act (19 U.S.C. 2253 note)
 is amended--
 (1) by striking out `fifth' in paragraph (1) and inserting `tenth'; and
 (2) by striking out `or fourth' in paragraph (2) and inserting `fourth,
 fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth or ninth'.
SEC. 3. ADMINISTRATION OF SHORT SUPPLY DETERMINATIONS.
 Section 805 of the Steel Import Stabilization Act is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsections (c) and (d) as subsections (d) and (e),
 respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection:
 `(c)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (3)(C), nothing in this subsection
 may be construed as prohibiting the Secretary of Commerce (hereinafter
 in this subsection referred to as the `Secretary'), subject to paragraph
 (2), from permitting the importation of additional quantities of specific
 products in cases where the Secretary determines that conditions of short
 supply or emergency economic situations related to market demand exist.
 `(2) For purposes of applying this subsection--
 `(A) a short supply or emergency economic situation shall not be considered
 to exist solely because domestic producers are unwilling to supply products
 at prices below their costs of production as verified by the Secretary; and
 `(B) the Secretary shall consider price as a factor in determining short
 supply only if the requesting party presents clear and convincing evidence
 that the price of the product being offered by any domestic producer offering
 to supply is substantially above the price at which the product is being
 offered by that domestic producer contemporaneously to other similarly
 situated domestic customers after adjustments for transportation costs
 and differences in product quality.
 `(3)(A) If the Secretary, pursuant to this subsection, authorizes a party to
 import a product in short supply and the Secretary subsequently determines
 that the party--
 `(i) failed to import the full amount authorized by the Secretary within
 the time period stated in the Secretary's authorization; or
 `(ii) resold, bartered, or otherwise placed in commerce any of the products
 imported pursuant to the short supply authorization;
the Secretary shall not consider any short supply request from that party
for a period of 12 months after such determination.
 `(B) If the Secretary determines in response to a request pursuant to
 this subsection that conditions of short supply do not exist because
 domestic producers are able to supply the product and the requesting
 party subsequently fails to purchase the requested tonnage from any
 domestic supplier during the period for which the request has been made,
 the Secretary shall not consider any short supply request from that party
 for a period of 12 months after such determination.
 `(C) The Secretary shall not permit the importation of additional steel
 products pursuant to a determination under this subsection with respect to
 any product covered by a particular bilateral arrangement if any imports
 of that product under such bilateral arrangement are made available solely
 to a particular domestic company.'.