S. 2858 IS
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2858
To amend the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to strengthen civil rights laws that
ban discrimination in employment, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
July 16 (legislative day JULY 10), 1990
Mrs. KASSEBAUM (for herself, Mr. GORTON, Mr. WILSON, and Mr. MURKOWSKI)
introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the
Committee on Labor and Human Resources
A BILL
To amend the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to strengthen civil rights laws that
ban discrimination in employment, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Civil Rights Act of 1990'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
 (a) FINDINGS- Congress finds that additional protections and remedies
 under Federal law are needed to deter unlawful discrimination.
 (b) PURPOSES- The purpose of this Act is to strengthen existing protections
 and remedies available under Federal civil rights to provide more effective
 deterrence.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 Section 701 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e) is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new subsections:
 `(l) The term `complaining party' means the Commission, the Attorney General,
 or a person who may bring an action or proceeding under this title.
 `(m) The term `demonstrates' means meets the burdens of production and
 persuasion in accordance with Rule 301 of the Federal Rules of Evidence.
 `(n) The term `justified by business necessity' means that the challenged
 practice has a manifest relationship to the employment in question or that
 the respondent's legitimate employment goals are significantly served by
 even if they do not require the challenged practice or group of practices.
 `(o) The term `respondent' means an employer, employment agency, labor
 organization, joint labor-management committee, controlling apprenticeship
 or other training or retraining program, including on-the-job training
 programs, or those Federal entities subject to the provisions of section
 717 (or the heads thereof).'.
SEC. 4. DISPARATE IMPACT CASES.
 Section 703 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-2) is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(k) Proof of Unlawful Employment Practices in Disparate Impact Cases-
 `(1) An unlawful employment practice based on disparate impact is established
 only when--
 `(A) a complaining party identifies a particular employment practice
 and demonstrates by statistical evidence that that particular employment
 practice causes a disparate impact on the basis of race, color, religion,
 sex, or national origin; and the respondent fails to demonstrate that such
 practice is justified by business necessity; or
 `(B) a complaining party identifies a combination of two or more employment
 practices and demonstrates by statistical evidence that that combination of
 two or more employment practices causes a disparate impact on the basis of
 race, color, religion, sex, or national origin, and that each employment
 practice in such combination has contributed to the exclusion; and the
 respondent fails to demonstrate that such combination would not cause
 a disparate impact but for employment practices justified by business
 necessity.
 `(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, a rule barring the
 employment of an individual who currently and knowingly uses or possesses
 an illegal drug as defined in schedules I and II of section 102(6) of
 the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802(6)), other than the use or
 possession of a drug taken under the supervision of a licensed health care
 professional, or any other use or possession authorized by the Controlled
 Substances Act or any other provision of Federal law, shall be considered an
 unlawful employment practice under this title only if such rule is adopted or
 applied with an intent to discriminate because of the race, color, religion,
 sex, or national origin except where permitted by 42 U.S.C. 2000e-2(i).'.
SEC. 5. CLARIFYING PROHIBITION AGAINST IMPERMISSIBLE CONSIDERATION OF RACE,
COLOR, RELIGION, SEX OR NATIONAL ORIGIN IN EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 703 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42
 U.S.C. 2000e-2) (as amended by section 4) is further amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(m) DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICE NEED NOT BE SOLE CONTRIBUTING FACTOR- Except
 as otherwise provided in this title, an unlawful employment practice is
 established when the complaining party demonstrates that race, color,
 religion, sex, or national origin was a major contributing factor for
 any employment practice, even though other factors also contributed to
 such practice.'.
 (b) ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS- Section 706(g) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5(g))
 is amended by inserting before the period in the last sentence the following:
 `or, in a case where a violation is established under section 703(1),
 if the respondent establishes that it would have taken the same action in
 the absence of any discrimination.'.
SEC. 6. FACILITATING PROMPT AND ORDERLY RESOLUTION OF CHALLENGES TO EMPLOYMENT
PRACTICES IMPLEMENTING LITIGATED OR CONSENT JUDGMENTS OR ORDERS.
 Section 703 of the Civil Rights of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-2) (as amended
 by sections 4 and 5) is further amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new subsection:
 `(n) Finality of Litigated or Consent Judgments or Orders-
 `(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and except as provided in
 paragraph (2), an employment practice specifically required by a litigated
 or consent judgment or order resolving a claim of employment discrimination
 under this title may not be challenged in a claim under the United States
 Constitution or Federal civil rights laws by a person who, at the time of
 the entry of such judgment or order, was an applicant for employment with
 or an employee of the entity covered by such decree, whose interests would
 likely be affected by the consent decree, and who had--
 `(A) actual notice that such judgment or order would likely affect the
 interests of such person and that later challenge by such person would be
 barred; and
 `(B) a reasonable opportunity to challenge such judgment or order;
 `(2) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to--
 `(A) alter the standards for intervention under rule 24 of the Federal
 Rules of Civil Procedure;
 `(B) apply to the rights of parties to the action in which the litigated or
 consent judgment or order was entered, or of members of a class represented
 or sought to be represented in such action, or of members of a group on
 whose behalf relief was sought in such action by the Federal Government; or
 `(C) prevent challenges to a litigated or consent judgment or order on
 the ground that such judgment or order was obtained through collusion
 or fraud, or is transparently invalid or was entered by a court lacking
 subject matter jurisdiction.'.
SEC. 7. EXPANSION OF RIGHT TO CHALLENGE DISCRIMINATORY SENIORITY SYSTEMS.
 Section 706(e) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5(e))
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following language: `For
 purposes of this section, an alleged unlawful employment practice occurs
 when a seniority system is adopted, when an individual becomes subject to a
 seniority system, or when a person aggrieved is injured by the application
 of a seniority system, or provision thereof, that is alleged to have been
 adopted for an intentionally discriminatory purpose, in violation of this
 title, whether or not that discriminatory purpose is apparent on the face
 of the seniority provision.'.
SEC. 8. PROVIDING FOR ADDITIONAL EQUITABLE RELIEF IN CERTAIN CASES OF
INTENTIONAL DISCRIMINATION.
 Section 706(g) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5(g)) is
 amended by inserting before the last sentence the following new sentences:
 `In fashioning remedies for an unlawful employment practice (other than
 an unlawful employment practice established in accordance with subsection
 703(k)), the court may require the respondent to pay the complaining party
 an amount not to exceed $100,000 if the court finds (i) that back pay
 cannot be awarded with respect to that practice; (ii) that an additional
 equitable remedy beyond those otherwise available is needed to deter the
 respondent from continuing to engage in such unlawful employment practices;
 and (iii) that such an award is otherwise justified by the equities. All
 issues in cases arising under title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
 (42 U.S.C. 2000e to 2000e-17) shall be heard and determined by a judge,
 as specified in section 706(f) of that title (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5f).'.
SEC. 9. ALLOWING THE AWARD OF EXPERT FEES.
 Section 706(k) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5(k)) is
 amended by inserting `(including expert fees) and' after `attorney's fee,';
SEC. 10. EXPANSION OF PROTECTIONS AGAINST ALL RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN THE
PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACTS.
 Section 1977 of the Revised Statutes of the United States (42 U.S.C. 1981)
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new language:
 `The rights protected by this section are protected against impairment by
 nongovernmental discrimination as well as against impairment under color of
 State law. This section affords the same protection against discrimination
 in the performance, breach, modification or termination of a contract as
 it does in the making or enforcement of that contract.'.
SEC. 11. PROVIDING CIVIL RIGHTS PROTECTIONS TO CONGRESSIONAL EMPLOYEES.
 Title VII (42 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the
 following new section:
`SEC. 719. CONGRESSIONAL COVERAGE.
 `Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, this title shall apply
 to the Congress of the United States. The means for enforcing this title
 as the title applies to each House of Congress shall be as determined by
 the House of Congress.'.
SEC. 12. SEVERABILITY.
 If any provision of the Act, or an amendment made by this Act, or the
 application of such provision to any person or circumstances is held to
 be invalid, the remainder of this Act and the amendments made by this Act,
 and the application of such provision to other persons and circumstances,
 shall not be affected thereby.