[Congressional Bills 112th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 397 Introduced in House (IH)]

112th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 397

To repeal the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health 
 Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 and to take meaningful 
 steps to lower health care costs and increase access to health 
insurance coverage without raising taxes, cutting Medicare benefits for 
 seniors, adding to the national deficit, intervening in the doctor-
 patient relationship, or instituting a government takeover of health 
 care.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 January 24, 2011

 Mr. Herger (for himself, Mr. Sam Johnson of Texas, Mr. Tiberi, Mr. 
 Reichert, Mr. Gerlach, Mr. Bachus, Mrs. Blackburn, Mr. Dent, Mr. 
 Harper, Mr. McCaul, Mrs. McMorris Rodgers, Mr. Gary G. Miller of 
California, and Mr. Sessions) introduced the following bill; which was 
 referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce, and in addition to 
 the Committees on Ways and Means, Education and the Workforce, the 
Judiciary, House Administration, Natural Resources, Appropriations, and 
 Rules, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in 
 each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the 
 jurisdiction of the committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

To repeal the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health 
 Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 and to take meaningful 
 steps to lower health care costs and increase access to health 
insurance coverage without raising taxes, cutting Medicare benefits for 
 seniors, adding to the national deficit, intervening in the doctor-
 patient relationship, or instituting a government takeover of health 
 care.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; PURPOSE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Reform Americans 
Can Afford Act of 2011''.
 (b) Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to take meaningful steps 
to lower health care costs and increase access to health insurance 
coverage (especially for individuals with preexisting conditions) 
without--
 (1) raising taxes;
 (2) cutting Medicare benefits for seniors;
 (3) adding to the national deficit;
 (4) intervening in the doctor-patient relationship; or
 (5) instituting a government takeover of health care.
 (c) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; purpose; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Repeal of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and 
 the Health Care and Education 
 Reconciliation Act of 2010.
 DIVISION A--MAKING HEALTH CARE COVERAGE AFFORDABLE FOR EVERY AMERICAN

TITLE I--ENSURING COVERAGE FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH PREEXISTING CONDITIONS 
 AND MULTIPLE HEALTH CARE NEEDS

Sec. 101. Establish universal access programs to improve high risk 
 pools and reinsurance markets.
Sec. 102. Elimination of certain requirements for guaranteed 
 availability in individual market.
Sec. 103. No annual or lifetime spending caps.
Sec. 104. Preventing unjust cancellation of insurance coverage.
 TITLE II--REDUCING HEALTH CARE PREMIUMS AND THE NUMBER OF UNINSURED 
 AMERICANS

Sec. 111. State innovation programs.
Sec. 112. Health plan finders.
Sec. 113. Administrative simplification.
 DIVISION B--IMPROVING ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE

 TITLE I--EXPANDING ACCESS AND LOWERING COSTS FOR SMALL BUSINESSES

Sec. 201. Rules governing association health plans.
Sec. 202. Clarification of treatment of single employer arrangements.
Sec. 203. Enforcement provisions relating to association health plans.
Sec. 204. Cooperation between Federal and State authorities.
Sec. 205. Effective date and transitional and other rules.
 TITLE II--TARGETED EFFORTS TO EXPAND ACCESS

Sec. 211. Extending coverage of dependents.
Sec. 212. Allowing auto-enrollment for employer sponsored coverage.
 TITLE III--EXPANDING CHOICES BY ALLOWING AMERICANS TO BUY HEALTH CARE 
 COVERAGE ACROSS STATE LINES

Sec. 221. Interstate purchasing of health insurance.
 TITLE IV--IMPROVING HEALTH SAVINGS ACCOUNTS

Sec. 231. Saver's credit for contributions to health savings accounts.
Sec. 232. HSA funds for premiums for high deductible health plans.
Sec. 233. Requiring greater coordination between HDHP administrators 
 and HSA account administrators so that 
 enrollees can enroll in both at the same 
 time.
Sec. 234. Special rule for certain medical expenses incurred before 
 establishment of account.
 DIVISION C--ENACTING REAL MEDICAL LIABILITY REFORM

Sec. 301. Encouraging speedy resolution of claims.
Sec. 302. Compensating patient injury.
Sec. 303. Maximizing patient recovery.
Sec. 304. Additional health benefits.
Sec. 305. Punitive damages.
Sec. 306. Authorization of payment of future damages to claimants in 
 health care lawsuits.
Sec. 307. Definitions.
Sec. 308. Effect on other laws.
Sec. 309. State flexibility and protection of States' rights.
Sec. 310. Applicability; effective date.
 DIVISION D--PROTECTING THE DOCTOR-PATIENT RELATIONSHIP

Sec. 401. Rule of construction.
Sec. 402. Repeal of Federal Coordinating Council for Comparative 
 Effectiveness Research.
 DIVISION E--INCENTIVIZING WELLNESS AND QUALITY IMPROVEMENTS

Sec. 501. Incentives for prevention and wellness programs.
 DIVISION F--PROTECTING TAXPAYERS

Sec. 601. Provide full funding to HHS OIG and HCFAC.
Sec. 602. Prohibiting taxpayer funded abortions and conscience 
 protections.
Sec. 603. Improved enforcement of the Medicare and Medicaid secondary 
 payer provisions.
Sec. 604. Strengthen Medicare provider enrollment standards and 
 safeguards.
Sec. 605. Tracking banned providers across State lines.
 DIVISION G--PATHWAY FOR BIOSIMILAR BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS

Sec. 701. Licensure pathway for biosimilar biological products.
Sec. 702. Fees relating to biosimilar biological products.
Sec. 703. Amendments to certain patent provisions.

SEC. 2. REPEAL OF THE PATIENT PROTECTION AND AFFORDABLE CARE ACT AND 
 THE HEALTH CARE AND EDUCATION RECONCILIATION ACT OF 2010.

 (a) Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.--Effective as of 
the enactment of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, such 
Act is repealed, and the provisions of law amended or repealed by such 
Act are restored or revived as if such Act had not been enacted.
 (b) Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010.--
Effective as of the enactment of the Health Care and Education 
Reconciliation Act of 2010, such Act is repealed, and the provisions of 
law amended or repealed by such Act are restored or revived as if such 
Act had not been enacted.

 DIVISION A--MAKING HEALTH CARE COVERAGE AFFORDABLE FOR EVERY AMERICAN

TITLE I--ENSURING COVERAGE FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH PREEXISTING CONDITIONS 
 AND MULTIPLE HEALTH CARE NEEDS

SEC. 101. ESTABLISH UNIVERSAL ACCESS PROGRAMS TO IMPROVE HIGH RISK 
 POOLS AND REINSURANCE MARKETS.

 (a) State Requirement.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than July 1, 2011, each State 
 shall--
 (A) subject to paragraph (3), operate--
 (i) a qualified State reinsurance program 
 described in subsection (b); or
 (ii) qualifying State high risk pool 
 described in subsection (c)(1); and
 (B) subject to paragraph (3), apply to the 
 operation of such a program from State funds an amount 
 equivalent to the portion of State funds derived from 
 State premium assessments (as defined by the Secretary) 
 that are not otherwise used on State health care 
 programs.
 (2) Relation to current qualified high risk pool program.--
 (A) States not operating a qualified high risk 
 pool.--In the case of a State that is not operating a 
 current section 2745 qualified high risk pool as of the 
 date of the enactment of this Act--
 (i) the State may only meet the requirement 
 of paragraph (1) through the operation of a 
 qualified State reinsurance program described 
 in subsection (b); and
 (ii) the State's operation of such a 
 reinsurance program shall be treated, for 
 purposes of section 2745 of the Public Health 
 Service Act, as the operation of a qualified 
 high risk pool described in such section.
 (B) State operating a qualified high risk pool.--In 
 the case of a State that is operating a current section 
 2745 qualified high risk pool as of the date of the 
 enactment of this Act--
 (i) as of July 1, 2011, such a pool shall 
 not be treated as a qualified high risk pool 
 under section 2745 of the Public Health Service 
 Act unless the pool is a qualifying State high 
 risk pool described in subsection (c)(1); and
 (ii) the State may use premium assessment 
 funds described in paragraph (1)(B) to 
 transition from operation of such a pool to 
 operation of a qualified State reinsurance 
 program described in subsection (b).
 (3) Application of funds.--If the program or pool operated 
 under paragraph (1)(A) is in strong fiscal health, as 
 determined in accordance with standards established by the 
 National Association of Insurance Commissioners and as approved 
 by the State Insurance Commissioner involved, the requirement 
 of paragraph (1)(B) shall be deemed to be met.
 (b) Qualified State Reinsurance Program.--
 (1) In general.--For purposes of this section, a 
 ``qualified State reinsurance program'' means a program 
 operated by a State program that provides reinsurance for 
 health insurance coverage offered in the small group market in 
 accordance with the model for such a program established (as of 
 the date of the enactment of this Act).
 (2) Form of program.--A qualified State reinsurance program 
 may provide reinsurance--
 (A) on a prospective or retrospective basis; and
 (B) on a basis that protects health insurance 
 issuers against the annual aggregate spending of their 
 enrollees as well as purchase protection against 
 individual catastrophic costs.
 (3) Satisfaction of hipaa requirement.--A qualified State 
 reinsurance program shall be deemed, for purposes of section 
 2745 of the Public Health Service Act, to be a qualified high 
 risk pool under such section.
 (c) Qualifying State High Risk Pool.--
 (1) In general.--A qualifying State high risk pool 
 described in this subsection means a current section 2745 
 qualified high risk pool that meets the following requirements:
 (A) The pool must provide at least two coverage 
 options, one of which must be a high deductible health 
 plan coupled with a health savings account.
 (B) The pool must be funded with a stable funding 
 source.
 (C) The pool must eliminate any waiting lists so 
 that all eligible residents who are seeking coverage 
 through the pool should be allowed to receive coverage 
 through the pool.
 (D) The pool must allow for coverage of individuals 
 who, but for the 24-month disability waiting period 
 under section 226(b) of the Social Security Act, would 
 be eligible for Medicare during the period of such 
 waiting period.
 (E) The pool must limit the pool premiums to no 
 more than 150 percent of the average premium for 
 applicable standard risk rates in that State.
 (F) The pool must conduct education and outreach 
 initiatives so that residents and brokers understand 
 that the pool is available to eligible residents.
 (G) The pool must provide coverage for preventive 
 services and disease management for chronic diseases.
 (2) Verification of citizenship or alien qualification.--
 (A) In general.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of law, only citizens and nationals of the 
 United States shall be eligible to participate in a 
 qualifying State high risk pool that receives funds 
 under section 2745 of the Public Health Service Act or 
 this section.
 (B) Condition of participation.--As a condition of 
 a State receiving such funds, the Secretary shall 
 require the State to certify, to the satisfaction of 
 the Secretary, that such State requires all applicants 
 for coverage in the qualifying State high risk pool to 
 provide satisfactory documentation of citizenship or 
 nationality in a manner consistent with section 1903(x) 
 of the Social Security Act.
 (C) Records.--The Secretary shall keep sufficient 
 records such that a determination of citizenship or 
 nationality only has to be made once for any individual 
 under this paragraph.
 (3) Relation to section 2745.--As of January 1, 2012, a 
 pool shall not qualify as qualified high risk pool under 
 section 2745 of the Public Health Service Act unless the pool 
 is a qualifying State high risk pool described in paragraph 
 (1).
 (d) Waivers.--In order to accommodate new and innovative programs, 
the Secretary may waive such requirements of this section for qualified 
State reinsurance programs and for qualifying State high risk pools as 
the Secretary deems appropriate.
 (e) Funding.--In addition to any other amounts appropriated, there 
is appropriated to carry out section 2745 of the Public Health Service 
Act (including through a program or pool described in subsection 
(a)(1))--
 (1) $15,000,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2012 
 through 2021; and
 (2) an additional $10,000,000,000 for the period of fiscal 
 years 2017 through 2021.
 (f) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Health insurance coverage; health insurance issuer.--
 The terms ``health insurance coverage'' and ``health insurance 
 issuer'' have the meanings given such terms in section 2791 of 
 the Public Health Service Act.
 (2) Current section 2745 qualified high risk pool.--The 
 term ``current section 2745 qualified high risk pool'' has the 
 meaning given the term ``qualified high risk pool'' under 
 section 2745(g) of the Public Health Service Act as in effect 
 as of the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (3) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services.
 (4) Standard risk rate.--The term ``standard risk rate'' 
 means a rate that--
 (A) is determined under the State high risk pool by 
 considering the premium rates charged by other health 
 insurance issuers offering health insurance coverage to 
 individuals in the insurance market served;
 (B) is established using reasonable actuarial 
 techniques; and
 (C) reflects anticipated claims experience and 
 expenses for the coverage involved.
 (5) State.--The term ``State'' means any of the 50 States 
 or the District of Columbia.

SEC. 102. ELIMINATION OF CERTAIN REQUIREMENTS FOR GUARANTEED 
 AVAILABILITY IN INDIVIDUAL MARKET.

 (a) In General.--Section 2741(b) of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 300gg-41(b)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) by striking ``(1)(A)'' and inserting ``(1)''; 
 and
 (B) by striking ``and (B)'' and all that follows up 
 to the semicolon at the end;
 (2) by adding ``and'' at the end of paragraph (2);
 (3) in paragraph (3)--
 (A) by striking ``(1)(A)'' and inserting ``(1)''; 
 and
 (B) by striking the semicolon at the end and 
 inserting a period; and
 (4) by striking paragraphs (4) and (5).
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 103. NO ANNUAL OR LIFETIME SPENDING CAPS.

 Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a health insurance 
issuer (including an entity licensed to sell insurance with respect to 
a State or group health plan) may not apply an annual or lifetime 
aggregate spending cap on any health insurance coverage or plan offered 
by such issuer. The previous sentence shall not apply with respect to a 
health plan if, as of the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
imposition on such plan of an annual or lifetime aggregate spending cap 
would result in a significant decrease in access to benefits under the 
plan or would significantly increase premiums under the plan.

SEC. 104. PREVENTING UNJUST CANCELLATION OF INSURANCE COVERAGE.

 (a) Clarification Regarding Application of Guaranteed Renewability 
of Individual Health Insurance Coverage.--Section 2742 of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-42) is amended--
 (1) in its heading, by inserting ``, continuation in force, 
 including prohibition of rescission,'' after ``guaranteed 
 renewability'';
 (2) in subsection (a), by inserting ``, including without 
 rescission,'' after ``continue in force''; and
 (3) in subsection (b)(2), by inserting before the period at 
 the end the following: ``, including intentional concealment of 
 material facts regarding a health condition related to the 
 condition for which coverage is being claimed''.
 (b) Opportunity for Independent, External Third Party Review in 
Certain Cases.--Subpart 1 of part B of title XXVII of the Public Health 
Service Act is amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 2746. OPPORTUNITY FOR INDEPENDENT, EXTERNAL THIRD PARTY REVIEW 
 IN CERTAIN CASES.

 ``(a) Notice and Review Right.--If a health insurance issuer 
determines to nonrenew or not continue in force, including rescind, 
health insurance coverage for an individual in the individual market on 
the basis described in section 2742(b)(2) before such nonrenewal, 
discontinuation, or rescission, may take effect the issuer shall 
provide the individual with notice of such proposed nonrenewal, 
discontinuation, or rescission and an opportunity for a review of such 
determination by an independent, external third party under procedures 
specified by the Secretary.
 ``(b) Independent Determination.--If the individual requests such 
review by an independent, external third party of a nonrenewal, 
discontinuation, or rescission of health insurance coverage, the 
coverage shall remain in effect until such third party determines that 
the coverage may be nonrenewed, discontinued, or rescinded under 
section 2742(b)(2).''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply after the date of the enactment of this Act with respect to 
health insurance coverage issued before, on, or after such date.

 TITLE II--REDUCING HEALTH CARE PREMIUMS AND THE NUMBER OF UNINSURED 
 AMERICANS

SEC. 111. STATE INNOVATION PROGRAMS.

 (a) Programs That Reduce the Cost of Health Insurance Premiums.--
 (1) Payments to states.--
 (A) For premium reductions in the small group 
 market.--If the Secretary determines that a State has 
 reduced the average per capita premium for health 
 insurance coverage in the small group market in year 3, 
 in year 6, or year 9 (as defined in subsection (c)) 
 below the premium baseline for such year (as defined 
 paragraph (2)), the Secretary shall pay the State an 
 amount equal to the product of--
 (i) bonus premium percentage (as defined in 
 paragraph (3)) for the State, market, and year; 
 and
 (ii) the maximum State premium payment 
 amount (as defined in paragraph (4)) for the 
 State, market, and year
 (B) For premium reductions in the individual 
 market.--If the Secretary determines that a State has 
 reduced the average per capita premium for health 
 insurance coverage in the individual market in year 3, 
 in year 6, or in year 9 below the premium baseline for 
 such year, the Secretary shall pay the State an amount 
 equal to the product of--
 (i) bonus premium percentage for the State, 
 market, and year; and
 (ii) the maximum State premium payment 
 amount for the State, market, and year.
 (2) Premium baseline.--For purposes of this subsection, the 
 term ``premium baseline'' means, for a market in a State--
 (A) for year 1, the average per capita premiums for 
 health insurance coverage in such market in the State 
 in such year; or
 (B) for a subsequent year, the baseline for the 
 market in the State for the previous year under this 
 paragraph increased by a percentage specified in 
 accordance with a formula established by the Secretary, 
 in consultation with the Congressional Budget Office 
 and the Bureau of the Census, that takes into account 
 at least the following:
 (i) Growth factor.--The inflation in the 
 costs of inputs to health care services in the 
 year.
 (ii) Historic premium growth rates.--
 Historic growth rates, during the 10 years 
 before year 1, of per capita premiums for 
 health insurance coverage.
 (iii) Demographic considerations.--Historic 
 average changes in the demographics of the 
 population covered that impact on the rate of 
 growth of per capita health care costs.
 (3) Bonus premium percentage defined.--
 (A) In general.--For purposes of this subsection, 
 the term ``bonus premium percentage'' means, for the 
 small group market or individual market in a State for 
 a year, such percentage as determined in accordance 
 with the following table based on the State's premium 
 performance level (as defined in subparagraph (B)) for 
 such market and year:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The bonus
 premium For year 3 if the premium For year 6 if the premium For year 9 if the premium
percentage for performance level of the State performance level of the State performance level of the
 a State is-- is-- is-- State is--
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 100 percent at least 8.5% at least 11% at least 13.5%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 50 percent at least 6.38%, at least 10.38%, at least 12.88%,
 but less than but less than but less than
 8.5% 11% 13.5%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 25 percent at least 4.25%, at least 9.75%, at least 12.25%,
 but less than but less than but less than
 6.38% 10.38% 12.88%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 0 percent less than 4.25% less than 9.75% less than 12.25%.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 (B) Premium performance level.--For purposes of 
 this subsection, the term ``premium performance level'' 
 means, for a State, market, and year, the percentage 
 reduction in the average per capita premiums for health 
 insurance coverage for the State, market, and year, as 
 compared to the premium baseline for such State, 
 market, and year.
 (4) Maximum state premium payment amount defined.--For 
 purposes of this subsection, the term ``maximum State premium 
 payment amount'' means, for a State for the small group market 
 or the individual market for a year, the product of--
 (A) the proportion (as determined by the 
 Secretary), of the number of nonelderly individuals 
 lawfully residing in all the States who are enrolled in 
 health insurance coverage in the respective market in 
 the year, who are residents of the State; and
 (B) the amount available for obligation from 
 amounts appropriated under subsection (d) for such 
 market with respect to performance in such year.
 (5) Methodology for calculating average per capita 
 premiums.--
 (A) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish, 
 by rule and consistent with this subsection, a 
 methodology for computing the average per capita 
 premiums for health insurance coverage for the small 
 group market and for the individual market in each 
 State for each year beginning with year 1.
 (B) Adjustments.--Under such methodology, the 
 Secretary shall provide for the following adjustments 
 (in a manner determined appropriate by the Secretary):
 (i) Exclusion of illegal aliens.--An 
 adjustment so as not to take into account 
 enrollees who are not lawfully present in the 
 United States and their premium costs.
 (ii) Treating state premium subsidies as 
 premium costs.--An adjustment so as to increase 
 per capita premiums to remove the impact of 
 premium subsidies made directly by a State to 
 reduce health insurance premiums.
 (6) Conditions of payment.--As a condition of receiving a 
 payment under paragraph (1), a State must agree to submit 
 aggregate, non-individually identifiable data to the Secretary, 
 in a form and manner specified by the Secretary, for use by the 
 Secretary to determine the State's premium baseline and premium 
 performance level for purposes of this subsection.
 (b) Programs That Reduce the Number of Uninsured.--
 (1) In general.--If the Secretary determines that a State 
 has reduced the percentage of uninsured nonelderly residents in 
 year 5, year 7, or year 9, below the uninsured baseline (as 
 defined in paragraph (2)) for the State for the year, the 
 Secretary shall pay the State an amount equal to the product 
 of--
 (A) bonus uninsured percentage (as defined in 
 paragraph (3)) for the State and year; and
 (B) the maximum uninsured payment amount (as 
 defined in paragraph (4)) for the State and year.
 (2) Uninsured baseline.--
 (A) In general.--For purposes of this subsection, 
 and subject to subparagraph (B), the term ``uninsured 
 baseline'' means, for a State, the percentage of 
 nonelderly residents in the State who are uninsured in 
 year 1.
 (B) Adjustment.--The Secretary may, at the written 
 request of a State, adjust the uninsured baseline for 
 States for a year to take into account unanticipated 
 and exceptional changes, such as an unanticipated 
 migration, of nonelderly individuals into, or out of, 
 States in a manner that does not reflect substantially 
 the proportion of uninsured nonelderly residents in the 
 States involved in year 1. Any such adjustment shall 
 only be done in a manner that does not result in the 
 average of the uninsured baselines for nonelderly 
 residents for all States being changed.
 (3) Bonus uninsured percentage.--
 (A) Bonus uninsured percentage.--For purposes of 
 this subsection, the term ``bonus uninsured 
 percentage'' means, for a State for a year, such 
 percentage as determined in accordance with the 
 following table, based on the uninsured performance 
 level (as defined in subparagraph (B)) for such State 
 and year:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The bonus
 uninsured For year 5 if the uninsured For year 7 if the uninsured For year 9 if the uninsured
percentage for performance level of the State performance level of the State performance level of the
 a State is-- is-- is-- State is--
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 100 percent at least 10% at least 15% at least 20%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 50 percent at least 7.5%, at least 13.75%, at least 18.75%,
 but less than but less than but less than
 10% 15% 20%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 25 percent at least 5%, at least 12.5%, at least 17.5%,
 but less than but less than but less than
 7.5% 13.75% 18.75%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 0 percent less than 5% less than 12.5% less than 17.5%.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 (B) Uninsured performance level.--For purposes of 
 this subsection, the term ``uninsured performance 
 level'' means, for a State for a year, the reduction 
 (expressed as a percentage) in the percentage of 
 uninsured nonelderly residents in such State in the 
 year as compared to the uninsured baseline for such 
 State for such year.
 (4) Maximum state uninsured payment amount defined.--For 
 purposes of this subsection, the term ``maximum State uninsured 
 payment amount'' means, for a State for a year, the product 
 of--
 (A) the proportion (as determined by the 
 Secretary), of the number of uninsured nonelderly 
 individuals lawfully residing in all the States in the 
 year, who are residents of the State; and
 (B) the amount available for obligation under this 
 subsection from amounts appropriated under subsection 
 (d) with respect to performance in such year.
 (5) Methodology for computing the percentage of uninsured 
 nonelderly residents in a state.--
 (A) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish, 
 by rule and consistent with this subsection, a 
 methodology for computing the percentage of nonelderly 
 residents in a State who are uninsured in each year 
 beginning with year 1.
 (B) Rules.--
 (i) Treatment of uninsured.--Such 
 methodology shall treat as uninsured those 
 residents who do not have health insurance 
 coverage or other creditable coverage (as 
 defined in section 9801(c)(1) of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986), except that such 
 methodology shall rely upon data on the 
 nonelderly and uninsured populations within 
 each State in such year provided through 
 population surveys conducted by Federal 
 agencies.
 (ii) Limitation to nonelderly.--Such 
 methodology shall exclude individuals who are 
 65 years of age or older.
 (iii) Exclusion of illegal aliens.--Such 
 methodology shall exclude individuals not 
 lawfully present in the United States.
 (6) Conditions of payment.--As a condition of receiving a 
 payment under paragraph (1), a State must agree to submit 
 aggregate, non-individually identifiable data to the Secretary, 
 in a form and manner specified by the Secretary, for use by the 
 Secretary in determining the State's uninsured baseline and 
 uninsured performance level for purposes of this subsection.
 (c) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
 (1) Group health plan.--The term ``group health plan'' has 
 the meaning given such term in section 9832(a) of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986.
 (2) Health insurance coverage.--The term ``health insurance 
 coverage'' has the meaning given such term in section 
 9832(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (3) Individual market.--Except as the Secretary may 
 otherwise provide in the case of group health plans that have 
 fewer than 2 participants as current employees on the first day 
 of a plan year, the term ``individual market'' means the market 
 for health insurance coverage offered to individuals other than 
 in connection with a group health plan.
 (4) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (5) Small group market.--The term ``small group market'' 
 means the market for health insurance coverage under which 
 individuals obtain health insurance coverage (directly or 
 through any arrangement) on behalf of themselves (and their 
 dependents) through a group health plan maintained by an 
 employer who employed on average at least 2 but not more than 
 50 employees on business days during a calendar year.
 (6) State.--The term ``State'' means any of the 50 States 
 and the District of Columbia.
 (7) Years.--The terms ``year 1'', ``year 2'', ``year 3'', 
 and similar subsequently numbered years mean 2012, 2013, 2014, 
 and subsequent sequentially numbered years.
 (d) Appropriations; Payments.--
 (1) Payments for reductions in cost of health insurance 
 coverage.--
 (A) Small group market.--
 (i) In general.--From any funds in the 
 Treasury not otherwise appropriated, there is 
 appropriated for payments under subsection 
 (a)(1)(A)--
 (I) $18,000,000,000 with respect to 
 performance in year 3;
 (II) $5,000,000,000 with respect to 
 performance in year 6; and
 (III) $2,000,000,000 with respect 
 to performance in year 9.
 (ii) Availability of appropriated funds.--
 Funds appropriated under clause (i) shall 
 remain available until expended.
 (B) Individual market.--
 (i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), 
 from any funds in the Treasury not otherwise 
 appropriated, there is appropriated for 
 payments under subsection (a)(1)(B)--
 (I) $7,000,000,000 with respect to 
 performance in year 3;
 (II) $2,000,000,000 with respect to 
 performance in year 6; and
 (III) $1,000,000,000 with respect 
 to performance in year 9.
 (ii) Availability of appropriated funds.--
 Of the funds appropriated under clause (i) that 
 are not expended or obligated by the end of the 
 year following the year for which the funds are 
 appropriated--
 (I) 75 percent shall remain 
 available until expended for payments 
 under subsection (a)(1)(B); and
 (II) 25 percent shall remain 
 available until expended for payments 
 under subsection (a)(1)(A).
 (2) Payments for reductions in the percentage of 
 uninsured.--
 (A) In general.--From any funds in the Treasury not 
 otherwise appropriated, there is appropriated for 
 payments under subsection (b)(1)--
 (i) $10,000,000,000 with respect to 
 performance in year 5;
 (ii) $3,000,000,000 with respect to 
 performance in year 7; and
 (iii) $2,000,000,000 with respect to 
 performance in year 9.
 (B) Availability of appropriated funds.--Funds 
 appropriated under subparagraph (A) shall remain 
 available until expended.
 (3) Payment timing.--Payments under this section shall be 
 made in a form and manner specified by the Secretary in the 
 year after the performance year involved.

SEC. 112. HEALTH PLAN FINDERS.

 (a) State Plan Finders.--Not later than 12 months after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, each State may contract with a private 
entity to develop and operate a plan finder Web site (referred to in 
this section as a ``State plan finder'') which shall provide 
information to individuals in such State on plans of health insurance 
coverage that are available to individuals in such State (in this 
section referred to as a ``health insurance plan''). Such State may not 
operate a plan finder itself.
 (b) Multi-State Plan Finders.--
 (1) In general.--A private entity may operate a multi-State 
 finder that operates under this section in the States involved 
 in the same manner as a State plan finder would operate in a 
 single State.
 (2) Sharing of information.--States shall regulate the 
 manner in which data is shared between plan finders to ensure 
 consistency and accuracy in the information about health 
 insurance plans contained in such finders.
 (c) Requirements for Plan Finders.--Each plan finder shall meet the 
following requirements:
 (1) The plan finder shall ensure that each health insurance 
 plan in the plan finder meets the requirements for such plans 
 under subsection (d).
 (2) The plan finder shall present complete information on 
 the costs and benefits of health insurance plans (including 
 information on monthly premium, copayments, and deductibles) in 
 a uniform manner that--
 (A) uses the standard definitions developed under 
 paragraph (3); and
 (B) is designed to allow consumers to easily 
 compare such plans.
 (3) The plan finder shall be available on the Internet and 
 accessible to all individuals in the State or, in the case of a 
 multi-State plan finder, in all States covered by the multi-
 State plan finder.
 (4) The plan finder shall allow consumers to search and 
 sort data on the health insurance plans in the plan finder on 
 criteria such as coverage of specific benefits (such as 
 coverage of disease management services or pediatric care 
 services), as well as data available on quality.
 (5) The plan finder shall meet all relevant State laws and 
 regulations, including laws and regulations related to the 
 marketing of insurance products. In the case of a multi-State 
 plan finder, the finder shall meet such laws and regulations 
 for all of the States involved.
 (6) The plan finder shall meet solvency, financial, and 
 privacy requirements established by the State or States in 
 which the plan finder operates or the Secretary for multi-State 
 finders.
 (7) The plan finder and the employees of the plan finder 
 shall be appropriately licensed in the State or States in which 
 the plan finder operates, if such licensure is required by such 
 State or States.
 (8) Notwithstanding subsection (f)(1), the plan finder 
 shall assist individuals who are eligible for the Medicaid 
 program under title XIX of the Social Security Act or State 
 Children's Health Insurance Program under title XXI of such Act 
 by including information on Medicaid options, eligibility, and 
 how to enroll.
 (d) Requirements for Plans Participating in a Plan Finder.--
 (1) In general.--Each State shall ensure that health 
 insurance plans participating in the State plan finder or in a 
 multi-State plan finder meet the requirements of paragraph (2) 
 (relating to adequacy of insurance coverage, consumer 
 protection, and financial strength).
 (2) Specific requirements.--In order to participate in a 
 plan finder, a health insurance plan must meet all of the 
 following requirements, as determined by each State in which 
 such plan operates:
 (A) The health insurance plan shall be actuarially 
 sound.
 (B) The health insurance plan may not have a 
 history of abusive policy rescissions.
 (C) The health insurance plan shall meet financial 
 and solvency requirements.
 (D) The health insurance plan shall disclose--
 (i) all financial arrangements involving 
 the sale and purchase of health insurance, such 
 as the payment of fees and commissions; and
 (ii) such arrangements may not be abusive.
 (E) The health insurance plan shall maintain 
 electronic health records that comply with the 
 requirements of the American Recovery and Reinvestment 
 Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5) related to electronic 
 health records.
 (F) The health insurance plan shall make available 
 to plan enrollees via the finder, whether by 
 information provided to the finder or by a Web site 
 link directing the enrollee from the finder to the 
 health insurance plan Web site, data that includes the 
 price and cost to the individual of services offered by 
 a provider according to the terms and conditions of the 
 health plan. Data described in this paragraph is not 
 made public by the finder, only made available to the 
 individual once enrolled in the health plan.
 (e) Prohibitions.--
 (1) Direct enrollment.--The State plan finder may not 
 directly enroll individuals in health insurance plans.
 (2) Conflicts of interest.--
 (A) Companies.--A health insurance issuer offering 
 a health insurance plan through a plan finder may not--
 (i) be the private entity developing and 
 maintaining a plan finder under subsections (a) 
 and (b); or
 (ii) have an ownership interest in such 
 private entity or in the plan finder.
 (B) Individuals.--An individual employed by a 
 health insurance issuer offering a health insurance 
 plan through a plan finder may not serve as a director 
 or officer for--
 (i) the private entity developing and 
 maintaining a plan finder under subsections (a) 
 and (b); or
 (ii) the plan finder.
 (f) Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to 
allow the Secretary authority to regulate benefit packages or to 
prohibit health insurance brokers and agents from--
 (1) utilizing the plan finder for any purpose; or
 (2) marketing or offering health insurance products.
 (g) Plan Finder Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term 
``plan finder'' means a State plan finder under subsection (a) or a 
multi-State plan finder under subsection (b).
 (h) State Defined.--In this section, the term ``State'' has the 
meaning given such term for purposes of title XIX of the Social 
Security Act.

SEC. 113. ADMINISTRATIVE SIMPLIFICATION.

 (a) Operating Rules for Health Information Transactions.--
 (1) Definition of operating rules.--Section 1171 of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320d) is amended by adding at 
 the end the following:
 ``(9) Operating rules.--The term `operating rules' means 
 the necessary business rules and guidelines for the electronic 
 exchange of information that are not defined by a standard or 
 its implementation specifications as adopted for purposes of 
 this part.''.
 (2) Operating rules and compliance.--Section 1173 of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320d-2) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)(2), by adding at the end the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(J) Electronic funds transfers.''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 subsections:
 ``(g) Operating Rules.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall adopt a single set 
 of operating rules for each transaction described in subsection 
 (a)(2) with the goal of creating as much uniformity in the 
 implementation of the electronic standards as possible. Such 
 operating rules shall be consensus-based and reflect the 
 necessary business rules affecting health plans and health care 
 providers and the manner in which they operate pursuant to 
 standards issued under Health Insurance Portability and 
 Accountability Act of 1996.
 ``(2) Operating rules development.--In adopting operating 
 rules under this subsection, the Secretary shall rely on 
 recommendations for operating rules developed by a qualified 
 nonprofit entity, as selected by the Secretary, that meets the 
 following requirements:
 ``(A) The entity focuses its mission on 
 administrative simplification.
 ``(B) The entity demonstrates an established multi-
 stakeholder and consensus-based process for development 
 of operating rules, including representation by or 
 participation from health plans, health care providers, 
 vendors, relevant Federal agencies, and other standard 
 development organizations.
 ``(C) The entity has established a public set of 
 guiding principles that ensure the operating rules and 
 process are open and transparent.
 ``(D) The entity coordinates its activities with 
 the HIT Policy Committee and the HIT Standards 
 Committee (as established under title XXX of the Public 
 Health Service Act) and complements the efforts of the 
 Office of the National Healthcare Coordinator and its 
 related health information exchange goals.
 ``(E) The entity incorporates national standards, 
 including the transaction standards issued under Health 
 Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996.
 ``(F) The entity supports nondiscrimination and 
 conflict of interest policies that demonstrate a 
 commitment to open, fair, and nondiscriminatory 
 practices.
 ``(G) The entity allows for public review and 
 updates of the operating rules.
 ``(3) Review and recommendations.--The National Committee 
 on Vital and Health Statistics shall--
 ``(A) review the operating rules developed by a 
 nonprofit entity described under paragraph (2);
 ``(B) determine whether such rules represent a 
 consensus view of the health care industry and are 
 consistent with and do not alter current standards;
 ``(C) evaluate whether such rules are consistent 
 with electronic standards adopted for health 
 information technology; and
 ``(D) submit to the Secretary a recommendation as 
 to whether the Secretary should adopt such rules.
 ``(4) Implementation.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall adopt 
 operating rules under this subsection, by regulation in 
 accordance with subparagraph (C), following 
 consideration of the rules developed by the non-profit 
 entity described in paragraph (2) and the 
 recommendation submitted by the National Committee on 
 Vital and Health Statistics under paragraph (3)(D) and 
 having ensured consultation with providers.
 ``(B) Adoption requirements; effective dates.--
 ``(i) Eligibility for a health plan and 
 health claim status.--The set of operating 
 rules for transactions for eligibility for a 
 health plan and health claim status shall be 
 adopted not later than July 1, 2011, in a 
 manner ensuring that such rules are effective 
 not later than January 1, 2013, and may allow 
 for the use of a machine readable 
 identification card.
 ``(ii) Electronic funds transfers and 
 health care payment and remittance advice.--The 
 set of operating rules for electronic funds 
 transfers and health care payment and 
 remittance advice shall be adopted not later 
 than July 1, 2012, in a manner ensuring that 
 such rules are effective not later than January 
 1, 2014.
 ``(iii) Other completed transactions.--The 
 set of operating rules for the remainder of the 
 completed transactions described in subsection 
 (a)(2), including health claims or equivalent 
 encounter information, enrollment and 
 disenrollment in a health plan, health plan 
 premium payments, and referral certification 
 and authorization, shall be adopted not later 
 than July 1, 2014, in a manner ensuring that 
 such rules are effective not later than January 
 1, 2016.
 ``(C) Expedited rulemaking.--The Secretary shall 
 promulgate an interim final rule applying any standard 
 or operating rule recommended by the National Committee 
 on Vital and Health Statistics pursuant to paragraph 
 (3). The Secretary shall accept public comments on any 
 interim final rule published under this subparagraph 
 for 60 days after the date of such publication.
 ``(h) Compliance.--
 ``(1) Health plan certification.--
 ``(A) Eligibility for a health plan, health claim 
 status, electronic funds transfers, health care payment 
 and remittance advice.--Not later than December 31, 
 2013, a health plan shall file a statement with the 
 Secretary, in such form as the Secretary may require, 
 certifying that the data and information systems for 
 such plan are in compliance with any applicable 
 standards (as described under paragraph (7) of section 
 1171) and operating rules (as described under paragraph 
 (9) of such section) for electronic funds transfers, 
 eligibility for a health plan, health claim status, and 
 health care payment and remittance advice, 
 respectively.
 ``(B) Other completed transactions.--Not later than 
 December 31, 2015, a health plan shall file a statement 
 with the Secretary, in such form as the Secretary may 
 require, certifying that the data and information 
 systems for such plan are in compliance with any 
 applicable standards and operating rules for the 
 remainder of the completed transactions described in 
 subsection (a)(2), including health claims or 
 equivalent encounter information, enrollment and 
 disenrollment in a health plan, health plan premium 
 payments, and referral certification and authorization, 
 respectively. A health plan shall provide the same 
 level of documentation to certify compliance with such 
 transactions as is required to certify compliance with 
 the transactions specified in subparagraph (A).
 ``(2) Documentation of compliance.--A health plan shall 
 provide the Secretary, in such form as the Secretary may 
 require, with adequate documentation of compliance with the 
 standards and operating rules described under paragraph (1). A 
 health plan shall not be considered to have provided adequate 
 documentation and shall not be certified as being in compliance 
 with such standards, unless the health plan--
 ``(A) demonstrates to the Secretary that the plan 
 conducts the electronic transactions specified in 
 paragraph (1) in a manner that fully complies with the 
 regulations of the Secretary; and
 ``(B) provides documentation showing that the plan 
 has completed end-to-end testing for such transactions 
 with their partners, such as hospitals and physicians.
 ``(3) Service contracts.--A health plan shall be required 
 to comply with any applicable certification and compliance 
 requirements (and provide the Secretary with adequate 
 documentation of such compliance) under this subsection for any 
 entities that provide services pursuant to a contract with such 
 health plan.
 ``(4) Certification by outside entity.--The Secretary may 
 contract with an independent, outside entity to certify that a 
 health plan has complied with the requirements under this 
 subsection, provided that the certification standards employed 
 by such entities are in accordance with any standards or rules 
 issued by the Secretary.
 ``(5) Compliance with revised standards and rules.--A 
 health plan (including entities described under paragraph (3)) 
 shall comply with the certification and documentation 
 requirements under this subsection for any interim final rule 
 promulgated by the Secretary under subsection (i) that amends 
 any standard or operating rule described under paragraph (1) of 
 this subsection. A health plan shall comply with such 
 requirements not later than the effective date of the 
 applicable interim final rule.
 ``(6) Audits of health plans.--The Secretary shall conduct 
 periodic audits to ensure that health plans (including entities 
 described under paragraph (3)) are in compliance with any 
 standards and operating rules that are described under 
 paragraph (1).
 ``(i) Review and Amendment of Standards and Rules.--
 ``(1) Establishment.--Not later than January 1, 2014, the 
 Secretary shall establish a review committee (as described 
 under paragraph (4)).
 ``(2) Evaluations and reports.--
 ``(A) Hearings.--Not later than April 1, 2014, and 
 not less than biennially thereafter, the Secretary, 
 acting through the review committee, shall conduct 
 hearings to evaluate and review the existing standards 
 and operating rules established under this section.
 ``(B) Report.--Not later than July 1, 2014, and not 
 less than biennially thereafter, the review committee 
 shall provide recommendations for updating and 
 improving such standards and rules. The review 
 committee shall recommend a single set of operating 
 rules per transaction standard and maintain the goal of 
 creating as much uniformity as possible in the 
 implementation of the electronic standards.
 ``(3) Interim final rulemaking.--
 ``(A) In general.--Any recommendations to amend 
 existing standards and operating rules that have been 
 approved by the review committee and reported to the 
 Secretary under paragraph (2)(B) shall be adopted by 
 the Secretary through promulgation of an interim final 
 rule not later than 90 days after receipt of the 
 committee's report.
 ``(B) Public comment.--
 ``(i) Public comment period.--The Secretary 
 shall accept public comments on any interim 
 final rule published under this paragraph for 
 60 days after the date of such publication.
 ``(ii) Effective date.--The effective date 
 of any amendment to existing standards or 
 operating rules that is adopted through an 
 interim final rule published under this 
 paragraph shall be 25 months following the 
 close of such public comment period.
 ``(4) Review committee.--
 ``(A) Definition.--For the purposes of this 
 subsection, the term `review committee' means a 
 committee within the Department of Health and Human 
 services that has been designated by the Secretary to 
 carry out this subsection, including--
 ``(i) the National Committee on Vital and 
 Health Statistics; or
 ``(ii) any appropriate committee as 
 determined by the Secretary.
 ``(B) Coordination of hit standards.--In developing 
 recommendations under this subsection, the review 
 committee shall consider the standards approved by the 
 Office of the National Coordinator for Health 
 Information Technology.
 ``(j) Penalties.--
 ``(1) Penalty fee.--
 ``(A) In general.--Not later than April 1, 2014, 
 and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall assess a 
 penalty fee (as determined under subparagraph (B)) 
 against a health plan that has failed to meet the 
 requirements under subsection (h) with respect to 
 certification and documentation of compliance with the 
 standards (and their operating rules) as described 
 under paragraph (1) of such subsection.
 ``(B) Fee amount.--Subject to subparagraphs (C), 
 (D), and (E), the Secretary shall assess a penalty fee 
 against a health plan in the amount of $1 per covered 
 life until certification is complete. The penalty shall 
 be assessed per person covered by the plan for which 
 its data systems for major medical policies are not in 
 compliance and shall be imposed against the health plan 
 for each day that the plan is not in compliance with 
 the requirements under subsection (h).
 ``(C) Additional penalty for misrepresentation.--A 
 health plan that knowingly provides inaccurate or 
 incomplete information in a statement of certification 
 or documentation of compliance under subsection (h) 
 shall be subject to a penalty fee that is double the 
 amount that would otherwise be imposed under this 
 subsection.
 ``(D) Annual fee increase.--The amount of the 
 penalty fee imposed under this subsection shall be 
 increased on an annual basis by the annual percentage 
 increase in total national health care expenditures, as 
 determined by the Secretary.
 ``(E) Penalty limit.--A penalty fee assessed 
 against a health plan under this subsection shall not 
 exceed, on an annual basis--
 ``(i) an amount equal to $20 per covered 
 life under such plan; or
 ``(ii) an amount equal to $40 per covered 
 life under the plan if such plan has knowingly 
 provided inaccurate or incomplete information 
 (as described under subparagraph (C)).
 ``(F) Determination of covered individuals.--The 
 Secretary shall determine the number of covered lives 
 under a health plan based upon the most recent 
 statements and filings that have been submitted by such 
 plan to the Securities and Exchange Commission.
 ``(2) Notice and dispute procedure.--The Secretary shall 
 establish a procedure for assessment of penalty fees under this 
 subsection that provides a health plan with reasonable notice 
 and a dispute resolution procedure prior to provision of a 
 notice of assessment by the Secretary of the Treasury (as 
 described under paragraph (4)(B)).
 ``(3) Penalty fee report.--Not later than December 1, 2015, 
 and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall provide the 
 Secretary of the Treasury with a report identifying those 
 health plans that have been assessed a penalty fee under this 
 subsection.
 ``(4) Collection of penalty fee.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury, 
 acting through the Financial Management Service, shall 
 administer the collection of penalty fees from health 
 plans that have been identified by the Secretary in the 
 penalty fee report provided under paragraph (3).
 ``(B) Notice.--Not later than August 1, 2014, and 
 annually thereafter, the Secretary of the Treasury 
 shall provide notice to each health plan that has been 
 assessed a penalty fee by the Secretary under this 
 subsection. Such notice shall include the amount of the 
 penalty fee assessed by the Secretary and the due date 
 for payment of such fee to the Secretary of the 
 Treasury (as described in subparagraph (C)).
 ``(C) Payment due date.--Payment by a health plan 
 for a penalty fee assessed under this subsection shall 
 be made to the Secretary of the Treasury not later than 
 November 1, 2014, and annually thereafter.
 ``(D) Unpaid penalty fees.--Any amount of a penalty 
 fee assessed against a health plan under this 
 subsection for which payment has not been made by the 
 due date provided under subparagraph (C) shall be--
 ``(i) increased by the interest accrued on 
 such amount, as determined pursuant to the 
 underpayment rate established under section 
 6601 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; and
 ``(ii) treated as a past-due, legally 
 enforceable debt owed to a Federal agency for 
 purposes of section 6402(d) of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986.
 ``(E) Administrative fees.--Any fee charged or 
 allocated for collection activities conducted by the 
 Financial Management Service will be passed on to a 
 health plan on a pro-rata basis and added to any 
 penalty fee collected from the plan.''.
 (b) Promulgation of Rules.--
 (1) Unique health plan identifier.--The Secretary shall 
 promulgate a final rule to establish a unique health plan 
 identifier (as described in section 1173(b) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320d-2(b))) based on the input of the 
 National Committee of Vital and Health Statistics. The 
 Secretary may do so on an interim final basis and such rule 
 shall be effective not later than October 1, 2012.
 (2) Electronic funds transfer.--The Secretary shall 
 promulgate a final rule to establish a standard for electronic 
 funds transfers (as described in section 1173(a)(2)(J) of the 
 Social Security Act, as added by subsection (a)(2)(A)). The 
 Secretary may do so on an interim final basis and shall adopt 
 such standard not later than January 1, 2012, in a manner 
 ensuring that such standard is effective not later than January 
 1, 2014.
 (c) Expansion of Electronic Transactions in Medicare.--Section 
1862(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (23), by striking the ``or'' at the end;
 (2) in paragraph (24), by striking the period and inserting 
 ``; or''; and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (24) the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(25) not later than January 1, 2014, for which the 
 payment is other than by electronic funds transfer (EFT) or an 
 electronic remittance in a form as specified in ASC X12 835 
 Health Care Payment and Remittance Advice or subsequent 
 standard.''.
 (d) Medicare and Medicaid Compliance Reports.--Not later than July 
1, 2013, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall submit a 
report to the chairs and ranking members of the Committee on Ways and 
Means and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
Representatives and the chairs and ranking members of the Committee on 
Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions and the Committee on Finance of 
the Senate on the extent to which the Medicare program and providers 
that serve beneficiaries under that program, and State Medicaid 
programs and providers that serve beneficiaries under those programs, 
transact electronically in accordance with transaction standards issued 
under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, 
part C of title XI of the Social Security Act, and regulations 
promulgated under such Acts.

 DIVISION B--IMPROVING ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE

 TITLE I--EXPANDING ACCESS AND LOWERING COSTS FOR SMALL BUSINESSES

SEC. 201. RULES GOVERNING ASSOCIATION HEALTH PLANS.

 (a) In General.--Subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by adding after part 7 the 
following new part:

 ``PART 8--RULES GOVERNING ASSOCIATION HEALTH PLANS

``SEC. 801. ASSOCIATION HEALTH PLANS.

 ``(a) In General.--For purposes of this part, the term `association 
health plan' means a group health plan whose sponsor is (or is deemed 
under this part to be) described in subsection (b).
 ``(b) Sponsorship.--The sponsor of a group health plan is described 
in this subsection if such sponsor--
 ``(1) is organized and maintained in good faith, with a 
 constitution and bylaws specifically stating its purpose and 
 providing for periodic meetings on at least an annual basis, as 
 a bona fide trade association, a bona fide industry association 
 (including a rural electric cooperative association or a rural 
 telephone cooperative association), a bona fide professional 
 association, or a bona fide chamber of commerce (or similar 
 bona fide business association, including a corporation or 
 similar organization that operates on a cooperative basis 
 (within the meaning of section 1381 of the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986)), for substantial purposes other than that of 
 obtaining or providing medical care;
 ``(2) is established as a permanent entity which receives 
 the active support of its members and requires for membership 
 payment on a periodic basis of dues or payments necessary to 
 maintain eligibility for membership in the sponsor; and
 ``(3) does not condition membership, such dues or payments, 
 or coverage under the plan on the basis of health status-
 related factors with respect to the employees of its members 
 (or affiliated members), or the dependents of such employees, 
 and does not condition such dues or payments on the basis of 
 group health plan participation.
Any sponsor consisting of an association of entities which meet the 
requirements of paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) shall be deemed to be a 
sponsor described in this subsection.

``SEC. 802. CERTIFICATION OF ASSOCIATION HEALTH PLANS.

 ``(a) In General.--The applicable authority shall prescribe by 
regulation a procedure under which, subject to subsection (b), the 
applicable authority shall certify association health plans which apply 
for certification as meeting the requirements of this part.
 ``(b) Standards.--Under the procedure prescribed pursuant to 
subsection (a), in the case of an association health plan that provides 
at least one benefit option which does not consist of health insurance 
coverage, the applicable authority shall certify such plan as meeting 
the requirements of this part only if the applicable authority is 
satisfied that the applicable requirements of this part are met (or, 
upon the date on which the plan is to commence operations, will be met) 
with respect to the plan.
 ``(c) Requirements Applicable to Certified Plans.--An association 
health plan with respect to which certification under this part is in 
effect shall meet the applicable requirements of this part, effective 
on the date of certification (or, if later, on the date on which the 
plan is to commence operations).
 ``(d) Requirements for Continued Certification.--The applicable 
authority may provide by regulation for continued certification of 
association health plans under this part.
 ``(e) Class Certification for Fully Insured Plans.--The applicable 
authority shall establish a class certification procedure for 
association health plans under which all benefits consist of health 
insurance coverage. Under such procedure, the applicable authority 
shall provide for the granting of certification under this part to the 
plans in each class of such association health plans upon appropriate 
filing under such procedure in connection with plans in such class and 
payment of the prescribed fee under section 807(a).
 ``(f) Certification of Self-Insured Association Health Plans.--An 
association health plan which offers one or more benefit options which 
do not consist of health insurance coverage may be certified under this 
part only if such plan consists of any of the following:
 ``(1) a plan which offered such coverage on the date of the 
 enactment of the Small Business Health Fairness Act of 2011,
 ``(2) a plan under which the sponsor does not restrict 
 membership to one or more trades and businesses or industries 
 and whose eligible participating employers represent a broad 
 cross-section of trades and businesses or industries, or
 ``(3) a plan whose eligible participating employers 
 represent one or more trades or businesses, or one or more 
 industries, consisting of any of the following: agriculture; 
 equipment and automobile dealerships; barbering and 
 cosmetology; certified public accounting practices; child care; 
 construction; dance, theatrical and orchestra productions; 
 disinfecting and pest control; financial services; fishing; 
 food service establishments; hospitals; labor organizations; 
 logging; manufacturing (metals); mining; medical and dental 
 practices; medical laboratories; professional consulting 
 services; sanitary services; transportation (local and 
 freight); warehousing; wholesaling/distributing; or any other 
 trade or business or industry which has been indicated as 
 having average or above-average risk or health claims 
 experience by reason of State rate filings, denials of 
 coverage, proposed premium rate levels, or other means 
 demonstrated by such plan in accordance with regulations.

``SEC. 803. REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO SPONSORS AND BOARDS OF TRUSTEES.

 ``(a) Sponsor.--The requirements of this subsection are met with 
respect to an association health plan if the sponsor has met (or is 
deemed under this part to have met) the requirements of section 801(b) 
for a continuous period of not less than 3 years ending with the date 
of the application for certification under this part.
 ``(b) Board of Trustees.--The requirements of this subsection are 
met with respect to an association health plan if the following 
requirements are met:
 ``(1) Fiscal control.--The plan is operated, pursuant to a 
 trust agreement, by a board of trustees which has complete 
 fiscal control over the plan and which is responsible for all 
 operations of the plan.
 ``(2) Rules of operation and financial controls.--The board 
 of trustees has in effect rules of operation and financial 
 controls, based on a 3-year plan of operation, adequate to 
 carry out the terms of the plan and to meet all requirements of 
 this title applicable to the plan.
 ``(3) Rules governing relationship to participating 
 employers and to contractors.--
 ``(A) Board membership.--
 ``(i) In general.--Except as provided in 
 clauses (ii) and (iii), the members of the 
 board of trustees are individuals selected from 
 individuals who are the owners, officers, 
 directors, or employees of the participating 
 employers or who are partners in the 
 participating employers and actively 
 participate in the business.
 ``(ii) Limitation.--
 ``(I) General rule.--Except as 
 provided in subclauses (II) and (III), 
 no such member is an owner, officer, 
 director, or employee of, or partner 
 in, a contract administrator or other 
 service provider to the plan.
 ``(II) Limited exception for 
 providers of services solely on behalf 
 of the sponsor.--Officers or employees 
 of a sponsor which is a service 
 provider (other than a contract 
 administrator) to the plan may be 
 members of the board if they constitute 
 not more than 25 percent of the 
 membership of the board and they do not 
 provide services to the plan other than 
 on behalf of the sponsor.
 ``(III) Treatment of providers of 
 medical care.--In the case of a sponsor 
 which is an association whose 
 membership consists primarily of 
 providers of medical care, subclause 
 (I) shall not apply in the case of any 
 service provider described in subclause 
 (I) who is a provider of medical care 
 under the plan.
 ``(iii) Certain plans excluded.--Clause (i) 
 shall not apply to an association health plan 
 which is in existence on the date of the 
 enactment of the Small Business Health Fairness 
 Act of 2011.
 ``(B) Sole authority.--The board has sole authority 
 under the plan to approve applications for 
 participation in the plan and to contract with a 
 service provider to administer the day-to-day affairs 
 of the plan.
 ``(c) Treatment of Franchise Networks.--In the case of a group 
health plan which is established and maintained by a franchiser for a 
franchise network consisting of its franchisees--
 ``(1) the requirements of subsection (a) and section 801(a) 
 shall be deemed met if such requirements would otherwise be met 
 if the franchiser were deemed to be the sponsor referred to in 
 section 801(b), such network were deemed to be an association 
 described in section 801(b), and each franchisee were deemed to 
 be a member (of the association and the sponsor) referred to in 
 section 801(b); and
 ``(2) the requirements of section 804(a)(1) shall be deemed 
 met.
The Secretary may by regulation define for purposes of this subsection 
the terms `franchiser', `franchise network', and `franchisee'.

``SEC. 804. PARTICIPATION AND COVERAGE REQUIREMENTS.

 ``(a) Covered Employers and Individuals.--The requirements of this 
subsection are met with respect to an association health plan if, under 
the terms of the plan--
 ``(1) each participating employer must be--
 ``(A) a member of the sponsor,
 ``(B) the sponsor, or
 ``(C) an affiliated member of the sponsor with 
 respect to which the requirements of subsection (b) are 
 met,
 except that, in the case of a sponsor which is a professional 
 association or other individual-based association, if at least 
 one of the officers, directors, or employees of an employer, or 
 at least one of the individuals who are partners in an employer 
 and who actively participates in the business, is a member or 
 such an affiliated member of the sponsor, participating 
 employers may also include such employer; and
 ``(2) all individuals commencing coverage under the plan 
 after certification under this part must be--
 ``(A) active or retired owners (including self-
 employed individuals), officers, directors, or 
 employees of, or partners in, participating employers; 
 or
 ``(B) the beneficiaries of individuals described in 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(b) Coverage of Previously Uninsured Employees.--In the case of 
an association health plan in existence on the date of the enactment of 
the Small Business Health Fairness Act of 2011, an affiliated member of 
the sponsor of the plan may be offered coverage under the plan as a 
participating employer only if--
 ``(1) the affiliated member was an affiliated member on the 
 date of certification under this part; or
 ``(2) during the 12-month period preceding the date of the 
 offering of such coverage, the affiliated member has not 
 maintained or contributed to a group health plan with respect 
 to any of its employees who would otherwise be eligible to 
 participate in such association health plan.
 ``(c) Individual Market Unaffected.--The requirements of this 
subsection are met with respect to an association health plan if, under 
the terms of the plan, no participating employer may provide health 
insurance coverage in the individual market for any employee not 
covered under the plan which is similar to the coverage 
contemporaneously provided to employees of the employer under the plan, 
if such exclusion of the employee from coverage under the plan is based 
on a health status-related factor with respect to the employee and such 
employee would, but for such exclusion on such basis, be eligible for 
coverage under the plan.
 ``(d) Prohibition of Discrimination Against Employers and Employees 
Eligible To Participate.--The requirements of this subsection are met 
with respect to an association health plan if--
 ``(1) under the terms of the plan, all employers meeting 
 the preceding requirements of this section are eligible to 
 qualify as participating employers for all geographically 
 available coverage options, unless, in the case of any such 
 employer, participation or contribution requirements of the 
 type referred to in section 2711 of the Public Health Service 
 Act are not met;
 ``(2) upon request, any employer eligible to participate is 
 furnished information regarding all coverage options available 
 under the plan; and
 ``(3) the applicable requirements of sections 701, 702, and 
 703 are met with respect to the plan.

``SEC. 805. OTHER REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO PLAN DOCUMENTS, CONTRIBUTION 
 RATES, AND BENEFIT OPTIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--The requirements of this section are met with 
respect to an association health plan if the following requirements are 
met:
 ``(1) Contents of governing instruments.--The instruments 
 governing the plan include a written instrument, meeting the 
 requirements of an instrument required under section 402(a)(1), 
 which--
 ``(A) provides that the board of trustees serves as 
 the named fiduciary required for plans under section 
 402(a)(1) and serves in the capacity of a plan 
 administrator (referred to in section 3(16)(A));
 ``(B) provides that the sponsor of the plan is to 
 serve as plan sponsor (referred to in section 
 3(16)(B)); and
 ``(C) incorporates the requirements of section 806.
 ``(2) Contribution rates must be nondiscriminatory.--
 ``(A) The contribution rates for any participating 
 small employer do not vary on the basis of any health 
 status-related factor in relation to employees of such 
 employer or their beneficiaries and do not vary on the 
 basis of the type of business or industry in which such 
 employer is engaged.
 ``(B) Nothing in this title or any other provision 
 of law shall be construed to preclude an association 
 health plan, or a health insurance issuer offering 
 health insurance coverage in connection with an 
 association health plan, from--
 ``(i) setting contribution rates based on 
 the claims experience of the plan; or
 ``(ii) varying contribution rates for small 
 employers in a State to the extent that such 
 rates could vary using the same methodology 
 employed in such State for regulating premium 
 rates in the small group market with respect to 
 health insurance coverage offered in connection 
 with bona fide associations (within the meaning 
 of section 2791(d)(3) of the Public Health 
 Service Act),
 subject to the requirements of section 702(b) relating 
 to contribution rates.
 ``(3) Floor for number of covered individuals with respect 
 to certain plans.--If any benefit option under the plan does 
 not consist of health insurance coverage, the plan has as of 
 the beginning of the plan year not fewer than 1,000 
 participants and beneficiaries.
 ``(4) Marketing requirements.--
 ``(A) In general.--If a benefit option which 
 consists of health insurance coverage is offered under 
 the plan, State-licensed insurance agents shall be used 
 to distribute to small employers coverage which does 
 not consist of health insurance coverage in a manner 
 comparable to the manner in which such agents are used 
 to distribute health insurance coverage.
 ``(B) State-licensed insurance agents.--For 
 purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `State-licensed 
 insurance agents' means one or more agents who are 
 licensed in a State and are subject to the laws of such 
 State relating to licensure, qualification, testing, 
 examination, and continuing education of persons 
 authorized to offer, sell, or solicit health insurance 
 coverage in such State.
 ``(5) Regulatory requirements.--Such other requirements as 
 the applicable authority determines are necessary to carry out 
 the purposes of this part, which shall be prescribed by the 
 applicable authority by regulation.
 ``(b) Ability of Association Health Plans To Design Benefit 
Options.--Subject to section 514(d), nothing in this part or any 
provision of State law (as defined in section 514(c)(1)) shall be 
construed to preclude an association health plan, or a health insurance 
issuer offering health insurance coverage in connection with an 
association health plan, from exercising its sole discretion in 
selecting the specific items and services consisting of medical care to 
be included as benefits under such plan or coverage, except (subject to 
section 514) in the case of (1) any law to the extent that it is not 
preempted under section 731(a)(1) with respect to matters governed by 
section 711, 712, or 713, or (2) any law of the State with which filing 
and approval of a policy type offered by the plan was initially 
obtained to the extent that such law prohibits an exclusion of a 
specific disease from such coverage.

``SEC. 806. MAINTENANCE OF RESERVES AND PROVISIONS FOR SOLVENCY FOR 
 PLANS PROVIDING HEALTH BENEFITS IN ADDITION TO HEALTH 
 INSURANCE COVERAGE.

 ``(a) In General.--The requirements of this section are met with 
respect to an association health plan if--
 ``(1) the benefits under the plan consist solely of health 
 insurance coverage; or
 ``(2) if the plan provides any additional benefit options 
 which do not consist of health insurance coverage, the plan--
 ``(A) establishes and maintains reserves with 
 respect to such additional benefit options, in amounts 
 recommended by the qualified actuary, consisting of--
 ``(i) a reserve sufficient for unearned 
 contributions;
 ``(ii) a reserve sufficient for benefit 
 liabilities which have been incurred, which 
 have not been satisfied, and for which risk of 
 loss has not yet been transferred, and for 
 expected administrative costs with respect to 
 such benefit liabilities;
 ``(iii) a reserve sufficient for any other 
 obligations of the plan; and
 ``(iv) a reserve sufficient for a margin of 
 error and other fluctuations, taking into 
 account the specific circumstances of the plan; 
 and
 ``(B) establishes and maintains aggregate and 
 specific excess/stop loss insurance and solvency 
 indemnification, with respect to such additional 
 benefit options for which risk of loss has not yet been 
 transferred, as follows:
 ``(i) The plan shall secure aggregate 
 excess/stop loss insurance for the plan with an 
 attachment point which is not greater than 125 
 percent of expected gross annual claims. The 
 applicable authority may by regulation provide 
 for upward adjustments in the amount of such 
 percentage in specified circumstances in which 
 the plan specifically provides for and 
 maintains reserves in excess of the amounts 
 required under subparagraph (A).
 ``(ii) The plan shall secure specific 
 excess/stop loss insurance for the plan with an 
 attachment point which is at least equal to an 
 amount recommended by the plan's qualified 
 actuary. The applicable authority may by 
 regulation provide for adjustments in the 
 amount of such insurance in specified 
 circumstances in which the plan specifically 
 provides for and maintains reserves in excess 
 of the amounts required under subparagraph (A).
 ``(iii) The plan shall secure 
 indemnification insurance for any claims which 
 the plan is unable to satisfy by reason of a 
 plan termination.
Any person issuing to a plan insurance described in clause (i), (ii), 
or (iii) of subparagraph (B) shall notify the Secretary of any failure 
of premium payment meriting cancellation of the policy prior to 
undertaking such a cancellation. Any regulations prescribed by the 
applicable authority pursuant to clause (i) or (ii) of subparagraph (B) 
may allow for such adjustments in the required levels of excess/stop 
loss insurance as the qualified actuary may recommend, taking into 
account the specific circumstances of the plan.
 ``(b) Minimum Surplus in Addition to Claims Reserves.--In the case 
of any association health plan described in subsection (a)(2), the 
requirements of this subsection are met if the plan establishes and 
maintains surplus in an amount at least equal to--
 ``(1) $500,000, or
 ``(2) such greater amount (but not greater than $2,000,000) 
 as may be set forth in regulations prescribed by the applicable 
 authority, considering the level of aggregate and specific 
 excess/stop loss insurance provided with respect to such plan 
 and other factors related to solvency risk, such as the plan's 
 projected levels of participation or claims, the nature of the 
 plan's liabilities, and the types of assets available to assure 
 that such liabilities are met.
 ``(c) Additional Requirements.--In the case of any association 
health plan described in subsection (a)(2), the applicable authority 
may provide such additional requirements relating to reserves, excess/
stop loss insurance, and indemnification insurance as the applicable 
authority considers appropriate. Such requirements may be provided by 
regulation with respect to any such plan or any class of such plans.
 ``(d) Adjustments for Excess/Stop Loss Insurance.--The applicable 
authority may provide for adjustments to the levels of reserves 
otherwise required under subsections (a) and (b) with respect to any 
plan or class of plans to take into account excess/stop loss insurance 
provided with respect to such plan or plans.
 ``(e) Alternative Means of Compliance.--The applicable authority 
may permit an association health plan described in subsection (a)(2) to 
substitute, for all or part of the requirements of this section (except 
subsection (a)(2)(B)(iii)), such security, guarantee, hold-harmless 
arrangement, or other financial arrangement as the applicable authority 
determines to be adequate to enable the plan to fully meet all its 
financial obligations on a timely basis and is otherwise no less 
protective of the interests of participants and beneficiaries than the 
requirements for which it is substituted. The applicable authority may 
take into account, for purposes of this subsection, evidence provided 
by the plan or sponsor which demonstrates an assumption of liability 
with respect to the plan. Such evidence may be in the form of a 
contract of indemnification, lien, bonding, insurance, letter of 
credit, recourse under applicable terms of the plan in the form of 
assessments of participating employers, security, or other financial 
arrangement.
 ``(f) Measures To Ensure Continued Payment of Benefits by Certain 
Plans in Distress.--
 ``(1) Payments by certain plans to association health plan 
 fund.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of an association 
 health plan described in subsection (a)(2), the 
 requirements of this subsection are met if the plan 
 makes payments into the Association Health Plan Fund 
 under this subparagraph when they are due. Such 
 payments shall consist of annual payments in the amount 
 of $5,000, and, in addition to such annual payments, 
 such supplemental payments as the Secretary may 
 determine to be necessary under paragraph (2). Payments 
 under this paragraph are payable to the Fund at the 
 time determined by the Secretary. Initial payments are 
 due in advance of certification under this part. 
 Payments shall continue to accrue until a plan's assets 
 are distributed pursuant to a termination procedure.
 ``(B) Penalties for failure to make payments.--If 
 any payment is not made by a plan when it is due, a 
 late payment charge of not more than 100 percent of the 
 payment which was not timely paid shall be payable by 
 the plan to the Fund.
 ``(C) Continued duty of the secretary.--The 
 Secretary shall not cease to carry out the provisions 
 of paragraph (2) on account of the failure of a plan to 
 pay any payment when due.
 ``(2) Payments by secretary to continue excess/stop loss 
 insurance coverage and indemnification insurance coverage for 
 certain plans.--In any case in which the applicable authority 
 determines that there is, or that there is reason to believe 
 that there will be: (A) a failure to take necessary corrective 
 actions under section 809(a) with respect to an association 
 health plan described in subsection (a)(2); or (B) a 
 termination of such a plan under section 809(b) or 810(b)(8) 
 (and, if the applicable authority is not the Secretary, 
 certifies such determination to the Secretary), the Secretary 
 shall determine the amounts necessary to make payments to an 
 insurer (designated by the Secretary) to maintain in force 
 excess/stop loss insurance coverage or indemnification 
 insurance coverage for such plan, if the Secretary determines 
 that there is a reasonable expectation that, without such 
 payments, claims would not be satisfied by reason of 
 termination of such coverage. The Secretary shall, to the 
 extent provided in advance in appropriation Acts, pay such 
 amounts so determined to the insurer designated by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(3) Association health plan fund.--
 ``(A) In general.--There is established on the 
 books of the Treasury a fund to be known as the 
 `Association Health Plan Fund'. The Fund shall be 
 available for making payments pursuant to paragraph 
 (2). The Fund shall be credited with payments received 
 pursuant to paragraph (1)(A), penalties received 
 pursuant to paragraph (1)(B); and earnings on 
 investments of amounts of the Fund under subparagraph 
 (B).
 ``(B) Investment.--Whenever the Secretary 
 determines that the moneys of the fund are in excess of 
 current needs, the Secretary may request the investment 
 of such amounts as the Secretary determines advisable 
 by the Secretary of the Treasury in obligations issued 
 or guaranteed by the United States.
 ``(g) Excess/Stop Loss Insurance.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Aggregate excess/stop loss insurance.--The term 
 `aggregate excess/stop loss insurance' means, in connection 
 with an association health plan, a contract--
 ``(A) under which an insurer (meeting such minimum 
 standards as the applicable authority may prescribe by 
 regulation) provides for payment to the plan with 
 respect to aggregate claims under the plan in excess of 
 an amount or amounts specified in such contract;
 ``(B) which is guaranteed renewable; and
 ``(C) which allows for payment of premiums by any 
 third party on behalf of the insured plan.
 ``(2) Specific excess/stop loss insurance.--The term 
 `specific excess/stop loss insurance' means, in connection with 
 an association health plan, a contract--
 ``(A) under which an insurer (meeting such minimum 
 standards as the applicable authority may prescribe by 
 regulation) provides for payment to the plan with 
 respect to claims under the plan in connection with a 
 covered individual in excess of an amount or amounts 
 specified in such contract in connection with such 
 covered individual;
 ``(B) which is guaranteed renewable; and
 ``(C) which allows for payment of premiums by any 
 third party on behalf of the insured plan.
 ``(h) Indemnification Insurance.--For purposes of this section, the 
term `indemnification insurance' means, in connection with an 
association health plan, a contract--
 ``(1) under which an insurer (meeting such minimum 
 standards as the applicable authority may prescribe by 
 regulation) provides for payment to the plan with respect to 
 claims under the plan which the plan is unable to satisfy by 
 reason of a termination pursuant to section 809(b) (relating to 
 mandatory termination);
 ``(2) which is guaranteed renewable and noncancellable for 
 any reason (except as the applicable authority may prescribe by 
 regulation); and
 ``(3) which allows for payment of premiums by any third 
 party on behalf of the insured plan.
 ``(i) Reserves.--For purposes of this section, the term `reserves' 
means, in connection with an association health plan, plan assets which 
meet the fiduciary standards under part 4 and such additional 
requirements regarding liquidity as the applicable authority may 
prescribe by regulation.
 ``(j) Solvency Standards Working Group.--
 ``(1) In general.--Within 90 days after the date of the 
 enactment of the Small Business Health Fairness Act of 2011, 
 the applicable authority shall establish a Solvency Standards 
 Working Group. In prescribing the initial regulations under 
 this section, the applicable authority shall take into account 
 the recommendations of such Working Group.
 ``(2) Membership.--The Working Group shall consist of not 
 more than 15 members appointed by the applicable authority. The 
 applicable authority shall include among persons invited to 
 membership on the Working Group at least one of each of the 
 following:
 ``(A) a representative of the National Association 
 of Insurance Commissioners;
 ``(B) a representative of the American Academy of 
 Actuaries;
 ``(C) a representative of the State governments, or 
 their interests;
 ``(D) a representative of existing self-insured 
 arrangements, or their interests;
 ``(E) a representative of associations of the type 
 referred to in section 801(b)(1), or their interests; 
 and
 ``(F) a representative of multiemployer plans that 
 are group health plans, or their interests.

``SEC. 807. REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATION AND RELATED REQUIREMENTS.

 ``(a) Filing Fee.--Under the procedure prescribed pursuant to 
section 802(a), an association health plan shall pay to the applicable 
authority at the time of filing an application for certification under 
this part a filing fee in the amount of $5,000, which shall be 
available in the case of the Secretary, to the extent provided in 
appropriation Acts, for the sole purpose of administering the 
certification procedures applicable with respect to association health 
plans.
 ``(b) Information To Be Included in Application for 
Certification.--An application for certification under this part meets 
the requirements of this section only if it includes, in a manner and 
form which shall be prescribed by the applicable authority by 
regulation, at least the following information:
 ``(1) Identifying information.--The names and addresses 
 of--
 ``(A) the sponsor; and
 ``(B) the members of the board of trustees of the 
 plan.
 ``(2) States in which plan intends to do business.--The 
 States in which participants and beneficiaries under the plan 
 are to be located and the number of them expected to be located 
 in each such State.
 ``(3) Bonding requirements.--Evidence provided by the board 
 of trustees that the bonding requirements of section 412 will 
 be met as of the date of the application or (if later) 
 commencement of operations.
 ``(4) Plan documents.--A copy of the documents governing 
 the plan (including any bylaws and trust agreements), the 
 summary plan description, and other material describing the 
 benefits that will be provided to participants and 
 beneficiaries under the plan.
 ``(5) Agreements with service providers.--A copy of any 
 agreements between the plan and contract administrators and 
 other service providers.
 ``(6) Funding report.--In the case of association health 
 plans providing benefits options in addition to health 
 insurance coverage, a report setting forth information with 
 respect to such additional benefit options determined as of a 
 date within the 120-day period ending with the date of the 
 application, including the following:
 ``(A) Reserves.--A statement, certified by the 
 board of trustees of the plan, and a statement of 
 actuarial opinion, signed by a qualified actuary, that 
 all applicable requirements of section 806 are or will 
 be met in accordance with regulations which the 
 applicable authority shall prescribe.
 ``(B) Adequacy of contribution rates.--A statement 
 of actuarial opinion, signed by a qualified actuary, 
 which sets forth a description of the extent to which 
 contribution rates are adequate to provide for the 
 payment of all obligations and the maintenance of 
 required reserves under the plan for the 12-month 
 period beginning with such date within such 120-day 
 period, taking into account the expected coverage and 
 experience of the plan. If the contribution rates are 
 not fully adequate, the statement of actuarial opinion 
 shall indicate the extent to which the rates are 
 inadequate and the changes needed to ensure adequacy.
 ``(C) Current and projected value of assets and 
 liabilities.--A statement of actuarial opinion signed 
 by a qualified actuary, which sets forth the current 
 value of the assets and liabilities accumulated under 
 the plan and a projection of the assets, liabilities, 
 income, and expenses of the plan for the 12-month 
 period referred to in subparagraph (B). The income 
 statement shall identify separately the plan's 
 administrative expenses and claims.
 ``(D) Costs of coverage to be charged and other 
 expenses.--A statement of the costs of coverage to be 
 charged, including an itemization of amounts for 
 administration, reserves, and other expenses associated 
 with the operation of the plan.
 ``(E) Other information.--Any other information as 
 may be determined by the applicable authority, by 
 regulation, as necessary to carry out the purposes of 
 this part.
 ``(c) Filing Notice of Certification With States.--A certification 
granted under this part to an association health plan shall not be 
effective unless written notice of such certification is filed with the 
applicable State authority of each State in which at least 25 percent 
of the participants and beneficiaries under the plan are located. For 
purposes of this subsection, an individual shall be considered to be 
located in the State in which a known address of such individual is 
located or in which such individual is employed.
 ``(d) Notice of Material Changes.--In the case of any association 
health plan certified under this part, descriptions of material changes 
in any information which was required to be submitted with the 
application for the certification under this part shall be filed in 
such form and manner as shall be prescribed by the applicable authority 
by regulation. The applicable authority may require by regulation prior 
notice of material changes with respect to specified matters which 
might serve as the basis for suspension or revocation of the 
certification.
 ``(e) Reporting Requirements for Certain Association Health 
Plans.--An association health plan certified under this part which 
provides benefit options in addition to health insurance coverage for 
such plan year shall meet the requirements of section 103 by filing an 
annual report under such section which shall include information 
described in subsection (b)(6) with respect to the plan year and, 
notwithstanding section 104(a)(1)(A), shall be filed with the 
applicable authority not later than 90 days after the close of the plan 
year (or on such later date as may be prescribed by the applicable 
authority). The applicable authority may require by regulation such 
interim reports as it considers appropriate.
 ``(f) Engagement of Qualified Actuary.--The board of trustees of 
each association health plan which provides benefits options in 
addition to health insurance coverage and which is applying for 
certification under this part or is certified under this part shall 
engage, on behalf of all participants and beneficiaries, a qualified 
actuary who shall be responsible for the preparation of the materials 
comprising information necessary to be submitted by a qualified actuary 
under this part. The qualified actuary shall utilize such assumptions 
and techniques as are necessary to enable such actuary to form an 
opinion as to whether the contents of the matters reported under this 
part--
 ``(1) are in the aggregate reasonably related to the 
 experience of the plan and to reasonable expectations; and
 ``(2) represent such actuary's best estimate of anticipated 
 experience under the plan.
The opinion by the qualified actuary shall be made with respect to, and 
shall be made a part of, the annual report.

``SEC. 808. NOTICE REQUIREMENTS FOR VOLUNTARY TERMINATION.

 ``Except as provided in section 809(b), an association health plan 
which is or has been certified under this part may terminate (upon or 
at any time after cessation of accruals in benefit liabilities) only if 
the board of trustees, not less than 60 days before the proposed 
termination date--
 ``(1) provides to the participants and beneficiaries a 
 written notice of intent to terminate stating that such 
 termination is intended and the proposed termination date;
 ``(2) develops a plan for winding up the affairs of the 
 plan in connection with such termination in a manner which will 
 result in timely payment of all benefits for which the plan is 
 obligated; and
 ``(3) submits such plan in writing to the applicable 
 authority.
Actions required under this section shall be taken in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed by the applicable authority by regulation.

``SEC. 809. CORRECTIVE ACTIONS AND MANDATORY TERMINATION.

 ``(a) Actions To Avoid Depletion of Reserves.--An association 
health plan which is certified under this part and which provides 
benefits other than health insurance coverage shall continue to meet 
the requirements of section 806, irrespective of whether such 
certification continues in effect. The board of trustees of such plan 
shall determine quarterly whether the requirements of section 806 are 
met. In any case in which the board determines that there is reason to 
believe that there is or will be a failure to meet such requirements, 
or the applicable authority makes such a determination and so notifies 
the board, the board shall immediately notify the qualified actuary 
engaged by the plan, and such actuary shall, not later than the end of 
the next following month, make such recommendations to the board for 
corrective action as the actuary determines necessary to ensure 
compliance with section 806. Not later than 30 days after receiving 
from the actuary recommendations for corrective actions, the board 
shall notify the applicable authority (in such form and manner as the 
applicable authority may prescribe by regulation) of such 
recommendations of the actuary for corrective action, together with a 
description of the actions (if any) that the board has taken or plans 
to take in response to such recommendations. The board shall thereafter 
report to the applicable authority, in such form and frequency as the 
applicable authority may specify to the board, regarding corrective 
action taken by the board until the requirements of section 806 are 
met.
 ``(b) Mandatory Termination.--In any case in which--
 ``(1) the applicable authority has been notified under 
 subsection (a) (or by an issuer of excess/stop loss insurance 
 or indemnity insurance pursuant to section 806(a)) of a failure 
 of an association health plan which is or has been certified 
 under this part and is described in section 806(a)(2) to meet 
 the requirements of section 806 and has not been notified by 
 the board of trustees of the plan that corrective action has 
 restored compliance with such requirements; and
 ``(2) the applicable authority determines that there is a 
 reasonable expectation that the plan will continue to fail to 
 meet the requirements of section 806,
the board of trustees of the plan shall, at the direction of the 
applicable authority, terminate the plan and, in the course of the 
termination, take such actions as the applicable authority may require, 
including satisfying any claims referred to in section 
806(a)(2)(B)(iii) and recovering for the plan any liability under 
subsection (a)(2)(B)(iii) or (e) of section 806, as necessary to ensure 
that the affairs of the plan will be, to the maximum extent possible, 
wound up in a manner which will result in timely provision of all 
benefits for which the plan is obligated.

``SEC. 810. TRUSTEESHIP BY THE SECRETARY OF INSOLVENT ASSOCIATION 
 HEALTH PLANS PROVIDING HEALTH BENEFITS IN ADDITION TO 
 HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE.

 ``(a) Appointment of Secretary as Trustee for Insolvent Plans.--
Whenever the Secretary determines that an association health plan which 
is or has been certified under this part and which is described in 
section 806(a)(2) will be unable to provide benefits when due or is 
otherwise in a financially hazardous condition, as shall be defined by 
the Secretary by regulation, the Secretary shall, upon notice to the 
plan, apply to the appropriate United States district court for 
appointment of the Secretary as trustee to administer the plan for the 
duration of the insolvency. The plan may appear as a party and other 
interested persons may intervene in the proceedings at the discretion 
of the court. The court shall appoint such Secretary trustee if the 
court determines that the trusteeship is necessary to protect the 
interests of the participants and beneficiaries or providers of medical 
care or to avoid any unreasonable deterioration of the financial 
condition of the plan. The trusteeship of such Secretary shall continue 
until the conditions described in the first sentence of this subsection 
are remedied or the plan is terminated.
 ``(b) Powers as Trustee.--The Secretary, upon appointment as 
trustee under subsection (a), shall have the power--
 ``(1) to do any act authorized by the plan, this title, or 
 other applicable provisions of law to be done by the plan 
 administrator or any trustee of the plan;
 ``(2) to require the transfer of all (or any part) of the 
 assets and records of the plan to the Secretary as trustee;
 ``(3) to invest any assets of the plan which the Secretary 
 holds in accordance with the provisions of the plan, 
 regulations prescribed by the Secretary, and applicable 
 provisions of law;
 ``(4) to require the sponsor, the plan administrator, any 
 participating employer, and any employee organization 
 representing plan participants to furnish any information with 
 respect to the plan which the Secretary as trustee may 
 reasonably need in order to administer the plan;
 ``(5) to collect for the plan any amounts due the plan and 
 to recover reasonable expenses of the trusteeship;
 ``(6) to commence, prosecute, or defend on behalf of the 
 plan any suit or proceeding involving the plan;
 ``(7) to issue, publish, or file such notices, statements, 
 and reports as may be required by the Secretary by regulation 
 or required by any order of the court;
 ``(8) to terminate the plan (or provide for its termination 
 in accordance with section 809(b)) and liquidate the plan 
 assets, to restore the plan to the responsibility of the 
 sponsor, or to continue the trusteeship;
 ``(9) to provide for the enrollment of plan participants 
 and beneficiaries under appropriate coverage options; and
 ``(10) to do such other acts as may be necessary to comply 
 with this title or any order of the court and to protect the 
 interests of plan participants and beneficiaries and providers 
 of medical care.
 ``(c) Notice of Appointment.--As soon as practicable after the 
Secretary's appointment as trustee, the Secretary shall give notice of 
such appointment to--
 ``(1) the sponsor and plan administrator;
 ``(2) each participant;
 ``(3) each participating employer; and
 ``(4) if applicable, each employee organization which, for 
 purposes of collective bargaining, represents plan 
 participants.
 ``(d) Additional Duties.--Except to the extent inconsistent with 
the provisions of this title, or as may be otherwise ordered by the 
court, the Secretary, upon appointment as trustee under this section, 
shall be subject to the same duties as those of a trustee under section 
704 of title 11, United States Code, and shall have the duties of a 
fiduciary for purposes of this title.
 ``(e) Other Proceedings.--An application by the Secretary under 
this subsection may be filed notwithstanding the pendency in the same 
or any other court of any bankruptcy, mortgage foreclosure, or equity 
receivership proceeding, or any proceeding to reorganize, conserve, or 
liquidate such plan or its property, or any proceeding to enforce a 
lien against property of the plan.
 ``(f) Jurisdiction of Court.--
 ``(1) In general.--Upon the filing of an application for 
 the appointment as trustee or the issuance of a decree under 
 this section, the court to which the application is made shall 
 have exclusive jurisdiction of the plan involved and its 
 property wherever located with the powers, to the extent 
 consistent with the purposes of this section, of a court of the 
 United States having jurisdiction over cases under chapter 11 
 of title 11, United States Code. Pending an adjudication under 
 this section such court shall stay, and upon appointment by it 
 of the Secretary as trustee, such court shall continue the stay 
 of, any pending mortgage foreclosure, equity receivership, or 
 other proceeding to reorganize, conserve, or liquidate the 
 plan, the sponsor, or property of such plan or sponsor, and any 
 other suit against any receiver, conservator, or trustee of the 
 plan, the sponsor, or property of the plan or sponsor. Pending 
 such adjudication and upon the appointment by it of the 
 Secretary as trustee, the court may stay any proceeding to 
 enforce a lien against property of the plan or the sponsor or 
 any other suit against the plan or the sponsor.
 ``(2) Venue.--An action under this section may be brought 
 in the judicial district where the sponsor or the plan 
 administrator resides or does business or where any asset of 
 the plan is situated. A district court in which such action is 
 brought may issue process with respect to such action in any 
 other judicial district.
 ``(g) Personnel.--In accordance with regulations which shall be 
prescribed by the Secretary, the Secretary shall appoint, retain, and 
compensate accountants, actuaries, and other professional service 
personnel as may be necessary in connection with the Secretary's 
service as trustee under this section.

``SEC. 811. STATE ASSESSMENT AUTHORITY.

 ``(a) In General.--Notwithstanding section 514, a State may impose 
by law a contribution tax on an association health plan described in 
section 806(a)(2), if the plan commenced operations in such State after 
the date of the enactment of the Small Business Health Fairness Act of 
2011.
 ``(b) Contribution Tax.--For purposes of this section, the term 
`contribution tax' imposed by a State on an association health plan 
means any tax imposed by such State if--
 ``(1) such tax is computed by applying a rate to the amount 
 of premiums or contributions, with respect to individuals 
 covered under the plan who are residents of such State, which 
 are received by the plan from participating employers located 
 in such State or from such individuals;
 ``(2) the rate of such tax does not exceed the rate of any 
 tax imposed by such State on premiums or contributions received 
 by insurers or health maintenance organizations for health 
 insurance coverage offered in such State in connection with a 
 group health plan;
 ``(3) such tax is otherwise nondiscriminatory; and
 ``(4) the amount of any such tax assessed on the plan is 
 reduced by the amount of any tax or assessment otherwise 
 imposed by the State on premiums, contributions, or both 
 received by insurers or health maintenance organizations for 
 health insurance coverage, aggregate excess/stop loss insurance 
 (as defined in section 806(g)(1)), specific excess/stop loss 
 insurance (as defined in section 806(g)(2)), other insurance 
 related to the provision of medical care under the plan, or any 
 combination thereof provided by such insurers or health 
 maintenance organizations in such State in connection with such 
 plan.

``SEC. 812. DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.

 ``(a) Definitions.--For purposes of this part--
 ``(1) Group health plan.--The term `group health plan' has 
 the meaning provided in section 733(a)(1) (after applying 
 subsection (b) of this section).
 ``(2) Medical care.--The term `medical care' has the 
 meaning provided in section 733(a)(2).
 ``(3) Health insurance coverage.--The term `health 
 insurance coverage' has the meaning provided in section 
 733(b)(1).
 ``(4) Health insurance issuer.--The term `health insurance 
 issuer' has the meaning provided in section 733(b)(2).
 ``(5) Applicable authority.--The term `applicable 
 authority' means the Secretary, except that, in connection with 
 any exercise of the Secretary's authority regarding which the 
 Secretary is required under section 506(d) to consult with a 
 State, such term means the Secretary, in consultation with such 
 State.
 ``(6) Health status-related factor.--The term `health 
 status-related factor' has the meaning provided in section 
 733(d)(2).
 ``(7) Individual market.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `individual market' 
 means the market for health insurance coverage offered 
 to individuals other than in connection with a group 
 health plan.
 ``(B) Treatment of very small groups.--
 ``(i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), 
 such term includes coverage offered in 
 connection with a group health plan that has 
 fewer than 2 participants as current employees 
 or participants described in section 732(d)(3) 
 on the first day of the plan year.
 ``(ii) State exception.--Clause (i) shall 
 not apply in the case of health insurance 
 coverage offered in a State if such State 
 regulates the coverage described in such clause 
 in the same manner and to the same extent as 
 coverage in the small group market (as defined 
 in section 2791(e)(5) of the Public Health 
 Service Act) is regulated by such State.
 ``(8) Participating employer.--The term `participating 
 employer' means, in connection with an association health plan, 
 any employer, if any individual who is an employee of such 
 employer, a partner in such employer, or a self-employed 
 individual who is such employer (or any dependent, as defined 
 under the terms of the plan, of such individual) is or was 
 covered under such plan in connection with the status of such 
 individual as such an employee, partner, or self-employed 
 individual in relation to the plan.
 ``(9) Applicable state authority.--The term `applicable 
 State authority' means, with respect to a health insurance 
 issuer in a State, the State insurance commissioner or official 
 or officials designated by the State to enforce the 
 requirements of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act 
 for the State involved with respect to such issuer.
 ``(10) Qualified actuary.--The term `qualified actuary' 
 means an individual who is a member of the American Academy of 
 Actuaries.
 ``(11) Affiliated member.--The term `affiliated member' 
 means, in connection with a sponsor--
 ``(A) a person who is otherwise eligible to be a 
 member of the sponsor but who elects an affiliated 
 status with the sponsor,
 ``(B) in the case of a sponsor with members which 
 consist of associations, a person who is a member of 
 any such association and elects an affiliated status 
 with the sponsor, or
 ``(C) in the case of an association health plan in 
 existence on the date of the enactment of the Small 
 Business Health Fairness Act of 2011, a person eligible 
 to be a member of the sponsor or one of its member 
 associations.
 ``(12) Large employer.--The term `large employer' means, in 
 connection with a group health plan with respect to a plan 
 year, an employer who employed an average of at least 51 
 employees on business days during the preceding calendar year 
 and who employs at least 2 employees on the first day of the 
 plan year.
 ``(13) Small employer.--The term `small employer' means, in 
 connection with a group health plan with respect to a plan 
 year, an employer who is not a large employer.
 ``(b) Rules of Construction.--
 ``(1) Employers and employees.--For purposes of determining 
 whether a plan, fund, or program is an employee welfare benefit 
 plan which is an association health plan, and for purposes of 
 applying this title in connection with such plan, fund, or 
 program so determined to be such an employee welfare benefit 
 plan--
 ``(A) in the case of a partnership, the term 
 `employer' (as defined in section 3(5)) includes the 
 partnership in relation to the partners, and the term 
 `employee' (as defined in section 3(6)) includes any 
 partner in relation to the partnership; and
 ``(B) in the case of a self-employed individual, 
 the term `employer' (as defined in section 3(5)) and 
 the term `employee' (as defined in section 3(6)) shall 
 include such individual.
 ``(2) Plans, funds, and programs treated as employee 
 welfare benefit plans.--In the case of any plan, fund, or 
 program which was established or is maintained for the purpose 
 of providing medical care (through the purchase of insurance or 
 otherwise) for employees (or their dependents) covered 
 thereunder and which demonstrates to the Secretary that all 
 requirements for certification under this part would be met 
 with respect to such plan, fund, or program if such plan, fund, 
 or program were a group health plan, such plan, fund, or 
 program shall be treated for purposes of this title as an 
 employee welfare benefit plan on and after the date of such 
 demonstration.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments to Preemption Rules.--
 (1) Section 514(b)(6) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 1144(b)(6)) is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(E) The preceding subparagraphs of this paragraph do not apply 
with respect to any State law in the case of an association health plan 
which is certified under part 8.''.
 (2) Section 514 of such Act (29 U.S.C. 1144) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (b)(4), by striking ``Subsection 
 (a)'' and inserting ``Subsections (a) and (d)'';
 (B) in subsection (b)(5), by striking ``subsection 
 (a)'' in subparagraph (A) and inserting ``subsection 
 (a) of this section and subsections (a)(2)(B) and (b) 
 of section 805'', and by striking ``subsection (a)'' in 
 subparagraph (B) and inserting ``subsection (a) of this 
 section or subsection (a)(2)(B) or (b) of section 
 805'';
 (C) by redesignating subsections (d) and (e) as 
 subsections (e) and (f), respectively; and
 (D) by inserting after subsection (c) the following 
 new subsection:
 ``(d)(1) Except as provided in subsection (b)(4), the provisions of 
this title shall supersede any and all State laws insofar as they may 
now or hereafter preclude, or have the effect of precluding, a health 
insurance issuer from offering health insurance coverage in connection 
with an association health plan which is certified under part 8.
 ``(2) Except as provided in paragraphs (4) and (5) of subsection 
(b) of this section--
 ``(A) In any case in which health insurance coverage of any 
 policy type is offered under an association health plan 
 certified under part 8 to a participating employer operating in 
 such State, the provisions of this title shall supersede any 
 and all laws of such State insofar as they may preclude a 
 health insurance issuer from offering health insurance coverage 
 of the same policy type to other employers operating in the 
 State which are eligible for coverage under such association 
 health plan, whether or not such other employers are 
 participating employers in such plan.
 ``(B) In any case in which health insurance coverage of any 
 policy type is offered in a State under an association health 
 plan certified under part 8 and the filing, with the applicable 
 State authority (as defined in section 812(a)(9)), of the 
 policy form in connection with such policy type is approved by 
 such State authority, the provisions of this title shall 
 supersede any and all laws of any other State in which health 
 insurance coverage of such type is offered, insofar as they may 
 preclude, upon the filing in the same form and manner of such 
 policy form with the applicable State authority in such other 
 State, the approval of the filing in such other State.
 ``(3) Nothing in subsection (b)(6)(E) or the preceding provisions 
of this subsection shall be construed, with respect to health insurance 
issuers or health insurance coverage, to supersede or impair the law of 
any State--
 ``(A) providing solvency standards or similar standards 
 regarding the adequacy of insurer capital, surplus, reserves, 
 or contributions, or
 ``(B) relating to prompt payment of claims.
 ``(4) For additional provisions relating to association health 
plans, see subsections (a)(2)(B) and (b) of section 805.
 ``(5) For purposes of this subsection, the term `association health 
plan' has the meaning provided in section 801(a), and the terms `health 
insurance coverage', `participating employer', and `health insurance 
issuer' have the meanings provided such terms in section 812, 
respectively.''.
 (3) Section 514(b)(6)(A) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 
 1144(b)(6)(A)) is amended--
 (A) in clause (i)(II), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in clause (ii), by inserting ``and which does 
 not provide medical care (within the meaning of section 
 733(a)(2)),'' after ``arrangement,'', and by striking 
 ``title.'' and inserting ``title, and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 ``(iii) subject to subparagraph (E), in the case of any 
 other employee welfare benefit plan which is a multiple 
 employer welfare arrangement and which provides medical care 
 (within the meaning of section 733(a)(2)), any law of any State 
 which regulates insurance may apply.''.
 (4) Section 514(e) of such Act (as redesignated by 
 paragraph (2)(C)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``Nothing'' and inserting ``(1) 
 Except as provided in paragraph (2), nothing''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(2) Nothing in any other provision of law enacted on or after the 
date of the enactment of the Small Business Health Fairness Act of 2011 
shall be construed to alter, amend, modify, invalidate, impair, or 
supersede any provision of this title, except by specific cross-
reference to the affected section.''.
 (c) Plan Sponsor.--Section 3(16)(B) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 
102(16)(B)) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: 
``Such term also includes a person serving as the sponsor of an 
association health plan under part 8.''.
 (d) Disclosure of Solvency Protections Related to Self-Insured and 
Fully Insured Options Under Association Health Plans.--Section 102(b) 
of such Act (29 U.S.C. 102(b)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following: ``An association health plan shall include in its summary 
plan description, in connection with each benefit option, a description 
of the form of solvency or guarantee fund protection secured pursuant 
to this Act or applicable State law, if any.''.
 (e) Savings Clause.--Section 731(c) of such Act is amended by 
inserting ``or part 8'' after ``this part''.
 (f) Report to the Congress Regarding Certification of Self-Insured 
Association Health Plans.--Not later than January 1, 2012, the 
Secretary of Labor shall report to the Committee on Education and the 
Workforce of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Health, 
Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate the effect association 
health plans have had, if any, on reducing the number of uninsured 
individuals.
 (g) Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1 of the 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by inserting 
after the item relating to section 734 the following new items:

 ``Part 8--Rules Governing Association Health Plans

``801. Association health plans.
``802. Certification of association health plans.
``803. Requirements relating to sponsors and boards of trustees.
``804. Participation and coverage requirements.
``805. Other requirements relating to plan documents, contribution 
 rates, and benefit options.
``806. Maintenance of reserves and provisions for solvency for plans 
 providing health benefits in addition to 
 health insurance coverage.
``807. Requirements for application and related requirements.
``808. Notice requirements for voluntary termination.
``809. Corrective actions and mandatory termination.
``810. Trusteeship by the Secretary of insolvent association health 
 plans providing health benefits in addition 
 to health insurance coverage.
``811. State assessment authority.
``812. Definitions and rules of construction.''.

SEC. 202. CLARIFICATION OF TREATMENT OF SINGLE EMPLOYER ARRANGEMENTS.

 Section 3(40)(B) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(40)(B)) is amended--
 (1) in clause (i), by inserting after ``control group,'' 
 the following: ``except that, in any case in which the benefit 
 referred to in subparagraph (A) consists of medical care (as 
 defined in section 812(a)(2)), two or more trades or 
 businesses, whether or not incorporated, shall be deemed a 
 single employer for any plan year of such plan, or any fiscal 
 year of such other arrangement, if such trades or businesses 
 are within the same control group during such year or at any 
 time during the preceding 1-year period,'';
 (2) in clause (iii), by striking ``(iii) the 
 determination'' and inserting the following:
 ``(iii)(I) in any case in which the benefit referred to in 
 subparagraph (A) consists of medical care (as defined in 
 section 812(a)(2)), the determination of whether a trade or 
 business is under `common control' with another trade or 
 business shall be determined under regulations of the Secretary 
 applying principles consistent and coextensive with the 
 principles applied in determining whether employees of two or 
 more trades or businesses are treated as employed by a single 
 employer under section 4001(b), except that, for purposes of 
 this paragraph, an interest of greater than 25 percent may not 
 be required as the minimum interest necessary for common 
 control, or
 ``(II) in any other case, the determination'';
 (3) by redesignating clauses (iv) and (v) as clauses (v) 
 and (vi), respectively; and
 (4) by inserting after clause (iii) the following new 
 clause:
 ``(iv) in any case in which the benefit referred to in 
 subparagraph (A) consists of medical care (as defined in 
 section 812(a)(2)), in determining, after the application of 
 clause (i), whether benefits are provided to employees of two 
 or more employers, the arrangement shall be treated as having 
 only one participating employer if, after the application of 
 clause (i), the number of individuals who are employees and 
 former employees of any one participating employer and who are 
 covered under the arrangement is greater than 75 percent of the 
 aggregate number of all individuals who are employees or former 
 employees of participating employers and who are covered under 
 the arrangement,''.

SEC. 203. ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS RELATING TO ASSOCIATION HEALTH PLANS.

 (a) Criminal Penalties for Certain Willful Misrepresentations.--
Section 501 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 
U.S.C. 1131) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(a)'' after ``Sec. 501.''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(b) Any person who willfully falsely represents, to any employee, 
any employee's beneficiary, any employer, the Secretary, or any State, 
a plan or other arrangement established or maintained for the purpose 
of offering or providing any benefit described in section 3(1) to 
employees or their beneficiaries as--
 ``(1) being an association health plan which has been 
 certified under part 8;
 ``(2) having been established or maintained under or 
 pursuant to one or more collective bargaining agreements which 
 are reached pursuant to collective bargaining described in 
 section 8(d) of the National Labor Relations Act (29 U.S.C. 
 158(d)) or paragraph fourth of section 2 of the Railway Labor 
 Act (45 U.S.C. 152, paragraph fourth) or which are reached 
 pursuant to labor-management negotiations under similar 
 provisions of State public employee relations laws; or
 ``(3) being a plan or arrangement described in section 
 3(40)(A)(i),
shall, upon conviction, be imprisoned not more than 5 years, be fined 
under title 18, United States Code, or both.''.
 (b) Cease Activities Orders.--Section 502 of such Act (29 U.S.C. 
1132) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(n) Association Health Plan Cease and Desist Orders.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), upon 
 application by the Secretary showing the operation, promotion, 
 or marketing of an association health plan (or similar 
 arrangement providing benefits consisting of medical care (as 
 defined in section 733(a)(2))) that--
 ``(A) is not certified under part 8, is subject 
 under section 514(b)(6) to the insurance laws of any 
 State in which the plan or arrangement offers or 
 provides benefits, and is not licensed, registered, or 
 otherwise approved under the insurance laws of such 
 State; or
 ``(B) is an association health plan certified under 
 part 8 and is not operating in accordance with the 
 requirements under part 8 for such certification,
 a district court of the United States shall enter an order 
 requiring that the plan or arrangement cease activities.
 ``(2) Exception.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply in the case 
 of an association health plan or other arrangement if the plan 
 or arrangement shows that--
 ``(A) all benefits under it referred to in 
 paragraph (1) consist of health insurance coverage; and
 ``(B) with respect to each State in which the plan 
 or arrangement offers or provides benefits, the plan or 
 arrangement is operating in accordance with applicable 
 State laws that are not superseded under section 514.
 ``(3) Additional equitable relief.--The court may grant 
 such additional equitable relief, including any relief 
 available under this title, as it deems necessary to protect 
 the interests of the public and of persons having claims for 
 benefits against the plan.''.
 (c) Responsibility for Claims Procedure.--Section 503 of such Act 
(29 U.S.C. 1133) is amended by inserting ``(a) In General.--'' before 
``In accordance'', and by adding at the end the following new 
subsection:
 ``(b) Association Health Plans.--The terms of each association 
health plan which is or has been certified under part 8 shall require 
the board of trustees or the named fiduciary (as applicable) to ensure 
that the requirements of this section are met in connection with claims 
filed under the plan.''.

SEC. 204. COOPERATION BETWEEN FEDERAL AND STATE AUTHORITIES.

 Section 506 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
(29 U.S.C. 1136) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection:
 ``(d) Consultation With States With Respect to Association Health 
Plans.--
 ``(1) Agreements with states.--The Secretary shall consult 
 with the State recognized under paragraph (2) with respect to 
 an association health plan regarding the exercise of--
 ``(A) the Secretary's authority under sections 502 
 and 504 to enforce the requirements for certification 
 under part 8; and
 ``(B) the Secretary's authority to certify 
 association health plans under part 8 in accordance 
 with regulations of the Secretary applicable to 
 certification under part 8.
 ``(2) Recognition of primary domicile state.--In carrying 
 out paragraph (1), the Secretary shall ensure that only one 
 State will be recognized, with respect to any particular 
 association health plan, as the State with which consultation 
 is required. In carrying out this paragraph--
 ``(A) in the case of a plan which provides health 
 insurance coverage (as defined in section 812(a)(3)), 
 such State shall be the State with which filing and 
 approval of a policy type offered by the plan was 
 initially obtained, and
 ``(B) in any other case, the Secretary shall take 
 into account the places of residence of the 
 participants and beneficiaries under the plan and the 
 State in which the trust is maintained.''.

SEC. 205. EFFECTIVE DATE AND TRANSITIONAL AND OTHER RULES.

 (a) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this title shall take 
effect 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act. The 
Secretary of Labor shall first issue all regulations necessary to carry 
out the amendments made by this title within 1 year after the date of 
the enactment of this Act.
 (b) Treatment of Certain Existing Health Benefits Programs.--
 (1) In general.--In any case in which, as of the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, an arrangement is maintained in a 
 State for the purpose of providing benefits consisting of 
 medical care for the employees and beneficiaries of its 
 participating employers, at least 200 participating employers 
 make contributions to such arrangement, such arrangement has 
 been in existence for at least 10 years, and such arrangement 
 is licensed under the laws of one or more States to provide 
 such benefits to its participating employers, upon the filing 
 with the applicable authority (as defined in section 812(a)(5) 
 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (as 
 amended by this subtitle)) by the arrangement of an application 
 for certification of the arrangement under part 8 of subtitle B 
 of title I of such Act--
 (A) such arrangement shall be deemed to be a group 
 health plan for purposes of title I of such Act;
 (B) the requirements of sections 801(a) and 803(a) 
 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
 shall be deemed met with respect to such arrangement;
 (C) the requirements of section 803(b) of such Act 
 shall be deemed met, if the arrangement is operated by 
 a board of directors which--
 (i) is elected by the participating 
 employers, with each employer having one vote; 
 and
 (ii) has complete fiscal control over the 
 arrangement and which is responsible for all 
 operations of the arrangement;
 (D) the requirements of section 804(a) of such Act 
 shall be deemed met with respect to such arrangement; 
 and
 (E) the arrangement may be certified by any 
 applicable authority with respect to its operations in 
 any State only if it operates in such State on the date 
 of certification.
 The provisions of this subsection shall cease to apply with 
 respect to any such arrangement at such time after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act as the applicable requirements of 
 this subsection are not met with respect to such arrangement.
 (2) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection, the 
 terms ``group health plan'', ``medical care'', and 
 ``participating employer'' shall have the meanings provided in 
 section 812 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
 1974, except that the reference in paragraph (7) of such 
 section to an ``association health plan'' shall be deemed a 
 reference to an arrangement referred to in this subsection.

 TITLE II--TARGETED EFFORTS TO EXPAND ACCESS

SEC. 211. EXTENDING COVERAGE OF DEPENDENTS.

 (a) Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.--
 (1) In general.--Part 7 of subtitle B of title I of the 
 Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by 
 inserting after section 2714 the following new section:

``SEC. 715. EXTENDING COVERAGE OF DEPENDENTS.

 ``(a) In General.--In the case of a group health plan, or health 
insurance coverage offered in connection with a group health plan, that 
treats as a beneficiary under the plan an individual who is a dependent 
child of a participant or beneficiary under the plan, the plan or 
coverage shall continue to treat the individual as a dependent child 
without regard to the individual's age through at least the end of the 
plan year in which the individual turns an age specified in the plan, 
but not less than 25 years of age.
 ``(b) Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as 
requiring a group health plan to provide benefits for dependent 
children as beneficiaries under the plan or to require a participant to 
elect coverage of dependent children.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of contents of such Act 
 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 714 
 the following new item:

``Sec. 715. Extending coverage of dependents through plan year that 
 includes 25th birthday.''.
 (b) PHSA.--Title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act is amended 
by inserting after section 2707 the following new section:

``SEC. 2708. EXTENDING COVERAGE OF DEPENDENTS.

 ``(a) In General.--In the case of a group health plan, or health 
insurance coverage offered in connection with a group health plan, that 
treats as a beneficiary under the plan an individual who is a dependent 
child of a participant or beneficiary under the plan, the plan or 
coverage shall continue to treat the individual as a dependent child 
without regard to the individual's age through at least the end of the 
plan year in which the individual turns an age specified in the plan, 
but not less than 25 years of age.
 ``(b) Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as 
requiring a group health plan to provide benefits for dependent 
children as beneficiaries under the plan or to require a participant to 
elect coverage of dependent children.''.
 (c) IRC.--
 (1) In general.--Subchapter B of chapter 100 of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end 
 the following new section:

``SEC. 9814. EXTENDING COVERAGE OF DEPENDENTS.

 ``(a) In General.--In the case of a group health plan that treats 
as a beneficiary under the plan an individual who is a dependent child 
of a participant or beneficiary under the plan, the plan shall continue 
to treat the individual as a dependent child without regard to the 
individual's age through at least the end of the plan year in which the 
individual turns an age specified in the plan, but not less than 25 
years of age.
 ``(b) Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as 
requiring a group health plan to provide coverage for dependent 
children as beneficiaries under the plan or to require a participant to 
elect coverage of dependent children.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections in such 
 subchapter is amended by adding at the end the following new 
 item:

``Sec. 9814. Extending coverage of dependents through plan year that 
 includes 25th birthday.''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to group health plans for each plan year beginning more than 3 
months after the date of the enactment of this Act and shall apply to 
individuals who are dependent children under a group health plan, or 
health insurance coverage offered in connection with such a plan, on or 
after such date.

SEC. 212. ALLOWING AUTO-ENROLLMENT FOR EMPLOYER SPONSORED COVERAGE.

 (a) In General.--No State shall establish a law that prevents an 
employer from instituting auto-enrollment for coverage of a participant 
or beneficiary, including current employees, under a group health plan, 
or health insurance coverage offered in connection with such a plan, so 
long as the participant or beneficiary has the option of declining such 
coverage.
 (b) Auto-Enrollment.--
 (1) Notice required.--Employers with auto-enrollment under 
 a group health plan or health insurance coverage shall provide 
 annual notification, within a reasonable period before the 
 beginning of each plan year, to each employee eligible to 
 participate in the plan. The notice shall explain the employee 
 contribution to such plan and the employee's right to decline 
 coverage.
 (2) Treatment of non-action.--After a reasonable period of 
 time after receipt of the notice, if an employee fails to make 
 an affirmative declaration declining coverage, then such an 
 employee may be enrolled in the group health plan or health 
 insurance coverage offered in connection with such a plan.''
 (c) Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to 
supersede State law which establishes, implements, or continues in 
effect any standard or requirement relating to employers in connection 
with payroll or the sponsoring of employer sponsored health insurance 
coverage except to the extent that such standard or requirement 
prevents an employer from instituting the auto-enrollment described in 
subsection (a).

 TITLE III--EXPANDING CHOICES BY ALLOWING AMERICANS TO BUY HEALTH CARE 
 COVERAGE ACROSS STATE LINES

SEC. 221. INTERSTATE PURCHASING OF HEALTH INSURANCE.

 (a) In General.--Title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 300gg et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
part:

``PART D--COOPERATIVE GOVERNING OF INDIVIDUAL HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE

``SEC. 2795. DEFINITIONS.

 ``In this part:
 ``(1) Primary state.--The term `primary State' means, with 
 respect to individual health insurance coverage offered by a 
 health insurance issuer, the State designated by the issuer as 
 the State whose covered laws shall govern the health insurance 
 issuer in the sale of such coverage under this part. An issuer, 
 with respect to a particular policy, may only designate one 
 such State as its primary State with respect to all such 
 coverage it offers. Such an issuer may not change the 
 designated primary State with respect to individual health 
 insurance coverage once the policy is issued, except that such 
 a change may be made upon renewal of the policy. With respect 
 to such designated State, the issuer is deemed to be doing 
 business in that State.
 ``(2) Secondary state.--The term `secondary State' means, 
 with respect to individual health insurance coverage offered by 
 a health insurance issuer, any State that is not the primary 
 State. In the case of a health insurance issuer that is selling 
 a policy in, or to a resident of, a secondary State, the issuer 
 is deemed to be doing business in that secondary State.
 ``(3) Health insurance issuer.--The term `health insurance 
 issuer' has the meaning given such term in section 2791(b)(2), 
 except that such an issuer must be licensed in the primary 
 State and be qualified to sell individual health insurance 
 coverage in that State.
 ``(4) Individual health insurance coverage.--The term 
 `individual health insurance coverage' means health insurance 
 coverage offered in the individual market, as defined in 
 section 2791(e)(1).
 ``(5) Applicable state authority.--The term `applicable 
 State authority' means, with respect to a health insurance 
 issuer in a State, the State insurance commissioner or official 
 or officials designated by the State to enforce the 
 requirements of this title for the State with respect to the 
 issuer.
 ``(6) Hazardous financial condition.--The term `hazardous 
 financial condition' means that, based on its present or 
 reasonably anticipated financial condition, a health insurance 
 issuer is unlikely to be able--
 ``(A) to meet obligations to policyholders with 
 respect to known claims and reasonably anticipated 
 claims; or
 ``(B) to pay other obligations in the normal course 
 of business.
 ``(7) Covered laws.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `covered laws' means 
 the laws, rules, regulations, agreements, and orders 
 governing the insurance business pertaining to--
 ``(i) individual health insurance coverage 
 issued by a health insurance issuer;
 ``(ii) the offer, sale, rating (including 
 medical underwriting), renewal, and issuance of 
 individual health insurance coverage to an 
 individual;
 ``(iii) the provision to an individual in 
 relation to individual health insurance 
 coverage of health care and insurance related 
 services;
 ``(iv) the provision to an individual in 
 relation to individual health insurance 
 coverage of management, operations, and 
 investment activities of a health insurance 
 issuer; and
 ``(v) the provision to an individual in 
 relation to individual health insurance 
 coverage of loss control and claims 
 administration for a health insurance issuer 
 with respect to liability for which the issuer 
 provides insurance.
 ``(B) Exception.--Such term does not include any 
 law, rule, regulation, agreement, or order governing 
 the use of care or cost management techniques, 
 including any requirement related to provider 
 contracting, network access or adequacy, health care 
 data collection, or quality assurance.
 ``(8) State.--The term `State' means the 50 States and 
 includes the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin 
 Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Northern Mariana 
 Islands.
 ``(9) Unfair claims settlement practices.--The term `unfair 
 claims settlement practices' means only the following 
 practices:
 ``(A) Knowingly misrepresenting to claimants and 
 insured individuals relevant facts or policy provisions 
 relating to coverage at issue.
 ``(B) Failing to acknowledge with reasonable 
 promptness pertinent communications with respect to 
 claims arising under policies.
 ``(C) Failing to adopt and implement reasonable 
 standards for the prompt investigation and settlement 
 of claims arising under policies.
 ``(D) Failing to effectuate prompt, fair, and 
 equitable settlement of claims submitted in which 
 liability has become reasonably clear.
 ``(E) Refusing to pay claims without conducting a 
 reasonable investigation.
 ``(F) Failing to affirm or deny coverage of claims 
 within a reasonable period of time after having 
 completed an investigation related to those claims.
 ``(G) A pattern or practice of compelling insured 
 individuals or their beneficiaries to institute suits 
 to recover amounts due under its policies by offering 
 substantially less than the amounts ultimately 
 recovered in suits brought by them.
 ``(H) A pattern or practice of attempting to settle 
 or settling claims for less than the amount that a 
 reasonable person would believe the insured individual 
 or his or her beneficiary was entitled by reference to 
 written or printed advertising material accompanying or 
 made part of an application.
 ``(I) Attempting to settle or settling claims on 
 the basis of an application that was materially altered 
 without notice to, or knowledge or consent of, the 
 insured.
 ``(J) Failing to provide forms necessary to present 
 claims within 15 calendar days of a requests with 
 reasonable explanations regarding their use.
 ``(K) Attempting to cancel a policy in less time 
 than that prescribed in the policy or by the law of the 
 primary State.
 ``(10) Fraud and abuse.--The term `fraud and abuse' means 
 an act or omission committed by a person who, knowingly and 
 with intent to defraud, commits, or conceals any material 
 information concerning, one or more of the following:
 ``(A) Presenting, causing to be presented or 
 preparing with knowledge or belief that it will be 
 presented to or by an insurer, a reinsurer, broker or 
 its agent, false information as part of, in support of 
 or concerning a fact material to one or more of the 
 following:
 ``(i) An application for the issuance or 
 renewal of an insurance policy or reinsurance 
 contract.
 ``(ii) The rating of an insurance policy or 
 reinsurance contract.
 ``(iii) A claim for payment or benefit 
 pursuant to an insurance policy or reinsurance 
 contract.
 ``(iv) Premiums paid on an insurance policy 
 or reinsurance contract.
 ``(v) Payments made in accordance with the 
 terms of an insurance policy or reinsurance 
 contract.
 ``(vi) A document filed with the 
 commissioner or the chief insurance regulatory 
 official of another jurisdiction.
 ``(vii) The financial condition of an 
 insurer or reinsurer.
 ``(viii) The formation, acquisition, 
 merger, reconsolidation, dissolution or 
 withdrawal from one or more lines of insurance 
 or reinsurance in all or part of a State by an 
 insurer or reinsurer.
 ``(ix) The issuance of written evidence of 
 insurance.
 ``(x) The reinstatement of an insurance 
 policy.
 ``(B) Solicitation or acceptance of new or renewal 
 insurance risks on behalf of an insurer reinsurer or 
 other person engaged in the business of insurance by a 
 person who knows or should know that the insurer or 
 other person responsible for the risk is insolvent at 
 the time of the transaction.
 ``(C) Transaction of the business of insurance in 
 violation of laws requiring a license, certificate of 
 authority or other legal authority for the transaction 
 of the business of insurance.
 ``(D) Attempt to commit, aiding or abetting in the 
 commission of, or conspiracy to commit the acts or 
 omissions specified in this paragraph.

``SEC. 2796. APPLICATION OF LAW.

 ``(a) In General.--The covered laws of the primary State shall 
apply to individual health insurance coverage offered by a health 
insurance issuer in the primary State and in any secondary State, but 
only if the coverage and issuer comply with the conditions of this 
section with respect to the offering of coverage in any secondary 
State.
 ``(b) Exemptions From Covered Laws in a Secondary State.--Except as 
provided in this section, a health insurance issuer with respect to its 
offer, sale, rating (including medical underwriting), renewal, and 
issuance of individual health insurance coverage in any secondary State 
is exempt from any covered laws of the secondary State (and any rules, 
regulations, agreements, or orders sought or issued by such State under 
or related to such covered laws) to the extent that such laws would--
 ``(1) make unlawful, or regulate, directly or indirectly, 
 the operation of the health insurance issuer operating in the 
 secondary State, except that any secondary State may require 
 such an issuer--
 ``(A) to pay, on a nondiscriminatory basis, 
 applicable premium and other taxes (including high risk 
 pool assessments) which are levied on insurers and 
 surplus lines insurers, brokers, or policyholders under 
 the laws of the State;
 ``(B) to register with and designate the State 
 insurance commissioner as its agent solely for the 
 purpose of receiving service of legal documents or 
 process;
 ``(C) to submit to an examination of its financial 
 condition by the State insurance commissioner in any 
 State in which the issuer is doing business to 
 determine the issuer's financial condition, if--
 ``(i) the State insurance commissioner of 
 the primary State has not done an examination 
 within the period recommended by the National 
 Association of Insurance Commissioners; and
 ``(ii) any such examination is conducted in 
 accordance with the examiners' handbook of the 
 National Association of Insurance Commissioners 
 and is coordinated to avoid unjustified 
 duplication and unjustified repetition;
 ``(D) to comply with a lawful order issued--
 ``(i) in a delinquency proceeding commenced 
 by the State insurance commissioner if there 
 has been a finding of financial impairment 
 under subparagraph (C); or
 ``(ii) in a voluntary dissolution 
 proceeding;
 ``(E) to comply with an injunction issued by a 
 court of competent jurisdiction, upon a petition by the 
 State insurance commissioner alleging that the issuer 
 is in hazardous financial condition;
 ``(F) to participate, on a nondiscriminatory basis, 
 in any insurance insolvency guaranty association or 
 similar association to which a health insurance issuer 
 in the State is required to belong;
 ``(G) to comply with any State law regarding fraud 
 and abuse (as defined in section 2795(10)), except that 
 if the State seeks an injunction regarding the conduct 
 described in this subparagraph, such injunction must be 
 obtained from a court of competent jurisdiction;
 ``(H) to comply with any State law regarding unfair 
 claims settlement practices (as defined in section 
 2795(9)); or
 ``(I) to comply with the applicable requirements 
 for independent review under section 2798 with respect 
 to coverage offered in the State;
 ``(2) require any individual health insurance coverage 
 issued by the issuer to be countersigned by an insurance agent 
 or broker residing in that Secondary State; or
 ``(3) otherwise discriminate against the issuer issuing 
 insurance in both the primary State and in any secondary State.
 ``(c) Clear and Conspicuous Disclosure.--A health insurance issuer 
shall provide the following notice, in 12-point bold type, in any 
insurance coverage offered in a secondary State under this part by such 
a health insurance issuer and at renewal of the policy, with the 5 
blank spaces therein being appropriately filled with the name of the 
health insurance issuer, the name of primary State, the name of the 
secondary State, the name of the secondary State, and the name of the 
secondary State, respectively, for the coverage concerned:
THIS POLICY IS ISSUED BY _____ AND IS GOVERNED BY THE LAWS AND 
REGULATIONS OF THE STATE OF _____, AND IT HAS MET ALL THE LAWS OF THAT 
STATE AS DETERMINED BY THAT STATE'S DEPARTMENT OF INSURANCE. THIS 
POLICY MAY BE LESS EXPENSIVE THAN OTHERS BECAUSE IT IS NOT SUBJECT TO 
ALL OF THE INSURANCE LAWS AND REGULATIONS OF THE STATE OF _____, 
INCLUDING COVERAGE OF SOME SERVICES OR BENEFITS MANDATED BY THE LAW OF 
THE STATE OF _____. ADDITIONALLY, THIS POLICY IS NOT SUBJECT TO ALL OF 
THE CONSUMER PROTECTION LAWS OR RESTRICTIONS ON RATE CHANGES OF THE 
STATE OF _____. AS WITH ALL INSURANCE PRODUCTS, BEFORE PURCHASING THIS 
POLICY, YOU SHOULD CAREFULLY REVIEW THE POLICY AND DETERMINE WHAT 
HEALTH CARE SERVICES THE POLICY COVERS AND WHAT BENEFITS IT PROVIDES, 
INCLUDING ANY EXCLUSIONS, LIMITATIONS, OR CONDITIONS FOR SUCH SERVICES 
OR BENEFITS.''.
 ``(d) Prohibition on Certain Reclassifications and Premium 
Increases.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, a health 
 insurance issuer that provides individual health insurance 
 coverage to an individual under this part in a primary or 
 secondary State may not upon renewal--
 ``(A) move or reclassify the individual insured 
 under the health insurance coverage from the class such 
 individual is in at the time of issue of the contract 
 based on the health-status related factors of the 
 individual; or
 ``(B) increase the premiums assessed the individual 
 for such coverage based on a health status-related 
 factor or change of a health status-related factor or 
 the past or prospective claim experience of the insured 
 individual.
 ``(2) Construction.--Nothing in paragraph (1) shall be 
 construed to prohibit a health insurance issuer--
 ``(A) from terminating or discontinuing coverage or 
 a class of coverage in accordance with subsections (b) 
 and (c) of section 2742;
 ``(B) from raising premium rates for all policy 
 holders within a class based on claims experience;
 ``(C) from changing premiums or offering discounted 
 premiums to individuals who engage in wellness 
 activities at intervals prescribed by the issuer, if 
 such premium changes or incentives--
 ``(i) are disclosed to the consumer in the 
 insurance contract;
 ``(ii) are based on specific wellness 
 activities that are not applicable to all 
 individuals; and
 ``(iii) are not obtainable by all 
 individuals to whom coverage is offered;
 ``(D) from reinstating lapsed coverage; or
 ``(E) from retroactively adjusting the rates 
 charged an insured individual if the initial rates were 
 set based on material misrepresentation by the 
 individual at the time of issue.
 ``(e) Prior Offering of Policy in Primary State.--A health 
insurance issuer may not offer for sale individual health insurance 
coverage in a secondary State unless that coverage is currently offered 
for sale in the primary State.
 ``(f) Licensing of Agents or Brokers for Health Insurance 
Issuers.--Any State may require that a person acting, or offering to 
act, as an agent or broker for a health insurance issuer with respect 
to the offering of individual health insurance coverage obtain a 
license from that State, with commissions or other compensation subject 
to the provisions of the laws of that State, except that a State may 
not impose any qualification or requirement which discriminates against 
a nonresident agent or broker.
 ``(g) Documents for Submission to State Insurance Commissioner.--
Each health insurance issuer issuing individual health insurance 
coverage in both primary and secondary States shall submit--
 ``(1) to the insurance commissioner of each State in which 
 it intends to offer such coverage, before it may offer 
 individual health insurance coverage in such State--
 ``(A) a copy of the plan of operation or 
 feasibility study or any similar statement of the 
 policy being offered and its coverage (which shall 
 include the name of its primary State and its principal 
 place of business);
 ``(B) written notice of any change in its 
 designation of its primary State; and
 ``(C) written notice from the issuer of the 
 issuer's compliance with all the laws of the primary 
 State; and
 ``(2) to the insurance commissioner of each secondary State 
 in which it offers individual health insurance coverage, a copy 
 of the issuer's quarterly financial statement submitted to the 
 primary State, which statement shall be certified by an 
 independent public accountant and contain a statement of 
 opinion on loss and loss adjustment expense reserves made by--
 ``(A) a member of the American Academy of 
 Actuaries; or
 ``(B) a qualified loss reserve specialist.
 ``(h) Power of Courts To Enjoin Conduct.--Nothing in this section 
shall be construed to affect the authority of any Federal or State 
court to enjoin--
 ``(1) the solicitation or sale of individual health 
 insurance coverage by a health insurance issuer to any person 
 or group who is not eligible for such insurance; or
 ``(2) the solicitation or sale of individual health 
 insurance coverage that violates the requirements of the law of 
 a secondary State which are described in subparagraphs (A) 
 through (H) of section 2796(b)(1).
 ``(i) Power of Secondary States To Take Administrative Action.--
Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authority of 
any State to enjoin conduct in violation of that State's laws described 
in section 2796(b)(1).
 ``(j) State Powers To Enforce State Laws.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to the provisions of subsection 
 (b)(1)(G) (relating to injunctions) and paragraph (2), nothing 
 in this section shall be construed to affect the authority of 
 any State to make use of any of its powers to enforce the laws 
 of such State with respect to which a health insurance issuer 
 is not exempt under subsection (b).
 ``(2) Courts of competent jurisdiction.--If a State seeks 
 an injunction regarding the conduct described in paragraphs (1) 
 and (2) of subsection (h), such injunction must be obtained 
 from a Federal or State court of competent jurisdiction.
 ``(k) States' Authority To Sue.--Nothing in this section shall 
affect the authority of any State to bring action in any Federal or 
State court.
 ``(l) Generally Applicable Laws.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to affect the applicability of State laws generally 
applicable to persons or corporations.
 ``(m) Guaranteed Availability of Coverage to HIPAA Eligible 
Individuals.--To the extent that a health insurance issuer is offering 
coverage in a primary State that does not accommodate residents of 
secondary States or does not provide a working mechanism for residents 
of a secondary State, and the issuer is offering coverage under this 
part in such secondary State which has not adopted a qualified high 
risk pool as its acceptable alternative mechanism (as defined in 
section 2744(c)(2)), the issuer shall, with respect to any individual 
health insurance coverage offered in a secondary State under this part, 
comply with the guaranteed availability requirements for eligible 
individuals in section 2741.

``SEC. 2797. PRIMARY STATE MUST MEET FEDERAL FLOOR BEFORE ISSUER MAY 
 SELL INTO SECONDARY STATES.

 ``A health insurance issuer may not offer, sell, or issue 
individual health insurance coverage in a secondary State if the State 
insurance commissioner does not use a risk-based capital formula for 
the determination of capital and surplus requirements for all health 
insurance issuers.

``SEC. 2798. INDEPENDENT EXTERNAL APPEALS PROCEDURES.

 ``(a) Right to External Appeal.--A health insurance issuer may not 
offer, sell, or issue individual health insurance coverage in a 
secondary State under the provisions of this title unless--
 ``(1) both the secondary State and the primary State have 
 legislation or regulations in place establishing an independent 
 review process for individuals who are covered by individual 
 health insurance coverage, or
 ``(2) in any case in which the requirements of subparagraph 
 (A) are not met with respect to the either of such States, the 
 issuer provides an independent review mechanism substantially 
 identical (as determined by the applicable State authority of 
 such State) to that prescribed in the `Health Carrier External 
 Review Model Act' of the National Association of Insurance 
 Commissioners for all individuals who purchase insurance 
 coverage under the terms of this part, except that, under such 
 mechanism, the review is conducted by an independent medical 
 reviewer, or a panel of such reviewers, with respect to whom 
 the requirements of subsection (b) are met.
 ``(b) Qualifications of Independent Medical Reviewers.--In the case 
of any independent review mechanism referred to in subsection (a)(2)--
 ``(1) In general.--In referring a denial of a claim to an 
 independent medical reviewer, or to any panel of such 
 reviewers, to conduct independent medical review, the issuer 
 shall ensure that--
 ``(A) each independent medical reviewer meets the 
 qualifications described in paragraphs (2) and (3);
 ``(B) with respect to each review, each reviewer 
 meets the requirements of paragraph (4) and the 
 reviewer, or at least 1 reviewer on the panel, meets 
 the requirements described in paragraph (5); and
 ``(C) compensation provided by the issuer to each 
 reviewer is consistent with paragraph (6).
 ``(2) Licensure and expertise.--Each independent medical 
 reviewer shall be a physician (allopathic or osteopathic) or 
 health care professional who--
 ``(A) is appropriately credentialed or licensed in 
 1 or more States to deliver health care services; and
 ``(B) typically treats the condition, makes the 
 diagnosis, or provides the type of treatment under 
 review.
 ``(3) Independence.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), 
 each independent medical reviewer in a case shall--
 ``(i) not be a related party (as defined in 
 paragraph (7));
 ``(ii) not have a material familial, 
 financial, or professional relationship with 
 such a party; and
 ``(iii) not otherwise have a conflict of 
 interest with such a party (as determined under 
 regulations).
 ``(B) Exception.--Nothing in subparagraph (A) shall 
 be construed to--
 ``(i) prohibit an individual, solely on the 
 basis of affiliation with the issuer, from 
 serving as an independent medical reviewer if--
 ``(I) a non-affiliated individual 
 is not reasonably available;
 ``(II) the affiliated individual is 
 not involved in the provision of items 
 or services in the case under review;
 ``(III) the fact of such an 
 affiliation is disclosed to the issuer 
 and the enrollee (or authorized 
 representative) and neither party 
 objects; and
 ``(IV) the affiliated individual is 
 not an employee of the issuer and does 
 not provide services exclusively or 
 primarily to or on behalf of the 
 issuer;
 ``(ii) prohibit an individual who has staff 
 privileges at the institution where the 
 treatment involved takes place from serving as 
 an independent medical reviewer merely on the 
 basis of such affiliation if the affiliation is 
 disclosed to the issuer and the enrollee (or 
 authorized representative), and neither party 
 objects; or
 ``(iii) prohibit receipt of compensation by 
 an independent medical reviewer from an entity 
 if the compensation is provided consistent with 
 paragraph (6).
 ``(4) Practicing health care professional in same field.--
 ``(A) In general.--In a case involving treatment, 
 or the provision of items or services--
 ``(i) by a physician, a reviewer shall be a 
 practicing physician (allopathic or 
 osteopathic) of the same or similar specialty, 
 as a physician who, acting within the 
 appropriate scope of practice within the State 
 in which the service is provided or rendered, 
 typically treats the condition, makes the 
 diagnosis, or provides the type of treatment 
 under review; or
 ``(ii) by a non-physician health care 
 professional, the reviewer, or at least 1 
 member of the review panel, shall be a 
 practicing non-physician health care 
 professional of the same or similar specialty 
 as the non-physician health care professional 
 who, acting within the appropriate scope of 
 practice within the State in which the service 
 is provided or rendered, typically treats the 
 condition, makes the diagnosis, or provides the 
 type of treatment under review.
 ``(B) Practicing defined.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the term `practicing' means, with respect to 
 an individual who is a physician or other health care 
 professional, that the individual provides health care 
 services to individual patients on average at least 2 
 days per week.
 ``(5) Pediatric expertise.--In the case of an external 
 review relating to a child, a reviewer shall have expertise 
 under paragraph (2) in pediatrics.
 ``(6) Limitations on reviewer compensation.--Compensation 
 provided by the issuer to an independent medical reviewer in 
 connection with a review under this section shall--
 ``(A) not exceed a reasonable level; and
 ``(B) not be contingent on the decision rendered by 
 the reviewer.
 ``(7) Related party defined.--For purposes of this section, 
 the term `related party' means, with respect to a denial of a 
 claim under a coverage relating to an enrollee, any of the 
 following:
 ``(A) The issuer involved, or any fiduciary, 
 officer, director, or employee of the issuer.
 ``(B) The enrollee (or authorized representative).
 ``(C) The health care professional that provides 
 the items or services involved in the denial.
 ``(D) The institution at which the items or 
 services (or treatment) involved in the denial are 
 provided.
 ``(E) The manufacturer of any drug or other item 
 that is included in the items or services involved in 
 the denial.
 ``(F) Any other party determined under any 
 regulations to have a substantial interest in the 
 denial involved.
 ``(8) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection:
 ``(A) Enrollee.--The term `enrollee' means, with 
 respect to health insurance coverage offered by a 
 health insurance issuer, an individual enrolled with 
 the issuer to receive such coverage.
 ``(B) Health care professional.--The term `health 
 care professional' means an individual who is licensed, 
 accredited, or certified under State law to provide 
 specified health care services and who is operating 
 within the scope of such licensure, accreditation, or 
 certification.

``SEC. 2799. ENFORCEMENT.

 ``(a) In General.--Subject to subsection (b), with respect to 
specific individual health insurance coverage the primary State for 
such coverage has sole jurisdiction to enforce the primary State's 
covered laws in the primary State and any secondary State.
 ``(b) Secondary State's Authority.--Nothing in subsection (a) shall 
be construed to affect the authority of a secondary State to enforce 
its laws as set forth in the exception specified in section 2796(b)(1).
 ``(c) Court Interpretation.--In reviewing action initiated by the 
applicable secondary State authority, the court of competent 
jurisdiction shall apply the covered laws of the primary State.
 ``(d) Notice of Compliance Failure.--In the case of individual 
health insurance coverage offered in a secondary State that fails to 
comply with the covered laws of the primary State, the applicable State 
authority of the secondary State may notify the applicable State 
authority of the primary State.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to individual health insurance coverage offered, issued, or sold 
after the date that is one year after the date of the enactment of this 
Act.
 (c) GAO Ongoing Study and Reports.--
 (1) Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States 
 shall conduct an ongoing study concerning the effect of the 
 amendment made by subsection (a) on--
 (A) the number of uninsured and under-insured;
 (B) the availability and cost of health insurance 
 policies for individuals with preexisting medical 
 conditions;
 (C) the availability and cost of health insurance 
 policies generally;
 (D) the elimination or reduction of different types 
 of benefits under health insurance policies offered in 
 different States; and
 (E) cases of fraud or abuse relating to health 
 insurance coverage offered under such amendment and the 
 resolution of such cases.
 (2) Annual reports.--The Comptroller General shall submit 
 to Congress an annual report, after the end of each of the 5 
 years following the effective date of the amendment made by 
 subsection (a), on the ongoing study conducted under paragraph 
 (1).

 TITLE IV--IMPROVING HEALTH SAVINGS ACCOUNTS

SEC. 231. SAVER'S CREDIT FOR CONTRIBUTIONS TO HEALTH SAVINGS ACCOUNTS.

 (a) Allowance of Credit.--Subsection (a) of section 25B of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting ``aggregate 
qualified HSA contributions and'' after ``so much of the''.
 (b) Qualified HSA Contributions.--Subsection (d) of section 25B of 
such Code is amended by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3) 
and by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new paragraph:
 ``(2) Qualified hsa contributions.--The term `qualified HSA 
 contribution' means, with respect to any taxable year, a 
 contribution of the eligible individual to a health savings 
 account (as defined in section 223(d)(1)) for which a deduction 
 is allowable under section 223(a) for such taxable year.''.
 (c) Conforming Amendment.--The first sentence of section 
25B(d)(3)(A) of such Code (as redesignated by subsection (b)) is 
amended to read as follows: ``The aggregate qualified retirement 
savings contributions determined under paragraph (1) and qualified HSA 
contributions determined under paragraph (2) shall be reduced (but not 
below zero) by the aggregate distributions received by the individual 
during the testing period from any entity of a type to which 
contributions under paragraph (1) or paragraph (2) (as the case may be) 
may be made.''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to contributions made after December 31, 2011.

SEC. 232. HSA FUNDS FOR PREMIUMS FOR HIGH DEDUCTIBLE HEALTH PLANS.

 (a) In General.--Subparagraph (C) of section 223(d)(2) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``or'' at the end 
of clause (iii), by striking the period at the end of clause (iv) and 
inserting ``, or'', and by adding at the end the following:
 ``(v) a high deductible health plan if--
 ``(I) such plan is not offered in 
 connection with a group health plan,
 ``(II) no portion of any premium 
 (within the meaning of applicable 
 premium under section 4980B(f)(4)) for 
 such plan is excludable from gross 
 income under section 106, and
 ``(III) the account beneficiary 
 demonstrates, using procedures deemed 
 appropriate by the Secretary, that 
 after payment of the premium for such 
 insurance the balance in the health 
 savings account is at least twice the 
 minimum deductible in effect under 
 subsection (c)(2)(A)(i) which is 
 applicable to such plan.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to premiums for a high deductible health plan for periods 
beginning after December 31, 2011.

SEC. 233. REQUIRING GREATER COORDINATION BETWEEN HDHP ADMINISTRATORS 
 AND HSA ACCOUNT ADMINISTRATORS SO THAT ENROLLEES CAN 
 ENROLL IN BOTH AT THE SAME TIME.

 The Secretary of the Treasury, through the issuance of regulations 
or other guidance, shall encourage administrators of health plans and 
trustees of health savings accounts to provide for simultaneous 
enrollment in high deductible health plans and setup of health savings 
accounts.

SEC. 234. SPECIAL RULE FOR CERTAIN MEDICAL EXPENSES INCURRED BEFORE 
 ESTABLISHMENT OF ACCOUNT.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (d) of section 223 of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by redesignating paragraph (4) as 
paragraph (5) and by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(4) Certain medical expenses incurred before 
 establishment of account treated as qualified.--
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (2), 
 an expense shall not fail to be treated as a qualified 
 medical expense solely because such expense was 
 incurred before the establishment of the health savings 
 account if such expense was incurred during the 60-day 
 period beginning on the date on which the high 
 deductible health plan is first effective.
 ``(B) Special rules.--For purposes of subparagraph 
 (A)--
 ``(i) an individual shall be treated as an 
 eligible individual for any portion of a month 
 for which the individual is described in 
 subsection (c)(1), determined without regard to 
 whether the individual is covered under a high 
 deductible health plan on the 1st day of such 
 month, and
 ``(ii) the effective date of the health 
 savings account is deemed to be the date on 
 which the high deductible health plan is first 
 effective after the date of the enactment of 
 this paragraph.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
with respect to insurance purchased after the date of the enactment of 
this Act in taxable years beginning after such date.

 DIVISION C--ENACTING REAL MEDICAL LIABILITY REFORM

SEC. 301. ENCOURAGING SPEEDY RESOLUTION OF CLAIMS.

 The time for the commencement of a health care lawsuit shall be 3 
years after the date of manifestation of injury or 1 year after the 
claimant discovers, or through the use of reasonable diligence should 
have discovered, the injury, whichever occurs first. In no event shall 
the time for commencement of a health care lawsuit exceed 3 years after 
the date of manifestation of injury unless tolled for any of the 
following--
 (1) upon proof of fraud;
 (2) intentional concealment; or
 (3) the presence of a foreign body, which has no 
 therapeutic or diagnostic purpose or effect, in the person of 
 the injured person.
Actions by a minor shall be commenced within 3 years from the date of 
the alleged manifestation of injury except that actions by a minor 
under the full age of 6 years shall be commenced within 3 years of 
manifestation of injury or prior to the minor's 8th birthday, whichever 
provides a longer period. Such time limitation shall be tolled for 
minors for any period during which a parent or guardian and a health 
care provider or health care organization have committed fraud or 
collusion in the failure to bring an action on behalf of the injured 
minor.

SEC. 302. COMPENSATING PATIENT INJURY.

 (a) Unlimited Amount of Damages for Actual Economic Losses in 
Health Care Lawsuits.--In any health care lawsuit, nothing in this 
title shall limit a claimant's recovery of the full amount of the 
available economic damages, notwithstanding the limitation in 
subsection (b).
 (b) Additional Noneconomic Damages.--In any health care lawsuit, 
the amount of noneconomic damages, if available, may be as much as 
$250,000, regardless of the number of parties against whom the action 
is brought or the number of separate claims or actions brought with 
respect to the same injury.
 (c) No Discount of Award for Noneconomic Damages.--For purposes of 
applying the limitation in subsection (b), future noneconomic damages 
shall not be discounted to present value. The jury shall not be 
informed about the maximum award for noneconomic damages. An award for 
noneconomic damages in excess of $250,000 shall be reduced either 
before the entry of judgment, or by amendment of the judgment after 
entry of judgment, and such reduction shall be made before accounting 
for any other reduction in damages required by law. If separate awards 
are rendered for past and future noneconomic damages and the combined 
awards exceed $250,000, the future noneconomic damages shall be reduced 
first.
 (d) Fair Share Rule.--In any health care lawsuit, each party shall 
be liable for that party's several share of any damages only and not 
for the share of any other person. Each party shall be liable only for 
the amount of damages allocated to such party in direct proportion to 
such party's percentage of responsibility. Whenever a judgment of 
liability is rendered as to any party, a separate judgment shall be 
rendered against each such party for the amount allocated to such 
party. For purposes of this section, the trier of fact shall determine 
the proportion of responsibility of each party for the claimant's harm.

SEC. 303. MAXIMIZING PATIENT RECOVERY.

 (a) Court Supervision of Share of Damages Actually Paid to 
Claimants.--In any health care lawsuit, the court shall supervise the 
arrangements for payment of damages to protect against conflicts of 
interest that may have the effect of reducing the amount of damages 
awarded that are actually paid to claimants. In particular, in any 
health care lawsuit in which the attorney for a party claims a 
financial stake in the outcome by virtue of a contingent fee, the court 
shall have the power to restrict the payment of a claimant's damage 
recovery to such attorney, and to redirect such damages to the claimant 
based upon the interests of justice and principles of equity. In no 
event shall the total of all contingent fees for representing all 
claimants in a health care lawsuit exceed the following limits:
 (1) Forty percent of the first $50,000 recovered by the 
 claimant(s).
 (2) Thirty-three and one-third percent of the next $50,000 
 recovered by the claimant(s).
 (3) Twenty-five percent of the next $500,000 recovered by 
 the claimant(s).
 (4) Fifteen percent of any amount by which the recovery by 
 the claimant(s) is in excess of $600,000.
 (b) Applicability.--The limitations in this section shall apply 
whether the recovery is by judgment, settlement, mediation, 
arbitration, or any other form of alternative dispute resolution. In a 
health care lawsuit involving a minor or incompetent person, a court 
retains the authority to authorize or approve a fee that is less than 
the maximum permitted under this section. The requirement for court 
supervision in the first two sentences of subsection (a) applies only 
in civil actions.

SEC. 304. ADDITIONAL HEALTH BENEFITS.

 In any health care lawsuit involving injury or wrongful death, any 
party may introduce evidence of collateral source benefits. If a party 
elects to introduce such evidence, any opposing party may introduce 
evidence of any amount paid or contributed or reasonably likely to be 
paid or contributed in the future by or on behalf of the opposing party 
to secure the right to such collateral source benefits. No provider of 
collateral source benefits shall recover any amount against the 
claimant or receive any lien or credit against the claimant's recovery 
or be equitably or legally subrogated to the right of the claimant in a 
health care lawsuit involving injury or wrongful death. This section 
shall apply to any health care lawsuit that is settled as well as a 
health care lawsuit that is resolved by a fact finder. This section 
shall not apply to section 1862(b) (42 U.S.C. 1395y(b)) or section 
1902(a)(25) (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(25)) of the Social Security Act.

SEC. 305. PUNITIVE DAMAGES.

 (a) In General.--Punitive damages may, if otherwise permitted by 
applicable State or Federal law, be awarded against any person in a 
health care lawsuit only if it is proven by clear and convincing 
evidence that such person acted with malicious intent to injure the 
claimant, or that such person deliberately failed to avoid unnecessary 
injury that such person knew the claimant was substantially certain to 
suffer. In any health care lawsuit where no judgment for compensatory 
damages is rendered against such person, no punitive damages may be 
awarded with respect to the claim in such lawsuit. No demand for 
punitive damages shall be included in a health care lawsuit as 
initially filed. A court may allow a claimant to file an amended 
pleading for punitive damages only upon a motion by the claimant and 
after a finding by the court, upon review of supporting and opposing 
affidavits or after a hearing, after weighing the evidence, that the 
claimant has established by a substantial probability that the claimant 
will prevail on the claim for punitive damages. At the request of any 
party in a health care lawsuit, the trier of fact shall consider in a 
separate proceeding--
 (1) whether punitive damages are to be awarded and the 
 amount of such award; and
 (2) the amount of punitive damages following a 
 determination of punitive liability.
If a separate proceeding is requested, evidence relevant only to the 
claim for punitive damages, as determined by applicable State law, 
shall be inadmissible in any proceeding to determine whether 
compensatory damages are to be awarded.
 (b) Determining Amount of Punitive Damages.--
 (1) Factors considered.--In determining the amount of 
 punitive damages, if awarded, in a health care lawsuit, the 
 trier of fact shall consider only the following--
 (A) the severity of the harm caused by the conduct 
 of such party;
 (B) the duration of the conduct or any concealment 
 of it by such party;
 (C) the profitability of the conduct to such party;
 (D) the number of products sold or medical 
 procedures rendered for compensation, as the case may 
 be, by such party, of the kind causing the harm 
 complained of by the claimant;
 (E) any criminal penalties imposed on such party, 
 as a result of the conduct complained of by the 
 claimant; and
 (F) the amount of any civil fines assessed against 
 such party as a result of the conduct complained of by 
 the claimant.
 (2) Maximum award.--The amount of punitive damages, if 
 awarded, in a health care lawsuit may be as much as $250,000 or 
 as much as two times the amount of economic damages awarded, 
 whichever is greater. The jury shall not be informed of this 
 limitation.

SEC. 306. AUTHORIZATION OF PAYMENT OF FUTURE DAMAGES TO CLAIMANTS IN 
 HEALTH CARE LAWSUITS.

 (a) In General.--In any health care lawsuit, if an award of future 
damages, without reduction to present value, equaling or exceeding 
$50,000 is made against a party with sufficient insurance or other 
assets to fund a periodic payment of such a judgment, the court shall, 
at the request of any party, enter a judgment ordering that the future 
damages be paid by periodic payments. In any health care lawsuit, the 
court may be guided by the Uniform Periodic Payment of Judgments Act 
promulgated by the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform 
State Laws.
 (b) Applicability.--This section applies to all actions which have 
not been first set for trial or retrial before the effective date of 
this title.

SEC. 307. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Alternative dispute resolution system; adr.--The term 
 ``alternative dispute resolution system'' or ``ADR'' means a 
 system that provides for the resolution of health care lawsuits 
 in a manner other than through a civil action brought in a 
 State or Federal court.
 (2) Claimant.--The term ``claimant'' means any person who 
 brings a health care lawsuit, including a person who asserts or 
 claims a right to legal or equitable contribution, indemnity, 
 or subrogation, arising out of a health care liability claim or 
 action, and any person on whose behalf such a claim is asserted 
 or such an action is brought, whether deceased, incompetent, or 
 a minor.
 (3) Collateral source benefits.--The term ``collateral 
 source benefits'' means any amount paid or reasonably likely to 
 be paid in the future to or on behalf of the claimant, or any 
 service, product, or other benefit provided or reasonably 
 likely to be provided in the future to or on behalf of the 
 claimant, as a result of the injury or wrongful death, pursuant 
 to--
 (A) any State or Federal health, sickness, income-
 disability, accident, or workers' compensation law;
 (B) any health, sickness, income-disability, or 
 accident insurance that provides health benefits or 
 income-disability coverage;
 (C) any contract or agreement of any group, 
 organization, partnership, or corporation to provide, 
 pay for, or reimburse the cost of medical, hospital, 
 dental, or income-disability benefits; and
 (D) any other publicly or privately funded program.
 (4) Compensatory damages.--The term ``compensatory 
 damages'' means objectively verifiable monetary losses incurred 
 as a result of the provision of, use of, or payment for (or 
 failure to provide, use, or pay for) health care services or 
 medical products, such as past and future medical expenses, 
 loss of past and future earnings, cost of obtaining domestic 
 services, loss of employment, and loss of business or 
 employment opportunities, damages for physical and emotional 
 pain, suffering, inconvenience, physical impairment, mental 
 anguish, disfigurement, loss of enjoyment of life, loss of 
 society and companionship, loss of consortium (other than loss 
 of domestic service), hedonic damages, injury to reputation, 
 and all other nonpecuniary losses of any kind or nature. The 
 term ``compensatory damages'' includes economic damages and 
 noneconomic damages, as such terms are defined in this section.
 (5) Contingent fee.--The term ``contingent fee'' includes 
 all compensation to any person or persons which is payable only 
 if a recovery is effected on behalf of one or more claimants.
 (6) Economic damages.--The term ``economic damages'' means 
 objectively verifiable monetary losses incurred as a result of 
 the provision of, use of, or payment for (or failure to 
 provide, use, or pay for) health care services or medical 
 products, such as past and future medical expenses, loss of 
 past and future earnings, cost of obtaining domestic services, 
 loss of employment, and loss of business or employment 
 opportunities.
 (7) Health care lawsuit.--The term ``health care lawsuit'' 
 means any health care liability claim concerning the provision 
 of health care goods or services or any medical product 
 affecting interstate commerce, or any health care liability 
 action concerning the provision of health care goods or 
 services or any medical product affecting interstate commerce, 
 brought in a State or Federal court or pursuant to an 
 alternative dispute resolution system, against a health care 
 provider, a health care organization, or the manufacturer, 
 distributor, supplier, marketer, promoter, or seller of a 
 medical product, regardless of the theory of liability on which 
 the claim is based, or the number of claimants, plaintiffs, 
 defendants, or other parties, or the number of claims or causes 
 of action, in which the claimant alleges a health care 
 liability claim. Such term does not include a claim or action 
 which is based on criminal liability; which seeks civil fines 
 or penalties paid to Federal, State, or local government; or 
 which is grounded in antitrust.
 (8) Health care liability action.--The term ``health care 
 liability action'' means a civil action brought in a State or 
 Federal court or pursuant to an alternative dispute resolution 
 system, against a health care provider, a health care 
 organization, or the manufacturer, distributor, supplier, 
 marketer, promoter, or seller of a medical product, regardless 
 of the theory of liability on which the claim is based, or the 
 number of plaintiffs, defendants, or other parties, or the 
 number of causes of action, in which the claimant alleges a 
 health care liability claim.
 (9) Health care liability claim.--The term ``health care 
 liability claim'' means a demand by any person, whether or not 
 pursuant to ADR, against a health care provider, health care 
 organization, or the manufacturer, distributor, supplier, 
 marketer, promoter, or seller of a medical product, including, 
 but not limited to, third-party claims, cross-claims, counter-
 claims, or contribution claims, which are based upon the 
 provision of, use of, or payment for (or the failure to 
 provide, use, or pay for) health care services or medical 
 products, regardless of the theory of liability on which the 
 claim is based, or the number of plaintiffs, defendants, or 
 other parties, or the number of causes of action.
 (10) Health care organization.--The term ``health care 
 organization'' means any person or entity which is obligated to 
 provide or pay for health benefits under any health plan, 
 including any person or entity acting under a contract or 
 arrangement with a health care organization to provide or 
 administer any health benefit.
 (11) Health care provider.--The term ``health care 
 provider'' means any person or entity required by State or 
 Federal laws or regulations to be licensed, registered, or 
 certified to provide health care services, and being either so 
 licensed, registered, or certified, or exempted from such 
 requirement by other statute or regulation.
 (12) Health care goods or services.--The term ``health care 
 goods or services'' means any goods or services provided by a 
 health care organization, provider, or by any individual 
 working under the supervision of a health care provider, that 
 relates to the diagnosis, prevention, or treatment of any human 
 disease or impairment, or the assessment or care of the health 
 of human beings.
 (13) Malicious intent to injure.--The term ``malicious 
 intent to injure'' means intentionally causing or attempting to 
 cause physical injury other than providing health care goods or 
 services.
 (14) Medical product.--The term ``medical product'' means a 
 drug, device, or biological product intended for humans, and 
 the terms ``drug'', ``device'', and ``biological product'' have 
 the meanings given such terms in sections 201(g)(1) and 201(h) 
 of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321(g)(1) 
 and (h)) and section 351(a) of the Public Health Service Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 262(a)), respectively, including any component or 
 raw material used therein, but excluding health care services.
 (15) Noneconomic damages.--The term ``noneconomic damages'' 
 means damages for physical and emotional pain, suffering, 
 inconvenience, physical impairment, mental anguish, 
 disfigurement, loss of enjoyment of life, loss of society and 
 companionship, loss of consortium (other than loss of domestic 
 service), hedonic damages, injury to reputation, and all other 
 nonpecuniary losses of any kind or nature.
 (16) Punitive damages.--The term ``punitive damages'' means 
 damages awarded, for the purpose of punishment or deterrence, 
 and not solely for compensatory purposes, against a health care 
 provider, health care organization, or a manufacturer, 
 distributor, or supplier of a medical product. Punitive damages 
 are neither economic nor noneconomic damages.
 (17) Recovery.--The term ``recovery'' means the net sum 
 recovered after deducting any disbursements or costs incurred 
 in connection with prosecution or settlement of the claim, 
 including all costs paid or advanced by any person. Costs of 
 health care incurred by the plaintiff and the attorneys' office 
 overhead costs or charges for legal services are not deductible 
 disbursements or costs for such purpose.
 (18) State.--The term ``State'' means each of the several 
 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto 
 Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Northern 
 Mariana Islands, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, 
 and any other territory or possession of the United States, or 
 any political subdivision thereof.

SEC. 308. EFFECT ON OTHER LAWS.

 (a) Vaccine Injury.--
 (1) To the extent that title XXI of the Public Health 
 Service Act establishes a Federal rule of law applicable to a 
 civil action brought for a vaccine-related injury or death--
 (A) this title does not affect the application of 
 the rule of law to such an action; and
 (B) any rule of law prescribed by this title in 
 conflict with a rule of law of such title XXI shall not 
 apply to such action.
 (2) If there is an aspect of a civil action brought for a 
 vaccine-related injury or death to which a Federal rule of law 
 under title XXI of the Public Health Service Act does not 
 apply, then this title or otherwise applicable law (as 
 determined under this title) will apply to such aspect of such 
 action.
 (b) Other Federal Law.--Except as provided in this section, nothing 
in this title shall be deemed to affect any defense available to a 
defendant in a health care lawsuit or action under any other provision 
of Federal law.

SEC. 309. STATE FLEXIBILITY AND PROTECTION OF STATES' RIGHTS.

 (a) Health Care Lawsuits.--The provisions governing health care 
lawsuits set forth in this title preempt, subject to subsections (b) 
and (c), State law to the extent that State law prevents the 
application of any provisions of law established by or under this 
title. The provisions governing health care lawsuits set forth in this 
title supersede chapter 171 of title 28, United States Code, to the 
extent that such chapter--
 (1) provides for a greater amount of damages or contingent 
 fees, a longer period in which a health care lawsuit may be 
 commenced, or a reduced applicability or scope of periodic 
 payment of future damages, than provided in this title; or
 (2) prohibits the introduction of evidence regarding 
 collateral source benefits, or mandates or permits subrogation 
 or a lien on collateral source benefits.
 (b) Protection of States' Rights and Other Laws.--(1) Any issue 
that is not governed by any provision of law established by or under 
this title (including State standards of negligence) shall be governed 
by otherwise applicable State or Federal law.
 (2) This title shall not preempt or supersede any State or Federal 
law that imposes greater procedural or substantive protections for 
health care providers and health care organizations from liability, 
loss, or damages than those provided by this title or create a cause of 
action.
 (c) State Flexibility.--No provision of this title shall be 
construed to preempt--
 (1) any State law (whether effective before, on, or after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act) that specifies a 
 particular monetary amount of compensatory or punitive damages 
 (or the total amount of damages) that may be awarded in a 
 health care lawsuit, regardless of whether such monetary amount 
 is greater or lesser than is provided for under this title, 
 notwithstanding section 302(a); or
 (2) any defense available to a party in a health care 
 lawsuit under any other provision of State or Federal law.

SEC. 310. APPLICABILITY; EFFECTIVE DATE.

 This title shall apply to any health care lawsuit brought in a 
Federal or State court, or subject to an alternative dispute resolution 
system, that is initiated on or after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, except that any health care lawsuit arising from an injury 
occurring prior to the date of the enactment of this Act shall be 
governed by the applicable statute of limitations provisions in effect 
at the time the injury occurred.

 DIVISION D--PROTECTING THE DOCTOR-PATIENT RELATIONSHIP

SEC. 401. RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.

 Nothing in this Act shall be construed to interfere with the 
doctor-patient relationship or the practice of medicine.

SEC. 402. REPEAL OF FEDERAL COORDINATING COUNCIL FOR COMPARATIVE 
 EFFECTIVENESS RESEARCH.

 Effective on the date of the enactment of this Act, section 804 of 
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 is repealed.

 DIVISION E--INCENTIVIZING WELLNESS AND QUALITY IMPROVEMENTS

SEC. 501. INCENTIVES FOR PREVENTION AND WELLNESS PROGRAMS.

 (a) Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 Limitation on 
Exception for Wellness Programs Under HIPAA Discrimination Rules.--
 (1) In general.--Section 702(b)(2) of the Employee 
 Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1182(b)(2)) 
 is amended by adding after and below subparagraph (B) the 
 following:
 ``In applying subparagraph (B), a group health plan (or a 
 health insurance issuer with respect to health insurance 
 coverage) may vary premiums and cost-sharing by up to 50 
 percent of the value of the benefits under the plan (or 
 coverage) based on participation in a standards-based wellness 
 program.''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) 
 shall apply to plan years beginning more than 1 year after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) Conforming Amendments to PHSA.--
 (1) Group market rules.--
 (A) In general.--Section 2702(b)(2) of the Public 
 Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-1(b)(2)) is amended 
 by adding after and below subparagraph (B) the 
 following:
 ``In applying subparagraph (B), a group health plan (or a 
 health insurance issuer with respect to health insurance 
 coverage) may vary premiums and cost-sharing by up to 50 
 percent of the value of the benefits under the plan (or 
 coverage) based on participation in a standards-based wellness 
 program.''.
 (B) Effective date.--The amendment made by 
 subparagraph (A) shall apply to plan years beginning 
 more than 1 year after the date of the enactment of 
 this Act.
 (2) Individual market rules relating to guaranteed 
 availability.--
 (A) In general.--Section 2741(f) of the Public 
 Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-1(b)(2)) is amended 
 by adding after and below paragraph (1) the following:
``In applying paragraph (2), a health insurance issuer may vary 
premiums and cost-sharing under health insurance coverage by up to 50 
percent of the value of the benefits under the coverage based on 
participation in a standards-based wellness program.''.
 (B) Effective date.--The amendment made by 
 paragraph (1) shall apply to health insurance coverage 
 offered or renewed on and after the date that is 1 year 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (c) Conforming Amendments to IRC.--
 (1) In general.--Section 9802(b)(2) of the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986 is amended by adding after and below subparagraph 
 (B) the following:
 ``In applying subparagraph (B), a group health plan (or a 
 health insurance issuer with respect to health insurance 
 coverage) may vary premiums and cost-sharing by up to 50 
 percent of the value of the benefits under the plan (or 
 coverage) based on participation in a standards-based wellness 
 program.''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) 
 shall apply to plan years beginning more than 1 year after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act.

 DIVISION F--PROTECTING TAXPAYERS

SEC. 601. PROVIDE FULL FUNDING TO HHS OIG AND HCFAC.

 (a) HCFAC Funding.--Section 1817(k)(3)(A) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i(k)(3)(A)) is amended--
 (1) in clause (i), by amending subclause (V) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(V) for each fiscal year after 
 fiscal year 2010, $300,000,000.''; and
 (2) in clause (ii)(X), by inserting before the period at 
 the end the following: ``, plus the amount by which the amount 
 made available under clause (i)(V) for fiscal year 2011 exceeds 
 the amount made available under clause (i)(IV) for fiscal year 
 2010''.
 (b) OIG Funding.--There are authorized to be appropriated for each 
of fiscal years 2011 through 2020 $100,000,000 for the Office of the 
Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human Services for 
fraud prevention activities under the Medicare and Medicaid programs.

SEC. 602. PROHIBITING TAXPAYER FUNDED ABORTIONS AND CONSCIENCE 
 PROTECTIONS.

 Title 1 of the United States Code is amended by adding at the end 
the following new chapter:

 ``CHAPTER 4--PROHIBITING TAXPAYER FUNDED ABORTIONS AND CONSCIENCE 
 PROTECTIONS

``SEC. 301. PROHIBITION ON FUNDING FOR ABORTIONS.

 ``No funds authorized or appropriated by Federal law, and none of 
the funds in any trust fund to which funds are authorized or 
appropriated by Federal law, shall be expended for any abortion.

``SEC. 302. PROHIBITION ON FUNDING FOR HEALTH BENEFITS PLANS THAT COVER 
 ABORTION.

 ``None of the funds authorized or appropriated by Federal law, and 
none of the funds in any trust fund to which funds are authorized or 
appropriated by Federal law, shall be expended for a health benefits 
plan that includes coverage of abortion.

``SEC. 303. TREATMENT OF ABORTIONS RELATED TO RAPE, INCEST, OR 
 PRESERVING THE LIFE OF THE MOTHER.

 ``The limitations established in sections 301 and 302 shall not 
apply to an abortion--
 ``(1) if the pregnancy is the result of an act of rape or 
 incest; or
 ``(2) in the case where a woman suffers from a physical 
 disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, as 
 certified by a physician, place the woman in danger of death 
 unless an abortion is performed, including a life-endangering 
 physical condition caused by or arising from the pregnancy 
 itself.

``SEC. 304. CONSTRUCTION RELATING TO SUPPLEMENTAL COVERAGE.

 ``Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting any 
individual, entity, or State or locality from purchasing separate 
supplemental abortion plan or coverage that includes abortion so long 
as such plan or coverage is paid for entirely using only funds not 
authorized or appropriated by Federal law and such plan or coverage 
shall not be purchased using matching funds required for a federally 
subsidized program, including a State's or locality's contribution of 
Medicaid matching funds.

``SEC. 305. CONSTRUCTION RELATING TO THE USE OF NON-FEDERAL FUNDS FOR 
 HEALTH COVERAGE.

 ``Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as restricting the 
ability of any managed care provider or other organization from 
offering abortion coverage or the ability of a State to contract 
separately with such a provider or organization for such coverage with 
funds not authorized or appropriated by Federal law and such plan or 
coverage shall not be purchased using matching funds required for a 
federally subsidized program, including a State's or locality's 
contribution of Medicaid matching funds.

``SEC. 306. NO GOVERNMENT DISCRIMINATION AGAINST CERTAIN HEALTH CARE 
 ENTITIES.

 ``(a) In General.--No funds authorized or appropriated by Federal 
law may be made available to a Federal agency or program, or to a State 
or local government, if such agency, program, or government subjects 
any institutional or individual health care entity to discrimination on 
the basis that the health care entity does not provide, pay for, 
provide coverage of, or refer for abortions.
 ``(b) Health Care Entity Defined.--For purposes of this section, 
the term `health care entity' includes an individual physician or other 
health care professional, a hospital, a provider-sponsored 
organization, a health maintenance organization, a health insurance 
plan, or any other kind of health care facility, organization, or 
plan.''.

SEC. 603. IMPROVED ENFORCEMENT OF THE MEDICARE AND MEDICAID SECONDARY 
 PAYER PROVISIONS.

 (a) Medicare.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary, in coordination with the 
 Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human 
 Services, shall provide through the Coordination of Benefits 
 Contractor for the identification of instances where the 
 Medicare program should be, but is not, acting as a secondary 
 payer to an individual's private health benefits coverage under 
 section 1862(b) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395y(b)).
 (2) Updating procedures.--The Secretary shall update 
 procedures for identifying and resolving credit balance 
 situations which occur under the Medicare program when payment 
 under such title and from other health benefit plans exceed the 
 providers' charges or the allowed amount.
 (3) Report on improved enforcement.--Not later than 1 year 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary 
 shall submit a report to Congress on progress made in improved 
 enforcement of the Medicare secondary payer provisions, 
 including recoupment of credit balances.
 (b) Medicaid.--Section 1903 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396b) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(aa) Enforcement of Payer of Last Resort Provisions.--
 ``(1) Submission of state plan amendment.--Each State shall 
 submit, not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment 
 of this subsection, a State plan amendment that details how the 
 State will become fully compliant with the requirements of 
 section 1902(a)(25).
 ``(2) Bonus for compliance.--If a State submits a timely 
 State plan amendment under paragraph (1) that the Secretary 
 determines provides for full compliance of the State with the 
 requirements of section 1902(a)(25), the Secretary shall 
 provide for an additional payment to the State of $1,000,000. 
 If a State certifies, to the Secretary's satisfaction, that it 
 is already fully compliant with such requirements, such amount 
 shall be increased to $2,000,000.
 ``(3) Reduction for noncompliance.--If a State does not 
 submit such an amendment, the Secretary shall reduce the 
 Federal medical assistance percentage otherwise applicable 
 under this title by 1 percentage point until the State submits 
 such an amendment.
 ``(4) Ongoing reduction.--If at any time the Secretary 
 determines that a State is not in compliance with section 
 1902(a)(25), regardless of the status of the State's submission 
 of a State plan amendment under this subsection or previous 
 determinations of compliance such requirements, the Secretary 
 shall reduce the Federal medical assistance percentage 
 otherwise applicable under this title for the State by 1 
 percentage point during the period of non-compliance as 
 determined by the Secretary.''.

SEC. 604. STRENGTHEN MEDICARE PROVIDER ENROLLMENT STANDARDS AND 
 SAFEGUARDS.

 (a) Protecting Against the Fraudulent Use of Medicare Provider 
Numbers.--Subject to subsection (c)(2)--
 (1) Screening new providers.--As a condition of a provider 
 of services or a supplier, including durable medical equipment 
 suppliers and home health agencies, applying for the first time 
 for a provider number under the Medicare program and before 
 granting billing privileges under such title, the Secretary 
 shall screen the provider or supplier for a criminal background 
 or other financial or operational irregularities through 
 fingerprinting, licensure checks, site-visits, other database 
 checks.
 (2) Application fees.--The Secretary shall impose an 
 application charge on such a provider or supplier in order to 
 cover the Secretary's costs in performing the screening 
 required under paragraph (1) and that is revenue neutral to the 
 Federal Government.
 (3) Provisional approval.--During an initial, provisional 
 period (specified by the Secretary) In which such a provider or 
 supplier has been issued such a number, the Secretary shall 
 provide enhanced oversight of the activities of such provider 
 or supplier under the Medicare program, such as through 
 prepayment review and payment limitations.
 (4) Penalties for false statements.--In the case of a 
 provider or supplier that makes a false statement in an 
 application for such a number, the Secretary may exclude the 
 provider or supplier from participation under the Medicare 
 program, or may impose a civil money penalty (in the amount 
 described in section 1128A(a)(4) of the Social Security Act), 
 in the same manner as the Secretary may impose such an 
 exclusion or penalty under sections 1128 and 1128A, 
 respectively, of such Act in the case of knowing presentation 
 of a false claim described in section 1128A(a)(1)(A) of such 
 Act.
 (5) Disclosure requirements.--With respect to approval of 
 such an application, the Secretary--
 (A) shall require applicants to disclose previous 
 affiliation with enrolled entities that have 
 uncollected debt related to the Medicare or Medicaid 
 programs;
 (B) may deny approval if the Secretary determines 
 that these affiliations pose undue risk to the Medicare 
 or Medicaid program, subject to an appeals process for 
 the applicant as determined by the Secretary; and
 (C) may implement enhanced safeguards (such as 
 surety bonds).
 (b) Moratoria.--The Secretary may impose moratoria on approval of 
provider and supplier numbers under the Medicare program for new 
providers of services and suppliers as determined necessary to prevent 
or combat fraud a period of delay for any one applicant cannot exceed 
30 days unless cause is shown by the Secretary.
 (c) Funding.--
 (1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated to 
 carry out this section such sums as may be necessary.
 (2) Condition.--The provisions of paragraphs (1) and (2) of 
 subsection (a) shall not apply unless and until funds are 
 appropriated to carry out such provisions.

SEC. 605. TRACKING BANNED PROVIDERS ACROSS STATE LINES.

 (a) Greater Coordination.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services shall provide for increased coordination between the 
Administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (in this 
section referred to as ``CMS'') and its regional offices to ensure that 
providers of services and suppliers that have operated in one State and 
are excluded from participation in the Medicare program are unable to 
begin operation and participation in the Medicare program in another 
State.
 (b) Improved Information Systems.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall improve information 
 systems to allow greater integration between databases under 
 the Medicare program so that--
 (A) Medicare administrative contractors, fiscal 
 intermediaries, and carriers have immediate access to 
 information identifying providers and suppliers 
 excluded from participation in the Medicare and 
 Medicaid program and other Federal health care 
 programs; and
 (B) such information can be shared across Federal 
 health care programs and agencies, including between 
 the Departments of Health and Human Services, the 
 Social Security Administration, the Department of 
 Veterans Affairs, the Department of Defense, the 
 Department of Justice, and the Office of Personnel 
 Management.
 (c) Medicare/Medicaid ``One PI'' Database.--The Secretary shall 
implement a database that includes claims and payment data for all 
components of the Medicare program and the Medicaid program.
 (d) Authorizing Expanded Data Matching.--Notwithstanding any 
provision of the Computer Matching and Privacy Protection Act of 1988 
to the contrary--
 (1) the Secretary and the Inspector General in the 
 Department of Health and Human Services may perform data 
 matching of data from the Medicare program with data from the 
 Medicaid program; and
 (2) the Commissioner of Social Security and the Secretary 
 may perform data matching of data of the Social Security 
 Administration with data from the Medicare and Medicaid 
 programs.
 (e) Consolidation of Databases.--The Secretary shall consolidate 
and expand into a centralized database for individuals and entities 
that have been excluded from Federal health care programs the 
Healthcare Integrity and Protection Data Bank, the National 
Practitioner Data Bank, the List of Excluded Individuals/Entities, and 
a national patient abuse/neglect registry.
 (f) Comprehensive Provider Database.--
 (1) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a 
 comprehensive database that includes information on providers 
 of services, suppliers, and related entities participating in 
 the Medicare program, the Medicaid program, or both. Such 
 database shall include, information on ownership and business 
 relationships, history of adverse actions, results of site 
 visits or other monitoring by any program.
 (2) Use.--Prior to issuing a provider or supplier number 
 for an entity under the Medicare program, the Secretary shall 
 obtain information on the entity from such database to assure 
 the entity qualifies for the issuance of such a number.
 (g) Comprehensive Sanctions Database.--The Secretary shall 
establish a comprehensive sanctions database on sanctions imposed on 
providers of services, suppliers, and related entities. Such database 
shall be overseen by the Inspector General of the Department of Health 
and Human Services and shall be linked to related databases maintained 
by State licensure boards and by Federal or State law enforcement 
agencies.
 (h) Access to Claims and Payment Databases.--The Secretary shall 
ensure that the Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human 
Services and Federal law enforcement agencies have direct access to all 
claims and payment databases of the Secretary under the Medicare or 
Medicaid programs.
 (i) Civil Money Penalties for Submission of Erroneous 
Information.--In the case of a provider of services, supplier, or other 
entity that submits erroneous information that serves as a basis for 
payment of any entity under the Medicare or Medicaid program, the 
Secretary may impose a civil money penalty of not to exceed $50,000 for 
each such erroneous submission. A civil money penalty under this 
subsection shall be imposed and collected in the same manner as a civil 
money penalty under subsection (a) of section 1128A of the Social 
Security Act is imposed and collected under that section.

 DIVISION G--PATHWAY FOR BIOSIMILAR BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS

SEC. 701. LICENSURE PATHWAY FOR BIOSIMILAR BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS.

 (a) Licensure of Biological Products as Biosimilar or 
Interchangeable.--Section 351 of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 262) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1)(A), by inserting ``under this 
 subsection or subsection (k)'' after ``biologics license''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(k) Licensure of Biological Products as Biosimilar or 
Interchangeable.--
 ``(1) In general.--Any person may submit an application for 
 licensure of a biological product under this subsection.
 ``(2) Content.--
 ``(A) In general.--
 ``(i) Required information.--An application 
 submitted under this subsection shall include 
 information demonstrating that--
 ``(I) the biological product is 
 biosimilar to a reference product based 
 upon data derived from--
 ``(aa) analytical studies 
 that demonstrate that the 
 biological product is highly 
 similar to the reference 
 product notwithstanding minor 
 differences in clinically 
 inactive components;
 ``(bb) animal studies 
 (including the assessment of 
 toxicity); and
 ``(cc) a clinical study or 
 studies (including the 
 assessment of immunogenicity 
 and pharmacokinetics or 
 pharmacodynamics) that are 
 sufficient to demonstrate 
 safety, purity, and potency in 
 1 or more appropriate 
 conditions of use for which the 
 reference product is licensed 
 and intended to be used and for 
 which licensure is sought for 
 the biological product;
 ``(II) the biological product and 
 reference product utilize the same 
 mechanism or mechanisms of action for 
 the condition or conditions of use 
 prescribed, recommended, or suggested 
 in the proposed labeling, but only to 
 the extent the mechanism or mechanisms 
 of action are known for the reference 
 product;
 ``(III) the condition or conditions 
 of use prescribed, recommended, or 
 suggested in the labeling proposed for 
 the biological product have been 
 previously approved for the reference 
 product;
 ``(IV) the route of administration, 
 the dosage form, and the strength of 
 the biological product are the same as 
 those of the reference product; and
 ``(V) the facility in which the 
 biological product is manufactured, 
 processed, packed, or held meets 
 standards designed to assure that the 
 biological product continues to be 
 safe, pure, and potent.
 ``(ii) Determination by secretary.--The 
 Secretary may determine, in the Secretary's 
 discretion, that an element described in clause 
 (i)(I) is unnecessary in an application 
 submitted under this subsection.
 ``(iii) Additional information.--An 
 application submitted under this subsection--
 ``(I) shall include publicly 
 available information regarding the 
 Secretary's previous determination that 
 the reference product is safe, pure, 
 and potent; and
 ``(II) may include any additional 
 information in support of the 
 application, including publicly 
 available information with respect to 
 the reference product or another 
 biological product.
 ``(B) Interchangeability.--An application (or a 
 supplement to an application) submitted under this 
 subsection may include information demonstrating that 
 the biological product meets the standards described in 
 paragraph (4).
 ``(3) Evaluation by secretary.--Upon review of an 
 application (or a supplement to an application) submitted under 
 this subsection, the Secretary shall license the biological 
 product under this subsection if--
 ``(A) the Secretary determines that the information 
 submitted in the application (or the supplement) is 
 sufficient to show that the biological product--
 ``(i) is biosimilar to the reference 
 product; or
 ``(ii) meets the standards described in 
 paragraph (4), and therefore is interchangeable 
 with the reference product; and
 ``(B) the applicant (or other appropriate person) 
 consents to the inspection of the facility that is the 
 subject of the application, in accordance with 
 subsection (c).
 ``(4) Safety standards for determining 
 interchangeability.--Upon review of an application submitted 
 under this subsection or any supplement to such application, 
 the Secretary shall determine the biological product to be 
 interchangeable with the reference product if the Secretary 
 determines that the information submitted in the application 
 (or a supplement to such application) is sufficient to show 
 that--
 ``(A) the biological product--
 ``(i) is biosimilar to the reference 
 product; and
 ``(ii) can be expected to produce the same 
 clinical result as the reference product in any 
 given patient; and
 ``(B) for a biological product that is administered 
 more than once to an individual, the risk in terms of 
 safety or diminished efficacy of alternating or 
 switching between use of the biological product and the 
 reference product is not greater than the risk of using 
 the reference product without such alternation or 
 switch.
 ``(5) General rules.--
 ``(A) One reference product per application.--A 
 biological product, in an application submitted under 
 this subsection, may not be evaluated against more than 
 1 reference product.
 ``(B) Review.--An application submitted under this 
 subsection shall be reviewed by the division within the 
 Food and Drug Administration that is responsible for 
 the review and approval of the application under which 
 the reference product is licensed.
 ``(C) Risk evaluation and mitigation strategies.--
 The authority of the Secretary with respect to risk 
 evaluation and mitigation strategies under the Federal 
 Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act shall apply to biological 
 products licensed under this subsection in the same 
 manner as such authority applies to biological products 
 licensed under subsection (a).
 ``(D) Restrictions on biological products 
 containing dangerous ingredients.--If information in an 
 application submitted under this subsection, in a 
 supplement to such an application, or otherwise 
 available to the Secretary shows that a biological 
 product--
 ``(i) is, bears, or contains a select agent 
 or toxin listed in section 73.3 or 73.4 of 
 title 42, section 121.3 or 121.4 of title 9, or 
 section 331.3 of title 7, Code of Federal 
 Regulations (or any successor regulations); or
 ``(ii) is, bears, or contains a controlled 
 substance in schedule I or II of section 202 of 
 the Controlled Substances Act, as listed in 
 part 1308 of title 21, Code of Federal 
 Regulations (or any successor regulations);
 the Secretary shall not license the biological product 
 under this subsection unless the Secretary determines, 
 after consultation with appropriate national security 
 and drug enforcement agencies, that there would be no 
 increased risk to the security or health of the public 
 from licensing such biological product under this 
 subsection.
 ``(6) Exclusivity for first interchangeable biological 
 product.--Upon review of an application submitted under this 
 subsection relying on the same reference product for which a 
 prior biological product has received a determination of 
 interchangeability for any condition of use, the Secretary 
 shall not make a determination under paragraph (4) that the 
 second or subsequent biological product is interchangeable for 
 any condition of use until the earlier of--
 ``(A) 1 year after the first commercial marketing 
 of the first interchangeable biosimilar biological 
 product to be approved as interchangeable for that 
 reference product;
 ``(B) 18 months after--
 ``(i) a final court decision on all patents 
 in suit in an action instituted under 
 subsection (l)(5) against the applicant that 
 submitted the application for the first 
 approved interchangeable biosimilar biological 
 product; or
 ``(ii) the dismissal with or without 
 prejudice of an action instituted under 
 subsection (l)(5) against the applicant that 
 submitted the application for the first 
 approved interchangeable biosimilar biological 
 product; or
 ``(C)(i) 42 months after approval of the first 
 interchangeable biosimilar biological product if the 
 applicant that submitted such application has been sued 
 under subsection (l)(5) and such litigation is still 
 ongoing within such 42-month period; or
 ``(ii) 18 months after approval of the first 
 interchangeable biosimilar biological product if the 
 applicant that submitted such application has not been 
 sued under subsection (l)(5).
 For purposes of this paragraph, the term `final court decision' 
 means a final decision of a court from which no appeal (other 
 than a petition to the United States Supreme Court for a writ 
 of certiorari) has been or can be taken.
 ``(7) Exclusivity for reference product.--
 ``(A) Effective date of biosimilar application 
 approval.--Approval of an application under this 
 subsection may not be made effective by the Secretary 
 until the date that is 12 years after the date on which 
 the reference product was first licensed under 
 subsection (a).
 ``(B) Filing period.--An application under this 
 subsection may not be submitted to the Secretary until 
 the date that is 4 years after the date on which the 
 reference product was first licensed under subsection 
 (a).
 ``(C) First licensure.--Subparagraphs (A) and (B) 
 shall not apply to a license for or approval of--
 ``(i) a supplement for the biological 
 product that is the reference product; or
 ``(ii) a subsequent application filed by 
 the same sponsor or manufacturer of the 
 biological product that is the reference 
 product (or a licensor, predecessor in 
 interest, or other related entity) for--
 ``(I) a change (not including a 
 modification to the structure of the 
 biological product) that results in a 
 new indication, route of 
 administration, dosing schedule, dosage 
 form, delivery system, delivery device, 
 or strength; or
 ``(II) a modification to the 
 structure of the biological product 
 that does not result in a change in 
 safety, purity, or potency.
 ``(8) Pediatric studies.--
 ``(A) Exclusivity.--If, before or after licensure 
 of the reference product under subsection (a) of this 
 section, the Secretary determines that information 
 relating to the use of such product in the pediatric 
 population may produce health benefits in that 
 population, the Secretary makes a written request for 
 pediatric studies (which shall include a timeframe for 
 completing such studies), the applicant or holder of 
 the approved application agrees to the request, such 
 studies are completed using appropriate formulations 
 for each age group for which the study is requested 
 within any such timeframe, and the reports thereof are 
 submitted and accepted in accordance with section 
 505A(d)(3) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act 
 the period referred to in paragraph (7)(A) of this 
 subsection is deemed to be 12 years and 6 months rather 
 than 12 years.
 ``(B) Exception.--The Secretary shall not extend 
 the period referred to in subparagraph (A) of this 
 paragraph if the determination under section 505A(d)(3) 
 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act is made 
 later than 9 months prior to the expiration of such 
 period.
 ``(C) Application of certain provisions.--The 
 provisions of subsections (a), (d), (e), (f), (h), (j), 
 (k), and (l) of section 505A of the Federal Food, Drug, 
 and Cosmetic Act shall apply with respect to the 
 extension of a period under subparagraph (A) of this 
 paragraph to the same extent and in the same manner as 
 such provisions apply with respect to the extension of 
 a period under subsection (b) or (c) of section 505A of 
 the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
 ``(9) Guidance documents.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary may, after 
 opportunity for public comment, issue guidance in 
 accordance, except as provided in subparagraph (B)(i), 
 with section 701(h) of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
 Cosmetic Act with respect to the licensure of a 
 biological product under this subsection. Any such 
 guidance may be general or specific.
 ``(B) Public comment.--
 ``(i) In general.--The Secretary shall 
 provide the public an opportunity to comment on 
 any proposed guidance issued under subparagraph 
 (A) before issuing final guidance.
 ``(ii) Input regarding most valuable 
 guidance.--The Secretary shall establish a 
 process through which the public may provide 
 the Secretary with input regarding priorities 
 for issuing guidance.
 ``(C) No requirement for application 
 consideration.--The issuance (or non-issuance) of 
 guidance under subparagraph (A) shall not preclude the 
 review of, or action on, an application submitted under 
 this subsection.
 ``(D) Requirement for product class-specific 
 guidance.--If the Secretary issues product class-
 specific guidance under subparagraph (A), such guidance 
 shall include a description of--
 ``(i) the criteria that the Secretary will 
 use to determine whether a biological product 
 is highly similar to a reference product in 
 such product class; and
 ``(ii) the criteria, if available, that the 
 Secretary will use to determine whether a 
 biological product meets the standards 
 described in paragraph (4).
 ``(E) Certain product classes.--
 ``(i) Guidance.--The Secretary may indicate 
 in a guidance document that the science and 
 experience, as of the date of such guidance, 
 with respect to a product or product class (not 
 including any recombinant protein) does not 
 allow approval of an application for a license 
 as provided under this subsection for such 
 product or product class.
 ``(ii) Modification or reversal.--The 
 Secretary may issue a subsequent guidance 
 document under subparagraph (A) to modify or 
 reverse a guidance document under clause (i).
 ``(iii) No effect on ability to deny 
 license.--Clause (i) shall not be construed to 
 require the Secretary to approve a product with 
 respect to which the Secretary has not 
 indicated in a guidance document that the 
 science and experience, as described in clause 
 (i), does not allow approval of such an 
 application.
 ``(10) Naming.--The Secretary shall ensure that the 
 labeling and packaging of each biological product licensed 
 under this subsection bears a name that uniquely identifies the 
 biological product and distinguishes it from the reference 
 product and any other biological products licensed under this 
 subsection following evaluation against such reference product.
 ``(l) Patent Notices; Relationship to Final Approval.--
 ``(1) Definitions.--For the purposes of this subsection, 
 the term--
 ``(A) `biosimilar product' means the biological 
 product that is the subject of the application under 
 subsection (k);
 ``(B) `relevant patent' means a patent that--
 ``(i) expires after the date specified in 
 subsection (k)(7)(A) that applies to the 
 reference product; and
 ``(ii) could reasonably be asserted against 
 the applicant due to the unauthorized making, 
 use, sale, or offer for sale within the United 
 States, or the importation into the United 
 States of the biosimilar product, or materials 
 used in the manufacture of the biosimilar 
 product, or due to a use of the biosimilar 
 product in a method of treatment that is 
 indicated in the application;
 ``(C) `reference product sponsor' means the holder 
 of an approved application or license for the reference 
 product; and
 ``(D) `interested third party' means a person other 
 than the reference product sponsor that owns a relevant 
 patent, or has the right to commence or participate in 
 an action for infringement of a relevant patent.
 ``(2) Handling of confidential information.--Any entity 
 receiving confidential information pursuant to this subsection 
 shall designate one or more individuals to receive such 
 information. Each individual so designated shall execute an 
 agreement in accordance with regulations promulgated by the 
 Secretary. The regulations shall require each such individual 
 to take reasonable steps to maintain the confidentiality of 
 information received pursuant to this subsection and use the 
 information solely for purposes authorized by this subsection. 
 The obligations imposed on an individual who has received 
 confidential information pursuant to this subsection shall 
 continue until the individual returns or destroys the 
 confidential information, a court imposes a protective order 
 that governs the use or handling of the confidential 
 information, or the party providing the confidential 
 information agrees to other terms or conditions regarding the 
 handling or use of the confidential information.
 ``(3) Public notice by secretary.--Within 30 days of 
 acceptance by the Secretary of an application filed under 
 subsection (k), the Secretary shall publish a notice 
 identifying--
 ``(A) the reference product identified in the 
 application; and
 ``(B) the name and address of an agent designated 
 by the applicant to receive notices pursuant to 
 paragraph (4)(B).
 ``(4) Exchanges concerning patents.--
 ``(A) Exchanges with reference product sponsor.--
 ``(i) Within 30 days of the date of 
 acceptance of the application by the Secretary, 
 the applicant shall provide the reference 
 product sponsor with a copy of the application 
 and information concerning the biosimilar 
 product and its production. This information 
 shall include a detailed description of the 
 biosimilar product, its method of manufacture, 
 and the materials used in the manufacture of 
 the product.
 ``(ii) Within 60 days of the date of 
 receipt of the information required to be 
 provided under clause (i), the reference 
 product sponsor shall provide to the applicant 
 a list of relevant patents owned by the 
 reference product sponsor, or in respect of 
 which the reference product sponsor has the 
 right to commence an action of infringement or 
 otherwise has an interest in the patent as such 
 patent concerns the biosimilar product.
 ``(iii) If the reference product sponsor is 
 issued or acquires an interest in a relevant 
 patent after the date on which the reference 
 product sponsor provides the list required by 
 clause (ii) to the applicant, the reference 
 product sponsor shall identify that patent to 
 the applicant within 30 days of the date of 
 issue of the patent, or the date of acquisition 
 of the interest in the patent, as applicable.
 ``(B) Exchanges with interested third parties.--
 ``(i) At any time after the date on which 
 the Secretary publishes a notice for an 
 application under paragraph (3), any interested 
 third party may provide notice to the 
 designated agent of the applicant that the 
 interested third party owns or has rights under 
 1 or more patents that may be relevant patents. 
 The notice shall identify at least 1 patent and 
 shall designate an individual who has executed 
 an agreement in accordance with paragraph (2) 
 to receive confidential information from the 
 applicant.
 ``(ii) Within 30 days of the date of 
 receiving notice pursuant to clause (i), the 
 applicant shall send to the individual 
 designated by the interested third party the 
 information specified in subparagraph (A)(i), 
 unless the applicant and interested third party 
 otherwise agree.
 ``(iii) Within 90 days of the date of 
 receiving information pursuant to clause (ii), 
 the interested third party shall provide to the 
 applicant a list of relevant patents which the 
 interested third party owns, or in respect of 
 which the interested third party has the right 
 to commence or participate in an action for 
 infringement.
 ``(iv) If the interested third party is 
 issued or acquires an interest in a relevant 
 patent after the date on which the interested 
 third party provides the list required by 
 clause (iii), the interested third party shall 
 identify that patent within 30 days of the date 
 of issue of the patent, or the date of 
 acquisition of the interest in the patent, as 
 applicable.
 ``(C) Identification of basis for infringement.--
 For any patent identified under clause (ii) or (iii) of 
 subparagraph (A) or under clause (iii) or (iv) of 
 subparagraph (B), the reference product sponsor or the 
 interested third party, as applicable--
 ``(i) shall explain in writing why the 
 sponsor or the interested third party believes 
 the relevant patent would be infringed by the 
 making, use, sale, or offer for sale within the 
 United States, or importation into the United 
 States, of the biosimilar product or by a use 
 of the biosimilar product in treatment that is 
 indicated in the application;
 ``(ii) may specify whether the relevant 
 patent is available for licensing; and
 ``(iii) shall specify the number and date 
 of expiration of the relevant patent.
 ``(D) Certification by applicant concerning 
 identified relevant patents.--Not later than 45 days 
 after the date on which a patent is identified under 
 clause (ii) or (iii) of subparagraph (A) or under 
 clause (iii) or (iv) of subparagraph (B), the applicant 
 shall send a written statement regarding each 
 identified patent to the party that identified the 
 patent. Such statement shall either--
 ``(i) state that the applicant will not 
 commence marketing of the biosimilar product 
 and has requested the Secretary to not grant 
 final approval of the application before the 
 date of expiration of the noticed patent; or
 ``(ii) provide a detailed written 
 explanation setting forth the reasons why the 
 applicant believes--
 ``(I) the making, use, sale, or 
 offer for sale within the United 
 States, or the importation into the 
 United States, of the biosimilar 
 product, or the use of the biosimilar 
 product in a treatment indicated in the 
 application, would not infringe the 
 patent; or
 ``(II) the patent is invalid or 
 unenforceable.
 ``(5) Action for infringement involving reference product 
 sponsor.--If an action for infringement concerning a relevant 
 patent identified by the reference product sponsor under clause 
 (ii) or (iii) of paragraph (4)(A), or by an interested third 
 party under clause (iii) or (iv) of paragraph (4)(B), is 
 brought within 60 days of the date of receipt of a statement 
 under paragraph (4)(D)(ii), and the court in which such action 
 has been commenced determines the patent is infringed prior to 
 the date applicable under subsection (k)(7)(A) or (k)(8), the 
 Secretary shall make approval of the application effective on 
 the day after the date of expiration of the patent that has 
 been found to be infringed. If more than one such patent is 
 found to be infringed by the court, the approval of the 
 application shall be made effective on the day after the date 
 that the last such patent expires.
 ``(6) Notification of agreements.--
 ``(A) Requirements.--
 ``(i) Agreement between biosimilar product 
 applicant and reference product sponsor.--If a 
 biosimilar product applicant under subsection 
 (k) and the reference product sponsor enter 
 into an agreement described in subparagraph 
 (B), the applicant and sponsor shall each file 
 the agreement in accordance with subparagraph 
 (C).
 ``(ii) Agreement between biosimilar product 
 applicants.--If 2 or more biosimilar product 
 applicants submit an application under 
 subsection (k) for biosimilar products with the 
 same reference product and enter into an 
 agreement described in subparagraph (B), the 
 applicants shall each file the agreement in 
 accordance with subparagraph (C).
 ``(B) Subject matter of agreement.--An agreement 
 described in this subparagraph--
 ``(i) is an agreement between the 
 biosimilar product applicant under subsection 
 (k) and the reference product sponsor or 
 between 2 or more biosimilar product applicants 
 under subsection (k) regarding the manufacture, 
 marketing, or sale of--
 ``(I) the biosimilar product (or 
 biosimilar products) for which an 
 application was submitted; or
 ``(II) the reference product;
 ``(ii) includes any agreement between the 
 biosimilar product applicant under subsection 
 (k) and the reference product sponsor or 
 between 2 or more biosimilar product applicants 
 under subsection (k) that is contingent upon, 
 provides a contingent condition for, or 
 otherwise relates to an agreement described in 
 clause (i); and
 ``(iii) excludes any agreement that solely 
 concerns--
 ``(I) purchase orders for raw 
 material supplies;
 ``(II) equipment and facility 
 contracts;
 ``(III) employment or consulting 
 contracts; or
 ``(IV) packaging and labeling 
 contracts.
 ``(C) Filing.--
 ``(i) In general.--The text of an agreement 
 required to be filed by subparagraph (A) shall 
 be filed with the Assistant Attorney General 
 and the Federal Trade Commission not later 
 than--
 ``(I) 10 business days after the 
 date on which the agreement is 
 executed; and
 ``(II) prior to the date of the 
 first commercial marketing of, for 
 agreements described in subparagraph 
 (A)(i), the biosimilar product that is 
 the subject of the application or, for 
 agreements described in subparagraph 
 (A)(ii), any biosimilar product that is 
 the subject of an application described 
 in such subparagraph.
 ``(ii) If agreement not reduced to text.--
 If an agreement required to be filed by 
 subparagraph (A) has not been reduced to text, 
 the persons required to file the agreement 
 shall each file written descriptions of the 
 agreement that are sufficient to disclose all 
 the terms and conditions of the agreement.
 ``(iii) Certification.--The chief executive 
 officer or the company official responsible for 
 negotiating any agreement required to be filed 
 by subparagraph (A) shall include in any filing 
 under this paragraph a certification as 
 follows: `I declare under penalty of perjury 
 that the following is true and correct: The 
 materials filed with the Federal Trade 
 Commission and the Department of Justice under 
 section 351(l)(6) of the Public Health Service 
 Act, with respect to the agreement referenced 
 in this certification: (1) represent the 
 complete, final, and exclusive agreement 
 between the parties; (2) include any ancillary 
 agreements that are contingent upon, provide a 
 contingent condition for, or are otherwise 
 related to, the referenced agreement; and (3) 
 include written descriptions of any oral 
 agreements, representations, commitments, or 
 promises between the parties that are 
 responsive to such section and have not been 
 reduced to writing.'.
 ``(D) Disclosure exemption.--Any information or 
 documentary material filed with the Assistant Attorney 
 General or the Federal Trade Commission pursuant to 
 this paragraph shall be exempt from disclosure under 
 section 552 of title 5, United States Code, and no such 
 information or documentary material may be made public, 
 except as may be relevant to any administrative or 
 judicial action or proceeding. Nothing in this 
 subparagraph prevents disclosure of information or 
 documentary material to either body of the Congress or 
 to any duly authorized committee or subcommittee of the 
 Congress.
 ``(E) Enforcement.--
 ``(i) Civil penalty.--Any person that 
 violates a provision of this paragraph shall be 
 liable for a civil penalty of not more than 
 $11,000 for each day on which the violation 
 occurs. Such penalty may be recovered in a 
 civil action--
 ``(I) brought by the United States; 
 or
 ``(II) brought by the Federal Trade 
 Commission in accordance with the 
 procedures established in section 
 16(a)(1) of the Federal Trade 
 Commission Act.
 ``(ii) Compliance and equitable relief.--If 
 any person violates any provision of this 
 paragraph, the United States district court may 
 order compliance, and may grant such other 
 equitable relief as the court in its discretion 
 determines necessary or appropriate, upon 
 application of the Assistant Attorney General 
 or the Federal Trade Commission.
 ``(F) Rulemaking.--The Federal Trade Commission, 
 with the concurrence of the Assistant Attorney General 
 and by rule in accordance with section 553 of title 5, 
 United States Code, consistent with the purposes of 
 this paragraph--
 ``(i) may define the terms used in this 
 paragraph;
 ``(ii) may exempt classes of persons or 
 agreements from the requirements of this 
 paragraph; and
 ``(iii) may prescribe such other rules as 
 may be necessary and appropriate to carry out 
 the purposes of this paragraph.
 ``(G) Savings clause.--Any action taken by the 
 Assistant Attorney General or the Federal Trade 
 Commission, or any failure of the Assistant Attorney 
 General or the Commission to take action, under this 
 paragraph shall not at any time bar any proceeding or 
 any action with respect to any agreement between a 
 biosimilar product applicant under subsection (k) and 
 the reference product sponsor, or any agreement between 
 biosimilar product applicants under subsection (k), 
 under any other provision of law, nor shall any filing 
 under this paragraph constitute or create a presumption 
 of any violation of any competition laws.''.
 (b) Definitions.--Section 351(i) of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 262(i)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``In this section, the term `biological 
 product' means'' and inserting the following: ``In this 
 section:
 ``(1) The term `biological product' means'';
 (2) in paragraph (1), as so designated, by inserting 
 ``protein (except any chemically synthesized polypeptide),'' 
 after ``allergenic product,''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2) The term `biosimilar' or `biosimilarity', in 
 reference to a biological product that is the subject of an 
 application under subsection (k), means--
 ``(A) that the biological product is highly similar 
 to the reference product notwithstanding minor 
 differences in clinically inactive components; and
 ``(B) there are no clinically meaningful 
 differences between the biological product and the 
 reference product in terms of the safety, purity, and 
 potency of the product.
 ``(3) The term `interchangeable' or `interchangeability', 
 in reference to a biological product that is shown to meet the 
 standards described in subsection (k)(4), means that the 
 biological product may be substituted for the reference product 
 without the intervention of the health care provider who 
 prescribed the reference product.
 ``(4) The term `reference product' means the single 
 biological product licensed under subsection (a) against which 
 a biological product is evaluated in an application submitted 
 under subsection (k).''.
 (c) Products Previously Approved Under Section 505.--
 (1) Requirement to follow section 351.--Except as provided 
 in paragraph (2), an application for a biological product shall 
 be submitted under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 262) (as amended by this Act).
 (2) Exception.--An application for a biological product may 
 be submitted under section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
 Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355) if--
 (A) such biological product is in a product class 
 for which a biological product in such product class is 
 the subject of an application approved under such 
 section 505 not later than the date of enactment of 
 this Act; and
 (B) such application--
 (i) has been submitted to the Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services (referred to in this 
 Act as the ``Secretary'') before the date of 
 enactment of this Act; or
 (ii) is submitted to the Secretary not 
 later than the date that is 10 years after the 
 date of enactment of this Act.
 (3) Limitation.--Notwithstanding paragraph (2), an 
 application for a biological product may not be submitted under 
 section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
 U.S.C. 355) if there is another biological product approved 
 under subsection (a) of section 351 of the Public Health 
 Service Act that could be a reference product with respect to 
 such application (within the meaning of such section 351) if 
 such application were submitted under subsection (k) of such 
 section 351.
 (4) Deemed approved under section 351.--An approved 
 application for a biological product under section 505 of the 
 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355) shall be 
 deemed to be a license for the biological product under such 
 section 351 on the date that is 10 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act.
 (5) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection, the term 
 ``biological product'' has the meaning given such term under 
 section 351 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262) 
 (as amended by this Act).

SEC. 702. FEES RELATING TO BIOSIMILAR BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS.

 Subparagraph (B) of section 735(1) of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 379g(1)) is amended by inserting ``, including 
licensure of a biological product under section 351(k) of such Act'' 
before the period at the end.

SEC. 703. AMENDMENTS TO CERTAIN PATENT PROVISIONS.

 (a) Section 271(e)(2) of title 35, United States Code is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``or'' after 
 ``patent,'';
 (2) in subparagraph (B), by adding ``or'' after the comma 
 at the end;
 (3) by inserting the following after subparagraph (B):
 ``(C) a statement under section 351(l)(4)(D)(ii) of 
 the Public Health Service Act,''; and
 (4) in the matter following subparagraph (C) (as added by 
 paragraph (3)), by inserting before the period the following: 
 ``, or if the statement described in subparagraph (C) is 
 provided in connection with an application to obtain a license 
 to engage in the commercial manufacture, use, or sale of a 
 biological product claimed in a patent or the use of which is 
 claimed in a patent before the expiration of such patent''.
 (b) Section 271(e)(4) of title 35, United States Code, is amended 
by striking ``in paragraph (2)'' in both places it appears and 
inserting ``in paragraph (2)(A) or (2)(B)''.
 <all>