S 2341 IS
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2341
To provide for the assessment and reduction of lead-based paint hazards
in housing.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
March 11 (legislative day, JANUARY 30), 1992
Mr. CRANSTON (for himself, Mr. D'AMATO, Mr. SARBANES, Mr. KERRY, Mr. LIEBERMAN,
and Mr. AKAKA) introduced the following bill; which was read twice and
referred to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
A BILL
To provide for the assessment and reduction of lead-based paint hazards
in housing.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Residential Lead-Based
 Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings.
Sec. 3. Purposes.
Sec. 4. Definitions.
TITLE I--RESIDENTIAL LEAD-BASED PAINT HAZARD REDUCTION
Sec. 101. Grants for lead-based paint hazard reduction in target housing.
Sec. 102. Assessment and reduction of lead-based paint hazards in Federal
housing programs.
Sec. 103. Disposition of federally owned housing.
Sec. 104. Comprehensive housing affordability strategy.
Sec. 105. Assessment and reduction of lead-based paint hazards under FHA
insurance programs.
Sec. 106. Task force on private sector financing of lead-based paint hazard
reduction.
Sec. 107. National consultation on lead-based paint hazard reduction.
TITLE II--ASSESSMENT AND REDUCTION INFRASTRUCTURE
Sec. 201. Contractor training and certification.
Sec. 202. Certification of laboratories.
Sec. 203. Guidelines for lead-based paint assessment and reduction activities.
Sec. 204. Monitoring of lead-based paint hazard work.
Sec. 205. National clearinghouse on childhood lead poisoning.
TITLE III--PUBLIC INFORMATION AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE
Sec. 301. Disclosure of information concerning lead upon transfer of
residential property.
Sec. 302. General notice requirements.
Sec. 303. Public awareness.
Sec. 304. Information and warning labels.
Sec. 305. Relationship to other laws.
TITLE IV--FORMULATION OF A NATIONAL STRATEGY
Sec. 401. National strategy.
TITLE V--RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
Subtitle A--HUD Research
Sec. 501. Research on lead exposure from other sources.
Sec. 502. Testing technologies.
Sec. 503. Authorization.
Subtitle B--GAO Report
Sec. 511. Insurance study.
TITLE VI--REPORTS
Sec. 601. Reports of the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) low-level lead poisoning is widespread among American children,
 afflicting as many as 3,000,000 children under age 6, with minority-
 and low-income communities disproportionately affected;
 (2) at low levels, lead poisoning in children causes intelligence quotient
 deficiencies, reading and learning disabilities, impaired hearing, reduced
 attention span, hyperactivity, and behavior problems;
 (3) pre-1978 American housing stock contains more than 3,000,000 tons
 of lead in the form of lead-based paint, with the vast majority of homes
 built before 1950 containing substantial amounts of lead-based paint;
 (4) the ingestion of household dust containing lead from deteriorating
 or abraded lead-based paint is the most common cause of lead poisoning
 in children;
 (5) the health and development of children living in as many as 3,800,000
 American homes is endangered by chipping or peeling lead paint, or excessive
 amounts of lead dust in their homes;
 (6) the danger posed by lead-based paint hazards can be reduced by abating
 lead-based paint or by taking interim measures to prevent paint deterioration
 and limit children's exposure to lead dust and chips;
 (7) despite the enactment of laws in the early 1970's requiring the Federal
 Government to eliminate as far as practicable lead-based paint hazards in
 federally owned, assisted, and insured housing, the Federal response to
 this national crisis remains severely limited; and
 (8) the Federal Government must take a leadership role in building the
 infrastructure--including an informed public, State and local delivery
 systems, certified contractors and laboratories, trained workers, and
 available financing and insurance--necessary to ensure that the national
 goal of eliminating lead-based paint hazards in housing can be achieved
 as expeditiously as possible.
SEC. 3. PURPOSES.
 The purposes of this Act are--
 (1) to reorient the national approach to the presence of lead-based paint
 in housing to implement, on a priority basis, a broad program to assess
 risk and reduce hazards in the Nation's housing stock;
 (2) to encourage effective action to prevent childhood lead poisoning by
 establishing a workable framework for lead-based paint hazard assessment
 and reduction and by ending the current confusion over reasonable standards
 of care;
 (3) to ensure that the existence of lead-based paint hazards is taken into
 account in the development of Government housing policies and in the sale,
 rental, and renovation of homes and apartments;
 (4) to mobilize national resources expeditiously, through a partnership
 among all levels of government and the private sector, to develop the most
 promising, cost-effective methods for assessing and reducing lead-based
 paint hazards;
 (5) to reduce the threat of childhood lead poisoning in housing owned or
 assisted by the Federal Government; and
 (6) to develop a national strategy to build the infrastructure necessary
 to eliminate lead-based paint hazards in all housing as expeditiously
 as possible.
SEC. 4. DEFINITIONS.
 For the purposes of this Act:
 (1) ABATEMENT- The term `abatement' means any measure designed to permanently
 eliminate lead-based paint hazards. Such term includes--
 (A) the removal of lead-based paint and lead-contaminated dust, the permanent
 containment or encapsulation of lead-based paint and the replacement of
 lead-painted surfaces and fixtures; and
 (B) all preparation, cleanup, worker protection, disposal, and postabatement
 clearance testing activities associated with such measures.
 (2) ACCESSIBLE SURFACE- The term `accessible surface' means a surface painted
 with lead-based paint that is accessible for a young child to mouth or chew.
 (3) ASSESSMENT- The term `assessment' means the evaluation of the nature
 and severity of lead-based paint hazards using information on the age
 and condition of the housing, data collected from risk assessments or
 inspections, and such other information as may be appropriate.
 (4) CERTIFIED CONTRACTOR- The term `certified contractor' means an inspector,
 worker, supervisor, contractor, or designer who has completed a training
 program certified by the appropriate Federal agency and in the case of an
 inspector, contractor, or supervisor, who has met any other requirements
 for certification or licensure established by such agency or who has
 been certified by any State whose certification program has been found by
 the appropriate Federal agency to be at least as rigorous as the Federal
 certification program.
 (5) CONTRACT FOR THE PURCHASE AND SALE OF RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY- The
 term `contract for the purchase and sale of residential real property'
 means any contract or agreement in which one party agrees to purchase an
 interest in real property on which there is situated 1 or more residential
 dwellings used or occupied, or intended to be used or occupied, in whole
 or in part, as the home or residence of 1 or more persons.
 (6) FEDERALLY ASSISTED HOUSING- The term `federally assisted housing'
 means housing assisted under--
 (A) section 221(d)(3) or 236 of the National Housing Act;
 (B) section 101 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1965;
 (C) section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937; or
 (D) section 515 of the Housing Act of 1949.
 (7) FEDERALLY CHARTERED SECONDARY MORTGAGE INSTITUTION- The term `federally
 chartered secondary mortgage institution' means an institution chartered
 by law that buys mortgage loans from originating financial institutions
 and resells them to investors. Such term includes the Federal National
 Mortgage Association, the Government National Mortgage Association, and
 the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Association.
 (8) FEDERALLY OWNED HOUSING- The term `federally owned housing' means
 housing owned by a Federal agency, including the Department of Housing
 and Urban Development, the Farmers Home Administration, the General
 Services Administration, the Department of Defense, the Department of
 Veterans Affairs, the Department of the Interior, the Resolution Trust
 Corporation, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Department
 of Transportation.
 (9) FEDERALLY SUPPORTED WORK- The term `federally supported work' means
 any assessment or reduction activities conducted in federally owned or
 assisted properties or funded in whole or in part through any financial
 assistance program of the Department of Housing and Urban Development,
 the Farmers Home Administration, or the Department of Veterans Affairs.
 (10) FRICTION SURFACE- The term `friction surface' means a surface that
 is subject to abrasion or friction, including certain window, floor,
 and stair surfaces.
 (11) IMPACT SURFACE- The term `impact surface' means an interior or
 exterior surface that is subject to damage by repeated impacts, for example,
 certain parts of door frames.
 (12) INSPECTION- The term `inspection' means a surface-by-surface
 investigation to determine the presence of lead-based paint.
 (13) INTERIM CONTROLS- The term `interim controls' means measures designed
 to temporarily reduce human exposure or likely exposure to lead-based paint
 hazards, including specialized cleaning, structural repairs, maintenance,
 painting and temporary containment.
 (14) LEAD-BASED PAINT- The term `lead-based paint' means paint or other
 surface coatings that contain lead in excess of limits established by the
 appropriate Federal agency pursuant to this Act.
 (15) LEAD-BASED PAINT HAZARD- The term `lead-based paint hazard' means
 any hazard to human health caused by exposure or likely exposure to lead
 from lead-contaminated dust, peeling paint, accessible surfaces, friction
 surfaces, or impact surfaces.
 (16) LEAD-CONTAMINATED DUST- The term `lead-contaminated dust' means interior
 house surface dust which contains an area or mass concentration of lead
 which may pose a threat of adverse health effects in pregnant women or
 young children, the concentration limits of which shall be established by
 the appropriate Federal agency pursuant to this Act.
 (17) LEAD HAZARD REDUCTION- The term `lead hazard reduction' means measures
 designed to reduce or eliminate human exposure to lead-based paint hazards
 through methods including interim controls and abatement.
 (18) LEAD-SAFE RESIDENTIAL DWELLING- The term `lead-safe residential
 dwelling' means a residential dwelling that contains no actual or potential
 lead-based paint hazards or one in which all lead-based paint hazards have
 been abated.
 (19) MORTGAGE LOAN- The term `mortgage loan' includes any loan (other than
 temporary financing such as a construction loan) that--
 (A) is secured by a first lien on any interest in residential real
 property; and
 (B) either--
 (i) is insured, guaranteed, made, or assisted by the Department of Housing
 and Urban Development, the Department of Veterans Affairs, or the Farmers
 Home Administration, or by any other agency of the Federal Government; or
 (ii) is intended to be sold by each originating mortgage institution to
 any federally chartered secondary mortgage market institution.
 (20) ORIGINATING MORTGAGE INSTITUTION- The term `originating mortgage
 institution' means a lender that provides mortgage loans, as defined by
 this section.
 (21) PEELING PAINT- The term `peeling paint' means any paint that is peeling,
 chipping, or cracking or any paint located on a surface or fixture that
 is damaged or deteriorated.
 (22) PUBLIC HOUSING- The term `public housing' has the same meaning
 given the term in section 3(b) of the United States Housing Act of 1937
 (42 U.S.C. 1437a(b)(1)).
 (23) RESIDENTIAL DWELLING- The term `residential dwelling' means--
 (A) a single-family dwelling; or
 (B) a single-family dwelling unit in a structure that contains more than
 1 separate residential dwelling unit, and in which each such unit is used
 or occupied, or intended to be used or occupied, in whole or in part,
 as the home or residence of 1 or more persons.
 (24) RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY- The term `residential real property' means
 real property on which there is situated 1 or more residential dwellings
 used or occupied, or intended to be used or occupied, in whole or in part,
 as the home or residence of 1 or more persons.
 (25) RISK ASSESSMENT- The term `risk assessment' means an on-site
 investigation to determine the existence of lead-based paint hazards,
 including sampling of lead contained in interior surface dust.
 (26) SECRETARY- The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Housing and
 Urban Development.
 (27) TARGET HOUSING- The term `target housing' means any housing constructed
 prior to 1978, except housing for the elderly or persons with disabilities
 (unless any child who is less than 6 years of age resides or is expected
 to reside in such housing for the elderly or persons with disabilities)
 or any 0-bedroom dwelling.
TITLE I--LEAD-BASED PAINT HAZARD REDUCTION
SEC. 101. GRANTS FOR LEAD-BASED PAINT HAZARD REDUCTION IN TARGET HOUSING.
 (a) GENERAL AUTHORITY- The Secretary is authorized to provide grants to
 eligible applicants to assess and reduce lead-based paint hazards in target
 housing that is not federally assisted housing, federally owned housing,
 or public housing, in accordance with the provisions of this section.
 (b) ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS- A State or unit of local government that has an
 approved comprehensive housing affordability strategy under section 105
 of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 12705)
 is eligible to apply for a grant under this section.
 (c) FORM OF APPLICATIONS- To receive a grant under this section, a State
 or unit of local government shall submit an application in such form and in
 such manner as the Secretary shall prescribe. An application shall contain--
 (1) a copy of that portion of an applicant's comprehensive housing
 affordability strategy required by section 105(b)(16) of the
 Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 12701 et seq.);
 (2) a description of the amount of assistance the applicant seeks under
 this section;
 (3) a description of the planned activities to be undertaken with grants
 made available under this section, including an estimate of the amount to
 be allocated to each activity;
 (4) a description of the forms of assistance to be employed in using grants
 made available under this section; and
 (5) such assurances as the Secretary may require regarding the applicant's
 capacity to carry out the activities.
 (d) SELECTION CRITERIA- The Secretary shall award grants under this section
 on the basis of the merit of the activities proposed to be carried out
 and on the basis of selection criteria, which shall include--
 (1) the extent to which the proposed activities will reduce the risk of
 lead-based paint poisoning to children under the age of 6;
 (2) the extent to which the proposed activities will benefit families that
 meet the income limits prescribed by section 214 of the Cranston-Gonzalez
 National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 12744);
 (3) the degree of severity and extent of lead-based paint hazards in the
 jurisdiction to be served;
 (4) the ability of the applicant to leverage State, local, and private
 funds to supplement the grant made available under this section;
 (5) the ability of the applicant to carry out the proposed activities; and
 (6) such other factors as the Secretary determines appropriate to ensure
 that grants made available under this section are used effectively and to
 promote the purposes of this Act.
 (e) ELIGIBLE ACTIVITIES- A grant under this section may be used to--
 (1) assess target housing units for lead-based paint hazards;
 (2) provide for the interim control of lead-based paint hazards;
 (3) provide for the abatement of lead-based paint hazards;
 (4) provide for the additional cost of abating lead-based paint hazards
 in units undergoing renovation funded by other sources;
 (5) ensure that assessments and other activities are carried out by
 trained personnel;
 (6) assist in the temporary relocation of families forced to vacate their
 housing while lead hazard reduction measures are being conducted;
 (7) help educate the public on lead-based paint hazards and measures to
 reduce exposure to such hazards;
 (8) perform periodic testing of children's blood-lead levels and lead
 dust levels to assure that exposure to lead-based paint hazards does not
 increase due to improperly conducted reduction activities; and
 (9) carry out such other activities that the Secretary determines appropriate
 to promote the purposes of this Act.
 (f) FORMS OF ASSISTANCE- The applicant may provide the services described
 in this section through a variety of programs, including grants, loans,
 revolving loan funds, loan funds, loan guarantees, and interest write-downs.
 (g) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall develop the capacity of eligible
 applicants to carry out the requirements of section 105(b)(16) of
 the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act and to carry out
 activities under this section.
 (2) SET-ASIDE- Of the total amount approved in appropriation Acts under
 subsection (m), there shall be set aside to carry out this subsection
 $2,000,000 for fiscal year 1993 and $2,000,000 for fiscal year 1994.
 (h) MATCHING REQUIREMENT- Each recipient of grants under this section shall
 make contributions toward the cost of activities that receive assistance
 under this section in an amount not less than 10 percent of the grant
 under this section.
 (i) LIMITATION ON USE- An applicant shall ensure that not more than 10
 percent of a grant will be used for administrative expenses associated
 with the activities funded.
 (j) FINANCIAL RECORDS- An applicant shall maintain and provide the Secretary
 with financial records sufficient, in the determination of the Secretary,
 to ensure proper accounting and disbursing of amounts received from a
 grant under this section.
 (k) REPORT- An applicant under this section shall submit to the Secretary,
 for any fiscal year in which the applicant receives a grant under this
 section, a report that--
 (1) describes the use of the amounts received;
 (2) states the number of housing units assessed for lead-based paint hazards;
 (3) states the number of housing units in which hazards have been reduced
 through interim controls;
 (4) states the number of housing units in which hazards have been abated; and
 (5) provides any other information that the Secretary determines to be
 appropriate.
 (l) PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS- The Secretary shall promulgate regulations
 for the implementation of this section within 120 days after the date
 of enactment of this Act. In promulgating such regulations, the Secretary
 shall consult with the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency,
 the Director of the Centers for Disease Control, and national organizations
 that have expertise in lead-based paint hazards and their reduction.
 (m) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- For the purposes of carrying out this
 Act, there are authorized to be appropriated $250,000,000 for fiscal year
 1993 and $250,000,000 for fiscal year 1994.
SEC. 102. ASSESSMENT AND REDUCTION OF LEAD-BASED PAINT HAZARDS IN FEDERAL
HOUSING PROGRAMS.
 (a) GENERAL REQUIREMENTS- Section 302(a) of the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning
 Prevention Act is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence, by inserting before the period `or otherwise
 assisted under a federal housing program';
 (2) in paragraph (1) of the second sentence, by striking `to eliminate
 as far as practicable immediate hazards due to the presence of accessible
 intact, intact and nonintact interior and exterior painted surfaces that
 may contain lead' and insert `to assess, reduce and eliminate as far as
 practicable lead-based paint hazards'; and
 (3) by adding after the second sentence, the following new sentence: `Not
 later than January 1, 1995, such procedures shall require the assessment
 and reduction of lead-based paint hazards in all federally assisted housing
 constructed or substantially rehabilitated prior to 1978 and in all target
 housing that is assisted under a Federal housing program, where the level
 of Federal assistance exceeds $5,000.'.
 (b) HOME INVESTMENT PARTNERSHIPS- Section 212(a) of the Cranston-Gonzalez
 National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 12742) is amended by adding at
 the end the following new paragraph:
 `(5) LEAD-BASED PAINT HAZARDS- A participating jurisdiction may use funds
 provided under this subtitle for the assessment and reduction of lead-based
 paint hazards, as defined in section 4 of the Residential Lead-Based Paint
 Hazard Reduction Act of 1992.'.
 (c) COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANTS- Section 105(a) of the Housing and
 Community Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5305(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (19), by striking `and' at the end;
 (2) in paragraph (20), by striking the period at the end and inserting `;
 and'; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(21) lead-based paint hazard assessment and reduction, as defined in
 section 4 of the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992.'.
 (d) SECTION 8 RENTAL ASSISTANCE- Section 8(c)(2)(B) of the United States
 Housing Act of 1937 is amended by adding at the end the following sentence:
 `The Secretary may (at the discretion of the Secretary and subject to the
 availability of appropriations for contract amendments for this purpose),
 on a project by project basis, provide adjustments to the maximum monthly
 rents to cover the costs of assessing and reducing lead-based paint hazards,
 as defined in section 4 of the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction
 Act of 1992.'.
 (e) HOPE FOR PUBLIC AND INDIAN HOUSING HOMEOWNERSHIP- The United States
 Housing Act of 1937 is amended--
 (1) in section 302(b)--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (4) through (8) as paragraphs (5) through
 (9), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following:
 `(4) assessments of lead-based paint hazards, as defined in section 4 of
 the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992;'; and
 (2) in section 303(b)--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (4) through (13) as paragraphs (5) through
 (14), respectively; and
 (B) by adding after paragraph (3) the following:
 `(4) Reduction of lead-based paint hazards, as defined in section 4 of
 the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992.'.
 (f) HOPE FOR HOMEOWNERSHIP OF MULTIFAMILY UNITS- The Cranston-Gonzalez
 National Affordable Housing Act is amended--
 (1) in section 422(b)--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (4) through (8) as paragraphs (5) through
 (9), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following:
 `(4) assessments of lead-based paint hazards, as defined in section 4 of
 the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992;'; and
 (2) in section 423(b)--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (4) through (13) as paragraphs (5) through
 (14), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following:
 `(4) Reduction of lead-based paint hazards, as defined in section 4 of
 the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992.'.
 (g) HOPE FOR HOMEOWNERSHIP OF SINGLE FAMILY HOMES- The Cranston-Gonzalez
 National Affordable Housing Act is amended--
 (1) in section 442(b)--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (4) through (8) as paragraphs (5) through
 (9), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following:
 `(4) assessments of lead-based paint hazards, as defined in section 4 of
 the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992;'; and
 (2) in section 443(b)--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (4) through (10) as paragraphs (5) through
 (11), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following:
 `(4) Reduction of lead-based paint hazards, as defined in section 4 of
 the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992.'.
 (h) FHA INSURANCE FOR SINGLE FAMILY HOMES-
 (1) HOME IMPROVEMENT LOANS- Section 2(a) of the National Housing Act is
 amended in the fourth paragraph--
 (A) by inserting after the first sentence the following: `Alterations,
 repairs, and improvements upon or in connection with existing structures may
 also include the assessment and reduction of lead-based paint hazards.'; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 `(4) the terms `assessment', `lead hazard reduction', and `lead-based
 paint hazard' have the same meanings given those terms in section 4 of
 the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992.'.
 (2) REHABILITATION LOANS- Section 203(k)(2)(B) of the National Housing Act
 is amended by adding at the end the following: `The term `rehabilitation'
 may also include measures to assess and reduce lead-based hazards, as such
 terms are defined in section 4 of the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard
 Reduction Act of 1992.'.
 (i) FHA INSURANCE FOR MULTIFAMILY HOUSING- Section 221(d)(4)(iv) of the
 National Housing Act is amended by inserting after the term `rehabilitation'
 the first time it appears the following: `(including the cost of assessing
 and reducing lead-based paint hazards, as such terms are defined in section
 4 of the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992)'.
SEC. 103. DISPOSITION OF FEDERALLY OWNED HOUSING.
 Section 302(a) of the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act is amended
 by adding at the end the following: `Beginning on January 1, 1993, such
 procedures shall require the inspection and abatement of lead-based paint
 hazards in all federally owned residential properties constructed prior
 to 1978, as defined in section 4 of the Residential Lead-Based Paint
 Hazard Reduction Act of 1992. For purposes of this subsection, the terms
 `assess', `reduce', `inspection', `abatement', `lead-based paint hazard',
 `target housing', and `federally assisted housing' shall have the same
 meanings provided under section 4 of the Residential Lead-Based Paint
 Hazard Reduction Act of 1992.'.
SEC. 104. COMPREHENSIVE HOUSING AFFORDABILITY STRATEGY.
 Section 105 of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act
 (42 U.S.C. 12705) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)(14), by striking `; and' and inserting a semicolon;
 (2) in subsection (b)(15), by striking the period and inserting `; and';
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (15) in subsection (b) the following
 new paragraph:
 `(16) estimate the number of housing units within the jurisdiction that
 contain lead-based paint hazards, outline the actions proposed or being
 taken to assess and reduce lead-based paint hazards, and describe how
 lead-based paint hazard reduction will be integrated into housing policies
 and programs.'; and
 (4) in subsection (e)--
 (A) by striking `CONSULTATION WITH SOCIAL SERVICE AGENCIES- ' and inserting:
 `(e) CONSULTATION WITH SOCIAL SERVICE AGENCIES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- '; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(2) LEAD-BASED PAINT HAZARDS- When preparing that portion of a housing
 strategy required by subsection (b)(16), a jurisdiction shall consult with
 local health and child welfare agencies and examine existing data related to
 lead-based paint hazards and poisonings, including health department data
 on the addresses of housing units in which children have been identified
 as lead poisoned.'.
SEC. 105. ASSESSMENT AND REDUCTION OF LEAD-BASED PAINT HAZARDS UNDER FHA
INSURANCE PROGRAMS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this
 Act, the Secretary shall revise the policies and procedures (including
 underwriting standards and appraisal guidelines) governing the provision
 of mortgage insurance under the National Housing Act to ensure that such
 policies and procedures address the need to finance the assessment and
 reduction of lead-based paint hazards.
 (b) REPORT- Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act,
 the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report--
 (1) describing any action taken pursuant to subsection (a); and
 (2) recommending any legislative action (including changes to loan limits)
 that is needed to facilitate the financing of assessment and reduction
 activities.
SEC. 106. TASK FORCE ON PRIVATE SECTOR FINANCING OF LEAD-BASED PAINT HAZARD
REDUCTION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall form a task force to make recommendations
 on financing the assessment and reduction of lead-based paint hazards in
 private mortgages, through the policies of Federal agencies and federally
 chartered financial institutions, primary lending institutions and private
 mortgage insurers.
 (b) MEMBERSHIP- The task force shall include individuals representing
 the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the Farmers Home
 Administration, the Department of Veterans Affairs, the Federal Home Loan
 Mortgage Corporation, the Federal National Mortgage Association, national
 organizations representing primary lending institutions, private mortgage
 insurers, and national organizations that have expertise in lead-based
 paint hazards.
SEC. 107. NATIONAL CONSULTATION ON LEAD-BASED PAINT HAZARD REDUCTION.
 In carrying out the purposes of this Act, the Secretary shall consult on
 an ongoing basis with the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
 Agency and the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and other Federal
 agencies concerned with lead poisoning prevention and national organizations
 that have expertise in lead-based paint hazards assessment and reduction.
TITLE II--ASSESSMENT AND REDUCTION INFRASTRUCTURE
SEC. 201. CONTRACTOR TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION.
 All federally supported assessment and reduction of lead-based paint hazards
 shall be conducted by trained contractors certified by the appropriate
 Federal agency.
SEC. 202. CERTIFICATION OF LABORATORIES.
 All federally supported assessment of lead-based paint hazards shall be
 conducted in laboratories certified by the appropriate Federal agency.
SEC. 203. GUIDELINES FOR LEAD-BASED PAINT ASSESSMENT AND REDUCTION ACTIVITIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of
 this Act, the Secretary, after consultation with the Administrator of the
 Environmental Protection Agency, the Secretary of Labor, and the Secretary
 of Health and Human Services (acting through the Director of the Centers
 for Disease Control), shall issue guidelines for the conduct of federally
 supported risk assessments, inspections, interim controls, and abatements
 of lead-based paint hazards.
 (b) STATE AND LOCAL REGULATIONS- Federally supported work shall be
 conducted in accordance with the guidelines issued under this section
 unless any State or local regulations impose more stringent standards or
 requirements than the Federal guidelines, in which case such work shall
 be conducted in accordance with the State or local regulations.
SEC. 204. MONITORING OF LEAD-BASED PAINT HAZARD WORK.
 (a) MONITORING BY HUD- Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment
 of this Act, the Secretary shall establish monitoring systems to oversee
 closely all federally supported efforts to assess and reduce lead-based
 paint hazards in housing.
 (b) PENALTY FOR NONCOMPLIANCE- Any contractor who performs lead-based paint
 hazard work under this Act and who fails to comply with the certification
 requirements of this title, or who negligently performs such work, shall
 be subject to the penalty described in subsection (c).
 (c) DETERMINATION BY SECRETARY- After providing the contractor with notice
 concerning the nature of the noncompliance and an opportunity to respond,
 the Secretary shall determine whether the contractor should be declared
 ineligible to perform any or all work authorized by the Department of
 Housing and Urban Development. The Secretary may establish procedures for
 agency review of such determinations, which shall otherwise be final and
 nonreviewable in any court.
 (d) OTHER REMEDIES- A penalty under this section does not preclude the
 Department of Housing and Urban Development, or any party aggrieved by a
 contractor, from seeking redress through other means.
SEC. 205. NATIONAL CLEARINGHOUSE ON RESIDENTIAL LEAD-BASED PAINT POISONING.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary shall establish, in consultation with the
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency and the Director of
 the Centers for Disease Control, a National Clearinghouse on Residential
 Lead-Based Paint Poisoning (hereafter in this section referred to as
 `Clearinghouse').
 (b) MISSION- The Clearinghouse shall--
 (1) collect, evaluate, and disseminate current information on the assessment
 and reduction of lead-based paint hazards in housing;
 (2) maintain a rapid-alert system to inform certified contractors and grant
 recipients of significant developments in research related to lead-based
 paint hazards; and
 (3) perform any other duty that the Secretary determines necessary to
 carry out the purposes of this Act.
 (c) AUTHORIZATION- Of the total amount approved in appropriation Acts under
 section 101(m) of this Act, there shall be set aside to carry out this
 section $1,000,000 for fiscal year 1993 and $1,000,000 for fiscal year 1994.
TITLE III--PUBLIC INFORMATION AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE
SEC. 301. DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION CONCERNING LEAD UPON TRANSFER OF
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.
 (a) LEAD DISCLOSURE PROVISIONS IN CONTRACT FOR PURCHASE AND SALE OF
 TARGET HOUSING-
 (1) LEAD-BASED PAINT AND LEAD-BASED PAINT HAZARDS- Within 2 years after the
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations
 under this subsection for the disclosure of lead-based paint hazards in
 target housing which is offered for sale. The regulations shall require
 that before the purchaser is obligated under any contract to purchase the
 premises, the seller shall--
 (A) provide a lead hazard information pamphlet, as prescribed in subsection
 (c), to the purchaser;
 (B) disclose to the purchaser the presence of any known lead-based paint or
 any known lead-based hazards in such housing and provide to the purchaser
 any lead hazard assessment report available to the seller; and
 (C) permit the purchaser a period of at least 10 days to have the premises
 assessed for the presence of lead-based paint hazards.
 (2) CONTRACT FOR PURCHASE AND SALE- Regulations promulgated under this
 subsection shall provide that every contract for the purchase and sale of
 any interest in target housing shall contain a Lead Warning Statement and
 a statement signed by the purchaser that the purchaser has--
 (A) read the Lead Warning Statement and understands its contents,
 (B) received a lead hazard information pamphlet, and
 (C) had an opportunity of at least 10 days before becoming obligated under
 the contract to purchase the premises to have the premises assessed for
 the presence of lead-based paint hazards.
The Lead Warning Statement shall contain the following text printed in large
type on a separate sheet of paper attached to the contract:
 `Every purchaser of any interest in residential real property on which a
 residential dwelling was built prior to 1978 is notified that such property
 may present exposure to lead from lead-based paint that may place young
 children at risk of developing lead poisoning. Lead poisoning in young
 children may produce permanent neurological damage, including learning
 disabilities, reduced intelligence quotient, behavioral problems, and
 impaired memory. Lead poisoning also poses a particular risk to pregnant
 women. The seller of any interest in residential real property is required
 to provide the buyer with any information on lead-based paint hazards from
 risk assessments or inspections in the seller's possession and notify the
 buyer of any known lead-based paint hazards. An assessment for possible
 lead-based paint hazards is recommended prior to purchase.'.
Whenever the seller has entered into a contract with an agent for the
purpose of selling a unit of target housing, the regulations promulgated
under this subsection shall require the agent, on behalf of the seller,
to ensure compliance with the requirements of this subsection.
 (b) LEASE OF TARGET HOUSING-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this
 Act, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations to require every lease
 for a residential dwelling in target housing to contain the following Lead
 Warning Statement:
 `Every lessee of any residential dwelling built prior to 1978 is notified
 that such dwelling may present exposure to lead from lead-based paint
 that may place young children at risk of developing lead poisoning. Lead
 poisoning in young children may produce permanent neurological damage,
 including learning disabilities, reduced intelligence quotient, behavioral
 problems, and impaired memory. Lead poisoning also poses a particular risk
 to pregnant women. The lessor of a residential dwelling is required to
 provide the lessee with any information on lead-based paint hazards from
 risk assessments or inspections in the lessor's possession and notify the
 lessee of any known lead-based paint hazards. An assessment for possible
 lead-based paint hazards is recommended prior to entering into a lease.'.
 (2) LEAD HAZARD ASSESSMENT-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Subject to subparagraph (B), the Secretary shall promulgate
 regulations that require each owner of target housing offered for rent--
 (i) to obtain an assessment of any lead-based paint hazards in the
 dwelling, and
 (ii) to provide a prospective lessee with a lead hazard report for the
 premises before executing a lease.
 (B) CONDITIONS- The Secretary shall promulgate regulations described in
 subparagraph (A) only after making a determination that--
 (i) there are available in all regions of the Nation a sufficient number
 of individuals certified to carry out the assessment and reduction of
 lead-based paint hazards, and
 (ii) the requirement set forth in subparagraph (A) will not have a
 deleterious impact on the availability of affordable housing for families
 with children.
 (C) REPORT TO CONGRESS- Not later than 12 months after the date of enactment
 of this Act, the Secretary shall issue a report to the Congress outlining
 the schedule for implementing the requirement set forth in subparagraph
 (A), specifying any barriers that may impede its implementation in a timely
 fashion, and recommending any legislative or administrative action necessary
 to remove such barriers.
 (c) LEAD HAZARD INFORMATION PAMPHLET- Not later than 2 years after the
 date of enactment of this Act, after notice and opportunity for comment,
 the Secretary shall publish, and from time to time revise, a lead hazard
 information pamphlet to be used in connection with the sale or lease of
 target housing. The pamphlet shall--
 (1) contain information regarding the health risks associated with exposure
 to lead;
 (2) describe the risks of lead exposure for children under 6 years of
 age, pregnant women, women of child bearing age, and others residing in
 a dwelling with lead-based paint hazards;
 (3) describe the risks of renovation in a dwelling with lead-based paint
 or lead-based paint hazards;
 (4) provide information on approved methods and devices for lead-based
 paint hazard reduction and their effectiveness in reducing, eliminating,
 or preventing exposure to lead-based paint hazards;
 (5) advise persons how to obtain a list of contractors certified pursuant
 to section 201 in lead-based paint hazard reduction in the area in which
 the pamphlet is to be used;
 (6) provide information on the presence of lead-based paint or lead-based
 paint hazards in target housing;
 (7) state that a lead-based paint hazard assessment is recommended prior
 to the purchase, lease, or renovation of target housing; and
 (8) provide information on approved methods and devices for lead-based paint
 hazard assessment, and advise persons how to obtain a list of contractors
 certified pursuant to section 201 in lead-based paint hazard assessment
 in the area in which the pamphlet is to be used.
 (d) PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS-
 (1) MONETARY PENALTY- Any person who knowingly violates any provision of
 this section shall be fined an amount not to exceed $5,000.
 (2) CIVIL LIABILITY- Any person who knowingly violates the provisions
 of this section shall be jointly and severally liable to the mortgage
 applicant, purchaser or lessee in an amount equal to 3 times the amount
 of damages incurred by such individual.
 (3) ACTION BY SECRETARY- The Secretary is authorized to take such lawful
 action as may be necessary to enjoin any violation of this section.
 (4) COSTS- In any civil action brought for damages pursuant to paragraph
 (2) of this section, the appropriate court may award court costs to the
 party commencing such action, together with reasonable attorney fees,
 if the party prevails.
 (e) VALIDITY OF CONTRACTS AND LIENS- Nothing in this section shall affect
 the validity or enforceability of any sale or contract for the purchase and
 sale or lease of any interest in residential real property or any loan,
 loan agreement, mortgage, or lien made or arising in connection with a
 mortgage loan, nor shall anything in this section create a defect in title.
 (f) EFFECTIVE DATE- Regulations promulgated under this section shall take
 effect 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 302. GENERAL NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
 Section 302(a)(2) of the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act is
 amended--
 (1) after `purchasers', by inserting `, owners,'; and
 (2) by striking `and of the importance and availability of maintenance
 and removal techniques for eliminating such hazards.' and inserting
 `of the importance and availability of techniques designed to assess,
 reduce and eliminate such hazards, and of the availability of Federal
 assistance for undertaking assessment and reduction activities. In the case
 of housing where assessment and reduction activities have been undertaken,
 the notification shall also contain a description of the nature and scope of
 such activities and available information on the location of any remaining
 lead-based paint on a surface-by-surface basis.'.
SEC. 303. PUBLIC AWARENESS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary, in cooperation with the heads of other
 appropriate Federal agencies, shall develop and undertake a campaign to
 increase public awareness of the dangers of childhood lead poisoning. The
 campaign shall be designed--
 (1) to inform the public of the health consequences of lead exposure;
 (2) to describe how to assess and reduce lead-based paint hazards; and
 (3) to provide advice about measures to reduce the risk of lead exposure.
The campaign carried out under this subsection shall target parents of
young children and persons involved in the rental, sale, and renovation of
residential properties.
 (b) COORDINATION- The Secretary shall coordinate activities carried out
 under this section with the President's Committee on Environmental Quality
 and any other public education efforts being undertaken by Federal agencies.
 (c) LEAD HAZARD HOTLINE- The Secretary, in cooperation with other Federal
 agencies and with State and local governments, shall establish a lead hazard
 hotline to provide the public with quick, easy-to-understand answers to
 basic questions about lead-based paint poisoning.
 (d) AUTHORIZATION- Of the total amount approved in appropriation Acts
 under section 101(m), there shall be set aside to carry out this section
 $2,000,000 for fiscal year 1993 and $2,000,000 for fiscal year 1994.
SEC. 304. INFORMATION AND WARNING LABELS.
 (a) INFORMATION- The Secretary, in consultation with the Chairman of
 the Consumer Product Safety Commission, shall develop information to be
 distributed by retailers of home improvement products to provide consumers
 with practical information related to the hazards of renovation and
 remodeling where lead-based paint may be present.
 (b) WARNING LABELS- Each manufacturer of hand tools, determined by the
 Commissioner of the Consumer Product Safety Commission to be commonly
 used for renovation or remodeling of residential painted surfaces, shall
 affix an appropriate warning label, as developed by the Commissioner, to
 advise users to obtain information regarding the hazards of renovation and
 remodeling in the presence of lead-based paint before such users engage
 in any activities that could cause hazardous exposures.
SEC. 305. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS.
 (a) STATE LAWS- Nothing in this title shall annul, alter, affect or exempt
 any person subject to the provisions of this title from complying with the
 laws of any State with respect to the provision of information concerning
 lead, except to the extent that the Secretary determines that any such
 law is inconsistent with this section, in which event, such law shall be
 affected only to the extent of remedying the inconsistency.
 (b) ESTABLISHMENT OF MORE STRINGENT STANDARDS- Nothing in this title
 shall be construed as precluding a State from establishing any standard
 of liability or other requirement concerning the disclosure of information
 concerning lead that is more stringent than the requirements of this title.
TITLE IV--FORMULATION OF A NATIONAL STRATEGY
SEC. 401. NATIONAL STRATEGY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of this
 Act, the Secretary shall formulate a national strategy for eliminating
 lead-based paint hazards in housing.
 (b) OBJECTIVE- The objective of the national strategy is to enable State
 and local governments to assess and reduce lead-based paint hazards within
 their respective jurisdictions as soon as practicable and to encourage
 and assist private sector efforts.
 (c) CONTENTS- The national strategy shall--
 (1) identify the infrastructure needed to eliminate lead-based paint hazards
 in all housing as expeditiously as possible, including cost-effective
 technology, uniform regulations, trained and certified contractors,
 certified laboratories, liability insurance, private financing techniques,
 and appropriate Government subsidies;
 (2) assess the extent to which the infrastructure described in paragraph
 (1) already exists;
 (3) describe any legislative or administrative actions that may be necessary
 to develop the infrastructure described in paragraph (1) in order to meet
 the goal set forth in paragraph (1); and
 (4) estimate the costs of carrying out actions proposed under paragraph (3).
TITLE V--RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
Subtitle A--HUD Research
SEC. 501. RESEARCH ON LEAD EXPOSURE FROM OTHER SOURCES.
 The Secretary, in cooperation with other Federal agencies, shall conduct
 research on strategies to reduce the risk of lead exposure from other
 sources, including exterior soil lead and interior lead dust in carpets,
 furniture, and forced air ducts.
SEC. 502. TESTING TECHNOLOGIES.
 The Secretary, in cooperation with other Federal agencies, shall conduct
 research to--
 (1) develop improved methods for assessing lead-based paint hazards
 in housing;
 (2) develop improved methods for reducing lead-based paint hazards in
 housing;
 (3) develop improved methods for measuring lead in paint films, dust,
 and soil samples;
 (4) establish performance standards for various detection methods, including
 spot test kits;
 (5) establish performance standards for hazard reduction and abatement
 methods, including encapsulants;
 (6) establish appropriate cleanup standards;
 (7) evaluate the efficacy of interim controls in various hazard situations;
 (8) evaluate the relative performance of various abatement techniques;
 (9) evaluate the long-term cost-effectiveness of interim control and
 abatement strategies; and
 (10) assess the effectiveness of hazard assessment and reduction activities
 funded by this Act.
SEC. 503. AUTHORIZATION.
 Of the total amount approved in appropriation Acts under section 101(m),
 there shall be set aside to carry out this section $5,000,000 for fiscal
 year 1993 and $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1994.
Subtitle B--GAO Report
SEC. 511. INSURANCE STUDY.
 The Comptroller General of the United States shall assess the availability
 of liability insurance for owners of residential housing that contains
 lead-based paint and persons engaged in lead-based paint hazard assessment
 and reduction activities. In carrying out the assessment, the Comptroller
 General shall analyze any precedents in the insurance industry for the
 containment and abatement of environmental hazards in housing, such as
 asbestos, and shall provide an assessment of the recent insurance experience
 in the public housing program and shall recommend measures for increasing
 the availability of liability insurance.
TITLE VI--REPORTS
SEC. 601. REPORTS OF THE SECRETARY OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT.
 (a) ANNUAL REPORT- The Secretary shall transmit to the Congress an annual
 report that--
 (1) sets forth the Secretary's assessment of the progress made in
 implementing the various programs authorized by this Act;
 (2) summarizes the most current health and environmental studies on childhood
 lead poisoning, including studies that analyze the relationship between
 reduction and abatement activities and the incidence of lead poisoning in
 resident children;
 (3) recommends legislative and administrative initiatives that may improve
 the performance by the Department of Housing and Urban Development in
 combating lead hazards through the expansion of lead hazard assessment
 and reduction;
 (4) describes the results of research carried out in accordance with title
 V of this Act; and
 (5) estimates the amount of Federal assistance annually expended on
 assessment and reduction activities.
 (b) BIENNIAL REPORT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- 24 months after the date of enactment of this Act, and every
 24-month period thereafter, the Secretary shall report to the Congress
 on the progress of the Department of Housing and Urban Development in
 implementing the provisions of section 301.
 (2) CONTENTS- The report shall--
 (A) include a statement as to the effectiveness of section 301 in making
 the public aware of the dangers of lead;
 (B) describe the extent to which lead-based paint hazard assessment and
 reduction is occurring as a result of the administration of section 301; and
 (C) include any additional information that the Secretary deems appropriate.