HR 1692 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1692
To amend title XVIII of the Social Security Act to provide for expanded
long-term care services under the medicare program, to amend the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986 to provide a credit for taxpayers with certain elderly
dependents in their households, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
April 10, 1991
Mr. GOODLING introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to
the Committees on Ways and Means, Energy and Commerce, and Education and Labor
A BILL
To amend title XVIII of the Social Security Act to provide for expanded
long-term care services under the medicare program, to amend the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986 to provide a credit for taxpayers with certain elderly
dependents in their households, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Comprehensive Long-Term Care For the Elderly
 Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. EXPANSION OF LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES UNDER MEDICARE.
 (a) ELIGIBILITY FOR EXPANDED LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES- Section 1812 of the
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395d) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in paragraph (2)(B), by striking `subsection (f),' and inserting
 `subsection (f) and section 1821,',
 (B) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (3),
 (C) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (4) and inserting `;
 and', and
 (D) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(5) long-term care services (in accordance with section 1821).'; and
 (2) in subsection (b)(2), by striking `post-hospital' and inserting
 `except as provided in section 1821, post-hospital'.
 (b) DESCRIPTION OF LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES- Part A of title XVIII of
 the Social Security Act is amended by adding at the end the following
 new section:
`LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES FOR DEPENDENT INDIVIDUALS
 `SEC. 1821. (a) IN GENERAL- An individual entitled to benefits under this
 part shall be entitled to have payments made on the individual's behalf
 for long-term care services if--
 `(1) the individual is a dependent individual; and
 `(2) such services are provided in accordance with a case management
 plan developed by the case management agency of the State in which the
 individual resides.
 `(b) DEVELOPMENT OF CASE MANAGEMENT PLANS-
 `(1) REQUESTS FOR ASSESSMENT- Each individual entitled to benefits under
 this part (or another person on such individual's behalf) may request
 the case management agency of the State in which the individual resides
 to conduct an assessment under this section to determine whether the
 individual is a dependent individual.
 `(2) DEVELOPMENT OF PLANS- If a case management agency determines that
 an individual is a dependent individual, the agency, together with the
 individual's attending physician, shall develop a case management plan for
 the individual that describes the long-term care services and the period
 during which the services are to be provided, and shall review such plan
 upon the request of an individual's family member or guardian, or at such
 intervals as the Secretary considers appropriate.
 `(c) SERVICES DESCRIBED-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (3), in this section, the term
 `long-term care services' means--
 `(A) extended care services (as defined in section 1861(h)); and
 `(B) home-based items and services (as described in paragraph (2)).
 `(2) HOME-BASED ITEMS AND SERVICES DESCRIBED-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The home-based items and services described in this
 paragraph are as follows:
 `(i) Nursing care provided by or under the supervision of a registered
 professional nurse.
 `(ii) Services of a homemaker/home health aide who has successfully completed
 a training and competency evaluation program approved by the Secretary.
 `(iii) Personal care services.
 `(iv) Medical social services.
 `(v) Physical, occupational, or respiratory therapy or speech-language
 pathology.
 `(vi) Medical supplies (other than drugs and biologicals) and durable
 medical equipment, while under such a plan.
 `(vii) Patient and caregiver (including family caregiver) education and
 training to develop skills necessary to permit the individual to remain
 in the home setting.
 `(viii) Such other home-based items and services (other than room and board)
 as the Secretary may approve.
 `(B) EXCEPTION FOR SERVICES PROVIDED OUTSIDE OF HOME- If an item or
 service furnished to a patient that would otherwise meet the requirements
 for home-based items or services under subparagraph (A) does not meet
 such requirements because it is not furnished in the patient's home, the
 Secretary may deem the item or service to be a home-based item or service
 under subparagraph (A) if the Secretary determines that the item or service
 may appropriately be furnished to the patient outside of the patient's home.
 `(3) PROHIBITING DUPLICATION OF SERVICES FURNISHED UNDER OTHER PROGRAMS-
 Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) and (2), no item or service may be a
 long-term care service for purposes of this section if the individual is
 able to obtain the service under title III of the Older Americans Act of
 1965 or part C of title II of the Domestic Volunteer Service Act of 1973.
 `(d) AMOUNT OF PAYMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3), the amount
 of payment made with respect to an individual for long-term care services
 furnished under this section shall be equal to the reasonable costs of
 the services provided under the individual's case management plan.
 `(2) COINSURANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR EXTENDED CARE SERVICES- The amount of
 payment made under this section for extended care services shall be equal
 to the amount determined under paragraph (1), reduced by--
 `(A) for services provided before the expiration of the 6-month period
 that begins on the first date on which the individual's case management
 plan is in effect, a coinsurance of 20 percent;
 `(B) for services provided after the expiration of the period described in
 subparagraph (A) and before the expiration the 2-year period that begins on
 the first date on which the individual's case management plan is in effect,
 a coinsurance of 25 percent;
 `(C) for services provided during a subsequent 1-year period, a coinsurance
 equal to the coinsurance applicable during the previous 1-year period,
 increased by 10 percent.
 `(3) CAP ON PAYMENT AMOUNTS- In the case of an individual who receives
 long-term care services in excess of the services recommended by the case
 management agency under the individual's case management plan, the amount
 of payment for long-term care services under this title with respect to an
 individual may not exceed the amount that would be payable for the services
 recommended for the individual under the individual's case management plan
 by the case management agency.
 `(e) CASE MANAGEMENT AGENCIES DESCRIBED-
 `(1) DESIGNATION- The Secretary shall designate for each State a case
 management agency to carry out the duties described in paragraph (3)
 with respect to residents of the State.
 `(2) DEFINITION- In this section, the term `case management agency' means--
 `(A) the area agency on aging designated by the State under section
 305(a)(2)(A) of the Older Americans Act of 1965 for the planning and
 service area (as described in section 305(a)(1)(E) of that Act) in which
 the individual resides; or
 `(B) in the case of an individual residing in a planning and service area
 for which an area agency on aging is not so designated, a nonprofit or
 public agency or organization, or a nonprofit or public subdivision of
 such an agency or organization, which--
 `(i) is experienced in providing assessments and in developing and
 periodically reviewing and revising plans of care for long-term care
 services;
 `(ii) is capable of performing directly or through contracts efficiently
 and effectively the duties described in paragraph (3); and
 `(iii) does not provide long-term care services and does not have a direct or
 indirect ownership or control interest in, or direct or indirect affiliation
 or relationship with, an entity that provides long-term care services.
 `(3) DUTIES OF AGENCIES- Each case management agency shall be responsible
 for--
 `(A) coordinating the provision of long-term care services under this section
 with the provision of services under title III of the Older Americans Act
 of 1965 and under part C of title II of the Domestic Volunteer Service
 Act of 1973;
 `(B) conducting assessments under this section;
 `(C) developing and periodically reviewing and revising case management
 plans for long-term care services under this section in accordance with
 subsection (b)(2); and
 `(D) informing and making recommendations to individuals with respect to
 entities from which they may obtain the long-term care services provided
 under case management plans, and assisting in the coordination of the
 provision of such services.
 `(4) APPEALS OF INITIAL DETERMINATIONS- Each State's case management agency
 shall provide for a mechanism for hearing appeals from the initial assessment
 of whether or not an individual is a chronically dependent individual and
 the scope of long-term care services provided under an individual's case
 management plan.
 `(f) DEPENDENT INDIVIDUAL DEFINED- In this section, the term `dependent
 individual' means an individual who--
 `(1) is unable to perform (without substantial assistance from another
 individual) because of physical or cognitive impairment at least 2 of
 the following activities of daily living: bathing, dressing, toileting,
 transferring, and eating; or
 `(2) has a similar level of disability due to cognitive impairment that
 requires substantial direction, instruction, or supervision of another
 individual in order--
 `(A) to perform 2 or more of the activities of daily living described in
 paragraph (1), or
 `(B) to remain in the community without causing harm to self or others
 because of inappropriate behavioral patterns.'.
 (c) RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FINANCING OF BENEFITS- Not later than March 1,
 1993, the Administrator of the Health Care Financing Administration shall
 submit to Congress recommendations on methods for financing the provision
 of long-term care services under section 1821 of the Social Security Act
 (as added by subsection (b)), including recommendations with respect to
 premiums, deductibles, and coinsurance that will be determined on a sliding
 scale on the basis of an individual's ability to pay.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall take effect
 on the date of the enactment of this Act, but no payments shall be made
 under title XVIII of the Social Security Act for services described in
 section 1821 of such title before January 1, 1992.
SEC. 3. MEDICARE COVERAGE OF IN-HOME CARE FOR CERTAIN CHRONICALLY DEPENDENT
INDIVIDUALS.
 (a) COVERAGE- Section 1832(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395k(a))
 is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2)(A)--
 (A) by inserting `(i)' after `(A)', and
 (B) by inserting before the semicolon at the end the following: `, and
 (ii) in accordance with section 1861(ll), in-home care for a chronically
 dependent individual for up to 80 hours in any calendar year;'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new sentence:
`In the case of in-home care (described in paragraph (2)(A)(ii)) provided
to a chronically dependent individual on any day, such care provided for 3
hours or less on the day shall be counted (for purposes of the limitation
in such paragraph) as 3 hours of such care.'.
 (b) IN-HOME CARE FOR CHRONICALLY DEPENDENT INDIVIDUAL DEFINED- Section
 1861 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x), as amended by sections
 4156(a)(2) and 4163(a)(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990
 (hereafter referred to as `OBRA-1990'), is amended by inserting after the
 subsection (jj) inserted by section 4163(a)(2) of OBRA-1990 the following
 new subsection:
`In-Home Care; Chronically Dependent Individual
 `(ll)(1) The term `in-home care' means the following items and services
 furnished, under the supervision of a registered professional nurse,
 to a chronically dependent individual (as defined in paragraph (2)) by
 a home health agency or by others under arrangements with them made by
 such agency in a place of residence used as such individual's home (or
 in a skilled nursing facility, personal board home, or other location in
 accordance with standards developed by the Secretary):
 `(A) Services of a homemaker/home health aide (who has successfully
 completed a training program approved by the Secretary).
 `(B) Personal care services.
 `(C) Nursing care provided by a licensed professional nurse.
 `(2) The term `chronically dependent individual' means an individual who--
 `(A) is dependent on a daily basis on a primary caregiver who is living
 with the individual and is assisting the individual without monetary
 compensation in the performance of at least 2 of the activities of daily
 living (described in paragraph (3)), and
 `(B) without such assistance could not perform such activities of daily
 living.
 `(3) The `activities of daily living', referred to in paragraph (2),
 are as follows:
 `(i) Eating.
 `(ii) Bathing.
 `(iii) Dressing.
 `(iv) Toileting.
 `(v) Transferring in and out of a bed or in and out of a chair.'.
 (c) PAYMENT- Section 1833(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(a))
 is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2), by inserting `(A)(ii),' after `subparagraphs' the
 first place it appears;
 (2) in paragraph (3), by striking `(D)' and inserting `(A)(ii), (D),'; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
`Payment for in-home care for chronically dependent individuals shall be
paid on the basis of an hour of such care provided. In applying paragraph
(2) in the case of an organization receiving payment under clause (A)
of paragraph (1) or under a reasonable cost reimbursement contract under
section 1876 and providing coverage of in-home care, the Secretary shall
provide for an appropriate adjustment in the payment amounts otherwise made
to reflect the aggregate increase in payments that would otherwise be made
with respect to enrollees in the organization if payments were made other
than under such clause or such a contract if payments were to be made on an
individual-by-individual basis.'.
 (d) CERTIFICATION- Section 1835(a)(2) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395n(a)(2)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of subparagraph (E);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (F) and inserting
 `; and'; and
 (3) by inserting after subparagraph (F) the following new subparagraph:
 `(G) in the case of in-home care provided to a chronically dependent
 individual during a 12-month period, the individual was a chronically
 dependent individual during the 3-month period immediately preceding the
 beginning of the 12-month period.'.
 (e) STANDARDS FOR UTILIZATION-
 (1) Section 1862(a) (42 U.S.C. 1395y(a)), as amended by section 4163(d)(2)
 of OBRA-1990, is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by striking `and' at the end of subparagraph (E);
 (ii) by striking the semicolon at the end of subparagraph (F) and inserting
 `, and', and
 (iv) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 `(G) in the case of in-home care for chronically dependent individuals,
 which is not reasonable and necessary to assure the health and condition
 of the individual is maintained in the individual's noninstitutional
 residence;'; and
 (B) in paragraph (6), by inserting `and except, in the case of in-home care,
 as is otherwise permitted under paragraph (1)(G)' after `paragraph (1)(C)'.
 (2) The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall take appropriate
 efforts to assure the quality, and provide for appropriate utilization of,
 in-home care for chronically dependent individuals under the amendments
 made by this section.
 (f) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 items and services furnished on or after January 1, 1992.
SEC. 4. CREDIT FOR TAXPAYERS WITH QUALIFIED ELDERLY DEPENDENTS IN THEIR
HOUSEHOLDS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits)
 is amended by inserting after section 23 the following new section:
`SEC. 24. CREDIT FOR TAXPAYERS WITH QUALIFIED ELDERLY DEPENDENTS IN THEIR
HOUSEHOLDS.
 `(a) ALLOWANCE OF CREDIT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In the case of an individual who maintains a household
 which includes as a member one or more qualified elderly dependents, there
 shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for
 the taxable year an amount for each such dependent equal to $1,000 for
 each such dependent.
 `(b) HIGHER CREDIT FOR SEVERELY IMPAIRED- In the case of any qualified
 elderly dependent who is severely impaired, subsection (a) shall be applied
 by substituting `$5,000' for `$1,000'.
 `(c) REDUCTION IN CREDIT FOR MONTHS OUTSIDE OF HOUSEHOLD- The amount of
 the credit allowed under this section shall be ratably reduced to take
 into account any months during the taxable year in which the qualified
 elderly dependent was not a member of the taxpayer's household.
 `(d) PHASEOUT OF CREDIT BASED ON ADJUSTED GROSS INCOME- If the adjusted
 gross income of the taxpayer for the taxable year exceeds $150,000, the
 $1,000 and $5,000 amounts in subsections (a) and (b) shall each be reduced
 (but not below zero) by the amount which bears the same ratio to such
 dollar amount as such excess bears to $50,000. Any reduction determined
 under this subsection which is not a multiple of $10 shall be rounded to
 the next lowest multiple of $10.
 `(e) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) QUALIFIED ELDERLY DEPENDENT- The term `qualified elderly dependent'
 means any individual (not including the taxpayer but including the taxpayer's
 spouse) if--
 `(A) a deduction is allowed under section 151 to the taxpayer with respect
 to such such individual;
 `(B) such individual has attained age 65 before the close of the taxable
 year;
 `(C) at the close of the taxable year, such individual has an impairment
 which--
 `(i) renders such individual unable to perform (without substantial
 assistance from another individual) because of physical or cognitive
 impairment at least 1 activity of daily living or 1 of the instrumental
 activities of daily living, and
 `(ii) has lasted or is expected to last 6 months or longer; and
 `(D) such individual has as his principal place of abode for more than
 half of the taxable year the home of the taxpayer.
 `(2) SEVERE IMPAIRMENT- An individual is severely impaired if the
 individual--
 `(A) is unable to perform (without substantial assistance from another
 individual) because of physical or cognitive impairment at least 3 of
 the following activities of daily living: bathing, dressing, toileting,
 transferring, and eating; or
 `(B) has a similar level of disability due to cognitive impairment that
 requires substantial direction, instruction, or supervision of another
 individual in order--
 `(i) to perform 3 or more of the activities of daily living described in
 paragraph (1), or
 `(ii) to remain in the community without causing harm to self or others
 because of inappropriate behavioral patterns.
 `(f) MAINTAINING A HOUSEHOLD- For purposes of this section, an individual
 shall be treated as maintaining a household for any period if over half
 the cost of maintaining the household for such period is furnished by
 such individual (or, if such individual is married during such period,
 by such individual and his spouse).
 `(g) REGULATIONS- The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may
 be necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.'
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of
 subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the
 item relating to section 23 the following new item:
`Sec. 24. Credit for taxpayers with qualified elderly dependents in their
households.'
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 5. AMENDMENTS TO TITLE III OF THE OLDER AMERICANS ACT OF 1965.
 (a) SLIDING FEE SCALE-
 (1) DEFINITIONS- Section 302 of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42
 U.S.C. 3022) is amended--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (14) through (21) as paragraphs (12)
 through (19), respectively, and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 `(20) The term `sliding fee scale' means a system of cost sharing by
 recipients of services provided under this title, that--
 `(A) is based on the resources (including income) of such recipients; and
 `(B) exempts individuals with greatest economic need from any requirement
 that part of the cost of such services be paid by recipients.'.
 (2) AREA PLAN- Section 306(a) of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42
 U.S.C. 3026(a)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (5)(A)(ii)
 (i) in subclause (I) by striking `and' at the end, and
 (ii) by inserting after subclause (II) the following:
 `(III) provide such services in accordance with the sliding fee scale
 established under section 307(a)(32) by the State agency and account for,
 and remit promptly to the area agency, fees such provider collects as
 required by such scale; and',
 (B) by redesignating paragraphs (7) through (10) as paragraphs (8) through
 (11), respectively, and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (6) the following:
 `(7) the area agency on aging will--
 `(A) account for all fees received for services provided under the sliding
 fee scale;
 `(B) promptly remit to the State agency 50 percent of such fees; and
 `(C) expend 50 percent of such fees to provide supportive services under
 this title;'.
 (3) STATE PLAN- Section 307(a) of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42
 U.S.C. 3027(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(32) The plan shall provide that the State agency shall--
 `(A) establish, in accordance with rules the Commissioner shall issue,
 a sliding fee scale applicable to services provided under this title; and
 `(B) shall account for, and expend to provide services under this title,
 fees received under section 306(a)(7)(B) from area agencies on aging.'.
 (b) INCREASED FUNDING- Section 303 of the Older Americans Act of 1965
 (42 U.S.C. 3023(a)) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by striking `1990, and' and inserting `1990,', and
 (ii) by inserting `and such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 1992,
 1993, 1994, and 1995' after `1991,',
 (B) in paragraph (2) by striking `and 1991' and inserting `1991, 1992,
 1993, 1994, and 1995', and
 (C) in paragraph (3) by striking `year 1991' and inserting `years 1991,
 1992, 1993, 1994, and 1995',
 (2) in subsection (b)(2)--
 (A) by striking `1990, and' and inserting `1990,', and
 (B) by inserting `and such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 1992,
 1993, 1994, and 1995' after `1991,',
 (3) in subsection (d)--
 (A) by striking `1990, and' and inserting `1990,', and
 (B) by inserting `and such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 1992,
 1993, 1994, and 1995' after `1991,',
 (4) in subsection (e) by striking `and 1991' and inserting `, 1991, 1992,
 1993, 1994, and 1995',
 (5) in subsection (f) by striking `and 1991' and inserting `, 1991, 1992,
 1993, 1994, and 1995', and
 (6) in subsection (g) by striking `and 1991,' and inserting `, 1991, 1992,
 1993, 1994, and 1995'.
 (c) TRAINING- Section 306(a) of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42
 U.S.C. 3026(a)), as amended by subsection (a), is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (8) through (11) as paragraphs (9) through
 (12), respectively, and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (7) the following:
 `(8) the area agency on aging, and each provider with which such agency has
 a contract to provide a service under this title, will provide (directly
 or through an arrangement with the ACTION Agency or with a community
 organization approved by the State agency) to each individual under its
 direction who provides such service directly to an older individual--
 `(A) not less than 40 hours of pre-service training that provides
 information--
 `(i) about policies and procedures applicable to providing such service;
 `(ii) to develop skills needed to provide personalized assistance and
 companionship to older individuals;
 `(iii) and advice about assisting older individuals to meet their personal
 needs, including emotional needs;
 `(iv) and advice about responding to physical health needs of older
 individuals, including the need to maintain general physical fitness;
 `(v) about how to monitor the health of older individuals and report their
 health problems to appropriate public agencies; and
 `(vi) about how to strengthen the ties between older individuals and their
 families; and
 `(B) not less that 4 hours of inservice training per month that provides
 advanced instruction from professionals regarding how to deal with behavioral
 problems such individual encounters when providing services to particular
 older individuals.'.
 (d) LIMITATION OF SOLICITATION OF VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS- Section 305 of
 the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 U.S.C. 3025) is amended by adding at
 the end the following:
 `(e) Except as provided in section 307(a)(13)(C), a contribution for a
 service provided under this title to an individual with greatest economic
 need may not be solicited by a State, a State agency, an area agency
 on aging, or a recipient of a grant or contract under this title. This
 subsection shall not be construed to prevent such individual from making
 an unsolicited, voluntary contribution for such service.'.
SEC. 6. INCREASED FUNDING FOR THE SENIOR COMPANION PROGRAM.
 Section 502(c) of the Domestic Volunteer Service Act of 1973 (42
 U.S.C. 5081(c)) is amended by striking `1991' and all that follows through
 `1993,', and inserting `1991, and such sums as may be necessary for fiscal
 years 1992 and 1993'.