[Congressional Bills 110th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]
[S. 3139 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

110th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 S. 3139

 To provide for greater accountability and transparency in the Federal 
 contracting process, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 June 16, 2008

 Mrs. Clinton introduced the following bill; which was read twice and 
referred to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To provide for greater accountability and transparency in the Federal 
 contracting process, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Oversight of the 
Performance and Effectiveness of National Contracting Act of 2008''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Definitions.
 TITLE I--ACCOUNTABILITY FOR CONTRACTORS

Sec. 101. Governmental policy.
Sec. 102. Prohibition on awarding of Government contracts or grants to 
 companies purposefully organized in an 
 offshore secrecy jurisdiction to avoid 
 Federal tax obligations.
Sec. 103. Prohibition on contracting with companies without financial 
 report certifications.
Sec. 104. Requirement for Federal contractors to possess satisfactory 
 record of integrity and business ethics.
Sec. 105. Preventing conflicts of interest of contractor personnel.
Sec. 106. Award fees.
 TITLE II--COMPETITION AND TRANSPARENCY

Sec. 201. Database for contracting officers.
Sec. 202. Enhancement of contracting information disclosed on 
 USASpending.gov.
 TITLE III--BUILDING A BETTER FEDERAL GOVERNMENT WORKFORCE

Sec. 301. Contractors and inherently governmental functions.
 TITLE IV--DISCLOSURE EXCEPTIONS

Sec. 401. Exceptions to disclosure requirements.

SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act:
 (1) Executive agency.--The term ``executive agency'' has 
 the meaning given the term in section 4 of the Office of 
 Federal Procurement Policy (41 U.S.C. 403).
 (2) Functions closely associated with governmental 
 functions.--The term ``functions closely associated with a 
 governmental functions'' means functions described in section 
 7.503(d) of the Federal Acquisition Regulation.
 (3) Inherently governmental functions.--The term 
 ``inherently governmental functions'' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 2.101 of the Federal Acquisition Regulation.

 TITLE I--ACCOUNTABILITY FOR CONTRACTORS

SEC. 101. GOVERNMENTAL POLICY.

 It is the policy of the United States Government that no Government 
contracts or grants should be awarded to companies purposefully 
organized in an offshore secrecy jurisdiction to avoid Federal tax 
obligations.

SEC. 102. PROHIBITION ON AWARDING OF GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS OR GRANTS TO 
 COMPANIES PURPOSEFULLY ORGANIZED IN AN OFFSHORE SECRECY 
 JURISDICTION TO AVOID FEDERAL TAX OBLIGATIONS.

 (a) In General.--The head of any Executive agency that issues an 
invitation for bids or a request for proposals for a contract or offers 
a grant may not award such contract or grant to any person which is an 
offshore secrecy jurisdiction company.
 (b) Regulations and Guidance.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 210 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this section (including a period of not more 
 than 30 days for comment), the Director of the Office of 
 Management and Budget and the Secretary shall adopt and revise 
 such regulations or guidance as necessary to incorporate the 
 requirements of this section, including procedures under 
 which--
 (A) the Commissioner of Internal Revenue shall 
 notify the head of each Executive agency of any 
 determination that a person is an offshore secrecy 
 jurisdiction company; and
 (B) any person that is no longer determined by the 
 Commissioner of Internal Revenue to be an offshore 
 secrecy jurisdiction company can petition for 
 reinstatement as a person eligible for the awarding of 
 any such contract or grant.
 (2) Determination of offshore secrecy jurisdiction 
 company.--As part of the regulations or guidance under 
 paragraph (1), the Secretary shall provide guidelines for the 
 determination by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue on 
 whether a person is purposefully organized in an offshore 
 secrecy jurisdiction to avoid Federal tax obligations. Such 
 guidelines shall provide that as part of such determination, 
 the Commissioner of Internal Revenue shall review--
 (A) whether such organization changes in a 
 meaningful way (apart from Federal tax effects) the 
 persons's economic position;
 (B) whether such person has a substantial nontax 
 purpose for organizing in an offshore secrecy 
 jurisdiction and whether the organization is a 
 reasonable means of accomplishing such purpose;
 (C) whether the present value of the reasonably 
 expected pre-tax profit attributable to the person's 
 organization in an offshore secrecy jurisdiction is 
 substantial in relation to the present value of the 
 expected net tax benefits of such organization; and
 (D) whether the reasonably expected pre-tax profit 
 attributable to the person's organization in an 
 offshore secrecy jurisdiction exceeds a risk-free rate 
 of return.
 In applying subparagraph (B), a purpose of achieving a 
 financial accounting benefit shall not be taken into account in 
 determining whether an organization has a substantial nontax 
 purpose if the origin of such financial accounting benefit is a 
 reduction of Federal income tax.
 (c) Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section:
 (1) Contract.--The term ``contract'' means a binding 
 agreement entered into by an Executive agency for the purpose 
 of obtaining property or services, but does not include--
 (A) a contract designated by the head of the agency 
 as assisting the agency in the performance of disaster 
 relief authorities; or
 (B) a contract designated by the head of the agency 
 as necessary to the national security of the United 
 States.
 (2) Executive agency.--The term ``executive agency'' has 
 the meaning given such term in section 4 of the Office of 
 Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 U.S.C. 403).
 (3) Offshore secrecy jurisdiction company.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``offshore secrecy 
 jurisdiction company'' means any person which the 
 Commissioner of Internal Revenue determines that for 
 the purpose of avoiding Federal tax obligations--
 (i) is organized in an offshore secrecy 
 jurisdiction; or
 (ii) is a member of a domestically 
 controlled group of entities any member of 
 which is organized in an offshore secrecy 
 jurisdiction.
 (B) Offshore secrecy jurisdiction.--
 (i) In general.--The term ``offshore 
 secrecy jurisdiction'' means any foreign 
 jurisdiction which is listed by the Secretary 
 as an offshore secrecy jurisdiction for 
 purposes of this title.
 (ii) Determination of jurisdictions on 
 list.--A jurisdiction shall be listed under 
 clause (i) if the Secretary determines that 
 such jurisdiction has corporate, business, 
 bank, or tax secrecy rules and practices which, 
 in the judgment of the Secretary, unreasonably 
 restrict the ability of the United States to 
 obtain information relevant to the enforcement 
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, unless 
 the Secretary also determines that such country 
 has effective information exchange practices.
 (iii) Secrecy or confidentiality rules and 
 practices.--For purposes of clause (ii), 
 corporate, business, bank, or tax secrecy or 
 confidentiality rules and practices include 
 both formal laws and regulations and informal 
 government or business practices having the 
 effect of inhibiting access of law enforcement 
 and tax administration authorities to 
 beneficial ownership and other financial 
 information.
 (iv) Ineffective information exchange 
 practices.--For purposes of clause (ii), a 
 jurisdiction shall be deemed to have 
 ineffective information exchange practices 
 unless the Secretary determines, on an annual 
 basis, that--
 (I) such jurisdiction has in effect 
 a treaty or other information exchange 
 agreement with the United States that 
 provides for the prompt, obligatory, 
 and automatic exchange of such 
 information as is forseeably relevant 
 for carrying out the provisions of the 
 treaty or agreement or the 
 administration or enforcement of such 
 Code,
 (II) during the 12-month period 
 preceding the annual determination, the 
 exchange of information between the 
 United States and such jurisdiction was 
 in practice adequate to prevent evasion 
 or avoidance of United States income 
 tax by United States persons and to 
 enable the United States effectively to 
 enforce such Code, and
 (III) during the 12-month period 
 preceding the annual determination, 
 such jurisdiction was not identified by 
 an intergovernmental group or 
 organization of which the United States 
 is a member as uncooperative with 
 international tax enforcement or 
 information exchange and the United 
 States concurs in such identification.
 (v) Initial list of offshore secrecy 
 jurisdictions.--For purposes of this 
 subparagraph, each of the following foreign 
 jurisdictions, which have been previously and 
 publicly identified by the Internal Revenue 
 Service as secrecy jurisdictions in Federal 
 court proceedings, shall be deemed listed by 
 the Secretary as an offshore secrecy 
 jurisdiction unless delisted by the Secretary 
 under clause (vi)(II):
 (I) Anguilla.
 (II) Antigua and Barbuda.
 (III) Aruba.
 (IV) Bahamas.
 (V) Barbados.
 (VI) Belize.
 (VII) Bermuda.
 (VIII) British Virgin Islands.
 (IX) Cayman Islands.
 (X) Cook Islands.
 (XI) Costa Rica.
 (XII) Cyprus.
 (XIII) Dominica.
 (XIV) Gibraltar.
 (XV) Grenada.
 (XVI) Guernsey/Sark/Alderney.
 (XVII) Hong Kong.
 (XVIII) Isle of Man.
 (XIX) Jersey.
 (XX) Latvia.
 (XXI) Liechtenstein.
 (XXII) Luxembourg.
 (XXIII) Malta.
 (XXIV) Nauru.
 (XXV) Netherlands Antilles.
 (XXVI) Panama.
 (XXVII) Samoa.
 (XXVIII) St. Kitts and Nevis.
 (XXIX) St. Lucia.
 (XXX) St. Vincent and the 
 Grenadines.
 (XXXI) Singapore.
 (XXXII) Switzerland.
 (XXXIII) Turks and Caicos.
 (XXXIV) Vanuatu.
 (vi) Modifications to list.--The 
 Secretary--
 (I) shall add to the list under 
 clause (i) jurisdictions which meet the 
 requirements of clause (ii), and
 (II) may remove from such list only 
 those jurisdictions which meet none of 
 the requirements of clause (ii).
 (C) Domestically controlled group of entities.--For 
 purposes of this subsection--
 (i) In general.--The term ``domestically 
 controlled group of entities'' means a 
 controlled group of entities the common parent 
 of which is a domestic corporation.
 (ii) Controlled group of entities.--The 
 term ``controlled group of entities'' means a 
 controlled group of corporations as defined in 
 section 1563(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code 
 of 1986, except that--
 (I) ``more than 50 percent'' shall 
 be substituted for ``at least 80 
 percent'' each place it appears 
 therein, and
 (II) the determination shall be 
 made without regard to subsections 
 (a)(4) and (b)(2) of section 1563 of 
 such Code.
 A partnership or any other entity (other than a 
 corporation) shall be treated as a member of a 
 controlled group of entities if such entity is 
 controlled (within the meaning of section 
 954(d)(3) of such Code) by members of such 
 group (including any entity treated as a member 
 of such group by reason of this sentence).
 (4) Person.--The term ``person'' means--
 (A) a corporation; or
 (B) a partnership or any other entity (other than a 
 corporation).
 (5) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of the Treasury or the Secretary's delegate.
 (d) Report.--The Secretary shall make an annual report to Congress 
and the Office of Management and Budget beginning 1 year after the 
effective date of this section regarding efforts to make determinations 
regarding persons purposefully organized in an offshore secrecy 
jurisdiction to avoid Federal tax obligations.
 (e) Effective Date.--This section shall apply to contracts and 
grants awarded after the date which is 210 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act.

SEC. 103. PROHIBITION ON CONTRACTING WITH COMPANIES WITHOUT FINANCIAL 
 REPORT CERTIFICATIONS.

 (a) Prohibition on Contracting With Companies That Fail To Certify 
Financial Reports.--Except as provided under subsection (c), the head 
of an executive agency may not enter into or approve any contract or 
approve any subcontract under a contract with any company filing 
periodic reports under section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities 
Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78m, 78o(d)) that has failed to make 
the certification required under section 302(a) of the Sarbanes-Oxley 
Act of 2002 (15 U.S.C. 7241(a)) for the most recent periodic report 
due.
 (b) Period of Prohibition.--A prohibition under subsection (a) 
shall remain in effect with respect to a company for the one-year 
period beginning on the date that the periodic report for which the 
certification was not made was due.
 (c) Waiver.--
 (1) In general.--The head of an executive agency may waive 
 the prohibition under subsection (a) with respect to a contract 
 if such agency head determines that--
 (A) the waiver is in the national security interest 
 of the United States; or
 (B) the failure of the company to make the 
 certification required under section 302(a) of the 
 Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (15 U.S.C. 7241(a)) was a 
 minor or technical infraction.
 (2) Justifications.--
 (A) National security waiver.--The head of an 
 executive agency granting a waiver under paragraph 
 (1)(A) shall submit a justification for the waiver to 
 the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and 
 the chairs and ranking members of the appropriate 
 oversight committees of Congress.
 (B) Waiver for minor or technical infraction.--The 
 head of an executive agency granting a waiver under 
 paragraph (1)(B) shall, in coordination with the 
 company for which the waiver is granted--
 (i) submit a justification for the waiver 
 to the Director of the Office of Management and 
 Budget and the chairs and ranking members of 
 the appropriate oversight committees of 
 Congress; and
 (ii) post the justification on the 
 searchable website required under the Federal 
 Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 
 2006 (Public Law 109-282; 31 U.S.C. 6101 note).
 (d) List of Companies Failing To Certify.--The Securities and 
Exchange Commission shall make publicly available on the searchable 
website required under the Federal Funding Accountability and 
Transparency Act of 2006 (Public Law 109-282; 31 U.S.C. 6101 note) a 
list of the companies that failed to make the certification required 
under section 302(a) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (15 U.S.C. 
7241(a)) for the most recent periodic report due. The list shall be 
updated on a quarterly basis.
 (e) Applicability.--This section applies to contracts and 
subcontracts entered into after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 104. REQUIREMENT FOR FEDERAL CONTRACTORS TO POSSESS SATISFACTORY 
 RECORD OF INTEGRITY AND BUSINESS ETHICS.

 (a) Defense Contractors.--
 (1) In general.--Chapter 137 of title 10, United States 
 Code, is amended by inserting after section 2305a the following 
 new section:
``Sec. 2305b. Satisfactory record of integrity and business ethics
 ``(a) In General.--No prospective contractor may be awarded a 
contract with an agency under this title unless the contracting officer 
for the contract determines that such prospective contractor has a 
satisfactory record of integrity and business ethics, including 
satisfactory compliance with the law (including tax, labor and 
employment, environmental, antitrust, and consumer protection laws).
 ``(b) Information To Be Considered.--In making a determination as 
to whether a prospective contractor has a satisfactory record of 
integrity and business ethics, a contracting officer--
 ``(1) shall consider all relevant credible information, but 
 shall give the greatest weight to violations of law that have 
 been adjudicated within the last 5 years preceding the offer;
 ``(2) shall give consideration to any administrative 
 agreements entered into with the prospective contractor if the 
 prospective contractor has taken corrective action after 
 disclosing a violation of law, and may consider such a 
 contractor to be a responsible contractor if the contractor has 
 corrected the conditions that led to the misconduct;
 ``(3) shall consider failure to comply with the terms of an 
 administrative agreement as evidence of a lack of integrity and 
 business ethics under this section;
 ``(4) shall consider in descending order of importance--
 ``(A) convictions of and civil judgments rendered 
 against the prospective contractor for--
 ``(i) commission of fraud or a criminal 
 offense in connection with obtaining, 
 attempting to obtain, or performing a public 
 Federal, State, or local contract or 
 subcontract;
 ``(ii) violation of Federal or State 
 antitrust law relating to the submission of 
 offers; or
 ``(iii) commission of embezzlement, theft, 
 forgery, bribery, falsification, or destruction 
 of records, making false statement, tax 
 evasion, or receiving stolen property; and
 ``(B) relative to tax, labor, employment, 
 environmental, antitrust, or consumer protection laws--
 ``(i) Federal or State felony convictions;
 ``(ii) adverse Federal court judgments in 
 civil cases brought by the United States;
 ``(iii) adverse decisions by a Federal 
 administrative law judge, board, or commission 
 indicating violations of law;
 ``(iv) Federal or State felony indictments; 
 and
 ``(v) any other civil judgment rendered 
 against the prospective contractor; and
 ``(5) may consider other relevant information, such as 
 civil or administrative complaints or similar actions filed by 
 or on behalf of a Federal agency, board, or commission, if such 
 action reflects an adjudicated determination by the agency.
 ``(c) Repeated Violations of Law.--A single violation of law 
normally should not give rise to a determination that the prospective 
contractor has an unsatisfactory record of integrity and business 
ethics, but evidence of repeated, pervasive, or significant violations 
of the law may indicate an unsatisfactory record of integrity and 
business ethics.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the 
 beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the 
 item relating to section 2305a the following new item:

``2305b. Contractor requirement for satisfactory record of integrity 
 and business ethics.''.
 (b) Civilian Contractors.--Title III of the Federal Property and 
Administrative Services Act of 1949 (41 U.S.C. 251 et seq.) is amended 
by inserting after section 303L the following new section:

``SEC. 303M. SATISFACTORY RECORD OF INTEGRITY AND BUSINESS ETHICS.

 ``(a) In General.--No prospective contractor may be awarded a 
contract with an executive agency under this title unless the 
contracting officer for the contract determines that such prospective 
contractor has a satisfactory record of integrity and business ethics, 
including satisfactory compliance with the law (including tax, labor 
and employment, environmental, antitrust, and consumer protection 
laws).
 ``(b) Information To Be Considered.--In making a determination as 
to whether a prospective contractor has a satisfactory record of 
integrity and business ethics, a contracting officer--
 ``(1) shall consider all relevant credible information, but 
 shall give the greatest weight to violations of law that have 
 been adjudicated within the last 5 years preceding the offer;
 ``(2) shall give consideration to any administrative 
 agreements entered into with the prospective contractor if the 
 prospective contractor has taken corrective action after 
 disclosing a violation of law, and may consider such a 
 contractor to be a responsible contractor if the contractor has 
 corrected the conditions that led to the misconduct;
 ``(3) shall consider failure to comply with the terms of an 
 administrative agreement as evidence of a lack of integrity and 
 business ethics under this section;
 ``(4) shall consider in descending order of importance--
 ``(A) convictions of and civil judgments rendered 
 against the prospective contractor for--
 ``(i) commission of fraud or a criminal 
 offense in connection with obtaining, 
 attempting to obtain, or performing a public 
 Federal, State, or local contract or 
 subcontract;
 ``(ii) violation of Federal or State 
 antitrust law relating to the submission of 
 offers; or
 ``(iii) commission of embezzlement, theft, 
 forgery, bribery, falsification, or destruction 
 of records, making false statement, tax 
 evasion, or receiving stolen property; and
 ``(B) relative to tax, labor, employment, 
 environmental, antitrust, or consumer protection laws--
 ``(i) Federal or State felony convictions;
 ``(ii) adverse Federal court judgments in 
 civil cases brought by the United States;
 ``(iii) adverse decisions by a Federal 
 administrative law judge, board, or commission 
 indicating violations of law; and
 ``(iv) Federal or State felony indictments; 
 and
 ``(5) may consider other relevant information, such as 
 civil or administrative complaints or similar actions filed by 
 or on behalf of an executive agency, board, or commission, if 
 such action reflects an adjudicated determination by the 
 agency.
 ``(c) Repeated Violations of Law.--A single violation of law 
normally should not give rise to a determination that the prospective 
contractor has an unsatisfactory record of integrity and business 
ethics, but evidence of repeated, pervasive, or significant violations 
of the law may indicate an unsatisfactory record of integrity and 
business ethics.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply with respect to contracts for which solicitations are issued 
after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 105. PREVENTING CONFLICTS OF INTEREST OF CONTRACTOR PERSONNEL.

 (a) In General.--The head of an executive agency may not enter into 
a covered contract unless the contract includes a conflicts of interest 
clause as described in subsection (b).
 (b) Conflict of Interest Clause.--The conflict of interest clause 
required under subsection (a) shall include the following:
 (1) A requirement that no employee of the contractor may 
 perform a covered function relating to a program, company, 
 contract, or other matter in which the employee (or a member of 
 the employee's immediate family) has a financial interest 
 without the express written approval of the contracting 
 officer.
 (2) A requirement that the contractor shall obtain, review, 
 update, and maintain as part of its personnel records a 
 financial disclosure statement from each employee assigned to 
 perform a covered function under the contract sufficient to 
 enable the contractor to verify compliance of such employee 
 with the requirements under paragraph (1).
 (3) A prohibition against employees of the contractor 
 responsible for performing a covered function under the 
 contract relating to a program, company, contract, or other 
 matter from accepting a gift from the company or from an 
 individual or entity that has a financial interest in the 
 program, company, contract, or other matter.
 (4) A prohibition against contractor personnel who have 
 access to non-public government information obtained while 
 performing work on the contract from using such information for 
 personal gain.
 (5) A requirement that the contractor take appropriate 
 disciplinary action in the case of employees who fail to comply 
 with requirements and prohibitions described in this 
 subsection.
 (6) A requirement for the contractor to promptly report any 
 failure to comply with such requirements and prohibitions to 
 the contracting officer.
 (7) Penalties for failures to comply with the requirements 
 and prohibitions described in paragraphs (1) through (6).
 (8) A requirement that the contractor report any failure to 
 comply with the requirements and prohibitions described in 
 paragraphs (1) through (6) to the applicable contracting 
 officer of the executive agency or representative of such 
 officer as soon as such failure is identified.
 (9) Such additional safeguards, definitions, and exceptions 
 as may be necessary to safeguard the public interest.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered contract'' means a contract (or task 
 or delivery order) in excess of $500,000 for the performance of 
 functions closely associated with governmental functions.
 (2) The term ``covered function'' means an inherently 
 governmental function or a function described in section 
 7.503(d) of the Federal Acquisition Regulation.
 (d) Effective Date; Applicability.--This section shall take effect 
on the date that is 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act 
and shall apply to--
 (1) contracts entered into on or after such effective date; 
 and
 (2) task or delivery orders awarded on or after such 
 effective date, regardless of whether the contracts pursuant to 
 which such task or delivery orders are awarded were entered 
 into before, on, or after such effective date.

SEC. 106. AWARD FEES.

 (a) Linkage of Award Fees to Successful Acquisition Outcomes.--
Every contract entered into by an executive agency that provides for 
award fees shall link such fees to successful acquisition outcomes 
(which outcomes shall be specified in terms of cost, schedule, and 
performance).
 (b) Prohibition on Award of Unwarranted Award Fees.--The head of an 
executive agency may not--
 (1) award a bonus or other incentive payment to a 
 contractor for work the contractor did not perform or with 
 respect to which the contractor received a poor performance 
 rating; or
 (2) provide to a contractor award fees unless the 
 contractor, to the extent reasonably within the control of the 
 contractor, achieved the successful acquisition outcome to 
 which such fees were linked under the contract.

 TITLE II--COMPETITION AND TRANSPARENCY

SEC. 201. DATABASE FOR CONTRACTING OFFICERS.

 (a) Database.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to the authority, direction, and 
 control of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, 
 the Administrator of General Services shall establish and 
 maintain a database of information regarding integrity and 
 performance of persons awarded Federal contracts and grants for 
 use by Federal officials having authority over contracts and 
 grants.
 (2) Persons covered.--The database shall cover any person 
 awarded a Federal contract or grant if any information 
 described in paragraph (3) exists with respect to such person.
 (3) Information included.--With respect to a person awarded 
 a Federal contract or grant, the database shall include 
 information (in the form of a brief description) for at least 
 the most recent 5-year period regarding--
 (A) all Federal contracts and grants awarded to the 
 person that were terminated in such period due to 
 default;
 (B) all Federal suspensions and debarments of the 
 person in that period;
 (C) all Federal administrative agreements entered 
 into by the person and the Federal Government in that 
 period to resolve a suspension or debarment proceeding 
 and, to the maximum extent practicable, agreements 
 involving a suspension or debarment proceeding entered 
 into by the person and a State government in that 
 period;
 (D) all final findings by a Federal official in 
 that period that the person has been determined not to 
 be a responsible source under either subparagraph (C) 
 or (D) of section 4(7) of the Office of Federal 
 Procurement Policy Act (41 U.S.C. 403(7));
 (E) evidence of repeated, pervasive, or significant 
 violations of the law that may indicate an 
 unsatisfactory record of integrity and business ethics;
 (F) all convictions of, or civil judgments rendered 
 against, the prospective contractor for--
 (i) commission of fraud or a criminal 
 offense in connection with obtaining, 
 attempting to obtain, or performing a public 
 Federal, State, or local government contract or 
 subcontract;
 (ii) violation of Federal or State 
 antitrust law relating to the submission of 
 offers; and
 (iii) commission of embezzlement, theft, 
 forgery, bribery, falsification, or obstruction 
 of records, making a false statement, tax 
 evasion, or receiving stolen property;
 (G) relative to tax, labor, employment, 
 environmental, antitrust, or consumer protection laws--
 (i) all Federal or State felony 
 convictions;
 (ii) all adverse Federal court judgments in 
 civil cases brought by the United States;
 (iii) all adverse decisions by a Federal 
 administrative law judge, board, or commission 
 indicating violations of law;
 (iv) all Federal or State felony 
 indictments; and
 (v) any other civil judgment rendered 
 against the prospective contractor;
 (H) all administrative agreements or compliance 
 agreements entered into between an executive agency and 
 the contractor;
 (I) all civil or administrative complains or 
 similar actions filed by or on behalf of a Federal 
 agency, board, or commission; and
 (J) other information, such as civil or 
 administrative complaints or similar actions filed by 
 or on behalf of a Federal agency, board, or commission, 
 determined by the Director of the Office of Management 
 and Budget to be relevant.
 (4) Requirements relating to information in database.--
 (A) Direct input and update.--The Administrator of 
 General Services shall design and maintain the database 
 in a manner that allows the appropriate officials of 
 each Federal agency to directly input and update in the 
 database information relating to actions it has taken 
 with regard to contractors or grant recipients.
 (B) Timeliness and accuracy.--The Administrator 
 shall develop policies to require--
 (i) the timely and accurate input of 
 information into the database;
 (ii) notification of any covered person 
 when information relevant to the person is 
 entered into the database; and
 (iii) an opportunity for any covered person 
 to append comments to information about such 
 person in the database.
 (5) Availability.--
 (A) Availability to all executive agencies and 
 congress.--The Administrator shall make the database 
 available to all executive agencies and Congress.
 (B) Limitation.--This subsection does not require 
 the public availability of information that is exempt 
 from public disclosure under section 552(b) of title 5, 
 United States Code.
 (b) Review of Database.--
 (1) Requirement to review database.--Prior to the award of 
 a contract or grant, an official responsible for awarding a 
 contract or grant shall review the database established under 
 subsection (a).
 (2) Requirement to document present responsibility.--In the 
 case of a prospective awardee of a contract or grant against 
 which a judgment or conviction has been rendered more than once 
 within any 3-year period for the same or similar offences, if 
 each judgment or conviction is a cause for debarment, the 
 official responsible for awarding the contract or grant shall 
 document why the prospective awardee is considered presently 
 responsible.
 (c) Disclosure in Applications.--
 (1) Requirement.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Federal Acquisition Regulation 
 shall be amended to require that in applying for any Federal 
 grant or submitting a proposal or bid for any Federal contract 
 a person shall disclose in writing information described in 
 subsection (a)(3).
 (2) Covered contracts and grants.--This subsection shall 
 apply only to contracts and grants in an amount greater than 
 the simplified acquisition threshold, as defined in section 
 4(11) of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 
 U.S.C. 401(11)).
 (d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to the Administrator of General Services such funds as may 
be necessary to establish the database described in subsection (a).
 (e) Report to Congress.--
 (1) Report required.--Not later than 180 days after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator of General 
 Services shall submit to Congress a report.
 (2) Contents of report.--The report shall contain the 
 following:
 (A) A list of all databases that include 
 information about Federal contracting and Federal 
 grants.
 (B) Recommendations for further legislation or 
 administrative action that the Administrator considers 
 appropriate to create a centralized, comprehensive 
 Federal contracting and Federal grant database.

SEC. 202. ENHANCEMENT OF CONTRACTING INFORMATION DISCLOSED ON 
 USASPENDING.GOV.

 The Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall maintain 
on the searchable website required under the Federal Funding 
Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006 (Public Law 109-282; 31 
U.S.C. 6101 note) the following information:
 (1) A detailed description of the type and purpose of work 
 to be performed under each contract included on the website, 
 unless the inclusion of such information is determined by the 
 Director not to be in the interest of the United States in the 
 case of a contract awarded in connection with a national 
 emergency, a national security situation, or in the national 
 defense.
 (2) Sworn affidavits by procurement managers and political 
 appointees involved in the award of a contract stating that 
 they complied with contracting rules regarding full and open 
 competition, including the restrictions on disclosing and 
 obtaining contractor bid or proposal information or source 
 selection information under section 27 of the Office of Federal 
 Procurement Policy Act (41 U.S.C. 423), and addressing any 
 conflicts of interest.
 (3) Award fees awarded to contractors and justifications 
 for such award fees.
 (4) Contractors performing work under contracts that is 
 closely associated with inherently governmental functions (as 
 that term is described in section 7.503 of the Federal 
 Acquisition Regulation).
 (5) The identities of any senior personnel, officers, or 
 board members of, or senior lobbyists or consultants for, 
 contractors who serve in a capacity where they provide media 
 commentary on the performance of an executive agency.
 (6) The price range of bids that were competitive with the 
 winning bid for each contract included on the website, 
 including the lowest price, median price, and highest price.
 (7) The performance range of the top 100 Federal 
 contractors (according to value of contracts awarded per fiscal 
 year), including a listing of ratings for unsatisfactory 
 performance, performance meeting expectations, and performance 
 exceeding expectations.
 (8) For each contractor included on the website, a list of 
 executive agencies for which the contractor is currently 
 performing services under a contract.
 (9) Any administrative agreements or compliance agreements 
 entered into between an executive agency and a contractor with 
 respect to a contract included on the website.

 TITLE III--BUILDING A BETTER FEDERAL GOVERNMENT WORKFORCE

SEC. 301. CONTRACTORS AND INHERENTLY GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS.

 (a) Department of Defense.--
 (1) Report on performance by contractors of certain 
 functions.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Inspector General of the Department 
 of Defense shall submit to the Secretary of Defense and the 
 Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and the House of 
 Representatives a report listing functions of the Department 
 that are inherently governmental functions or are closely 
 associated with the performance of inherently governmental 
 functions and are performed by contractor personnel.
 (2) Staffing plan.--Not later than 120 days after the 
 submission of the report required under subsection (a), the 
 Secretary of Defense shall submit to the Committees on Armed 
 Services of the Senate and the House of Representatives a plan 
 for staffing with Department of Defense personnel the functions 
 identified in such report.
 (3) Incremental staffing requirements.--
 (A) One year after inspector general report.--Not 
 later than one year after the submission of the report 
 required under subsection (a), the Secretary of Defense 
 shall--
 (i) ensure that--
 (I) at least 50 percent of the 
 functions identified in the report as 
 inherently governmental functions are 
 staffed by Department of Defense 
 personnel;
 (II) at least 10 percent of the 
 functions identified in the report as 
 closely associated with the performance 
 of inherently governmental functions 
 are staffed by Department of Defense 
 personnel; and
 (III) the remainder of the 
 functions identified in the report as 
 inherently governmental functions or as 
 closely associated with the performance 
 of inherently governmental functions 
 are individually screened for potential 
 conflicts of interest involving 
 contractor personnel; and
 (ii) implement a contract oversight plan 
 within the Department of Defense to mitigate 
 the risk that functions identified as 
 inherently governmental functions or as closely 
 associated with the performance of inherently 
 governmental functions are performed by 
 contractor personnel, particularly personnel 
 who may experience conflicts of interest.
 (B) Two years after inspector general report.--Not 
 later than two years after the submission of the report 
 required under subsection (a), the Secretary of Defense 
 shall ensure that--
 (i) all functions identified in the report 
 as inherently governmental functions are 
 staffed by Department of Defense personnel;
 (ii) at least 30 percent of the functions 
 identified in the report as closely associated 
 with the performance of inherently governmental 
 functions are staffed by Department of Defense 
 personnel; and
 (iii) the remainder of the functions 
 identified in the report as inherently 
 governmental functions or as closely associated 
 with the performance of inherently governmental 
 functions are individually screened for 
 potential conflicts of interest involving 
 contractor personnel.
 (C) Three years after inspector general report.--
 Not later than three years after the submission of the 
 report required under subsection (a), the Secretary of 
 Defense shall ensure that at least 50 percent of the 
 functions identified in the report as closely 
 associated with the performance of inherently 
 governmental functions are staffed by Department of 
 Defense personnel.
 (b) Department of Homeland Security.--
 (1) Report on performance by contractors of certain 
 functions.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Inspector General of the Department 
 of Homeland Security shall submit to the Secretary of Homeland 
 Security and the Committee on Homeland Security and 
 Governmental Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on 
 Homeland Security of the House of Representatives a report 
 listing functions of the Department that are inherently 
 governmental functions or are closely associated with the 
 performance of inherently governmental functions and are 
 performed by contractor personnel.
 (2) Staffing plan.--Not later than 120 days after the 
 submission of the report required under subsection (a), the 
 Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit to the Committee on 
 Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate and 
 the Committee on Homeland Security of the House of 
 Representatives a plan for staffing with Department of Homeland 
 Security personnel the functions identified in such report.
 (3) Incremental staffing requirements.--
 (A) One year after inspector general report.--Not 
 later than one year after the submission of the report 
 required under subsection (a), the Secretary of 
 Homeland Security shall--
 (i) ensure that--
 (I) at least 50 percent of the 
 functions identified in the report as 
 inherently governmental functions are 
 staffed by Department of Homeland 
 Security personnel;
 (II) at least 10 percent of the 
 functions identified in the report as 
 closely associated with the performance 
 of inherently governmental functions 
 are staffed by Department of Homeland 
 Security personnel; and
 (III) the remainder of the 
 functions identified in the report as 
 inherently governmental functions or as 
 closely associated with the performance 
 of inherently governmental functions 
 are individually screened for potential 
 conflicts of interest involving 
 contractor personnel; and
 (ii) implement a contract oversight plan 
 within the Department of Homeland Security to 
 mitigate the risk that functions identified as 
 inherently governmental functions or as closely 
 associated with the performance of inherently 
 governmental functions are performed by 
 contractor personnel, particularly personnel 
 who may experience conflicts of interest.
 (B) Two years after inspector general report.--Not 
 later than two years after the submission of the report 
 required under subsection (a), the Secretary of 
 Homeland Security shall ensure that--
 (i) all functions identified in the report 
 as inherently governmental functions are 
 staffed by Department of Homeland Security 
 personnel;
 (ii) at least 30 percent of the functions 
 identified in the report as closely associated 
 with the performance of inherently governmental 
 functions are staffed by Department of Homeland 
 Security personnel; and
 (iii) the remainder of the functions 
 identified in the report as inherently 
 governmental functions or as closely associated 
 with the performance of inherently governmental 
 functions are individually screened for 
 potential conflicts of interest involving 
 contractor personnel.
 (C) Three years after inspector general report.--
 Not later than three years after the submission of the 
 report required under subsection (a), the Secretary of 
 Homeland Security shall ensure that at least 50 percent 
 of the functions identified in the report as closely 
 associated with the performance of inherently 
 governmental functions are staffed by Department of 
 Homeland Security personnel.

 TITLE IV--DISCLOSURE EXCEPTIONS

SEC. 401. EXCEPTIONS TO DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS.

 Nothing in this Act shall be construed to require the disclosure of 
the following information:
 (1) Information exempted from disclosure under the Federal 
 Acquisition Regulation, the Defense Federal Acquisition 
 Regulation Supplement, Subpart 206.3, and the Agency for 
 International Development Acquisition Regulations, Subpart 
 706.3.
 (2) Information exempted from disclosure pursuant to--
 (A) paragraphs (1) through (7) of section 2304(c) 
 of title 10, United States Code; or
 (B) paragraphs (1) through (7) of section 303(c) of 
 the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 
 1949 (41 U.S.C. 253(c)(1)-(7)).
 (3) Information exempt from disclosure in accordance with 
 contracting procedures designed to promote procurement 
 opportunities for minority and women small business owners.
 (4) Information exempt from disclosure in accordance with 
 the exercise of special emergency procurement authority 
 exercised under section 32A of the Office of Federal 
 Procurement Policy Act (41 U.S.C. 428a).
 (5) Proprietary information.
 <all>