HR 2417 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2417
To amend the Agricultural Act of 1949 to establish a two-tier program of milk
price support to operate during years in which the Secretary of Agriculture
estimates that purchases of milk and milk products by the Commodity Credit
Corporation will exceed 4,500,000,000 pounds.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
May 21, 1991
Mr. PETERSON of Minnesota introduced the following bill; which was referred
to the Committee on Agriculture
A BILL
To amend the Agricultural Act of 1949 to establish a two-tier program of milk
price support to operate during years in which the Secretary of Agriculture
estimates that purchases of milk and milk products by the Commodity Credit
Corporation will exceed 4,500,000,000 pounds.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Dairy Stabilization Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. TWO-TIER MILK PRICE SUPPORT PROGRAM.
 (a) PRICE SUPPORT RATE- Section 204(b) of the Agricultural Act of 1949
 (7 U.S.C. 1446e(b)) is amended by striking out `$10.10 per hundredweight'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `12.60 per hundredweight'.
 (b) TWO-TIER PROGRAM- The Agricultural Act of 1949 (7 U.S.C. 1441 et
 seq.) is amended by inserting after section 204 the following new section:
`SEC. 204A. TWO-TIER MILK PRICE SUPPORT PROGRAM.
 `(a) IMPLEMENTATION OF PROGRAM- Not later than November 1 of each year,
 the Secretary shall estimate the level of purchases of milk and products
 of milk by the Commodity Credit Corporation under section 204 (less sales
 under section 407 for unrestricted use) for the next year. If the estimated
 level of these purchases for a year will exceed 4,500,000,000 pounds (milk
 equivalent, total milk solids basis), the Secretary shall implement for
 that year the two-tier milk price support program required by this section.
 `(b) MILK MARKETING BASE-
 `(1) NOTIFICATION OF MILK PRODUCERS- Before January 1 of a year in which
 the two-tier milk price support program is to be in effect, the Secretary
 shall notify each milk producer in the United States of the milk marketing
 base of the producer for that year.
 `(2) DETERMINATION- The milk marketing base of a milk producer for a year
 is equal to the product of--
 `(A) the milk marketing history of the producer determined by the Secretary
 under subsection (c); and
 `(B) the national marketing factor for that year determined by the Secretary
 under subsection (d).
 `(c) DETERMINATION OF MILK MARKETING HISTORY-
 `(1) THREE-YEAR AVERAGE- The milk marketing history of a milk producer for
 a year shall be equal to the average annual quantity of milk marketed by
 the producer for commercial use during the five previous years in which
 the producer has marketed milk for commercial use, excluding--
 `(A) the year in which the largest quantity is marketed and the year in
 which the smallest quantity is marketed;
 `(B) any year in which the producer's dairy operations were conducted in
 a drought or disaster area declared by the President or the Secretary; and
 `(C) any year in which the producer participated in a milk diversion
 program under section 201(d).
 `(2) EFFECT OF EXCLUSION- In the case of marketing years excluded under
 subparagraph (B) or (C) of paragraph (1), the Secretary shall consider
 other representative years during which the milk producer marketed milk
 for commercial use so that the average remains based on three years of
 milk production by the producer.
 `(3) NEW PRODUCERS- In the case of a producer who has marketed milk for
 commercial use for less than five years, the Secretary shall establish
 the milk marketing history of the producer for a year by determining the
 average annual quantity of milk marketed by the producer for commercial use
 during any years in which the producer did market milk for commercial use.
 `(4) REVIEW- The Secretary shall establish a review committee which
 shall be responsible for the prompt hearing and judgment of appeals from
 milk producers regarding the determination of milk marketing histories
 under this subsection. A milk producer shall not be eligible to a hearing
 under this paragraph unless the producer provided the Secretary with such
 information and records as the Secretary considered necessary to permit
 the determination of the milk marketing history of the producer.
 `(d) NATIONAL MARKETING FACTOR-
 `(1) DETERMINATION- The national marketing factor for a year shall be the
 ratio of--
 `(A) the estimated aggregate quantity of milk necessary to satisfy domestic
 consumption and exports of milk and the products of milk for that year; to
 `(B) the estimated aggregate quantity of milk to be produced in the United
 States for that year.
 `(2) CONSULTATION- The national marketing factor shall be determined by the
 Secretary in consultation with the National Board of Agricultural Producers.
 `(e) TRANSFER OF MARKETING HISTORY-
 `(1) TRANSFER PROHIBITED- Except as provided in paragraph (2), a milk
 producer may not transfer a milk marketing history by sale, lease, exchange,
 or other means.
 `(2) EXCEPTION- The milk marketing history of a milk producer may be
 transferred--
 `(A) in the case of a milk producer that is a partnership, among the
 partners; and
 `(B) in the case of individual milk producers, to a family member of the
 producer who wishes to assume operation of the producer's milk operations.
 `(3) FAMILY MEMBER DEFINED- For purposes of this subsection, the term
 `family member' means--
 `(A) the spouse, parent, brother, sister, or child of an individual who
 is a milk producer; and
 `(B) any other individual to whom a milk producer stands in loco parentis.
 `(f) MARKETING IN EXCESS OF MILK MARKETING BASE-
 `(1) REDUCTION IN PRICE RECEIVED- In any year in which a two-tier milk
 price support program is in effect under this section, the Secretary
 shall provide for a reduction to be made in the price to be received by
 a milk producer for any quantity of milk produced in the United States
 and marketed by such producer for commercial use in excess of the milk
 marketing base of such producer for that year.
 `(2) AMOUNT OF REDUCTION- The amount of the reduction under paragraph
 (1) in the price received by such producer for milk marketed in excess of
 the milk marketing base of the producer shall be such that the producer
 receives $5.00 per hundredweight for milk containing 3.67 percent milkfat.
 `(3) FUNDS TO COMMODITY CREDIT CORPORATION- The difference between the
 market price and the price received by a milk producer under this subsection
 shall be collected and remitted to the Commodity Credit Corporation, at
 such time and in such manner as prescribed by the Secretary, by each person
 making payment to the producer for milk purchased from the producer. In the
 case of a milk producer who markets milk of the producer's own production
 directly to consumers, the producer shall remit the difference directly
 to the Corporation.
 `(4) TREATMENT OF FUNDS- Funds received by the Corporation under paragraph
 (3) shall be considered as included in the payments to the milk producer
 involved for purposes of the minimum price provisions of the Agricultural
 Adjustment Act (7 U.S.C. 601 et seq.), reenacted with amendments by the
 Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937.
 `(g) EFFECT OF PROGRAM ON OTHER LAWS- Subsections (d), (g), and (h) of
 section 204 shall not apply during a year in which a two-tier milk price
 support program is in effect under this section.'.
SEC. 3. SOLIDS CONTENT OF BEVERAGE MILK.
 (a) IN GENERAL- All milk produced or consumed in the United States that
 is in final package form for beverage use shall contain not less than 8.7
 percent milk solids not fat.
 (b) LOWFAT MILK- All lowfat milk produced or consumed in the United States
 that is in final package form for beverage use shall contain not less than
 10 percent milk solids not fat.
 (c) SKIM MILK- All skim milk produced or consumed in the United States
 that is in final package form for beverage use shall contain not less than
 9 percent milk solids not fat.
 (d) DEFINITION OF MILK- For purposes of this section, the term `milk'
 means sweet milk of cows.
SEC. 4. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect on October
 1, 1991.