S 1505 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1505
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to require nutrition
labeling on packaged foods, to provide for national uniformity in food
labeling, to establish an expert scientific advisory committee, and for
other related purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
August 3 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. HATCH introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources
A BILL
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to require nutrition
labeling on packaged foods, to provide for national uniformity in food
labeling, to establish an expert scientific advisory committee, and for
other related purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act may be cited as the
 `Food and Nutrition Labeling Act of 1989'.
FINDINGS AND DECLARATIONS
 SECTION 1. The Congress finds and declares that:
 (a) There is a recognized relationship between diet, nutrition, and health.
 (b) Health officials agree that consumers need nutrition information about
 food in order to choose healthy diets.
 (c) The Nation's public health goals will be enhanced by providing for
 more nutrition information to be provided to consumers on the labels of
 packaged food.
 (d) Accurate and truthful health messages about food are an important tool
 for consumers in choosing healthful diets.
 (e) A sound nutrition education program is needed to inform consumers
 about the availability, importance, and usefulness of nutrition labeling
 and health messages for food.
 (f) State and local requirements for food labeling which differ from
 Federal requirements imposed by the Secretary interfere with and frustrate
 the purposes and objectives of Federal regulation under the Federal Food,
 Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
 (g) The development of sound Federal programs for nutrition labeling on
 foods and for food regulation generally require that the Secretary have
 access to expert scientific advice and counsel.
MANDATORY NUTRITION LABELING
 SEC. 2. (a) Section 403 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21
 U.S.C. 343) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new
 paragraph (q):
 `(q)(1) If it is a food for human consumption in package form unless its
 label bears information concerning its protein, carbohydrate, calorie,
 and fat content and about vitamin, mineral, and other dietary properties as
 the Secretary determines to be, and, after consultation with the advisory
 committee provided for under section 414 of this title, by regulation
 prescribes as useful and important to inform consumers about the nutritional
 and other dietary properties of the food and is based on scientific evidence
 that such information is important to the health of consumers: Provided,
 That, to the extent compliance with the requirements of this paragraph is
 impracticable, exemptions shall be established in regulations promulgated by
 the Secretary: Provided further, That the Secretary shall exempt from the
 requirements of this paragraph fresh fruits and vegetables, foods which
 are not a meaningful source of nutrients and for which no nutrition or
 dietary claim or information is otherwise provided, food that is subject
 to other similar labeling requirements, and food prepared and sold in a
 restaurant or other food service establishment for consumptions at the
 place of sale or elsewhere.'.
 (b) The Secretary shall promulgate regulations to establish the nutrition
 information required under paragraph (1) and the format for such information
 within two years of the date of enactment of the Food and Nutrition Act
 of 1989.
 (c)(1) The Secretary shall continue to implement and enforce the nutrition
 labeling regulations in part 101 of volume 21, Code of Federal Regulations,
 1988 edition, until such time as they may be amended by rulemaking and
 new requirements become effective.
 (2) The Secretary shall amend the nutrition labeling regulations in part
 101 of volume 21, Code of Federal Regulations, 1988 edition, by rulemaking
 pursuant to section 554 of title 5, United States Code, to implement
 section 2 of this Act.
HEALTH AND PRODUCT CHARACTERISTIC MESSAGES
 SEC. 3. (a) Section 403 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21
 U.S.C. 343) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new
 paragraph (r):
 `(r) If its label or labeling bears any statement which characterizes the
 nutritional or dietary properties of the food, describes the food in such
 terms as `high', `light', or `organic', or contains any statement which
 relates the food to any disease or condition unless such statements or
 terms conform to regulations promulgated by the Secretary.'.
 (b) The Secretary shall promulgate regulations to implement this section
 within twelve months of date of enactment.
 (c) Section 403(r) shall become effective for products labeled two years
 after the effective date of the regulations promulgated under subsection (b).
HUMAN FOOD SAFETY AND NUTRITION ADVISORY COMMITTEE
 SEC. 4. Chapter IV (21 U.S.C. 341 et seq.) is amended by adding at the
 end thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 413. HUMAN FOOD SAFETY AND NUTRITION ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary shall establish an advisory committee which
 shall be known as the `Human Food Safety and Nutrition Advisory Committee'
 (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `Advisory Committee').
 `(b) Composition-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Advisory Committee shall consist of fifteen members
 appointed by the Secretary.
 `(2) MEMBERSHIP- In making appointments under paragraph (1), the Secretary
 shall--
 `(A) consult with the Secretary of Agriculture; and
 `(B) ensure that the membership of the Advisory Committee includes--
 `(i) consumers;
 `(ii) representatives of the food industry;
 `(iii) experts in the field of food technology and food production;
 `(iv) experts in the application of biotechnology to food products;
 `(v) experts in the field of nutrition and nutrition education; and
 `(vi) experts in the field of food safety.
 `(c) DUTIES- The Advisory Committee shall advise the Secretary and
 the Commissioner of Food and Drugs on issues involving food for human
 consumption, including issues relating to--
 `(1) food technology and production;
 `(2) food research and development;
 `(3) biotechnology and food products;
 `(4) food safety;
 `(5) the relationship between diet, nutrition, and health; and
 `(6) health-related claims for food for human consumption.
 `(d) TERMS- A member of the Advisory Committee shall be appointed for
 a term of three years, except that of the members first appointed, five
 members shall be appointed for a term of one year, five members shall be
 appointed for a terms of two years, and five members shall be appointed
 for a term of three years, as determined by the Secretary.
 `(e) SUPPORT- The Commissioner of Food and Drugs shall provide the Advisory
 Committee with such professional and clerical staff and information as
 may be necessary for the Advisory Committee to carry out this section.
 `(f) Compensation; Travel Expenses-
 `(1) COMPENSATION- A member of the Advisory Committee shall be compensated
 at a rate not to exceed the daily equivalent of the rate in effect for grade
 GS-18 of the General Schedule established under section 5332 of title 5,
 United State Code, for each day (including traveltime) that the member is
 engaged in the performance of duties as a member of the Advisory Committee.
 `(2) TRAVEL EXPENSES- A member of the Advisory Committee, while so
 serving away from the home or regular place of business of the member,
 may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence,
 in the same manner as such expenses are authorized under section 5703 of
 title 5, United State Code, for employees serving intermittently.'.
NATIONAL UNIFORMITY IN FOOD LABELING
 SEC. 5. Chapter VII of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act is amended
 to add the following new section 710:
`NATIONAL UNIFORMITY IN FOOD LABELING
 `SEC. 710. (a) GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b), no State
 or political subdivision thereof may establish or continue in effect any
 requirement with respect to a food intended for human consumption any
 requirement respecting the label of, or any labeling for, the food unless--
 `(1) such a requirement is also established pursuant to a statute for which
 responsibility for the administration or implementation has been delegated
 by law or by the Secretary to the Commissioner of Food and Drugs; and
 `(2) the State or local requirement is identical to the Federal requirement
 except as otherwise provided for in this section.
 `(b) DEFINITION- As used in this section, the term `requirement relating
 to the regulation of a food intended for human consumption' shall include--
 `(1) any requirement or prohibition relating to the subject matter in any
 provision of any of the statutes described in paragraph (a)(1); or
 `(2) any requirement relating to the dissemination of information about
 a food intended for human consumption in any manner, such as by posters,
 public notices, advertising, or other means of communication.
 `(b) Upon application of a State, the Secretary may, by regulation
 promulgated after notice and opportunity for receipt of written views and
 an oral hearing, exempt from subsection (a), under such conditions as may
 be prescribed in such regulation, a requirement of such State applicable
 to the labeling of a food intended for human consumption if the requirement--
 `(1) is required by compelling and unique local conditions,
 `(2) would not cause the food to be in violation of any applicable
 requirement under Federal law, and
 `(3) would not unduly burden interstate commerce.
 `(c) PETITION FOR REGULATION- A State or political subdivision of a State
 may petition the Secretary for the adoption, by regulation, of an existing
 or proposed State or local requirement relating to the labeling of a food
 for human use, as a Federal requirement.
 `(d) CONCURRENT JURISDICTION- Any State may, consistent with the requirements
 under Federal law regarding the labeling of food for human consumption,
 exercise concurrent jurisdiction with the Secretary for the purpose of
 enforcing any State requirement concerning the labeling of food for human
 consumption which is identical to the requirements established under Federal
 law: Provided, however, That, before a State exercises such concurrent
 jurisdiction, it shall consult with the Secretary or his designee at least
 thirty days before it initiates any enforcement action.'.
NATIONWIDE NUTRITION EDUCATION PROGRAM
 SEC. 6. Chapter IV of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new section 414:
 `SEC. 414. Nationwide Nutrition Education Program-
 `(1) The Secretary shall, with the assistance of the Advisory Committee
 provided for under section 413 of this Act, develop and implement a
 nationwide program to educate consumers about the relationship between
 diet, nutrition, and health, and about the proper interpretation and use
 of nutritional information and health messages on food labels.
 `(2) There are authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for each fiscal
 year 1990 through 1992.'.
EFFECTIVE DATE
 SEC. 7. This Act shall take effect on the date of enactment.