S 2571 IS1S
(Star Print)
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2571
To amend the Social Security Act to assure universal access to long-term
care in the United States, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
APRIL 9 (legislative day, MARCH 26), 1992
Mr. MITCHELL (for himself, Mr. ROCKEFELLER, Mr. KENNEDY, Mr. PRYOR, Mr. RIEGLE,
Ms. MIKULSKI, Mr. SIMON, Mr. PELL, Mr. ADAMS, Mr. BURDICK, and Mr. GLENN)
introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the
Committee on Finance
A BILL
To amend the Social Security Act to assure universal access to long-term
care in the United States, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Long-Term Care Family
 Security Act of 1992'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents of this Act is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--COMMUNITY CARE AND NURSING FACILITY CARE
Sec. 101. Community care and nursing facility care
`TITLE XXI--COMMUNITY CARE AND NURSING FACILITY CARE
`Part A--Entitlement to Benefits
`Sec. 2101. Entitlement to benefits.
`Sec. 2102. Scope of community care.
`Sec. 2103. Limits on hours of community care.
`Sec. 2104. Scope of nursing facility care.
`Sec. 2105. Limits on short-term nursing facility care.
`Part B--Assessments and Certifications
`Sec. 2111. Request for and performance of assessments.
`Sec. 2112. Certifications.
`Sec. 2113. Appeals.
`Sec. 2114. Assessment agencies.
`Sec. 2115. Care managers.
`Part C--Payment
`Sec. 2121. Community care.
`Sec. 2122. Nursing facility care.
`Sec. 2123. Certification for payment; conditions of payment.
`Sec. 2124. Use of carriers.
`Sec. 2125. Long-Term Care Payment Assessment Commission.
`Part D--Low-Income Assistance and Financial Eligibility for Long-Term
Nursing Facility Services
`Sec. 2131. Assistance for low-income individuals for coinsurance for community
care and short-term nursing facility care and charges for assessments.
`Sec. 2132. Resource protection for long-term nursing facility care.
`Sec. 2133. Amount of resident-specific deductible.
`Part E--Financing
`Sec. 2141. Federal Long-Term Care Trust Fund.
`Part F--(Reserved)
`Part G--Definitions and Miscellaneous Provisions
`[Sec. 2161. Reserved.]
`Sec. 2162. Coverage standards.
`Sec. 2163. Provider agreements; incorporation of additional conditions
of participation.
`Sec. 2164. Application of certain fraud and abuse provisions.
`Sec. 2165. Demonstration projects; waiver authority.
`Sec. 2166. Glossary of terms used in parts A through G.
Sec. 102. Amendments to nursing facility requirements.
Sec. 103. Coordination with medicaid.
Sec. 104. Miscellaneous amendments.
Sec. 105. Effective date; waiver of paperwork requirements.
TITLE II--FINANCING PROVISIONS
Sec. 201. Progressive financing of public program.
Sec. 202. State maintenance of effort payment required.
TITLE III--TREATMENT OF LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE
Subtitle A--Establishment of Standards for Long-Term Care Insurance Policies
Sec. 301. Establishment of standards under the Social Security Act.
`Part H--Long-Term Care Insurance Standards
`Sec. 2181. Promulgation of standards and model benefits.
`Sec. 2182. Application of long-term care insurance standards.
`Sec. 2183. Standards for approval of State regulatory programs.
`Sec. 2184. Standards relating to sales practices.
`Sec. 2185. Standards relating to issuers.
`Sec. 2186. Standards relating to policies.
`Sec. 2187. Secretarial enforcement authority.
`Sec. 2188. Long-term care insurance policy defined.
Sec. 302. Establishment of standards under the Public Health Service Act.
`TITLE XXVII--LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE STANDARDS
`Sec. 2701. Promulgation of standards and model benefits.
`Sec. 2702. Application of long-term care insurance standards.
`Sec. 2703. Standards for approval of State regulatory programs.
`Sec. 2704. Standards relating to sales practices.
`Sec. 2705. Standards relating to issuers.
`Sec. 2706. Standards relating to policies.
`Sec. 2707. Secretarial enforcement authority.
`Sec. 2708. Long-term care insurance policy defined.
Sec. 303. Report on solvency protection.
Sec. 304. Waiver of paperwork requirements.
Subtitle B--Clarification of Tax Treatment of Long-Term Care Services and
Long-Term Care Insurance Policies
Part I--General Provisions
Sec. 311. Qualified long-term care services treated as medical care.
Sec. 312. Treatment of long-term care insurance or plans.
Sec. 313. Effective dates.
Part II--Treatment of Accelerated Death Benefits, Disability Income Payments,
and Certain Other Benefits
Sec. 321. Tax treatment of accelerated death benefits disability income
payments, and certain other benefits.
Sec. 322. Tax treatment of companies issuing riders providing qualified
accelerated death benefits, disability income payments, and certain other
benefits.
Sec. 323. Applicants or recipients under public assistance programs not to
be required to make election respecting certain pre-death benefits under
life insurance policies.
Sec. 324. Effective dates.
TITLE IV--ADDITIONAL GRANTS AND DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS
Sec. 401. Establishment of grant program in Public Health Service Act.
Sec. 402. Grants for long-term care services.
Sec. 403. Additional funding for long-term care ombudsmen programs under
the Older Americans Act.
Sec. 404. Additional funding for information and referral services for
persons under the Developmental Disabilities Act.
Sec. 405. Expansion of information and counseling under the Protection and
Advocacy for the Mentally Ill Act.
TITLE V--REVIEW OF PHARMACEUTICAL BENEFITS
Sec. 501. Pharmaceutical Payment Assessment and Policy Review Commission.
Sec. 502. Establishment of long-term care pharmaceutical benefits demonstration
projects.
TITLE I--COMMUNITY CARE AND NURSING FACILITY CARE
SEC. 101. COMMUNITY CARE AND NURSING FACILITY CARE.
 The Social Security Act is amended by adding at the end the following
 new title:
`TITLE XXI--COMMUNITY CARE AND NURSING FACILITY CARE
`Part A--Entitlement to Benefits
`ENTITLEMENT TO BENEFITS
 `SEC. 2101. (a) ENTITLEMENT OF MODERATELY OR SEVERELY DISABLED INDIVIDUALS
 TO COMMUNITY CARE AND NURSING FACILITY CARE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to the provisions of this title, if an eligible
 individual (as defined in subsection (c)) is determined under part B to
 be a moderately or severely disabled individual (as defined in subsection
 (b)(1)), the individual is entitled to have payment made on his behalf
 under this title--
 `(A) for community care (as defined in section 2102(a)), subject to the
 limits established in section 2103;
 `(B) for nursing facility care (as defined in section 2104(a)), subject
 to the limits established in section 2105; and
 `(C) for long-term nursing facility care (described in paragraph (3)(B)),
 subject to paragraph (2),
as elected by the individual.
 `(2) FINANCIAL ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENT FOR LONG-TERM NURSING FACILITY
 CARE- An eligible individual is entitled to benefits for long-term nursing
 facility care under paragraph (1)(C) only when the individual's resources
 (as determined under section 2132(b)) are at or below the protected resource
 level specified under section 2132(a).
 `(3) REFERENCES TO SHORT-TERM AND LONG-TERM NURSING FACILITY CARE- In
 this title--
 `(A) any reference to `short-term nursing facility care' is a reference
 to nursing facility care which is not long-term nursing facility care
 (described in subparagraph (B)) and for which an entitlement is established
 under paragraph (1)(B); and
 `(B) any reference to `long-term nursing facility care' is a reference
 to nursing facility care which is not subject to the limits established
 in section 2105 and which is provided to an individual who is entitled to
 benefits for such care consistent with paragraph (2).
 `(b) DEFINITIONS RELATING TO MODERATELY OR SEVERELY DISABLED INDIVIDUALS-
 In this title:
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The term `moderately or severely disabled individual'
 means--
 `(A) in the case of an individual 6 years of age or older, an eligible
 individual who (without regard to income or employment status)--
 `(i) needs substantial assistance or supervision from another individual
 with at least 3 activities of daily living (described in paragraph (5));
 `(ii) needs substantial supervision due to cognitive or other mental
 impairment and needs substantial assistance or supervision from another
 individual with at least 1 activity of daily living or in complying with
 a daily drug regimen; or
 `(iii) needs substantial supervision from another individual due to
 behaviors that are dangerous (to themselves or others), disruptive, or
 difficult to manage; or
 `(B) in the case of an individual under 6 years of age, an eligible
 individual who suffers from any medically determinable physical, cognitive,
 or other mental impairment of comparable severity to that which would make
 an individual 6 years of age or older meet the requirement of clause (i),
 (ii), or (iii) of subparagraph (A).
 `(2) COMPARABLE SEVERITY DEFINED- In paragraph (1)(B), the term
 `comparable severity' means that a child's physical, cognitive, or other
 mental impairment or impairments so limit the child's ability to function
 independently, appropriately, and effectively, in an age-appropriate manner
 that any impairments and limitations resulting from them are comparable
 to those which would disable an adult.
 `(3) DETERMINATIONS OF DISABILITY- For purposes of this title, an individual
 is considered to have been determined under part B to be--
 `(A) a moderately or severely disabled individual if there is an affirmative
 certification in effect for the individual under that part;
 `(B) a moderately disabled individual if there is such an affirmative
 certification in effect and a determination under such part that the
 individual has a moderate impairment; or
 `(C) a severely disabled individual if there is such an affirmative
 certification in effect and a determination under such part that the
 individual has a severe impairment.
 `(4) CERTIFIED INDIVIDUAL DEFINED- The term `certified individual' means
 an individual who has been determined under part B to be a moderately or
 severely disabled individual and, with respect to long-term nursing facility
 care, to be entitled to benefits for such care consistent with subsection
 (a)(2).
 `(5) ACTIVITY OF DAILY LIVING DEFINED- Each of the following is an activity
 of daily living: bathing, dressing, transferring, toileting, and eating.
 `(c) ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL DEFINED- In this title, the term `eligible
 individual' means an individual who is--
 `(1)(A) a citizen or national of the United States, (B) an alien lawfully
 admitted for permanent residence, or (C) an alien otherwise residing
 permanently in the United States under color of law, and
 `(2) a resident of the United States.
 `(d) EFFECTIVE DATE OF TITLE-
 `(1) NO BENEFITS FOR CARE PROVIDED BEFORE EFFECTIVE DATE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- No benefits are available under this part for items or
 services furnished before the effective date of this title.
 `(B) DEFINED- In this title, the term `effective date of this title'
 means January 1, 1994.
 `(2) PHASE-IN OF BENEFITS-
 `(A) FIRST EFFECTIVE YEAR- In the case of services furnished during the
 12-month period that begins on the effective date of this title--
 `(i) the number of hours specified in subsections (a) and (b)(2) of
 section 2103 shall be 15 percent of the number of hours specified in those
 subsections, and
 `(ii) no benefits are available under this part for nursing facility care.
 `(B) SECOND EFFECTIVE YEAR- In the case of services furnished during the
 12-month period that begins 1 year after the effective date of this title--
 `(i) the number of hours specified in subsections (a) and (b)(2) of
 section 2103 shall be 30 percent of the number of hours specified in those
 subsections, and
 `(ii) no benefits are available under this part for nursing facility care.
 `(C) THIRD EFFECTIVE YEAR- In the case of services furnished during the
 12-month period that begins 2 years after the effective date of this title--
 `(i) the number of hours specified in subsections (a) and (b)(2) of
 section 2103 shall be 50 percent of the number of hours specified in those
 subsections, and
 `(ii) benefits are available under this part for nursing facility care.
 `(D) SUBSEQUENT EFFECTIVE YEARS- In the case of services furnished after
 such 12-month period--
 `(i) the number of hours specified in subsections (a) and (b)(2) of
 section 2103 shall be 100 percent of the number of hours specified in
 those subsections, and
 `(ii) benefits are available under this part for nursing facility care.
`SCOPE OF COMMUNITY CARE
 `SEC. 2102. (a) IN GENERAL- In this title, the term `community care'
 means items and services which are--
 `(1)(A) home-based services (as defined in subsection (b)),
 `(B) community-based services (as defined in subsection (c)),
 `(C) respite care (as defined in subsection (d)(1)), or
 `(D) hospice respite care (as defined in subsection (d)(2));
 `(2) furnished to an individual by a community care agency (as defined in
 subsection (e)) or by others under arrangements made by the agency;
 `(3) furnished under a written plan of care (for furnishing such items
 and services and other related items and services to such individual) which--
 `(A) is established and periodically reviewed and revised by a care manager
 (as defined in section 2115(a)(1)),
 `(B) is developed with the participation of the individual,
 `(C) reflects the individual's needs identified in the assessment under
 section 2111 and the types of community care necessary to maintain the
 individual outside a nursing or other health care facility, and
 `(D) takes into account the coverage levels under section 2103; and
 `(4) in the case of services furnished in a small community setting or large
 community setting (as defined in subsection (g)(1) or (h)(1), respectively,
 of section 1929), furnished in a setting that meets the minimum requirements
 for such a setting under subsection (g)(2) or (h)(2) of such section.
 `(b) HOME-BASED SERVICES DEFINED- In this title, the term `home-based
 services' means, with respect to an individual, the following items and
 services which are provided in a place of residence used as the individual's
 home (or, in the case of services described in paragraphs (3), (6), and (7),
 which may be provided outside the individual's residence) to the extent they
 are not respite care or hospice respite care (as defined in subsection (d)):
 `(1) Nursing care provided by or under the supervision of a registered
 professional nurse.
 `(2) Services of a homemaker/home health aide who has successfully completed
 a training and competency evaluation program that meets minimum standards
 established by the Secretary under section 1891(a)(3)(D).
 `(3) Personal assistance services furnished by an individual who has
 successfully completed a training and competency evaluation program that
 meets minimum standards established by the Secretary.
 `(4) Medical social services.
 `(5) Physical, occupational, or respiratory therapy or speech-language
 pathology.
 `(6) Medical supplies (other than drugs and biologicals), assistive
 technologies, and equipment that assist in the performance of activities
 of daily living.
 `(7) Patient and caregiver (including family caregiver) education and
 training to develop skills necessary to permit the individual to remain
 in the home setting.
 `(8) Such other home-based items and services as the Secretary may approve.
 `(c) COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES DEFINED- In this title, the term
 `community-based services' means the following (to the extent they are
 not respite care or hospice respite care, as defined in subsection (d)):
 `(1) Adult day care services provided by an adult day care program that
 meets such standards (including the provision of at least 1 meal a day
 and the provision of necessary transportation) established by the Secretary.
 `(2) In the case of individuals with chronic mental illness, day treatment
 or other partial hospitalization services, psychosocial rehabilitation
 services, and clinic services (whether or not furnished in a facility),
 but only insofar as such services are equivalent to services described in
 paragraph (1) and do not include individual therapy.
 `(3) Such other community-based items and services as the Secretary may
 approve.
 `(d) RESPITE CARE AND HOSPICE RESPITE CARE DEFINED- In this title:
 `(1) RESPITE CARE- The term `respite care' means the following:
 `(A) Services of the type described in subsections (b) and (c) provided
 on an occasional basis for the purpose of providing relief for an unpaid,
 regular caregiver.
 `(B) The training of family members in how to deliver effectively home-based
 services.
 `(C) Support counseling for family caregivers.
 `(2) HOSPICE RESPITE CARE- The term `hospice respite care' means services
 of the type described in subsections (b) and (c) provided for the purpose
 of assisting terminally ill individuals.
 `(e) COMMUNITY CARE AGENCY DEFINED- In this title, the term `community care
 agency' means a public agency or private organization, or a subdivision
 of such an agency or organization, which has entered into a participation
 agreement described in section 2163(a), which meets participation standards
 established under section 1891, and which--
 `(1) is a home health agency (as defined in section 1861(m)); or
 `(2)(A) is primarily engaged in delivering, or arranging for the delivery
 of, homemaker/home health services and personal assistance services,
 `(B) maintains clinical records on all patients,
 `(C) in the case of an agency or organization in any State in which
 State or applicable local law provides for the licensing of agencies or
 organizations of this nature, (i) is licensed pursuant to such law, or
 (ii) is approved, by the agency of such State or locality, responsible
 for licensing agencies or organizations of this nature, as meeting the
 standards established for such licensing, and
 `(D) meets such additional requirements as the Secretary may find necessary
 in the interest of the health and safety of individuals who are furnished
 services by such agency or organization or as may be necessary for the
 effective and efficient operation of the program under this title.
`LIMITS ON HOURS OF COMMUNITY CARE
 `SEC. 2103. (a) INDIVIDUAL ENTITLEMENT BASED ON LEVEL OF IMPAIRMENT- Subject
 to subsection (c) and section 2101(d)(2), coverage under this title for
 community care may not exceed, subject to subsection (b), in any month--
 `(1) 52 hours in the case of a moderately disabled individual, or
 `(2) 88 hours in the case of a severely disabled individual.
 `(b) ADDITIONAL, POOLED COVERAGE FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH GREATER NEED-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to the aggregate limit established under paragraph
 (2) consistent with guidelines established under paragraph (3) and subject
 to individual limits under paragraph (4), the number of hours of community
 care for certified individuals may be increased under this subsection
 (above the maximum number permitted under subsection (a)) to provide for
 the greater needs of the individual.
 `(2) LIMIT ON AGGREGATE ADDITIONAL HOURS FOR A CARE MANAGER- Subject to
 section 2101(d)(2), the total number of additional hours of community care
 made available under this subsection to certified individuals under the care
 of a care manager (as defined in section 2115(a)) may not exceed the sum of--
 `(A) 13 multiplied by the average number of certified moderately disabled
 individuals receiving community care under the care of the manager during
 the month; and
 `(B) 22 multiplied by the average number of certified severely disabled
 individuals receiving community care under the care of the manager during
 the month.
 `(3) ALLOCATION-
 `(A) ESTABLISHMENT OF GUIDELINES- The Secretary shall establish guidelines
 for the allocation of additional hours of community care under this
 subsection.
 `(B) APPLICATION OF GUIDELINES- Each care manager shall establish standards
 for the allocation of additional hours of community care under this
 subsection consistent with such guidelines.
 `(C) DISCRETION- Except as may be provided by a care manager under such
 standards (consistent with such guidelines), no individual is entitled to
 additional hours of community care under this subsection. An individual
 who is dissatisfied with a care manager's allocation of hours under this
 subsection may file a complaint with the assessment agency (as defined in
 section 2114(a)(1)) with responsibility for monitoring the care manager.
 `(4) INDIVIDUAL LIMIT- The total of the number of hours of community
 care provided under subsection (a), and the number of additional hours of
 community care provided under this subsection, with respect to an individual
 for a month may not exceed such level as would permit the total payment
 rate for such community care for the month to exceed the payment rate that
 would apply under this title if the individual were provided benefits for
 long-term nursing facility care under this title during the entire month.
 `(c) Adjustment in Computation of Hours of Community Care to Account for
 Variation in Intensity of Types of Care-
 `(1) DIVISION OF COMMUNITY CARE BY TYPE; COMPUTATION OF WEIGHTING FACTOR
 FOR EACH TYPE- Based on the relative intensity of (or payment rates under
 part C for) different types of community care, the Secretary shall--
 `(A) assign similar community care to a type of services, and
 `(B) for each such type of community care assign an appropriate weighting
 factor that--
 `(i) reflects the relative intensity of services (or payment level) of
 that type compared to the average mix of community care, and
 `(ii) has an average value of 1.0.
 `(2) ADJUSTMENT IN COMPUTING HOURS OF CARE- In applying the limit on
 number of hours of community care under subsections (a) and (b), each
 hour of a given type of service shall be adjusted by the weighting factor
 (established under paragraph (1)(B)) for that type.
 `(d) SPECIAL RULE FOR ITEMS- In applying the hourly limits of the previous
 subsections in the case of community care that is an item (rather than
 a personal or professional service), the Secretary shall provide for a
 method for converting units of such care into hours of community care
 based on factors reflecting the payment level for such items compared to
 the payment levels for community care consisting of services.
`SCOPE OF NURSING FACILITY CARE
 `SEC. 2104. (a) NURSING FACILITY CARE DEFINED- In this title, the term
 `nursing facility care' means the following items and services furnished
 to a resident of a nursing facility (as defined in subsection (b)) and
 (except as provided in paragraphs (3) and (6)) by such facility, excluding,
 however, any such item or service if it would not be included under section
 1861(b) if furnished to an inpatient of a hospital:
 `(1) Nursing care provided by or under the supervision of a registered
 professional nurse.
 `(2) Bed and board in connection with the furnishing of such nursing care.
 `(3) Physical, occupational, or respiratory therapy, or speech-language
 pathology, furnished by the facility or by others under arrangements with
 them made by the facility.
 `(4) Medical social services.
 `(5) Such drugs, biologicals, supplies, appliances, and equipment, furnished
 for use in the facility as are ordinarily furnished by such facility for
 the care and treatment of residents.
 `(6) Medical services provided by an intern or resident-in-training of
 a hospital with which the facility has in effect a transfer agreement
 (meeting the requirements of section 1861(l)), under a teaching program of
 such hospital approved as provided in the last sentence of section 1861(b),
 and other diagnostic or therapeutic services provided by a hospital with
 which the facility has such an agreement in effect.
 `(7) Such other services necessary to the health of the residents as are
 generally provided by nursing facilities.
 `(b) NURSING FACILITY DEFINED- In this title, the term `nursing facility'
 means--
 `(1) a skilled nursing facility (as defined in section 1819(a)), or
 `(2) a facility that is a nursing facility (as defined in section 1919(a))
 which meets the requirements of section 1819(b)(4)(C) (relating to required
 nursing care),
which has entered into a participation agreement under section 2163(a). Such
term does not include an intermediate care facility for the mentally retarded
(as defined in section 1905(d)).
`LIMITS ON SHORT-TERM NURSING FACILITY CARE
 `SEC. 2105. (a) IN GENERAL- Coverage under this title for short-term
 nursing facility services under section 2101(a)(1)(B) for an individual
 may not exceed 180 days of nursing facility services in each of 2 episodes
 of care in each individual's lifetime.
 `(b) EPISODE OF CARE DEFINED- In subsection (a), the term `episode of care'
 means, subject to subsection (c), a 180-day period--
 `(1) which begins with the first day an individual elects to receive benefits
 with respect to short-term nursing facility care under this title, and
 `(2) subject to subsection (d), immediately preceding which there was a
 period of noninstitutionalization (as defined in subsection (e)).
 `(c) RELATION TO MEDICARE DAYS- Any day in which an individual is receiving
 benefits with respect to extended care services under part A of title
 XVIII shall not be included in an episode of care.
 `(d) TRANSITION- In the case of an individual who is a resident of a nursing
 facility on the first date on which benefits are available under this part
 for nursing facility care (under section 2101(d)(2)) and who elects to
 receive benefits with respect to short-term nursing facility care under
 this title, the individual is deemed to be in an episode of care as of
 such date, but the number of days of benefits available under this title
 for the episode shall be reduced by 1 day for each day during the period
 ending on such first date and beginning at the end of the individual's
 last previous period of noninstitutionalization.
 `(e) PERIOD OF NONINSTITUTIONALIZATION DEFINED- In this section, the term
 `period of noninstitutionalization' means, with respect to an individual,
 a period of 180 consecutive days during each of which the individual was
 not a resident of a nursing facility.
`Part B--Assessments and Certifications
`REQUEST FOR AND PERFORMANCE OF ASSESSMENTS
 `SEC. 2111. (a) REQUESTS FOR ASSESSMENT- Each eligible individual (as
 defined in section 2101(c)) (or another person on such individual's behalf)
 may request an assessment agency (as defined in section 2114(a)(1)) to
 conduct an assessment (or, if previously certified under section 2112(a),
 a reassessment) under this section with respect to the individual.
 `(b) BENEFICIARY ASSESSMENT CHARGES- Subject to section 2131--
 `(1) INITIAL ASSESSMENT- The charge for an initial assessment under this
 section shall be $25. The Secretary may, from time to time, modify the
 amount of such charge, but only insofar as the relative costs of conducting
 assessments under this section have changed over time.
 `(2) SUBSEQUENT BENEFICIARY ASSESSMENT CHARGE- The charge for a subsequent
 assessment (or reassessment) under this section shall be an amount, not to
 exceed the amount provided under paragraph (1), specified by the Secretary.
 `(3) APPLICATION OF CHARGES- Charges collected under this subsection with
 respect to assessments conducted by an assessment agency shall be retained
 by such agency and will be applied (in accordance with section 2114(e)(1)(B))
 against the payments otherwise due such agency under section 2114(e)(1)(A).
 `(c) PERFORMANCE OF ASSESSMENTS-
 `(1) LOCATION AND PROMPTNESS- To the extent practicable, assessments shall
 be conducted on the individual in the individual's home with any primary
 caregiver present and shall be conducted within 14 days after the date of
 the request for the assessment.
 `(2) TIMING OF ASSESSMENT IN RELATION TO NURSING FACILITY CARE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- To the extent practicable, assessments shall be conducted
 before the date an individual is admitted to a nursing facility. In no case
 shall payment be made under this title for nursing facility care furnished
 an individual earlier than 14 days before the date the individual has an
 assessment under this section.
 `(B) TRANSITION-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- If an individual is a resident of a nursing facility on
 the first date on which benefits are available under this part for nursing
 facility care (under section 2101(d)(2)) and has resided in the facility
 for at least 180 consecutive days before such date, the individual is
 deemed to have had an assessment under this section (and an affirmative
 certification under section 2112) as of such first date.
 `(ii) VALIDITY OF CERTIFICATION- An affirmative certification shall be
 deemed valid for a period of 1 year beginning on such effective date.
 `(iii) FINANCIAL ELIGIBILITY STILL REQUIRED- Nothing in this paragraph
 shall be construed as waiving the requirement of section 2101(a)(2) that
 an individual's resources be at or below the protected resource level in
 order to be entitled to benefits under this title for long-term nursing
 facility care.
 `(3) FREQUENCY OF ASSESSMENTS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this paragraph, a request for an
 assessment under this section may be made at any time.
 `(B) LIMITATION ON FREQUENCY- If an individual, based on an assessment under
 this section, has an affirmative or negative certification under section
 2112(a) (and, if affirmative, a determination of degree of impairment
 under such section), no further assessment (or reassessment) under this
 section shall be valid with respect to the individual unless--
 `(i) subject to subparagraph (C), it is conducted at least 3 months after
 the date of the previous assessment, or
 `(ii) a physician certifies that there has been a significant change
 in the individual's condition that may affect the certification or the
 determination of the degree of impairment.
 `(C) REASSESSMENT AT TIME OF DISCHARGE FROM NURSING FACILITY-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Subject to clause (ii), in the case of a certified
 individual who is discharged from a nursing facility, if the individual
 desires to remain eligible for benefits under this title after the date
 of such discharge the individual must obtain a new assessment under this
 section at the time of the discharge. Any previous affirmative certification
 under section 2112(a) shall not remain valid after the date of the discharge
 unless such an assessment has been conducted; and, if such assessment has
 been conducted, the previous certification shall not remain valid after
 the date of the new certification pursuant to such assessment.
 `(ii) EXCEPTIONS- The Secretary may provide for such exceptions to clause
 (i) as may be appropriate with respect to particular circumstances or
 timing of discharges from nursing facilities.
 `(d) ASSESSMENT TEAMS- Each assessment under this section shall be
 conducted by a multidisciplinary team of such appropriately trained
 individuals designated by the assessment agency as may be required to
 evaluate properly the disability of an individual.
 `(e) UNIFORM ASSESSMENT INSTRUMENT AND METHODOLOGY- In making
 assessments under this section, assessment agencies shall use a standard,
 reproducible, uniform assessment instrument and methodology designated
 by the Secretary. The Secretary shall first designate such instrument
 and methodology by not later than 6 months before the effective date of
 this title.
`CERTIFICATIONS
 `SEC. 2112. (a) AFFIRMATIVE OR NEGATIVE CERTIFICATION- Based on an assessment
 of an eligible individual conducted under section 2111, an assessment agency
 shall determine and certify whether or not the individual is a moderately
 or severely disabled individual (as defined in section 2101(b)(1)). In this
 title, the terms `affirmative certification' and `negative certification'
 mean, with respect to an individual, a certification under the previous
 sentence that the individual is, or is not, respectively, a moderately or
 severely disabled individual.
 `(b) CONTENTS OF AFFIRMATIVE CERTIFICATION- If the agency makes an
 affirmative certification, the agency--
 `(1) shall--
 `(A) include in the certification a determination, consistent with the
 guidelines established under subsection (c)(1), as to whether the degree
 of impairment is moderate or severe;
 `(B) specify, consistent with guidelines established under subsection (c)(2),
 the period (not to exceed 12 months) during which the certification will
 be effective and before the end of which the individual must be reassessed
 to continue to remain eligible for benefits under this title;
 `(C) if the individual elects to receive community care under this title,
 provide the individual with a referral to one or more care managers (as
 defined in section 2115(a)) who may establish a plan of care for community
 care, consistent with the benefit level available under section 2103 with
 respect to that degree of impairment; and
 `(D) if the individual is receiving community care under this title at the
 time of a recertification, include a review of, and instructing the care
 manager to make an appropriate revision of, the plan of care established
 with respect to such care; and
 `(2) may identify (in accordance with criteria which the Secretary may
 establish and which are consistent with the guidelines under section
 2103(b)(3)(A)) those factors (such as the availability of a primary
 unpaid caregiver) that might influence the selection of individuals who
 may need the additional hours of community care under section 2103(b)
 and the allocation of such additional hours of care among such individuals.
 `(c) SECRETARIAL GUIDELINES- By not later than 6 months before the effective
 date of this title, the Secretary shall establish--
 `(1) guidelines for determining degrees of impairment under subsection
 (b)(1)(A), and
 `(2) guidelines for specifying the period of effectiveness of affirmative
 certifications under subsection (b)(1)(B).
`APPEALS
 `SEC. 2113. (a) IN GENERAL- The provisions of section 1869 shall apply--
 `(1) to determinations of whether an individual is entitled to benefits
 under this title, and
 `(2) to the determination of the amount of benefits under this title,
 including a negative certification under section 2112 or the determination
 of a level of impairment under section 2112(b)(1)(A), but not including
 the allocation of additional hours of community care under section 2103(b),
in the same manner as they apply to such benefits under part B of title XVIII.
 `(b) RESTRICTION ON COURT REVIEW- A negative certification or a determination
 of a level of impairment shall not be overturned or modified by a court
 on the basis of the facts in any particular case unless the court finds
 that there is no reasonable basis for the factual determination and the
 certification or determination was arbitrary and capricious.
`ASSESSMENT AGENCIES
 `SEC. 2114. (a) DEFINED-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In this title, the term `assessment agency' means a
 nonprofit or public agency or organization, or a nonprofit or public
 subdivision of such an agency or organization, which the Secretary
 determines--
 `(A) is capable of performing directly (or, with respect to conducting
 assessments and reviewing plans of care, directly or through contracts under
 subsection (d)) efficiently and effectively the duties of an assessment
 agency described in subsection (c);
 `(B) demonstrates capability--
 `(i) in conducting assessments (or contracting for the conduct of
 assessments),
 `(ii) in reviewing the quality of community care, and
 `(iii) in making determinations under part D with respect to low-income
 assistance and financial eligibility for long-term nursing facility care; and
 `(C)(i) does not provide community care or nursing facility care and does
 not have a direct or indirect ownership or control interest in, or direct
 or indirect affiliation or relationship with, an entity that provides
 such care, and (ii) except as provided in paragraph (2), does not have a
 direct or indirect ownership or control interest in, or direct or indirect
 affiliation or relationship with, a care manager.
 `(2) WAIVER OF RESTRICTION OF CARE MANAGERS- At the request of an assessment
 agency, the Secretary may waive the restriction of paragraph (1)(C)(ii)
 and section 2115(a)(1)(C)(i) for the assessment agency to be (or be related
 to) a care manager if the Secretary is satisfied that--
 `(A) there is a qualified independent entity that will review and assure
 the quality of the care management functions otherwise reviewed by the
 agency, and
 `(B) the number of individuals with respect to whom the agency will make
 affirmative certifications is consistent with the number of such individuals
 the agency would make if it were not related to a care manager.
 `(b) SELECTION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall, for each State, enter into a
 contract with an assessment agency to perform duties of such an agency
 with respect to residents of the State. Such a contract shall only be
 entered into with an agency if the Secretary determines that the agency
 will perform such duties in a manner consistent with the efficient and
 effective administration of this title. Subject to paragraph (4), the
 period of each such contract shall be 3 years.
 `(2) BASIS FOR SELECTION- Subject to paragraph (3), the Secretary shall
 select the qualified assessment agency to enter into a contract under this
 subsection for a State on the basis of a competitive bidding process which
 takes into account the costs and quality of services to be provided under
 the contract.
 `(3) PRIORITY FOR STATE OR STATE AGENCY- If more than one agency is
 qualified to enter into a contract with the Secretary under this subsection
 for the performance of duties in a State, priority shall be given to any
 such organization which is the State or an agency of the State.
 `(4) TERMINATION- The Secretary may terminate a contract with an assessment
 agency under this subsection, upon reasonable notice to the agency, if
 the Secretary determines that the agency has failed substantially to carry
 out its duties under the contract.
 `(c) DUTIES OF ASSESSMENT AGENCIES-
 `(1) REQUIREMENTS- Each assessment agency shall be responsible for--
 `(A) conducting assessments under section 2111;
 `(B) in cooperation with care managers, reviewing periodically the quality
 of care provided under this title;
 `(C) monitoring the performance of care managers with respect to individuals
 certified by the agency, including receiving complaints respecting their
 performance; and
 `(D) making determinations under part D with respect to (i) determining
 eligibility for low-income assistance, (ii) determining the amount
 of resources of individuals, (iii) verifying under section 2131(c)(6)
 information supplied in applications for assistance under that part, and
 (iv) establishing resident-specific deductibles under section 2133.
 `(2) RECOMMENDATIONS-
 `(A) CARE MANAGERS- With respect to community care, each assessment agency
 shall inform, and may make recommendations to, certified individuals
 respecting care managers that are qualified to plan and coordinate their
 care under this title.
 `(B) NURSING FACILITIES- With respect to nursing facility care, each
 assessment agency shall inform, and may make recommendations to, certified
 individuals respecting nursing facilities from which they may obtain
 covered services under this title.
 `(d) CONTRACTING OUT CERTAIN FUNCTIONS- The Secretary shall permit an
 assessment agency, to the extent necessary to carry out duties under
 this title and except as provided in subsection (a)(2), to provide for
 assessments through contracts with nonprofit or public organizations which
 do not provide community care or nursing facility care and which do not
 have a direct or indirect ownership or control interest in, or a direct
 or indirect affiliation or relationship with, an entity that provides,
 community care or nursing facility care or with a care manager.
 `(e) PAYMENT TO ASSESSMENT AGENCIES-
 `(1) FOR ASSESSMENTS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Each assessment agency shall be paid under this title,
 for conducting an assessment under section 2111, a per assessment payment
 amount in accordance with a schedule established by the Secretary. Such
 schedule shall take into account costs that are reasonable and related to
 the cost of performing such assessments.
 `(B) OFFSETTING ASSESSMENT CHARGES COLLECTED- Amounts otherwise payable to
 an assessment agency under this paragraph shall be reduced by the amount
 of assessment charges collected by the agency under section 2111(b).
 `(2) FOR QUALITY REVIEW- Each assessment agency shall be paid under this
 title, for reviewing the quality of care provided under this title, an
 amount that the Secretary determines is reasonable and related to the
 costs of conducting such reviews.
 `(3) FOR LOW-INCOME ASSISTANCE AND ELIGIBILITY DETERMINATIONS- Each
 assessment agency shall be paid under this title, for--
 `(A) making determinations under part D with respect to low-income assistance
 under section 2131 (including verifying under section 2131(c)(6) information
 supplied in applications for assistance under that part),
 `(B) computing resources under section 2132, and
 `(C) establishing resident-specific deductibles under section 2133,
an amount that the Secretary determines is reasonable and related to the
costs of conducting such activities.
`CARE MANAGERS
 `SEC. 2115. (a) DEFINED-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In this title, the term `care manager' means an individual
 or nonprofit or public agency or organization, or a nonprofit or public
 subdivision of such an agency or organization, which the appropriate
 assessment agency determines--
 `(A) is capable of performing directly, efficiently, and effectively the
 duties of a care manager described in subsection (c);
 `(B) demonstrates capability--
 `(i) in establishing and periodically reviewing and revising plans of care
 for community care,
 `(ii) in arranging for and monitoring the provision and quality of (or,
 in the case described in paragraph (2), in providing) community care, and
 `(iii) in allocating, in accordance with the guidelines established under
 section 2103(b)(3)(A), additional hours of community care under section
 2103(b) among different certified individuals whose plans of care are
 being monitored by the individual, agency, or organization;
 `(C) in the case of an agency or organization--
 `(i) except as provided in section 2114(a)(2), is not designated as an
 assessment agency and is not an affiliate of an agency so designated,
 `(ii) except as provided in subsection (b), does not provide community care
 or nursing facility care and does not have a direct or indirect ownership
 or control interest in, or direct or indirect affiliation or relationship
 with, an entity that provides such care, and
 `(iii) if the agency or organization is in a State in which State or
 applicable local law provides for the licensing of care managers, (I)
 is licensed pursuant to such law, or (II) is approved, by the agency of
 the State or locality responsible for licensing care managers, as meeting
 the standards established for such licensing; and
 `(D) in the case of an individual, is in a State in which State or applicable
 local law provides for the licensing of individuals as care managers and
 (i) is licensed pursuant to such law, or (ii) is approved, by the agency of
 the State or locality responsible for licensing individual care managers,
 as meeting the standards established for such licensing.
 `(2) WAIVER OF RESTRICTION ON PROVISION OF CARE- The Secretary may waive
 the restriction of paragraph (1)(C)(ii) for a care manager if the Secretary
 is satisfied that--
 `(A) there is a qualified independent entity that will review and assure
 the quality of the care that is furnished by the manager (or by the entity
 affiliated with the manager) and that otherwise is subject to review by
 the manager, and
 `(B) the allocation of additional hours of community care under section
 2103(b) will be done in a manner that treats individuals equitably without
 regard to whether or not the manager (or an entity affiliated with the
 manager) is providing the care.
 `(b) SELECTION-
 `(1) BY INDIVIDUALS- Subject to paragraph (2), each certified individual
 may select the care manager who will provide care management services with
 respect to the individual.
 `(2) RESTRICTIONS ON SELECTION-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to subparagraph (B), a State may limit care
 managers that may be selected under paragraph (1) to--
 `(i) a care manager that is a public agency or organization,
 `(ii) a limited number of such managers, or
 `(iii) managers that meet additional qualifications.
 `(B) FREEDOM OF CHOICE- A State may not restrict an individual's choice among
 the care managers that may be selected consistent with subparagraph (A).
 `(3) DISQUALIFICATION- If an assessment agency determines that a care
 manager has not performed (or is no longer capable of performing) directly,
 efficiently, and effectively the duties of a care manager described in
 subsection (c) or otherwise no longer meets the qualifications of such
 a manager, the agency, after notice to the manager, may disqualify the
 manager from serving as a care manager under this title until such time
 as the assessment agency determines that such qualifications are met.
 `(c) DUTIES OF CARE MANAGERS- Each care manager shall be responsible for--
 `(1) establishing and periodically reviewing and revising plans of care
 for community care,
 `(2) arranging for and monitoring the provision and quality of (or, in
 the case described in subsection (a)(2), in providing) community care and
 authorizing payment for care, and
 `(3) allocating, in accordance with the guidelines established under
 section 2103(b)(3)(A), additional hours of community care under section
 2103(b) among different certified individuals whose plans of care are
 being monitored by the care manager.
In carrying out paragraph (2), the care manager shall assure that the care
is responsive to the preferences of patients in how the care is provided.
 `(d) PROHIBITING CONTRACTING OUT DUTIES- The Secretary shall not permit
 a care manager to contract out any of its duties.
 `(e) PAYMENT TO CARE MANAGERS-
 `(1) FOR ESTABLISHING PLANS OF CARE- Each care manager shall be paid under
 this title, for establishing a plan of care for a certified individual, a
 per capita amount in accordance with a schedule established by the Secretary.
 `(2) FOR MONITORING CARE AND REVIEWING AND REVISING PLANS OF CARE- Each
 care manager shall be paid under this title, for monitoring community
 care furnished to a certified individual and for periodically reviewing
 and revising the plans of care of such individuals, a monthly per capita
 fee in accordance with a schedule established by the Secretary.
 `(3) BASIS FOR SCHEDULES- The Secretary shall establish fee schedules
 under paragraphs (1) and (2) in a manner that--
 `(A) does not vary the fee based on the degree of an individual's
 disability, and
 `(B) takes into account costs that are reasonable and related to the cost
 of establishing plans of care or of monitoring care and reviewing and
 revising such plans of care, respectively.
`Part C--Payment
`COMMUNITY CARE
 `SEC. 2121. (a) IN GENERAL-
 `(1) GENERAL RULE- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this part,
 there shall be paid from the Federal Long-Term Care Trust Fund (established
 under section 2141), in the case of each certified individual who incurs
 expenses for community care with respect to which benefits are payable
 under this title, amounts equal to--
 `(A) the amount determined under a fee schedule (or other
 prospectively-determined reimbursement mechanism) established and annually
 adjusted by the Secretary under subsection (b), or
 `(B) the actual charges for such care,
whichever is less, reduced by the coinsurance amount established under
subsection (c).
 `(2) CARE MANAGER APPROVAL REQUIRED- No payment may be made under this
 title for community care, furnished under a plan of care of a care manager,
 unless--
 `(A) the provider furnishing the care has provided the care manager with
 a statement of the number of hours and type of community care furnished, and
 `(B) the care manager has authorized payment for such care.
 `(b) PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT METHODOLOGY-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT OF FEE SCHEDULES- The Secretary shall establish--
 `(A) a fee schedule (or other prospectively-determined reimbursement
 mechanism) for home-based services (as defined in section 2102(b)),
 `(B) such a schedule or mechanism for community-based services (as defined
 in section 2102(c)), and
 `(C) such a schedule or mechanism for respite care and hospice respite care
 (as defined in section 2102(d)),
consistent with paragraphs (2) through (4).
 `(2) NATIONAL SCHEDULES- Except as adjusted under paragraph (4), the
 schedules or mechanisms under paragraph (1) shall provide for uniform
 national rates that vary among different types of services based on the
 skill level required in providing the services, the resources required to
 provide the services, or similar measure of intensity of services.
 `(3) ANNUAL UPDATE- The Secretary shall provide for an annual adjustment
 in the rates under such schedules or mechanisms based on the Secretary's
 estimate, before the beginning of the calendar year involved, of the
 percentage by which the cost of the mix of goods and services covered by
 the schedule (based on an index of appropriately weighted indicators of
 changes in wages and prices which are representative of such mix of goods
 and services) for the year will exceed the cost of such mix of goods and
 services for the preceding year.
 `(4) ADJUSTMENT FOR DIFFERENT AREA WAGE LEVELS- The Secretary shall adjust
 the proportion (as estimated by the Secretary from time to time) of payment
 amounts under such a schedule or mechanism which are attributable to wages
 and wage-related costs of services covered by the schedule or mechanism for
 area differences in wage levels by a factor (established by the Secretary)
 reflecting the relative wage level for such services in the geographic area
 in which the services are provided compared to the national average wage
 level for such services. At least every 36 months, the Secretary shall
 update the factor under the preceding sentence on the basis of a survey
 conducted by the Secretary (and updated as appropriate) of the wages and
 wage-related costs for different services in the United States. To the
 extent determined feasible by the Secretary, such survey shall measure
 the earnings and paid hours of employment by occupational category.
 `(c) 20 PERCENT COINSURANCE- Subject to section 2131, in the case of a
 community care agency (or other entity acting under an arrangement with
 such agency) furnishing community care under this title, the agency (or
 entity) shall impose a charge for the community care in an amount equal
 to 20 percent of--
 `(1) the amount determined under the fee schedule or mechanism under
 subsection (b) for the care, or
 `(2) the agency's or entity's charge for the care,
whichever is less.
`NURSING FACILITY CARE
 `SEC. 2122. (a) PAYMENT RATES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL-
 `(A) PER DIEM PROSPECTIVE PAYMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS AND PERSONAL
 CARE- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this part, there shall be
 paid from the Federal Long-Term Care Trust Fund (established under section
 2141), in the case of each certified individual who incurs expenses for
 a day of nursing facility care with respect to which benefits are payable
 under this title, an amount equal to the sum of the following (reduced to
 the extent provided under subparagraph (B)):
 `(i) ADMINISTRATIVE PER DIEM- The administrative per diem rate specified
 under subsection (b)(1).
 `(ii) PERSONAL CARE PER DIEM- The product of--
 `(I) the personal care per diem rate specified in subsection (c), and
 `(II) the weighting factor for the classification of the individual (as
 established under subsection (d)).
 `(iii) CAPITAL PER DIEM- The capital per diem amount determined under
 subsection (e)(1).
 `(iv) RETURN-ON-EQUITY PER DIEM- The return-on-equity per diem amount
 (if applicable) specified in subsection (f).
 `(B) REDUCTION FOR COINSURANCE, RESIDENT-SPECIFIC DEDUCTIBLE- The amount
 otherwise payable under this paragraph to a nursing facility shall be
 reduced by the coinsurance or resident-specific deductible, as appropriate,
 required under paragraph (2).
 `(2) COINSURANCE; RESIDENT-SPECIFIC DEDUCTIBLE-
 `(A) SHORT-TERM NURSING FACILITY CARE-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Subject to section 2131, a nursing facility shall impose
 a charge for each day of short-term nursing facility care (as defined in
 section 2101(a)(3)(A)) in an amount equal to 20 percent of the average per
 diem rate determined under clause (ii) for the geographic area in which
 the facility is located.
 `(ii) DETERMINATION OF AVERAGE PER DIEM RATE- For purposes of clause (i)
 for nursing facility care in a geographic area, the Secretary shall determine
 before the beginning of each year for which benefits are available under this
 title for nursing facility care (pursuant to section 2101(d)(2)) with respect
 to nursing facility care to be provided in the year, an average per diem
 rate based on the Secretary's estimate of the weighted average (converted
 into an average per diem amount) of the sums described in paragraph (1)(A)
 (determined without regard to any reduction under paragraph (1)(B)) for
 the area.
 `(B) LONG-TERM NURSING FACILITY CARE- A nursing facility shall impose
 charges for long-term nursing facility care in the amount of the coinsurance
 and resident-specific deductible specified under subsection (a)(2) and
 section 2133.
 `(b) ADMINISTRATIVE PER DIEM RATE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of subsection (a)(1)(A)(i), the administrative
 per diem rate for a facility in a State in a cost reporting period ending
 in a basing period (as defined in subsection (g)(2)) is equal to the sum of--
 `(A) the lesser of--
 `(i) the base facility administrative per diem rate (determined under
 paragraph (2)) for the facility, or
 `(ii) the limiting administrative per diem rate (determined under paragraph
 (3)) for facilities in the State applicable to the period; and
 `(B) the base efficiency incentive per diem amount (specified in paragraph
 (4)),
increased (or decreased), for a cost reporting period ending after the
first year of the basing period, by the percentage increase (or decrease),
respectively, in the administrative marketbasket index (established under
paragraph (6)) from the midpoint of the cost reporting period ending in the
first year of the basing period to the midpoint of the cost reporting period
involved, and adjusted to reflect area wage levels in the manner specified
in paragraph (5).
 `(2) BASE FACILITY ADMINISTRATIVE PER DIEM RATE-
 `(A) FIRST BASING PERIOD- The Secretary shall determine, for each nursing
 facility for the first year of the basing period beginning in 1996 a base
 facility administrative per diem rate equal to--
 `(i) the facility-specific administrative per diem described in subparagraph
 (C) computed for the cost reporting period which ended in 1991,
 `(ii) if the cost reporting period referred to in clause (i) ended before
 December 31, 1991, updated by the estimated average rate of change of
 administrative costs of nursing facilities industry-wide in the State
 between the midpoint of the cost reporting period and July 1, 1991, and
 `(iii) further updated for 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, and 1996 by the percentage
 change in the administrative marketbasket index between July 1, 1991,
 and July 1 of the year involved, as estimated by the Secretary before the
 beginning of the basing period.
For an examination of the update provided under clause (iii), see section
2125(c)(2).
 `(B) SUBSEQUENT BASING PERIOD- The Secretary shall determine, for each
 nursing facility for the first year of each subsequent basing period, a base
 facility administrative per diem rate equal to the sum of the following:
 `(i) MOST RECENT COST REPORTING PERIOD- The product of .5 and the
 facility-specific administrative per diem for the most recent cost reporting
 period ending at least 1 year before the first year of the basing period,
 increased by the percentage change in the administrative marketbasket
 index between the midpoint of that cost reporting period and July 1 of the
 first year of the basing period, as estimated by the Secretary before the
 beginning of the basing period.
 `(ii) SECOND MOST RECENT COST REPORTING PERIOD- The product of .375 and
 the facility-specific administrative per diem for the most recent cost
 reporting period ending at least 2 years before the first year of the
 basing period, increased by the percentage change in the administrative
 marketbasket index between the midpoint of that cost reporting period
 and July 1 of the first year of the basing period, as estimated by the
 Secretary before the beginning of the basing period.
 `(iii) THIRD MOST RECENT COST REPORTING PERIOD- The product of .125 and
 the facility-specific administrative per diem for the most recent cost
 reporting period ending at least 3 years before the first year of the
 basing period, increased by the percentage change in the administrative
 marketbasket index between the midpoint of that cost reporting period
 and July 1 of the first year of the basing period, as estimated by the
 Secretary before the beginning of the basing period.
 `(C) FACILITY-SPECIFIC ADMINISTRATIVE PER DIEM-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- In this subsection, the `facility-specific administrative
 per diem' for a facility for a cost reporting period is--
 `(I) the facility's total administrative costs (as defined in subsection
 (g)(1)) for such period, divided by
 `(II) the total number of resident days of nursing facility care at the
 facility in the period,
standardized by the Secretary in order to adjust for variations among
facilities by area within a State in the average facility wage level.
 `(ii) USE OF MEDICAID COST REPORTS FOR FIRST BASING PERIOD- The Secretary
 shall determine facility-specific administrative per diems for the basing
 period beginning with 1996 based on cost reports filed under title XIX
 (with appropriate adjustments to reflect ratios of reported costs to costs
 that would be allowed after audit).
 `(3) LIMITING ADMINISTRATIVE PER DIEM RATE- The Secretary shall determine,
 for nursing facilities in each State for the first year of each basing
 period, a limiting administrative per diem rate equal--
 `(A) in the case of the basing period beginning in 1996, to the rate
 corresponding to the 80th percentile (weighted by resident days) of the base
 facility administrative per diem rates determined under paragraph (2)(A)
 for facilities in the State for the first year of that basing period, or
 `(B) in the case of a subsequent basing period, the rate described in
 subparagraph (A) increased by the percentage change in the administrative
 marketbasket index between the midpoint of the first year of the first basing
 period and the midpoint of the first year of the basing period involved.
In applying such rate to any specific facility the cost reporting period
of which is not a calendar year, the Secretary shall adjust the rate, using
changes in the administrative marketbasket index, to reflect appropriately
the difference between the midpoint of the facility's cost reporting period
and July 1.
 `(4) BASE EFFICIENCY INCENTIVE PER DIEM AMOUNT- For purposes of paragraph
 (1)(B), the base efficiency incentive per diem amount for a facility in
 a State for a basing period is equal to 1/2 of the product, determined
 for the first year of the basing period, of--
 (A) the ratio of (i) the facility's base facility administrative per diem
 rate (determined under paragraph (2)), to (ii) the limiting administrative
 per diem rate (determined under paragraph (3) for facilities in the
 State); and
 (B) the amount (if any) by which (i) the limiting administrative per diem
 rate (determined under paragraph (3) for facilities in the State), exceeds
 (ii) the facility's base facility administrative per diem rate (determined
 under paragraph (2)).
 `(5) ADJUSTMENT FOR DIFFERENT AREA WAGE LEVELS- The Secretary shall
 adjust the proportion (as estimated by the Secretary from time to time)
 of a facility's administrative costs which are attributable to wages and
 wage-related costs for area differences in facility wage levels by a factor
 (established by the Secretary) reflecting the relative facility wage level
 in the geographic area of the facility compared to the Statewide average
 facility wage level. At least every 36 months, the Secretary shall update
 the factor under the preceding sentence on the basis of a survey conducted
 by the Secretary (and updated as appropriate) of the wages and wage-related
 costs of nursing facility care in States. To the extent determined feasible
 by the Secretary, such survey shall measure the earnings and paid hours
 of employment by occupational category.
 `(6) ADMINISTRATIVE MARKETBASKET INDEX- The Secretary shall establish an
 index which measures, through appropriately weighted indicators of wages and
 prices, the change in the cost of the mix of goods and services (including
 personnel costs but excluding nonoperating costs) comprising administrative
 costs of nursing facility care. In this subsection, the term `administrative
 marketbasket index' means the index established under this paragraph.
 `(c) PERSONAL CARE PER DIEM RATE-
 `(1) FORMULA-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to the personal care per diem floor specified in
 paragraph (4), for purposes of subsection (a)(1)(A)(ii)(I) the personal
 care per diem rate for a facility in a State in a cost reporting period
 ending in a basing period is--
 `(i) the lesser of the amounts specified in subparagraph (B), increased
 (or decreased), for a cost reporting period ending after the first year of
 the basing period, by the percentage increase (or decrease), respectively,
 in the personal care marketbasket index (established under paragraph (6))
 from the midpoint of the cost reporting period ending in the first year of
 the basing period to the midpoint of the cost reporting period involved; or
 `(ii) the facility's actual per diem personal care costs for the previous
 cost reporting period increased (or decreased) by the percentage income
 (or decrease) in the personal care marketbasket index from the midpoint of
 the previous cost reporting period to the midpoint of the cost reporting
 period involved,
whichever is less, adjusted to reflect area wage levels in the manner
specified in paragraph (5).
 `(B) AMOUNTS- The amounts specified in this subparagraph for a facility
 in a State are as follows:
 `(i) The base facility personal care per diem rate (determined under
 paragraph (2)) for the facility.
 `(ii) The limiting personal care per diem rate (determined under paragraph
 (3)) for facilities in the State.
 `(2) BASE FACILITY PERSONAL CARE PER DIEM RATE- The Secretary shall
 determine, for each nursing facility for each basing period, a base
 facility personal care per diem rate. Such rate shall be determined in
 the same manner as the Secretary determines administrative per diem rates
 under subsection (b)(2) (assuming that `personal care' were substituted for
 `administrative' each place it appears in such subsection).
 `(3) LIMITING PERSONAL CARE PER DIEM RATE- The Secretary shall determine, for
 nursing facilities in each State for the first year of each basing period,
 a limiting personal care per diem rate. Such rate shall be determined in the
 same manner as the Secretary determines a limiting administrative per diem
 rate under subsection (b)(3) (assuming that `personal care' were substituted
 for `administrative' each place it appears in such subsection). Such rate
 shall be adjusted and applied with respect to cost reporting periods of
 specific facilities in the manner described in such subsection.
 `(4) BASE FLOOR PERSONAL CARE PER DIEM AMOUNT-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to subparagraph (C), in no case shall the
 personal care per diem rate for a facility in a State under paragraph
 (1)(A) in a cost reporting period in a basing period be less than the
 base floor personal care per diem amount (specified in subparagraph (B))
 increased (or decreased), for a cost reporting period ending after the
 first year of the basing period, by the percentage increase (or decrease),
 respectively, in the personal care marketbasket index from the midpoint of
 the cost reporting period ending in the first year of the basing period to
 the midpoint of the cost reporting period involved and adjusted to reflect
 area wage levels in the manner specified in paragraph (5).
 `(B) BASE FLOOR PERSONAL CARE PER DIEM AMOUNT- For purposes of subparagraph
 (A), the base floor personal care per diem amount for a facility in a
 State for any part of a cost reporting period occurring during--
 `(i) the first 12-month period in which this title is effective, is
 equal to--
 `(I) the rate corresponding to the 20th percentile (weighted by resident
 days) of the base facility personal care per diem rates (determined
 under paragraph (2)) for all facilities in the State for portions of cost
 reporting periods occurring the 12-month period, or
 `(II) the rate corresponding to the 20th percentile (weighted by resident
 days) of the base facility personal care per diem rates (determined under
 paragraph (2)) for all facilities in the United States for portions of
 cost reporting periods occurring the 12-month period,
whichever is greater; or
 `(ii) a succeeding 12-month period, is equal to--
 `(I) the rate corresponding to the 30th percentile (weighted by resident
 days) of the base facility personal care per diem rates (determined
 under paragraph (2)) for all facilities in the State for portions of cost
 reporting periods occurring the 12-month period, or
 `(II) the rate corresponding to the 30th percentile (weighted by resident
 days) of the base facility personal care per diem rates (determined under
 paragraph (2)) for all facilities in the United States for portions of
 cost reporting periods occurring the 12-month period,
whichever is greater.
 `(C) MUST SPEND FUNDS TO GET BASE FLOOR- Subparagraph (A) shall not apply
 to a facility for a cost reporting period if the facility's actual per diem
 personal care costs for the period is less than the base floor personal
 care per diem amount specified in subparagraph (B).
 `(5) ADJUSTMENT FOR DIFFERENT AREA WAGE LEVELS- The Secretary shall adjust
 a proportion of a facility's personal care costs which are attributable to
 wages and wage-related costs for area differences in facility wage levels
 in the same manner as such an adjustment is made under subsection (b)(5).
 `(6) PERSONAL CARE MARKETBASKET INDEX- The Secretary shall establish an
 index which measures, through appropriately weighted indicators of wages and
 prices, the change in the cost of the mix of goods and services (including
 personnel costs but excluding nonoperating costs) comprising personal
 care costs (as defined in subsection (g)(4)) of nursing facility care.
 In this subsection, the term `personal care marketbasket index' means the
 index established under this paragraph.
 `(d) WEIGHTING FACTORS-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT OF CLASSIFICATION LEVELS- The Secretary shall establish
 a classification of individuals receiving nursing facility care based on
 individuals' level of impairment and need for personal care services under
 a plan of care. The Secretary shall establish, by not later than 6 months
 before the effective date of this title, at least 3 classification levels
 under this paragraph.
 `(2) WEIGHTING FACTORS- For each such classification level, the Secretary
 shall assign an appropriate weighting factor which reflects the relative
 costs of personal care services expected to be used with respect to
 individuals who are classified at that level compared to individuals who
 are classified at other levels.
 `(3) ADJUSTMENTS- The Secretary may, from time to time, adjust the
 classifications and weighting factors established under this subsection
 to reflect changes in treatment patterns, technology, and other factors
 which may change the relative use of nursing facility resources.
 `(e) CAPITAL PER DIEM PAYMENT AMOUNT-
 `(1) COMPUTATION- Subject to paragraph (6), the Secretary shall determine
 for each nursing facility for each cost reporting period a capital per
 diem payment amount equal to the capital adjustment percentage (specified
 in paragraph (3)) for the facility multiplied by the lesser of--
 `(A) the facility-specific capital per diem payment amount (specified in
 paragraph (2)) for the facility, or
 `(B) the limiting capital per diem payment amount (determined under paragraph
 (4)).
Such per diem amount shall be preliminarily determined on a prospective basis,
but is subject to retrospective adjustment to reflect actual costs, actual
capital cost/assessed value ratios, and actual resident days of care provided.
 `(2) FACILITY-SPECIFIC CAPITAL PER DIEM PAYMENT AMOUNT- For purposes of
 paragraph (1), the facility-specific capital per diem payment amount for
 a facility is the actual costs of capital-related items (as defined in
 subsection (g)(3)) of the facility relating to nursing facility services,
 divided by the greater of--
 `(A) the total number of resident days of nursing facility care provided
 in the period in the facility, or
 `(B) the total number of resident days of nursing facility care that could
 have been provided in the period in the facility if the facility had an
 average occupancy rate of 85 percent during the period.
 `(3) CAPITAL ADJUSTMENT PERCENTAGE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- For purposes of paragraph (1), if the capital cost/assessed
 value ratio (as defined in subparagraph (B)) of a facility in a State is--
 `(i) less than a ratio that corresponds to the 33rd percentile of such
 ratio for such nursing facilities (determined State-wide on a bed weighted
 basis), the capital adjustment percentage for the facility is 102 percent;
 `(ii) not less than a ratio that corresponds to the 33rd percentile, but
 less than the 66th percentile, of such ratio for such nursing facilities
 (determined State-wide on a bed weighted basis), the capital adjustment
 percentage for the facility is 100 percent;
 `(iii) not less than a ratio that corresponds to the 66th percentile, but
 less than the 90th percentile, of such ratio for such nursing facilities
 (determined State-wide on a bed weighted basis), the capital adjustment
 percentage for the facility is 98 percent; or
 `(iv) at least equal to a ratio that corresponds to the 90th percentile
 of such ratio for such nursing facilities (determined State-wide on a bed
 weighted basis), the capital adjustment percentage for the facility is
 95 percent.
 `(B) CAPITAL COST/ASSESSED VALUE RATIO-
 `(i) DEFINED- In subparagraph (A), the term `capital cost/assessed
 value ratio' means, for a facility, the ratio of (I) the costs of fixed
 capital-related items (computed on a per bed basis) of the facility, to
 (II) the assessed value of such items (as determined in accordance with
 standards and methods specified by the Secretary).
 `(ii) METHOD OF DETERMINATION- The capital cost/assessed value ratio shall
 be determined in a manner that--
 `(I) takes into account major capital improvements of a facility in a
 timely manner,
 `(II) provides for assessments of value of fixed capital-related items of
 each nursing facility not less often than every 5 years, and
 `(III) provides (in the determination of percentiles of State-wide ratios)
 for the application of appropriate trend factors to effect valuation
 comparisons on an equitable basis.
 `(4) LIMITING CAPITAL PER BED AMOUNT-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- For purposes of paragraph (1)(B), the Secretary shall
 determine, for nursing facilities in each State for the first year of
 each basing period, a limiting capital per bed amount equal to the amount
 corresponding to the 80th percentile (weighted by resident days) of the
 capital per bed ratio (as defined in subparagraph (B)) for facilities in the
 State for the first year of that basing period. The limiting capital per bed
 amount applied to any specific facility for a cost reporting period is equal
 to the amount determined under the previous sentence adjusted to reflect
 the Secretary's estimate of the average change in capital per bed ratio,
 for facilities in the State, between the midpoint of the year for which such
 amount was most recently determined and the midpoint of the cost reporting
 period of the facility in which the limiting amount will be applied. However,
 the Secretary may adjust such amount as applied to facilities in an area to
 reflect differences between the State-wide average cost of capital-related
 items and such average cost for facilities in the area.
 `(B) CAPITAL PER BED RATIO DEFINED- In subparagraph (A), the term `capital
 per bed ratio' means, for a year or period, for a facility the ratio of
 (i) the costs of capital-related items for nursing facility services in
 the facility during the year or period, to (ii) the average number of
 licensed nursing beds in the facility during the year or period.
 `(5) DETERMINATION OF CAPITAL COSTS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this subsection, costs for a facility for
 capital-related items shall be determined based on the historical costs
 of the items, recognizing interest, depreciation, and rent and, except
 as provided in subparagraph (C), not subject to adjustment as a result of
 the sale, transfer, or refinancing of the items (or of the corporation or
 other entity that owns the items).
 `(B) LIMITATION ON RENT- In no case shall costs for rent determined under
 subparagraph (A) for a capital-related item be greater than the interest
 and depreciation with respect to such item if the item were owned, rather
 than rented.
 `(C) ADJUSTMENT OF HISTORICAL CAPITAL COSTS- In the case of the sale,
 transfer, or refinancing of a capital-related item, the Secretary shall
 permit the depreciation and interest for the item to be adjusted to take
 into account the value of such item in such financial transaction, except
 that such adjustment may not be made more often than once every 10 years.
 `(6) REDUCTION FOR INCREASE IN BED-TO-USER-RATIO-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraph (C), if the Secretary
 determines that, as of October in a year, the bed-to-user-ratio described
 in subparagraph (B) for the State exceeds the greater of--
 `(i) such ratio for the State as of October 1991, or
 `(ii) such ratio for the United States as of October 1991,
the capital payment amount under this subsection, and any return-on-equity
per diem amount under subsection (f), for days in the following year shall
be eliminated.
 `(B) BED-TO-USER-RATIO DESCRIBED-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- For purposes of subparagraph (A), the `bed-to-user-ratio'
 described in this subparagraph, for a State or the United States for a
 month, is the sum, for each age-cohort (described in clause (ii)), of the
 ratios of--
 `(I) the number of licensed nursing facility beds in the State or United
 States, respectively, as of the month, to
 `(II) the product of the use-weighting factor for individuals in the
 age-cohort (as determined under clause (iii)) and the average number of
 thousands of individuals in the age-cohort residing in the State or United
 States, respectively, as of such month.
 `(ii) AGE-COHORTS- For purposes of this subparagraph, individuals within each
 of the following age ranges are considered to be in a separate age-cohort:
 `(I) Under age 65.
 `(II) Age 65 through age 70.
 `(III) Age 71 through age 75.
 `(IV) Age 76 through age 80.
 `(V) Age 81 through age 85.
 `(VI) Over age 85.
 `(iii) COMPUTATION OF USE-WEIGHTING FACTOR- The Secretary shall determine
 use-weighting factors for individuals in each age-cohort which reflect
 (using data as of October 1991) the likelihood of individuals in the
 cohort receiving nursing facility care in a month.
 `(C) EXCEPTION IF NO INCREASE IN LICENSED BEDS- Subparagraph (A) shall
 not apply to a State for days in a year if the number of licensed nursing
 facility beds in the State as of October of the previous year does not
 exceed such number as of October 1991.
 `(f) RETURN ON EQUITY FOR FOR-PROFIT NURSING FACILITIES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- With respect to a nursing facility (other than a public
 or nonprofit private nursing facility) that receives payment for nursing
 facility services under this title, subject to subsection (e)(6), for
 purposes of subsection (a)(1)(A)(iv) the return-on-equity per diem amount for
 the facility for a cost reporting period under this subsection is equal to--
 `(A) the average rate of return during such period of the Federal Long-Term
 Care Trust Fund of the Federal share (as defined in paragraph (2)) of the
 equity in the facility, divided by
 `(B) the total number of resident days of nursing facility care provided
 in the period in the facility.
 `(2) FEDERAL SHARE DEFINED- In paragraph (1), the term `Federal share'
 means, with respect to a facility for a cost reporting period, the ratio
 of (A) the total number of resident days of nursing facility care in the
 facility for the period for which payment is made under this title, to (B)
 the total number of resident days of nursing facility care in the facility
 for the period.
 `(3) DETERMINATION OF EQUITY- For purposes of paragraph (1), the equity
 in a nursing facility shall be determined in accordance with standards
 established by the Secretary and consistent with rules for the adjustment
 of historical capital costs.
 `(g) GENERAL DEFINITIONS- In this section:
 `(1) ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS- The term `administrative costs' means costs
 of nursing facility care other than personal care costs (as defined in
 paragraph (4)) or costs of capital-related items.
 `(2) BASING PERIOD- The term `basing period' means a 3-calendar-year period
 beginning with 1996 or beginning with each 3rd calendar year thereafter.
 `(3) CAPITAL-RELATED ITEMS- The term `capital-related items' does not
 include any return on equity capital.
 `(4) PERSONAL CARE COSTS- The term `personal care costs' means costs
 associated with direct resident care which the Secretary identifies
 as varying by needs of residents and includes costs of raw food, food
 preparation, and laundry services.
`CERTIFICATION FOR PAYMENT; CONDITIONS OF PAYMENT
 `SEC. 2123. (a) IN GENERAL- Payment for care under this title may be made
 only to providers and facilities that meet conditions of participation
 established under this title and only if--
 `(1)(A) in the case of community care provided under the supervision of
 a care manager, the manager has filed written authorization for payment
 for such care, or, in the case of nursing facility care provided to an
 individual, a written request (signed by such individual, except in cases
 in which the Secretary finds it impracticable for the individual to do
 so) is filed for such payment, in such form, in such manner, and by such
 person or persons as the Secretary may specify, no later than the close
 of the period of 1 calendar year following the year in which such care is
 furnished (deeming any care furnished in the last 3 calendar months of any
 calendar year to have been furnished in the succeeding calendar year); and
 `(2) an assessment agency certifies (and recertifies, where such care
 is furnished over a period of time, in such cases, with such frequency,
 and accompanied by such supporting material, appropriate to the individual
 involved, as may be provided by the Secretary) that--
 `(A) in the case of community care or nursing facility care provided to
 an individual, the individual is a certified individual, and
 `(B) in the case of community care provided to an individual, a plan
 for furnishing such care to such individual has been established and is
 periodically reviewed and revised by such agency and the care is provided
 pursuant to the plan of care.
 `(b) SPECIAL PROVISIONS- To the extent provided by the Secretary, the
 certification and recertification requirements of subsection (a)(2)
 shall be deemed satisfied where, at a later date, an assessment agency
 makes an affirmative certification of the kind required, but only where
 such certification is accompanied by such evidence as may be required by
 the Secretary.
 `(c) INFORMATION REQUIRED- No payment shall be made to any community care
 agency, nursing facility, or other person under this title unless there has
 been furnished such information as may be necessary in order to determine
 the amounts due such agency, facility, or other person under this title
 for the period with respect to which amounts are being paid.
 `(d) FEDERAL PROVIDERS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (2), no payment may be made under this
 title to any Federal agency or facility, except an agency or facility which
 the Secretary determines is providing services to the public generally
 as a community agency or facility; and no such payment may be made to
 any agency, facility, or other person for any item or service which such
 agency, facility, or person is obligated by a law of, or a contract with,
 the United States to render at public expense.
 `(2) EXCEPTION FOR INDIAN HEALTH SERVICES- As provided by the Secretary,
 payment may be made under this title for covered services provided by
 facilities of the Indian Health Service in the same manner in which,
 pursuant to section 1880, payment under title XVIII is permitted to be
 made to facilities of such Service.
`USE OF CARRIERS
 `SEC. 2124. The Secretary is authorized to enter into contracts with carriers
 (described in subsection (f) of section 1842) to perform functions under
 this title of the type described in such section, in the same manner as the
 Secretary is authorized to enter into contracts under such section. The
 amount of any payment made by a carrier for services provided under this
 title shall be based exclusively on payment methodologies provided under
 this title and not on those methodologies described in such section or
 title XVIII.
`LONG-TERM CARE PAYMENT ASSESSMENT COMMISSION
 `SEC. 2125. (a) ESTABLISHMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Director of the Congressional Office of Technology
 Assessment (in this section referred to as the `Director' and the `Office'
 respectively) shall provide for appointment of a Long-Term Care Payment
 Assessment Commission (in this section referred to as the `Commission'),
 to be composed of independent experts appointed by the Director. The
 provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointment in the
 competitive service, shall not apply to such appointments.
 `(2) NUMBER OF MEMBERS- The Commission shall consist of
 13 individuals. Members of the Commission shall first be appointed no
 later than July 1, 1993, for a term of 3 years, except that the Director
 may provide initially for such shorter terms as will insure that (on a
 continuing basis) the terms of no more than 5 members expire in any one year.
 `(3) COMPOSITION- The membership of the Commission shall include (but need
 not be limited to) providers of community care and of nursing facility
 care, health care professionals, individuals skilled in the conduct and
 interpretation of biomedical, health services, and health economics research,
 and representatives of consumers and the recipients of community care and
 nursing facility residents.
 `(b) GENERAL DUTIES- The Commission shall--
 `(1) make recommendations to the Secretary and Congress annually regarding
 the appropriate payment rates to be established for community care and
 nursing facility care under this part, and
 `(2) conduct studies regarding the delivery and payment for community care
 and nursing facility care under this title.
 `(c) CONSIDERATIONS IN MAKING RECOMMENDATIONS- In making its recommendations
 under subsection (b)(1), the Commission shall examine--
 `(1) the methodology used in establishing payment rates for community care;
 `(2) the factor used in making year-to-year updates in payment rates
 (including the updates provided under section 2122(b)(2)(A)(iii));
 `(3) adjustments made on the basis of location of community care agencies
 and nursing facilities; and
 `(4) costs reports used in determining payment for nursing facility care
 and the consistency of definitions used in establishing allowable costs
 of such care.
 `(d) STUDIES- The Commission shall provide for the following studies
 (and reports to Congress respecting such studies):
 `(1) STUDY OF ADMISSIONS- A study of the factors influencing nursing facility
 admissions with respect to individuals who are entitled to benefits under
 this title. Such study shall include an examination of the length of the
 period between the date of such an individual's application for admission
 and the date of admission and the occupancy rate of facilities during that
 period. The Commission shall report to Congress by not later than January 1,
 1997, on the results of such study.
 `(2) STUDY OF BED-TO-USER-RATIOS- A study of the appropriate ratio of the
 number of licensed nursing facility beds to the number of thousands of
 individuals in different age groups in the population required to provide
 cost effective care for moderately or severely disabled individuals. The
 Commission shall report to Congress by not later than January 1, 1994,
 on the results of such study and shall include such recommendations for
 changes in legislation (including section 2122(e)(6)) as may be appropriate
 to provide for the appropriate number of nursing facility beds.
 `(3) STUDY OF PAYMENT RATES FOR NURSING FACILITY CARE- A study, based
 on cost reports provided under this title, on whether the payment rates
 provided under section 2122 for nursing facility care reflect the costs
 that are necessary in the efficient delivery of needed nursing facility
 care. The Commission shall report to Congress by not later than January 1,
 1997, on the results of such study and shall include such recommendations
 for changes in payment rates under such section as may be appropriate.
 `(4) STUDY OF LEVELS OF IMPAIRMENT- A study of the number of levels of
 impairment, and amount of services for which payment may be made for such
 levels, under this title, to determine whether the services and payment
 levels are appropriate to meet the care needs of moderately or severely
 disabled individuals. The Commission shall report to Congress by not later
 than January 1, 1997, on the results of such study and shall include such
 recommendations for changes in the number of (or amount of services with
 respect to) such levels under this title as may be appropriate.
 `(e) INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS- The following
 provisions of section 1886(e)(6) shall apply to the Commission in the same
 manner as they apply to the Prospective Payment Assessment Commission:
 `(1) Subparagraph (C) (relating to staffing and administration).
 `(2) Subparagraph (D) (relating to reimbursement for travel expenses).
 `(3) Subparagraph (F) (relating to access to information).
 `(4) Subparagraph (G) (relating to use of funds).
 `(5) Subparagraph (H) (relating to periodic GAO audits).
 `(6) Subparagraph (J) (relating to requests for appropriations).
 `(f) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be
 appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of
 this section. Such sums shall be payable from the Federal Long-Term Care
 Trust Fund.
`Part D--Low-Income Assistance and Financial Eligibility for Long-Term
Nursing Facility Services
`ASSISTANCE FOR LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUALS FOR COINSURANCE FOR COMMUNITY CARE
AND SHORT-TERM NURSING FACILITY CARE AND CHARGES FOR ASSESSMENTS
 `SEC. 2131. (a) INDIVIDUALS WITH INCOME BELOW THE POVERTY LEVEL- Except as
 otherwise provided in this section, in the case of a certified individual
 whose family adjusted total income (as defined in subsection (f)(2))
 does not exceed 100 percent of the official poverty line (as defined in
 subsection (f)(4)), the low-income assistance under this part shall consist
 of waiver of--
 `(1) the coinsurance under section 2121(c) for the individual with respect
 to community care and coinsurance under section 2122(a)(2)(A) for the
 individual with respect to short-term nursing facility care, and
 `(2) charges for assessments and reassessments under section 2111(b).
 `(b) INDIVIDUALS WITH INCOME BELOW TWICE THE POVERTY LEVEL-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In the case of a certified individual whose family
 adjusted total income exceeds 100 percent but is less than 200 percent,
 of the official poverty line, the low-income assistance under this part
 shall consist of--
 `(A) the percentage coinsurance applied under sections 2121(c) and
 2122(a)(2) being reduced by the subsidy percentage multiplied by the
 percentage coinsurance otherwise applied, and
 `(B) charges for assessments and reassessments under section 2111(b) being
 reduced by the subsidy percentage multiplied by the charges otherwise
 applicable.
 `(2) SUBSIDY PERCENTAGE DEFINED- In this subsection, the term `subsidy
 percentage' means the number of percentage points (rounded to the nearest
 multiple of 5 percentage points) by which the family's adjusted total
 income (expressed as a percent of the applicable official poverty line)
 is less than 200 percent.
 `(c) APPLICATIONS FOR ASSISTANCE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to subsection (d), any individual who seeks
 assistance under this section (with respect to himself or herself or a
 family member) shall submit a written application, by person or mail, to
 the assessment agency which made the affirmative certification under part B.
 `(2) BASIS FOR DETERMINATION-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to subparagraph (B) and subsection (d),
 eligibility for assistance under this part shall be based on 4 times the
 family adjusted total income during the 3 months preceding the month in
 which the application is filed.
 `(B) EXCEPTIONS PROCESS- The Secretary shall establish a process under which
 individuals who experience an unforeseen and significant change of income
 in a month may have eligibility for assistance under this part based on the
 family adjusted total income projected for the 3 months beginning with the
 month in which the application is filed, if the application of subparagraph
 (A) would otherwise create a significant hardship and unreasonably delay
 the provision of needed care.
 `(C) TIMELINESS- The assessment agency shall make a determination on an
 application for assistance under this part within 14 days after the date
 of submission of the application.
 `(3) FORM AND CONTENTS- An application for assistance under this section
 shall be in a form and manner specified by the Secretary and shall require
 the provision of information necessary to make the determinations described
 in paragraph (2).
 `(4) FREQUENCY OF APPLICATIONS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- An application for assistance under this section may be
 filed at any time during the year and may be resubmitted (but not more
 frequently than once every 3 months) based upon a change of income or
 family composition.
 `(B) NEED TO REAPPLY- In order to remain eligible for assistance under
 this section, an individual must resubmit an application for assistance
 at the time of each reassessment under section 2111, but in no case less
 often than once every six months. The Secretary shall provide for notice
 by assessment agencies, at least 30 days (to the extent practicable)
 before the date of assistance under this section will otherwise terminate,
 reminding individuals of the requirement of this subparagraph.
 `(5) TIMING OF ASSISTANCE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- If an application for assistance under this part is
 filed during a month, assistance under this section shall be available
 for coinsurance for expenses incurred on or after the first day of the month.
 `(B) WELFARE RECIPIENTS- In the case of an individual with respect to whom
 an application for assistance is not required because of subsection (d),
 in applying subparagraph (A), the date of approval of assistance described
 in such subsection shall be considered the date of filing of an application
 for assistance under this section.
 `(6) VERIFICATION- In the case of an application for assistance under
 this section for individuals who have been certified under part B by an
 assessment agency, the agency shall provide for verification, on a sample
 basis or other basis, of the information supplied in those applications.
 `(7) FILING OF APPLICATION DEFINED- Except as provided in paragraph (5)(B),
 for purposes of this subsection, an application under this section is
 considered to be `filed' on the date on which the complete application,
 including all documentation required to act on the application, has been
 filed with the appropriate assessment agency.
 `(d) TREATMENT OF CERTAIN CASH ASSISTANCE RECIPIENTS- In the case of a
 family that has been determined to be eligible for aid under part A or
 E of title IV or an individual who has been determined to be eligible
 for supplemental security income benefits under title XVI, the family or
 individual is deemed, without the need to file an application for assistance
 under this subsection, to have adjusted total income below 100 percent of
 the official poverty line applicable to a family of the size involved.
 `(e) PENALTIES FOR INACCURATE INFORMATION-
 `(1) INTEREST FOR UNDERSTATEMENTS- Each individual who knowingly understates
 income reported in an application for assistance under this section or
 otherwise makes a material misrepresentation of information in such an
 application shall be liable to the Federal Government for excess payments
 made based on such understatement or misrepresentation, and for interest
 on such excess payments at a rate specified by the Secretary.
 `(2) PENALTIES FOR MISREPRESENTATION- Each individual who knowingly
 misrepresents material information in an application for assistance
 under this section shall be liable to the Federal Government for $1,000
 or, if greater, three times the excess payments made based on such
 misrepresentation.
 `(f) DEFINITIONS- In this section:
 `(1) ADJUSTED TOTAL INCOME DEFINED-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `adjusted total income' means--
 `(i) adjusted gross income (as defined in section 62(a) of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986), determined without the application of paragraphs
 (6) and (7) of such section and without the application of section 162(l)
 of such Code, plus
 `(ii) the amount of social security benefits (described in section 86(d)
 of such Code) which is not includable in gross income under section 86 of
 such Code.
 `(B) REDUCTION FOR EXTRAORDINARY MEDICAL EXPENSES- The Secretary shall
 provide for the reduction of the adjusted total income for a family by
 extraordinary and disproportionate expenses for medical care (other than
 care for which benefits are provided under this title) for family members.
 `(2) FAMILY ADJUSTED TOTAL INCOME- The term `family adjusted total income'
 means, with respect to a certified individual who--
 `(A) is married or over 18 years of age, the sum of the adjusted total
 income for the individual and the individual's spouse (if any); or
 `(B) is unmarried and under 19 years of age and--
 `(i) is a resident of a nursing facility, the adjusted total income for
 the individual, or
 `(ii) is not a resident of a nursing facility, the adjusted total income
 for the individual and for the individual's parents or guardians.
 `(3) FAMILY SIZE- In determining the family size to be applied under this
 section, with respect to a certified individual who--
 `(A) is married or over 18 years of age, the family is considered to
 include the individual, the individual's spouse (if any), and any unmarried
 dependent child (or legal ward) of the individual or spouse; or
 `(B) is unmarried and under 19 years of age and--
 `(i) is a resident of a nursing facility, the family size is 1, or
 `(ii) is not a resident of a nursing facility, the family is considered
 to include the individual, the individual's parent or parents (or legal
 guardian or guardian) with whom the individual resides, and any unmarried
 dependent children (or legal wards) of such a parent (or guardian).
 `(4) OFFICIAL POVERTY LINE- The term `official poverty line' means,
 for an individual in a family, the official poverty line (as defined by
 the Office of Management and Budget, and revised annually in accordance
 with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981)
 applicable to a family of the size involved.
`RESOURCE PROTECTION FOR LONG-TERM NURSING FACILITY CARE
 `SEC. 2132. (a) PROTECTED RESOURCE LEVEL-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- With respect to benefits under this title for a certified
 individual for long-term nursing facility care, subject to paragraph (2),
 the protected resource level is--
 `(A) $30,000 in the case of an unmarried individual, or
 `(B) $60,000 in the case of a married individual.
 `(2) INDEXING DOLLAR AMOUNTS- For care furnished during a calendar year after
 1992, the dollar amounts specified in paragraph (1) shall be increased by
 the same percentage as the percentage increase in the consumer price index
 for all urban consumers (all items; U.S. city average) between September
 1991 and the September before the calendar year involved.
 `(b) DETERMINATION OF RESOURCES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this title, except as otherwise provided
 in this section, resources shall be computed in a manner specified by the
 Secretary, except that--
 `(A) resources shall not include the home (including the land or family
 farm that appertains thereto), and
 `(B) an individual's resources shall include the resources of the
 individual's spouse.
 `(2) TREATMENT OF TRANSFERRED RESOURCES AND RESOURCES IN TRUSTS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraphs (B) and (C) and
 paragraph (3), the Secretary shall include in an individual's resources--
 `(i) resources of the individual disposed of for less than fair market
 value during or after the 5-year period ending on the date the individual
 (or the individual's spouse) was admitted to a nursing facility; and
 `(ii) resources in a trust, or resources the control or disposition of
 which is governed by another written legal instrument or mechanism, if
 the individual (or any family member of the individual, as defined by
 the Secretary) may derive benefit from the resources and if the trust,
 instrument, or mechanism was designed, intended, or has the intended
 effect of removing the resources (and income therefrom) from otherwise
 being included in determining eligibility for (or amount of) benefits for
 long-term nursing facility care under this title and medical assistance
 under title XIX.
 `(B) EXCEPTIONS- Subparagraph (A)(i) shall not apply to--
 `(i) a transfer described in subparagraph (B) of section 1917(c)(2);
 `(ii) a transfer of resources if a satisfactory showing is made to the
 appropriate assessment agency (in accordance with any standards established
 by the Secretary) that (I) the individual intended to dispose of the
 resources either at fair market value or for other valuable consideration,
 or (II) the resources were transferred exclusively for a purpose other
 than to qualify for benefits under this title or title XIX; or
 `(iii) the appropriate assessment agency determines (in accordance with
 criteria established by the Secretary) that the inclusion of the resource
 would work an undue hardship.
 `(C) GRANDPARENT PROVISION- Subparagraph (A)(ii) shall not apply to a
 resource transferred before October 1, 1989.
 `(D) VALUATION-
 `(i) TRANSFERRED RESOURCES- In the case of resources described in
 subparagraph (A)(i), the resources shall be valued at the difference
 between the fair market value at the time of disposal and the value of
 the compensation received in the transfer.
 `(ii) TRUST- In the case of resources described in subparagraph (A)(ii),
 the resources shall be valued, in accordance with standards established by
 the Secretary, based on the maximum benefit which the individual may derive.
 `(3) TREATMENT OF QUALIFYING LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE POLICIES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- In the case of a qualifying long-term care insurance policy
 (as defined in subparagraph (C)) that provides benefits with respect to
 an individual, in applying this section the amount of the individual's
 resources shall be reduced by the resource value of the policy (as valued
 under subparagraph (B)) or the amounts paid out on the individual's behalf
 under the policy, whichever is greater.
 `(B) DETERMINATION OF RESOURCE VALUE OF POLICY- The Secretary shall
 establish standards for the valuation of qualifying long-term care
 insurance policies. Such standards shall provide for valuation based on
 the product of--
 `(i) the number of months of benefits provided for long-term nursing
 facility care under the policy, and
 `(ii) a reasonable valuation of the such benefits on a monthly basis,
 which valuation may be based on the average monthly payment amount for
 long-term nursing facility care under this title in the State in which
 the nursing facility (in which the individual is a resident) is located
 monthly or such other measure as the Secretary identifies.
For purposes of this subparagraph, in the case of a lapsed policy the value
of the policy shall be zero.
 `(C) QUALIFYING LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE POLICY DEFINED- In this paragraph,
 the term `qualifying long-term care insurance policy' means a long-term
 care insurance policy that meets the standards specified in section 2186.
 `(d) NO LIENS- No lien may be imposed against the property of any individual
 on account of benefits paid or to be paid under this title except pursuant
 to the judgment of a court on account of benefits incorrectly paid on
 behalf of such individual.
`AMOUNT OF RESIDENT-SPECIFIC DEDUCTIBLE
 `SEC. 2133. (a) Application of Countable Income-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In the case of a certified individual who is a resident
 of a nursing facility in a month, the resident-specific deductible for
 nursing facility care for the month is the amount of the individual's
 countable income for the month (as computed under paragraph (2)), less any
 housing allowance permitted under subsection (b) and any amounts excluded
 from income under the operation of subsection (c).
 `(2) DETERMINATION OF COUNTABLE INCOME- For purposes of this section,
 except as otherwise provided in this section, countable income shall be
 computed in a manner specified by the Secretary.
 `(b) 1-YEAR TRANSITIONAL HOUSING ALLOWANCE AND SPOUSAL HOUSING ALLOWANCE-
 `(1) TRANSITIONAL ALLOWANCE- During the first 12 months during which
 a married or unmarried individual is receiving benefits for long-term
 nursing facility services under this title, the countable income of
 the individual shall be reduced by 30 percent (in order to provide an
 allowance to maintain the individual's housing during that period in case
 the individual may return home). In the case of an institutionalized spouse,
 in applying section 1924(d)(1), the reduction under this paragraph shall
 be made before the reduction described in subparagraph (A) of such section.
 `(2) SPOUSAL ALLOWANCE- During any subsequent month in which the individual's
 spouse is residing outside an institution, the countable income of the
 individual shall be reduced by 30 percent (in order to provide an allowance
 to maintain the spouse in community housing).
 `(c) PROTECTION OF INCOME FOR PERSONAL NEEDS AND NONINSTITUTIONALIZED
 SPOUSES-
 `(1) RULES FOR TREATMENT OF INCOME- Except as provided in this subsection
 and subsection (b)(1), the provisions of subsections (b) and (d) of section
 1924 (relating to rules for treatment of income and protecting income for
 community spouse) shall apply under this title (to the determination of
 the income to be applied toward the costs of long-term nursing facility
 services) in the same manner as they apply under title XIX.
 `(2) INCREASE IN PERSONAL NEED ALLOWANCE- In applying section 1924(d)(1)(A)
 pursuant to paragraph (1), $100 and $200 (subject to adjustment under
 subsection (d)) shall be deemed to have been substituted for $30 and $60,
 respectively, in section 1902(q)(2).
 `(3) CHANGE IN MINIMUM MONTHLY MAINTENANCE NEEDS ALLOWANCE- In applying
 subsection (d) of such section pursuant to paragraph (1)--
 `(A) there shall be no excess shelter allowance (specified in paragraph
 (3)(A)(ii) and defined in paragraph (4) of such subsection),
 `(B) the applicable percent (described in paragraph (3)(B) of such
 subsection) applied under paragraph (3)(A)(i) of such subsection is 200
 percent, and
 `(C) the cap on minimum monthly maintenance needs allowance (specified in
 paragraph (3)(C) of such subsection) and the court-ordered support exception
 (specified in paragraph (5) of such subsection) shall not apply.
 `(4) TREATMENT OF INCOME FROM TRANSFERRED RESOURCES AND RESOURCES IN TRUSTS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the Secretary
 shall include, in an individual's income, income produced by a resource
 which is included as a resource under section 2132(b)(2)(A)(ii).
 `(B) VALUATION- In the case of a resource described in subparagraph (A),
 the income from the resource shall be valued, in accordance with standards of
 the Secretary, based on the maximum benefit which the individual may derive.
 `(d) INDEXING DOLLAR AMOUNTS- For services furnished during a calendar year
 after 1992, the amounts of $100 and $200 specified in subsection (c)(2)
 shall be increased by the same percentage as the percentage increase in the
 consumer price index for all urban consumers (all items; U.S. city average)
 between September 1991 and the September before the calendar year involved.
`Part E--Financing
`FEDERAL LONG-TERM CARE TRUST FUND
 `SEC. 2141. (a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is hereby created on the books of the
 Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Federal
 Long-Term Care Trust Fund' (in this section referred to as the `Trust
 Fund'). The Trust Fund shall consist of such gifts and bequests as may be
 made as provided in section 201(i)(1) and amounts as may be deposited in,
 or appropriated to, such fund as provided in this title.
 `(b) FUNDING- There are hereby appropriated to the Trust Fund for each
 fiscal year, out of any moneys in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated,
 amounts equivalent to--
 `(1) the amounts paid by States under section 202 of the Long-Term Care
 Family Security Act of 1992, and
 `(2) such additional amounts, provided under section 201 of such Act,
 as may be required to carry out this title.
 `(c) INCORPORATION OF SIMILAR TRUST FUND PROVISIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The provisions of subsections (b) through (e), (g), (h),
 and (i) of section 1817 shall apply to the Trust Fund and this title in
 the same manner as they apply to the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund
 and to part A of title XVIII, respectively.
 `(2) INCORPORATION OF BORROWING AUTHORITY- Section 201(l) shall apply to the
 Trust Fund and this title in the same manner as it applies to the Federal
 Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and title II, respectively,
 except that under this paragraph--
 `(A) the borrowing authority may be exercised prior to January 1996;
 `(B) there shall be substituted for the OASDI trust fund ratio as of a month,
 the ratio of (i) the balance in the Trust Fund reduced by the outstanding
 amount of any loan (including interest thereon) theretofore made to such
 Trust Fund under this paragraph, as of the last day of the second month
 preceding the month, to (ii) the amount obtained by multiplying by 12
 the total amount which (as estimated by the Secretary) will be paid from
 the Trust Fund during the month for which the ratio is to be determined
 (other than payments of interest on, or repayments of loans from another
 Trust Fund under this paragraph); and
 `(C) in applying section 201(l)(3)(C) under this paragraph, references
 to 1987, 1989, and 1990, are deemed references to 1996, 1998, and 1999,
 respectively.
 `(d) PROJECTED ANNUAL RATES OF INCREASE FOR BENEFITS- In October of 1992 and
 October of every 5th year thereafter, for purposes of section 2186(g)(2),
 the Board of Trustees of the Trust Fund shall issue a report which specifies
 the Board's best estimate of the following:
 `(1) The average annual percentage rate of increase projected for payment
 rates for community care under this title during the 20-year period
 beginning with the year following the year in which the report is made.
 `(2) The average annual percentage rate of increase projected for payments
 rates for nursing facility care under this title during the 20-year period
 beginning with the year following the year in which the report is made.
Such estimates shall apply for purposes of part H to policies issued in
the 5-year period beginning in the year after the year in which the report
is issued.
 `(e) ANNUAL INCREASE IN NURSING FACILITY COSTS- In October of each year,
 for purposes of 7702B(b)(5)(D) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, the
 Board of Trustees of the Trust Fund shall issue a report which specifies
 the Board's best estimate of the annual percentage increase or decrease
 in the average per diem costs in nursing facilities during the year.
`Part F--(RESERVED)
`Part G--Definitions and Miscellaneous Provisions
`(RESERVED)
 `SEC. 2161.
`COVERAGE STANDARDS
 `SEC. 2162. (a) IN GENERAL- No payment shall be made under this title for
 any expenses incurred--
 `(1)(A) in the case of community care, for items and services which are
 not reasonable and necessary to assure that the health and functional
 capacity of an individual is maintained in the individual's noninstitutional
 residence, or
 `(B) in the case of nursing facility care, for items and services which
 are not reasonable and necessary to assure that the health and functional
 capacity of an individual is maintained in the individual's institutional
 residence;
 `(2) for items and services for which the individual furnished such items
 or services has no legal obligation to pay;
 `(3) for items and services which are paid for directly or indirectly by
 a governmental entity (other than under this title), except in such cases
 as the Secretary may specify;
 `(4) for items and services which are not provided in the United States;
 `(5) for items and services which are required as a result of war, or of
 an act of war, occurring after the effective date of such individual's
 current coverage under this title; or
 `(6)(A) where such expenses constitute charges imposed by the individual's
 spouse or parent, or
 `(B) except pursuant to demonstration projects under section 2165(c), where
 such expenses constitute charges imposed by another immediate relative of
 the individual.
 `(b) PAYMENT SECONDARY TO MEDICARE AND LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE POLICIES-
 No payment may be made under this title with respect to any items or
 services furnished an individual--
 `(1) to the extent that such individual is entitled (or would be entitled
 except for sections 1813 and 1833) to have payment made with respect to
 such items or services under title XVIII, or
 `(2) to the extent that payment may be made with respect to such items or
 services under a long-term care insurance policy that meets the standards
 specified in section 2186.
`PROVIDER AGREEMENTS; INCORPORATION OF ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS OF PARTICIPATION
 `SEC. 2163. (a) PROVIDER AGREEMENTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A community care agency or nursing facility is qualified to
 participate under this title and eligible for payments under this title only
 if it files with the Secretary an agreement that provides for the following:
 `(A) LIMITATION ON CHARGES UNDER TITLE- The agency or facility agrees--
 `(i) not to charge, except as provided in paragraph (2), any individual or
 any other person for items or services for which such individual is entitled
 to have payment made under this title (or for which the individual would
 be so entitled if the agency or facility had complied with the procedural
 and other requirements under or pursuant to this title);
 `(ii) not to charge any individual or any other person for items or services
 for which such individual is not entitled to have payment made under this
 title because payment for expenses incurred for such items or services may
 not be made by reason of section 2162(a)(1), but only if such individual
 was without fault in incurring such expenses; and
 `(iii) to make adequate provision for return (or other disposition in
 accordance with regulations) of any moneys incorrectly collected from such
 individual or other person.
 `(B) LIMITATION ON CHARGES FOR SERVICES NOT COVERED UNDER TITLE (ALL PAYOR
 RATE SCHEDULE)-
 `(i) COMMUNITY CARE- In the case of a community care agency, the agency
 agrees not to charge for community care for which payment may not be made
 under this title more than, and accept as payment in full, the amount
 determined under the schedule or mechanism established under section 2121(b).
 `(ii) NURSING FACILITY CARE- In the case of a nursing facility, the
 facility agrees--
 `(I) not to charge for nursing facility care for which payment may not
 be made under this title more than, and to accept as payment in full,
 the payment rates established under section 2122 for that care, and
 `(II) to report, on an annual basis in a manner specified by the Secretary,
 such information respecting the facility's costs relating to the provision
 of nursing facility care as the Secretary determines to be appropriate in
 order to carry out this title.
 `(C) LIMITATION ON EMPLOYMENT- The agency or facility agrees to notify
 promptly the Secretary of its employment of an individual who, at any time
 during the year preceding such employment, was employed in a managerial,
 accounting, auditing, or similar capacity (as determined by the Secretary)
 by an organization which serves as a carrier under this title with respect
 to the agency or facility.
 `(D) RELEASE OF DATA- The agency or facility agrees to release data with
 respect to patients of the agency or residents of the facility upon request
 to an assessment agency or care manager as may be necessary to allow the
 agency or manager to carry out its functions under this title.
 `(E) ADVANCE DIRECTIVES- The agency or facility agrees to comply with the
 requirements of section 1866(f) (relating to maintaining written policies
 and procedures respecting advance directives), as made applicable under
 paragraph (3), in the same manner as such requirements apply to home health
 agencies and skilled nursing facilities under title XVIII.
 `(2) PERMISSIBLE CHARGES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- A community care agency or nursing facility may charge
 an individual or other person--
 `(i) the coinsurance amounts specified in section 2121(c) and 2122(a)(2)(A),
 with respect to community care and short-term nursing facility care, and
 `(ii) with respect to long-term nursing facility care, the resident-specific
 deductible (specified in section 2133(a)(1)) which an individual is
 otherwise responsible for under this title.
 `(B) ADDITIONAL REQUESTED SERVICES- Where an agency or facility has
 furnished, at the request of an individual, items or services which are in
 excess of the items or services with respect to which payment may be made
 under this title, the agency or facility may also charge such individual
 or other person for such items or services but only if the charges do not
 exceed its customary charges (which customary charges may not exceed the
 rates provided for such services under this title). In order to apply the
 previous sentence, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations respecting
 the scope of items and services that are covered under this title.
 `(3) INCORPORATION OF ENFORCEMENT AND OTHER PROVISIONS- Subsections (b),
 (c)(1), (f), and (h) of section 1866 shall apply to agreements under
 this subsection in the same manner as they apply to agreements under such
 section and title XVIII.
 `(b) STANDARDS FOR COMMUNITY CARE AGENCIES-
 `(1) USE OF STATE AGENCIES IN DETERMINING QUALIFICATIONS- Sections 1863 and
 1864(a) shall apply to community care agencies under this title in the same
 manner as they apply to home health agencies under title XVIII. In applying
 the previous sentence, any reference in such sections to section 1861(o)
 is deemed a reference to section 2102(e)(1).
 `(2) CONDITIONS OF PARTICIPATION FOR COMMUNITY CARE AGENCIES; COMMUNITY
 CARE QUALITY-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to subparagraph (B), the provisions of section
 1891 shall apply to community care agencies in the same manner as they
 apply to home health agencies.
 `(B) REFERENCES- In applying subparagraph (A) with respect to community
 care agencies:
 `(i) Any reference in section 1891 to a home health agency or to a home
 health aide is deemed a reference to a community care agency or to a
 homemaker/home health aide or individual providing personal assistance
 services (described in section 2102(b)(3)), respectively.
 `(ii) Subject to clause (iii), any reference in such section to section
 1861(m), section 1861(o) (or paragraph (3) thereof), section 1864 or 1864(a),
 or title XVIII is deemed a reference to section 2102(a), section 2102(e)(1)
 (or subparagraph (B) thereof), paragraph (1) of this subsection, or this
 title, respectively.
 `(iii) Any reference in subsection (a)(1) of such section to `this title'
 is deemed a reference to title XVIII and this title.
 `(c) STANDARDS FOR NURSING FACILITIES-
 `(1) CONDITIONS OF PARTICIPATION FOR NURSING FACILITIES- Except as provided
 in this subsection, the provisions of section 1919 shall apply to nursing
 facilities under this title in the same manner as they apply to nursing
 facilities under title XIX.
 `(2) MODIFICATION OF ENFORCEMENT- In applying section 1919 under paragraph
 (1)--
 `(A) any reference in subsection (b)(4)(C)(ii) of such section to a State
 is deemed a reference to the Secretary;
 `(B) any reference in subsections (c)(1)(B)(iv), (c)(2)(A)(v), (c)(5),
 (e)(6), (g)(5)(A)(ii), and (i) of such section to title XVIII or XIX is
 deemed to include a reference to this title;
 `(C) subsections (c)(2)(D) and (c)(7) of such section shall not apply;
 `(D) subsection (e)(7) of such section shall be applied in a manner so
 that if the requirements of that subsection were not complied with in a
 State with respect to an individual in a nursing facility, the amount of
 the payment required of the State under section 204 of the Long-Term Care
 Family Security Act of 1992 shall be increased, under subsection (d) of
 that section, by the full Federal cost of nursing facility care provided
 to the individual under this title;
 `(E) instead of applying subsection (g) of such section, the provisions of
 section 1819(g) and 1864 shall apply to nursing facility care under this
 title in the same manner as they apply to extended care services under
 title XVIII; and
 `(F) subsection (h) of section 1819 shall be deemed to be substituted for
 subsection (h) of section 1919.
`APPLICATION OF CERTAIN FRAUD AND ABUSE PROVISIONS
 `SEC. 2164. The following provisions shall apply to community care agencies
 and nursing facilities under this title in the same manner as they apply
 to home health agencies or skilled nursing facilities under title XVIII:
 `(1) Section 1124 (relating to disclosure of ownership and related
 information).
 `(2) Section 1126 (relating to disclosure by institutions, organizations,
 and agencies of owners and certain other individuals who have been convicted
 of certain offenses).
 `(3) Sections 1128, 1128A, and 1128B (relating to exclusion of certain
 individuals and entities from participation in medicare and State health
 care programs, civil monetary penalties, and criminal penalties for acts
 involving medicare or State health care programs).
`DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS; WAIVER AUTHORITY
 `SEC. 2165. (a) IN GENERAL-
 `(1) AUTHORIZATION- The Secretary may conduct such demonstration projects
 as may be appropriate to evaluate changes in the delivery and financing
 of community care and nursing facility care under this title. There are
 authorized to be appropriated from the Federal Long-Term Care Trust Fund
 such sums as may be necessary in order to carry out demonstration projects
 under this section.
 `(2) WAIVER AUTHORITY- The Secretary may waive such requirements of this
 title as may be necessary in order to conduct such projects.
 `(3) REPORTS- The Secretary shall report periodically to the Congress on
 demonstration projects conducted under this section and shall include in
 such reports recommendations for legislative changes in this title that
 may be appropriate.
 `(4) LIMITATION ON MEDICAID DEMONSTRATION PROJECT AUTHORITY- The Secretary
 shall not approve a demonstration project under section 1915 for community
 care for which benefits are provided under this title.
 `(b) WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS TO PERMIT CONTINUATION AND EXPANSION OF CERTAIN
 DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall waive such requirements of this title
 as may be necessary to permit--
 `(A) continuation of demonstration projects in effect as of the date
 of the enactment of this title, including the social health maintenance
 demonstration projects referred to in section 2355 of the Deficit Reduction
 Act of 1984 (as amended by section 4207(b)(4)(B)(i) of the Omnibus Budget
 Reconciliation Act of 1990) and the On Lok and related frail elderly
 demonstration projects referred to in section 603(c) of the Social
 Security Amendments of 1983 or in section 9412(b) of the Omnibus Budget
 Reconciliation Act of 1986 (as amended by section 4744(a) of the Omnibus
 Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990), and
 `(B) additional demonstration projects provided for under the succeeding
 provisions of this section.
Subparagraph (A) shall not be construed to apply to the state-wide Arizona
demonstration project conducted under section 1115 to the extent such
demonstration project provides for community care or nursing facility care.
 `(2) EXPANSION OF DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS- Not later than 12 months after
 the date of the enactment of this title, the Secretary shall approve
 applications or protocols submitted under subsection (a) of section 2355
 of the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 for an additional 10 demonstration
 projects described in subsection (b) of that section. Any reference in
 such section to a project conducted as a result of the amendments made by a
 section of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 is deemed to include
 a reference to a project conducted as a result of the previous sentence.
 `(c) DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS ON PAYMENT OF RELATIVES AS CAREGIVERS-
 The Secretary shall provide for demonstration projects under which the
 exclusion of section 2162(a)(6)(B) is waived in order to demonstrate the
 efficacy and appropriateness of permitting adults who are fully qualified
 under this title to provide community care to be compensated for such care
 provided to relatives. Such projects shall specifically examine--
 `(1) the effect on costs and provision of unpaid services of permitting
 payment for community care provided by such relatives,
 `(2) whether the appropriate amount of payment in such circumstances should
 be based on a percentage of the payment amount otherwise permitted, and
 `(3) whether payment should be limited to cases in which the relative has
 terminated (or forsakes) employment in order to care for the individual.
 `(d) CASH EQUIVALENT DEMONSTRATION PROJECT- The Secretary shall provide for
 a demonstration project, over a period of 3 years, under which a certified
 individual, instead of receiving benefits under this title, is paid
 periodically amounts based upon the level of impairment of the individual,
 but not to exceed the estimated actuarial value of benefits under this
 title to a certified individual with such level of impairment. The payments
 under the project may be used to pay for such benefits or for any other
 appropriate services and such payment shall be not subject to approval by
 any care manager.
`SEC. 2166. GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PARTS A THROUGH G.
 `(a) GENERAL TERMS-
 `The term `activity of daily living' is defined in section 2101(b)(5).
 `The term `adjusted total income' is defined in section 2131(f)(1).
 `The term `affirmative certification' is defined in section 2112(a).
 `The term `assessment agency' is defined in section 2114(a)(1).
 `The term `care manager' is defined in section 2115(a).
 `The term `certified individual' is defined in section 2101(b)(4).
 `The term `community-based services' is defined in section 2102(c).
 `The term `community care' is defined in section 2102(a).
 `The term `community care agency' is defined in section 2102(e).
 `The term `comparable severity' is defined in section 2101(b)(2).
 `The term `effective date of this title' is defined in section 2101(d)(1)(B).
 `The term `eligible individual' is defined in section 2101(c).
 `The term `family adjusted total income' is defined in section 2131(f)(2).
 `The `family size' is determined under section 2131(f)(3).
 `The term `home-based services' is defined in section 2102(b).
 `The term `hospice respite care' is defined in section 2102(d)(2).
 `The term `long-term nursing facility care' is defined in section
 2101(a)(3)(B).
 `A `moderately disabled individual' is described in section 2101(b)(3)(B).
 `The term `moderately or severely disabled individual' is defined in
 section 2101(b)(1).
 `The term `negative certification' is defined in section 2112(a).
 `The term `nursing facility' is defined in section 2104(b).
 `The term `nursing facility care' is defined in section 2104(a).
 `The term `official poverty line' is defined in section 2131(f)(4).
 `The `protected resource level' is specified in section 2132(a).
 `The term `qualifying long-term care insurance policy' is defined in
 section 2132(c)(3)(C).
 `The `resident-specific deductible' is specified in section 2133(a)(1).
 `The term `respite care' is defined in section 2102(d)(1).
 `The term `short-term nursing facility care' is defined in section
 2101(a)(3)(A).
 `A `severely disabled individual' is described in section 2101(b)(3)(C).
 `(b) PAYMENT-RELATED TERMS USED ONLY IN PART C-
 `The term `administrative costs' is defined in section 2122(g)(1).
 `The term `administrative marketbasket index' is defined in section
 2112(b)(6).
 `The `administrative per diem rate' is specified in section 2112(b)(1).
 `The `base efficiency incentive per diem amount' is specified under
 section 2122(b)(4).
 `The `base facility personal care per diem rate' is determined under
 section 2122(c)(2).
 `The `base floor personal care per diem amount' is specified in section
 2122(c)(4)(B).
 `The term `basing period' is defined in section 2122(g)(2).
 `The term `bed-to-user-ratio' is defined in section 2122(e)(6)(B).
 `The `capital adjustment percentage' is specified in section 2122(e)(3)(A).
 `The term `capital cost/assessed value ratio' is defined in section
 2122(e)(3)(B).
 `The term `capital per bed ratio' is defined in section 2122(e)(4)(B).
 `The `capital per diem payment amount' is determined under section
 2112(e)(1).
 `The term `capital-related items' is defined in section 2122(g)(3).
 `The term `facility-specific administrative per diem' is defined in section
 2122(b)(2)(C).
 `The `facility-specific capital per diem payment amount' is specified in
 section 2122(e)(2).
 `The term `Federal share' is defined in section 2122(f)(2).
 `The `limiting administrative per diem rate' is determined under section
 2122(b)(3).
 `The `limiting capital per diem payment amount' is determined under
 section 2122(e)(4).
 `The `limiting personal care per diem rate' is determined under section
 2122(c)(3).
 `The term `personal care costs' is defined in section 2122(g)(4).
 `The term `personal care marketbasket index' is defined in section
 2112(c)(6).
 `The `personal care per diem rate' is specified in section 2112(c)(1)(A).
 `The `resident-specific deductible' is specified in section 2133.
 `The `return-on-equity per diem amount' is specified in section 2112(f)(1).'.
SEC. 102. AMENDMENTS TO NURSING FACILITY REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) NONDISCRIMINATION IN ADMISSIONS- Sections 1819(c)(4) and 1919(c)(4)(A)
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-3(c)(4), 1396r(c)(4)(A))
 are each amended by inserting `admission,' after `regarding'.
 (b) CLARIFICATION OF NO CHARGES FOR BASIC SERVICES-
 (1) Section 1819(c)(5)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-3(c)(5)(A))
 is amended--
 (A) by striking `and' at the end of clause (i),
 (B) by striking the period at the end of clause (ii) and inserting `;
 and', and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 `(iii) in the case of an individual who has an affirmative certification
 under part B of title XXI, not to charge, solicit, accept, or receive,
 in addition to any amount otherwise required to be paid under such title,
 any gift, money, donation, or other consideration as a precondition of
 admitting (or expediting the admission of) the individual to the facility
 or as a requirement for the individual's continued stay in the facility.'.
 (2) Section 1919(c)(5)(A) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1396r(c)(5)(A)) is amended--
 (A) by striking `and' at the end of clause (ii),
 (B) by striking the period at the end of clause (iii) and inserting `;
 and', and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 `(iv) in the case of an individual who has an affirmative certification
 under part B of title XXI, not to charge, solicit, accept, or receive,
 in addition to any amount otherwise required to be paid under such title,
 any gift, money, donation, or other consideration as a precondition of
 admitting (or expediting the admission of) the individual to the facility
 or as a requirement for the individual's continued stay in the facility.'.
 (c) NOTICE AT TIME OF DISCHARGE- Sections 1819(c)(2)(B) and 1919(c)(2)(B)
 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-3(c)(2)(B), 1396r(c)(2)(B)) are each amended--
 (1) in clause (i), by adding at the end the following:
`Before effecting a discharge of a resident who is a certified individual
(within the meaning of section 2101(b)(4)), the facility must notify the
assessment agency under title XXI of the impending discharge.'; and
 (2) in clause (iii), by adding at the end the following:
`Each such notice with respect to a discharge of a resident who is a
certified individual (within the meaning of section 2101(b)(4)) shall include
a statement that, in order for the individual to remain eligible for benefits
under title XXI, a new reassessment must be conducted under section 2111.'.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsections (a) and (c) shall
 take effect on January 1, 1994, and the amendments made by subsection (b)
 shall take effect on January 1, 1996, without regard to whether regulations
 to implement such amendments are promulgated by such date.
SEC. 103. COORDINATION WITH MEDICAID.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) LIMITING FEDERAL FINANCIAL PARTICIPATION UNDER MEDICAID FOR SERVICES
 COVERED UNDER TITLE XXI- Section 1903(i) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1396b(i)) is amended--
 (A) in the paragraph (10) inserted by section 4401(a)(1)(B) of Omnibus
 Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990, by striking all that follows `1927(g)'
 and inserting a semicolon;
 (B) by redesignating the paragraph (10) added by section 4701(b)(2)
 as paragraph (11), by transferring and inserting it after the paragraph
 (10) inserted by section 4401(a)(1)(B) of Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
 Act of 1990, and by striking all that follows `with respect to hospitals
 or facilities' and inserting a semicolon;
 (C) by transferring and inserting the paragraph (12) inserted by section
 4752(a)(2) of Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 after paragraph
 (11), as redesignated by subparagraph (B), and by striking the period at
 the end and inserting a semicolon;
 (D) by redesignating the paragraph (14) inserted by section 4752(e) of
 Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 as paragraph (13), by transferring
 and inserting it after paragraph (12), and by striking the period at the
 end and inserting a semicolon;
 (E) by redesignating the paragraph (11) inserted by section 4801(e)(16)(A) of
 Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 as paragraph (14), by transferring
 and inserting it after paragraph (13), and by striking the period at the
 end and inserting `; or'; and
 (F) by inserting after paragraph (14), as so redesignated, the following
 new paragraph:
 `(15)(A) on or after the first day of the 12-month period that begins 2 years
 after the effective date of title XXI (as defined in section 2101(d)(1)(B)),
 with respect to nursing facility care (as defined in section 2104(a)); or
 `(B) on or after the first day of the 12-month period that begins 3 years
 after such effective date, with respect to--
 `(i) services described in subsection (b)(3), (b)(7), (b)(8), (c), or (d)
 of section 2102,
 `(ii) other services described in section 2102(b) provided to an individual
 entitled to benefits under title XXI unless the individual is determined to
 require such services for treatment of an acute illness under certification
 standards (established by the State) that are comparable to the certification
 standards used under title XVIII for coverage of home health services, or
 `(iii) case management services for individuals entitled to benefits under
 title XXI.'.
 (2) CLARIFICATION OF NONDUPLICATION OF MEDICAL ASSISTANCE WITH BENEFITS
 UNDER TITLE XXI- Title XIX of such Act is amended by adding at the end
 the following new section:
`NONDUPLICATION OF BENEFITS WITH TITLE XXI
 `SEC. 1931. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, a State is not
 required under its plan under section 1901(a) to provide medical assistance--
 `(1) on or after the first day of the 12-month period that begins 2 years
 after the effective date of title XXI (as defined in section 2101(d)(1)(B)),
 for nursing facility care (as defined in section 2104(a)); or
 `(2) on or after the first day of the 12-month period that begins 3 years
 after such effective date, for--
 `(A) services described in subsection (b)(3), (b)(7), (b)(8), (c), or (d)
 of section 2102,
 `(B) other services described in section 2102(b) provided to an individual
 entitled to benefits under title XXI unless the individual is determined to
 require such services for treatment of an acute illness under certification
 standards (established by the State) that are comparable to the certification
 standards used under title XVIII for coverage of home health services, or
 `(C) case management services for individuals entitled to benefits under
 title XXI.'.
 (b) CONTINUATION OF MEDICAID BENEFITS NOT COVERED UNDER PUBLIC HEALTH
 INSURANCE PLAN- Nothing in this Act shall be construed as--
 (1) changing the eligibility of individuals for medical assistance under
 title XIX of the Social Security Act, or
 (2) subject to the amendments made by subsection (a), changing the amount,
 duration, or scope of medical assistance required (or permitted) to be
 provided under such title.
 (c) LIMITATION ON WAIVER AUTHORITY- Section 1915(h) of the Social Security
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396n(h)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(1)' after `(h)', and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(2) The Secretary shall not approve a demonstration project under this
 section which provides for medical assistance for care for which benefits
 are provided under title XXI.'.
SEC. 104. MISCELLANEOUS AMENDMENTS.
 (a) CHANGES TO MEDICARE SKILLED NURSING FACILITY BENEFIT-
 (1) Section 1812(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395d(a))
 is amended by striking `100 days' in subsections (a)(2)(A) and (b)(2)
 and inserting `20 days'.
 (2) Section 1813(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395e(a)) is amended by striking
 paragraph (3).
 (b) TREATMENT OF HOSPICE PATIENTS- Section 1812(d)(2)(A) of such Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1395d(d)(2)(A)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of clause (i),
 (2) by striking the semicolon at the end of clause (ii) and inserting `,
 and', and
 (3) by inserting after clause (ii) the following new clause:
 `(iii) community care under title XXI;'.
 (c) MISCELLANEOUS- (1) Section 201(i)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 401(i)(1))
 is amended by striking `and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance
 Trust Fund' and inserting `the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance
 Trust Fund, and the Federal Long-Term Care Trust Fund'.
 (2) Section 1101(a)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1301(a)(1)) is amended--
 (A) by striking `and XIX' and inserting `XIX, and XXI', and
 (B) by striking `title XIX' and inserting `titles XIX and XXI'.
SEC. 105. EFFECTIVE DATE; WAIVER OF PAPERWORK REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments (and provisions) of this title shall
 apply to community care and nursing facility care provided on or after on
 January 1, 1994.
 (b) WAIVER OF PAPERWORK REQUIREMENTS- Chapter 35 of title 44, United
 States Code, and Executive Order 12291 shall not apply to information
 and regulations required for purposes of carrying out this title and the
 amendments made by this title.
TITLE II--FINANCING PROVISIONS
SEC. 201. PROGRESSIVE FINANCING OF PUBLIC PROGRAM.
 The public program of long-term care insurance under title XXI of the
 Social Security Act shall be funded through one or more funding means in
 a manner that--
 (1) is progressive in the aggregate,
 (2) is sufficient, each year, over time, and in the aggregate, to cover
 the net costs of the program, and
 (3) is not derived from any one age group of society.
SEC. 202. STATE MAINTENANCE OF EFFORT PAYMENT REQUIRED.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding any other provision of the Social Security
 Act, as a condition of payment to a State (as defined in subsection (e)(3))
 under title V or XIX of such Act for a calendar quarter beginning during
 or after the first maintenance year (as defined in subsection (e)(2)), the
 State must provide (in a manner and at a time specified by the Secretary
 of Health and Human Services) for payment to the Federal Long-Term Care
 Trust Fund (established under section 2141 of such Act) of the sum of the
 amounts specified in subsections (b), (c), and (d) for the quarter.
 (b) AMOUNT BASED ON MEDICAID PLAN EXPENDITURES FOR COVERED SERVICES-
 (1) FIRST MAINTENANCE YEAR- Subject to paragraph (3), the amount specified
 in this subsection for a State for a quarter in the first maintenance year
 is 1/4 of the amount by which the payments (net of Federal payments)
 made by a State under its State plan under title XIX of the Social Security
 Act for 1992 for medical assistance would have been reduced if the law
 (as amended by this Act and in effect during the first maintenance year)
 had been in effect during all of 1992, increased by the compounded sum of
 the increase in the medical care component of the consumer price index
 for all urban consumers (all items; U.S. city average, as published by
 the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the Department of Labor) for each year
 after 1992 and up to the year in which the quarter occurs.
 (2) SUCCEEDING YEARS- Subject to paragraph (3), the amount specified in
 this subsection for a State for a quarter in a year following the first
 maintenance year is 1/4 of the amount by which the payments (net of Federal
 payments) made by a State under its State plan under title XIX of the Social
 Security Act for 1992 for medical assistance would have been reduced if the
 law (as amended by this Act and in effect during the year following the
 first maintenance year) had been in effect during all of 1992, increased
 by the compounded sum of the increase in the medical care component of the
 consumer price index for all urban consumers (all items; U.S. city average,
 as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the Department of Labor)
 for each year after 1992 and up to the year in which the quarter occurs.
 (3) ADJUSTMENT FOR CHANGES IN STATE MATCHING RATES-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The amount specified in this subsection for a State for a
 quarter in a year shall be adjusted by the ratio of (i) the weighted average
 State matching rate (as defined in subparagraph (B)) that applied in 1992,
 to (ii) the weighted average State matching rate that the Secretary of
 Health and Human Services estimates would have applied in the year involved
 if this Act had not been enacted.
 (B) WEIGHTED AVERAGE STATE MATCHING RATE DEFINED- In subparagraph (A),
 the term `weighted average State matching rate' means, for a State,
 the average proportion, of the total payments for medical assistance and
 administrative costs for community care and nursing facility care under
 title XIX of the Social Security Act, that are not paid for by the Federal
 Government under section 1903(a) of such Act.
 (c) SHARE OF EXCESS EXPENDITURES FOR LONG-TERM NURSING FACILITY CARE-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The amount specified in this subsection, for a State for
 a quarter in a 12-month period (beginning at least 1 year after the end
 of the first maintenance year), is 1/4 of the product of--
 (A) the amount by which--
 (i) the expenditures under title XXI of the Social Security Act in the State
 in the previous 12-month period for long-term nursing facility care, exceeded
 (ii) the projected long-term nursing facility care expenditure amount (as
 determined under paragraph (2)) for the State for such previous period; and
 (B) the State matching percentage (as defined in paragraph (3)) applicable
 to the State for the quarter.
 (2) PROJECTED EXPENDITURE AMOUNT DEFINED- For purposes of this subsection,
 the `projected long-term nursing facility care expenditure amount' for a
 State for a 12-month period is--
 (A) the amount of expenditures under title XXI of the Social Security Act
 for long-term nursing facility care for residents of the State for the
 first maintenance period (as projected by the Secretary), increased by
 (B) the percentage change in the average per diem payment rate for nursing
 facility care in the State in the year (as determined under section 2122 of
 such Act) from the previous 12-month period to the 12-month period involved.
 (3) STATE MATCHING PERCENTAGE DEFINED-
 (A) IN GENERAL- In paragraph (1)(B), the term `State matching percentage',
 for a State for a quarter in a fiscal year, is equal to 1 minus the
 Federal medical assistance percentage (as defined in section 1905(b)
 of the Social Security Act) applicable to the State for the quarter, if,
 in determining such Federal medical assistance percentage, the per capita
 income per aged person (as defined in subparagraph (B)) were substituted
 for per capita income.
 (B) PER CAPITA INCOME PER AGED PERSON- In subparagraph (A), the term
 `per capita income per aged person' means, for a State or the United States--
 (i) the per capita income of the State or United States, respectively,
 multiplied by
 (ii) the total population of the State or United States, respectively,
 and divided by
 (iii) the population of individuals 65 years of age or older in the State
 or the United States, respectively.
In this subparagraph, the term `United States' means the continental United
States (including Alaska) and Hawaii
 (d) ADDITIONAL AMOUNT FOR FAILURE TO PERFORM REQUIRED PREADMISSION SCREEN
 AND RESIDENT REVIEW- The amount specified in this subsection for a State
 is the full Federal cost under title XXI of the Social Security Act of
 nursing facility care provided to an individual with respect to whom the
 State has failed to comply with the preadmission screening and resident
 review requirements of section 1919(e)(7) of such Act (as incorporated
 under section 2163(c)(2)(D) of such Act).
 (e) DEFINITIONS- In this section:
 (1) COMMUNITY CARE; NURSING FACILITY CARE; LONG-TERM NURSING FACILITY
 CARE- The terms `community care', `nursing facility care', and `long-term
 nursing facility care' have the meanings given such terms in title XXI of
 the Social Security Act.
 (2) FIRST MAINTENANCE YEAR- The term `first maintenance year' means the
 calendar year beginning 2 years after the effective date of title XXI of
 the Social Security Act (as defined in section 2101(d)(1)(B) of such Act).
 (3) STATE; UNITED STATES- Except as provided in the last sentence of
 subsection (c)(3)(B), the terms `State' and `United States' have the
 meaning given such term for purposes of title XXI of the Social Security Act.
TITLE III--TREATMENT OF LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE
Subtitle A--Establishment of Standards for Long-Term Care Insurance Policies
SEC. 301. ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS UNDER THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT.
 Title XXI of the Social Security Act, as added by the previous provisions
 of this Act, is amended by adding at the end the following new part:
`Part H--Long-Term Care Insurance Standards
`PROMULGATION OF STANDARDS AND MODEL BENEFITS
 `SEC. 2181. (a) APPLICATION OF STANDARDS-
 `(1) NAIC- If, within 12 months after the date of the enactment of this
 title, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (in this part
 referred to as the `NAIC') promulgates model standards that incorporate
 the requirements of this part, such standards shall apply under section 2182.
 `(2) DEFAULT- If the NAIC does not promulgate the model standards under
 paragraph (1) by the deadline established in that subsection, the Secretary
 shall promulgate, within 12 months after such deadline, a regulation that
 provides standards that incorporate the requirements of this part and such
 standards shall apply under section 2182.
 `(3) SUBSEQUENT REFERENCE TO STANDARDS- In this part, the term `Standards'
 means all standards established under this section that apply in a State
 under section 2182.
 `(b) ITEMS INCLUDED IN STANDARDS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Standards promulgated under subsection (a) shall
 incorporate standards that specify the requirements of this part for
 long-term care insurance policies (as defined in section 2188(a)), for the
 approval of State regulatory programs, for the issuers of such policies,
 for the sale of such policies, for the contents of such policies, and for
 the disclosure of certain information.
 `(2) SPECIFIC STANDARDS RELATING TO STATE REGULATORY PROGRAMS- Such Standards
 shall include (with respect to State regulatory programs), the information
 to be required by such programs under section 2183(e)(2)(B) with respect
 to proposed premium increases for long-term care insurance policies.
 `(3) SPECIFIC STANDARDS RELATING TO SALES OF POLICIES- Such Standards
 shall include the following (with respect to the sale of long-term care
 insurance policies):
 `(A) The training required in order for an sales agent to be certified
 under section 2184(a).
 `(B) The information to be provided under section 2184(f)(1)(B).
 `(C) The contents of outlines of coverage under section 2184(f)(2).
 `(D) The manner of disclosure of financial arrangements under section
 2184(h).
 `(4) SPECIFIC STANDARDS RELATING TO ISSUERS- Such Standards shall include
 the following (with respect to issuers of long-term care insurance policies):
 `(A) The procedures for appeals of denied claims (under section 2185(c)(3)).
 `(B) The additional information required to be reported by issuers under
 section 2185(e)(1), and the format for reporting of such information.
 `(5) SPECIFIC STANDARDS RELATING TO POLICIES- Such Standards shall include
 the following (with respect to long-term care insurance policies):
 `(A) The uniform language and definitions and uniform format for outlines
 of coverage under section 2186(a).
 `(B) The process for appeals of assessments under section 2186(f)(3).
 `(C) The premium adjustment for those electing to modify inflation protection
 under section 2186(g)(3).
 `(D) Methods for the allocation of premium elements and means of evaluating
 actuarial value to carry out section 2186(h)(3)(A).
 `(E) The nonforfeiture protection to be provided under section 2186(i).
 `(F) Limitations on underwriting restrictions under section 2186(j)(3).
 `(6) SPECIFIC STANDARDS RELATING TO DISCLOSURE- Such standard shall include
 the disclosure required of certain policies under section 2188(d).
 `(c) MODEL BENEFITS- In order to promote consumer understanding and to
 facilitate benefit and price comparison among long-term care policies,
 the NAIC is requested to establish models for benefits (including the
 specification of benefit levels and cost-sharing as well as the grouping
 of benefits) under long-term care insurance policies which are consistent
 with the requirements of section 2186(b).
 `(d) CONSULTATION- In establishing Standards and models of benefits under
 this section, the NAIC or Secretary shall provide for and consult with
 an advisory committee chosen by the NAIC or Secretary, respectively,
 and composed of--
 `(1) a chairman (who is not a representative of issuers of long-term care
 insurance policies or providers of long-term care services);
 `(2) 3 individuals who are representatives of issuers of long-term care
 insurance policies;
 `(3) 3 individuals who are representatives of consumer groups;
 `(4) 3 representatives who are representatives of providers of long-term
 care services; and
 `(5) 3 other individuals who are not representatives of issuers of long-term
 care insurance policies or of providers of long-term care services and
 who have expertise in the delivery and financing of such services.
 `(e) RELATION TO STATE LAW-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Standards established under this section preempt
 provisions of State law which conflict with such Standards, but nothing
 in this part shall be construed as preventing a State from applying
 standards that provide greater protection to policyholders of long-term
 care insurance policies.
 `(2) GRANDPARENTING OF CURRENT POLICIES- Except as a State may provide,
 such Standards shall not apply to policies issued before the date specified
 in section 2182(b).
`APPLICATION OF LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE STANDARDS
 `SEC. 2182. (a) IN GENERAL- No long-term care insurance policy (as defined
 in section 2188(a)) may be issued, sold, or offered for sale in a State
 on or after the date specified in subsection (b) unless--
 `(1) the Secretary determines that--
 `(A) the State has established a regulatory program that meets the
 requirements of section 2183, by the date specified in subsection (b), and
 `(B) the policy has been approved by the State commissioner or superintendent
 of insurance under such program; or
 `(2) in the case of a State that does not have a regulatory program approved
 under section 2183, the policy has been certified by the Secretary (in
 accordance with such procedures as the Secretary establishes by regulation)
 as meeting the Standards (insofar as they relate to the contents of a
 long-term care insurance policy).
For purposes of this subsection, the advertising or soliciting with respect
to a long-term care insurance policy, directly or indirectly, shall be deemed
the offering for sale of the policy.
 `(b) DEADLINE FOR APPLICATION OF STANDARDS IN STATES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (2), the date specified in this
 subsection for a State is--
 `(A) the date the State adopts the Standards, or
 `(B) 1 year after the date the Standards are first established,
whichever is earlier.
 `(2) STATE REQUIRING LEGISLATION- In the case of a State which the Secretary
 identifies, in consultation with the NAIC, as--
 `(A) requiring State legislation (other than legislation appropriating
 funds) in order for the Standards to be applied, but
 `(B) having a legislature which is not scheduled to meet in 1994 in a
 legislative session in which such legislation may be considered,
the date specified in this subsection is the first day of the first calendar
quarter beginning after the close of the first legislative session of the
State legislature that begins on or after January 1, 1994. For purposes of
the previous sentence, in the case of a State that has a 2-year legislative
session, each year of such session shall be deemed to be a separate regular
session of the State legislature.
`STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL OF STATE REGULATORY PROGRAMS
 `SEC. 2183. (a) APPROVAL-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may not approve a State regulatory program
 for purposes of section 2182(a), unless the Secretary determines that
 the program--
 `(A) provides for the application and enforcement of the Standards, and
 `(B) complies with the requirements of--
 `(i) subsection (b) (relating to enforcement),
 `(ii) subsection (c) (relating to provision of toll-free telephone system),
 `(iii) subsection (d) (relating to publication and public access to
 compliance information),
 `(iv) subsection (e) (relating to a process for the approval of premiums),
 and
 `(v) subsection (f) (relating to annual reports).
 `(2) PERIODIC REVIEW OF STATE REGULATORY PROGRAMS- The Secretary periodically
 shall review State regulatory programs to determine if they continue to
 meet the requirements for approval under paragraph (1). Before making
 a final determination that a State regulatory program no longer meets
 such requirements, the Secretary shall provide the State a hearing and an
 opportunity to adopt such a plan of correction as would permit the program
 to continue to meet such requirements. If the Secretary makes a final
 determination that the State regulatory program, after such a hearing
 and opportunity, fails to meet such requirements, the Secretary shall
 assume responsibility under section 2182(a)(2) with respect to certifying
 policies in the State and shall exercise full authority under section 2187
 for persons and entities in the State.
 `(b) ENFORCEMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The enforcement process under each State regulatory
 program--
 `(A) shall be designed in a manner so as to secure compliance with the
 Standards within 30 days after the date of a finding of noncompliance with
 such Standards, and
 `(B) shall provide for notice to the Secretary in cases where such compliance
 is not secured within such 30-day period.
 `(2) PROCESS- The enforcement process under each State regulatory program
 shall provide for--
 `(A) procedures for individuals and entities to file written, signed
 complaints respecting alleged violations of the Standards;
 `(B) responding on a timely basis to such complaints;
 `(C) the investigation of--
 `(i) those complaints which, on their face, have a substantial probability
 of validity, and
 `(ii) such other alleged violations of the Standards as the program finds
 appropriate;
 `(D) notice and opportunity for a hearing before executing sanctions; and
 `(E) the imposition of appropriate sanctions (which include, in appropriate
 cases, the imposition of a civil money penalty) in the case of a person
 or entity determined to have violated the Standards.
 `(c) TOLL-FREE TELEPHONE SYSTEM- Each State regulatory program shall
 provide a toll-free telephone system which provides for--
 `(1) a mechanism for the receipt and disposition of consumer complaints
 or inquiries regarding compliance with the requirements of this part, and
 `(2) information to consumers about issuers that offer long-term health
 care policies in the area covered by the regulatory authority.
Such system shall provide for the recording of consumer complaints in
accordance with a uniform methodology developed by the NAIC or the Secretary.
 `(d) PUBLICATION AND PUBLIC ACCESS TO COMPLIANCE INFORMATION-
 `(1) PUBLICATION OF INFORMATION- Each State regulatory program shall
 publish annually a summary--
 `(A) by issuer, of (i) the types of long-term health care policies issued
 and (ii) the types of complaints filed concerning such policies, and
 `(B) of the information reported by policy under section 2185(e).
 `(2) ACCESS TO INFORMATION ON COMPLAINTS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Each State regulatory program shall provide for consumer
 access to complaints filed with the State commissioner or superintendent
 of insurance with respect to long-term care insurance policies.
 `(B) CONFIDENTIALITY- The access provided under subparagraph (A) shall
 be limited to the extent required to protect the confidentiality of the
 identity of individual policyholders.
 `(e) PROCESS FOR APPROVAL OF PREMIUMS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each State regulatory program shall--
 `(A) provide for a process for approving or disapproving proposed premium
 increases with respect to long-term care insurance policies, and
 `(B) establish a policy for receipt and consideration of public comments
 before approving such a premium increase.
 `(2) CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL- No such premium increase shall be approved
 (or deemed approved) unless the proposed increase is accompanied by an
 actuarial memorandum which--
 `(A) includes a description of the assumptions which justify the increase,
 `(B) contains such information as may be required under the Standards, and
 `(C) is made available to the public.
 `(f) ANNUAL REPORTS- Each State regulatory program shall provide for
 annual reports to the Secretary on the implementation and enforcement of
 the Standards in the State.
 `(g) INCREASE IN FUNDING FOR LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE, INFORMATION,
 COUNSELING, AND ASSISTANCE THROUGH STATE REGULATORY PROGRAMS- In addition
 to amounts otherwise authorized to be appropriated, there are authorized to
 be appropriated, under section 4360(f) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
 Act of 1990, $20,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1993, 1994, and 1995,
 to fund grant programs under such section for the purpose of providing
 information, counseling, and assistance relating to long-term care benefits
 under this title and the procurement of adequate and appropriate long-term
 care insurance.
`STANDARDS RELATING TO SALES PRACTICES
 `SEC. 2184. (a) CERTIFICATION OF TRAINING OF SALES AGENTS- A person may
 not sell or offer for sale a long-term care insurance policy unless the
 person has been certified under the State regulatory program or by the
 Secretary as having received training with respect to such policies in
 accordance with the Standards.
 `(b) DUTY OF GOOD FAITH AND FAIR DEALING-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each person who is selling or offering for sale a long-term
 care insurance policy has the duty of good faith and fair dealing to the
 purchaser or potential purchaser of such a policy.
 `(2) UNFAIR PRACTICES- A person is considered to have violated paragraph
 (1) if the person engages in any of the following practices:
 `(A) TWISTING- Knowingly making any misleading representation or incomplete
 or fraudulent comparison of any long-term care insurance policy, issuer of
 such a policy, or the program under part A or low-income assistance under
 part D for the purpose of inducing, or tending to induce, any person to
 retain or effect a change with respect to a long-term care insurance policy.
 `(B) HIGH PRESSURE TACTICS- Employing any method of marketing having the
 effect of, or intending to, induce the purchase of long-term care insurance
 policy through undue pressure.
 `(C) COLD LEAD ADVERTISING- Making use directly or indirectly of any method
 of marketing which fails to disclose in a conspicuous manner that a purpose
 of the method of marketing is solicitation of insurance and that contact
 will be made by an insurance agent or insurance company.
 `(D) ADDITIONAL PRACTICES- Such sales practices as the Secretary may
 specify in regulations.
The NAIC shall periodically report to the Secretary on improper sales practices
that should be treated (under subparagraph (D)) as violations of paragraph
(1). Any additional unfair sales practices specified in regulations referred
to in subparagraph (D) shall only apply to activities occurring after the
date of promulgation of the regulations.
 `(c) PROHIBITION OF COMPLETION OF MEDICAL HISTORIES- A person who is selling
 or offering for sale a long-term care insurance policy may not complete
 the medical history portion of an application for any other individual
 (other than a relative of the person).
 `(d) PROHIBITION OF SALE OR ISSUANCE TO MEDICAID BENEFICIARIES AND
 INDIVIDUALS RECEIVING LONG-TERM CARE NURSING BENEFITS UNDER PART A- A
 person may not knowingly sell or issue a long-term care insurance policy
 to an individual who--
 `(1) is eligible for medical assistance (other than only as a qualified
 medicare beneficiary) under title XIX, or
 `(2) is a certified individual (as defined in section 2101(b)(4)).
 `(e) PROHIBITION OF SALE OR ISSUANCE OF DUPLICATE POLICIES- A person may
 not sell or issue a long-term care insurance policy--
 `(1) knowing that the policy provides for coverage that duplicates coverage
 already provided in another long-term care insurance policy (unless the
 policy is intended to replace such other policy), or
 `(2) for the benefit of an individual unless the individual (or a
 representative of the individual) provides a written statement to the
 effect that the coverage--
 `(A) does not duplicate other coverage in effect under a long-term care
 insurance policy, or
 `(B) will replace another long-term care insurance policy.
 `(f) PROVISION OF OUTLINE OF COVERAGE AND OTHER INFORMATION-
 `(1) OUTLINE OF COVERAGE- A person may not sell or offer for a sale a
 long-term care insurance policy for the benefit of an individual without
 providing to the individual (or a representative of the individual)--
 `(A) an outline of coverage that includes the information required under
 paragraph (2); and
 `(B) information (specified under the Standards) describing--
 `(i) benefits available under this title,
 `(ii) the right of individuals to turn down the policy in 3 days, and
 `(iii) the right of individuals to cancel a policy, and receive a refund
 on premiums paid, within 30 days after the date the policy is issued.
In applying this paragraph in the case of a group long-term care insurance
policy, the issuer of the policy is responsible for the provision of the
outline and information to each certificate holder before the policy takes
effect with respect to that certificate holder.
 `(2) CONTENTS OF OUTLINE OF COVERAGE- The outline of coverage for each
 long-term care insurance policy shall include (in accordance with the
 Standards) at least the following:
 `(A) A description of the principal benefits and coverage under the policy
 and how such benefits and coverage compare to the range of potential
 benefits and coverage available under such policies.
 `(B) A statement of the principal exclusions, reductions, and limitations
 contained in the policy.
 `(C) A statement of the terms under which the policy (or certificate in
 the case of a group policy) may be continued in force or discontinued,
 the terms for continuation or conversion, and any reservation in the policy
 of a right to change premiums.
 `(D) A statement that the outline of coverage is a summary only, not a
 contract of insurance, and that the policy (or master policy) contains
 the contractual provisions that govern.
 `(E) A description of the terms, specified in 2185(a)(1), under which a
 policy may be returned and the premium refunded.
 `(F) A statement of the percentage limit on annual premium increases that
 is provided under the policy pursuant to section 2186(h).
 `(G) Information on the average costs for community care and nursing facility
 care in the State of residence and information on the relationship of the
 benefits provided under the policy to such national and State average costs.
 `(H) Information (in graphic form) on the projected effect of inflation
 on the value of benefits provided under the policy during a period of at
 least 20 years.
 `(I) Information on the relationship of the benefits under the policy
 to the benefits under part A of this title and on low-income assistance
 available under part D of this title.
 `(J) Information on the resource value of the policy (as established under
 paragraph (3)(B) of section 2132(b) for purposes of that section).
 `(g) OFFERING OF POLICY WITH MINIMUM BENEFITS- A person may not sell
 or offer for sale a long-term care insurance policy to an individual
 unless the person has offered for sale to the individual a long-term care
 insurance policy that only provides the minimum benefits for long-term
 nursing facility care consistent with section 2186(b).
 `(h) INFORMATION ON FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS WITH GROUPS- A person may not
 sell or offer for sale a long-term care insurance policy with respect to
 a member of an organization with which the person (or the issuer of the
 policy) has a financial arrangement of any type unless the person discloses
 (in accordance with the Standards) the nature of the financial arrangement.
 `(i) PENALTIES- In addition to sanctions provided under State regulatory
 programs, any person who sells, offers for sale, or issues a long-term
 care insurance policy in violation of this section is subject to sanctions
 under section 2187.
`STANDARDS RELATING TO ISSUERS
 `SEC. 2185. (a) Free Look; Refund of Premiums--
 `(1) RIGHT TO RETURN (FREE LOOK)- Each applicant for a long-term care
 insurance policy shall have the right to return the policy within 30 days
 of the date of its delivery (and to have the premium refunded) if, after
 examination of the policy, the applicant is not satisfied for any reason.
 `(2) REFUND OF PREMIUMS- If an application for a long-term care insurance
 policy is denied or an applicant returns a policy within 30 days of the
 date of its issuance pursuant to paragraph (1), the issuer shall refund
 to the applicant, not later than 30 days after the date of the denial or
 return, any premiums paid with respect to such a policy.
 `(b) MAILING OF POLICY- If an application for a long-term care insurance
 policy is approved, the issuer shall transmit to the applicant the policy
 of insurance not later than 30 days after the date of the approval.
 `(c) CLAIMS DENIALS-
 `(1) INFORMATION ON DENIALS OF CLAIMS- If a claim under a long-term care
 insurance policy is denied, the issuer shall, within 60 days of the
 date of a written request by the policyholder (or a representative of
 the policyholder)--
 `(A) provide a written explanation to the individual of the reasons for
 the denial,
 `(B) make available to the individual all information directly relating
 to such denial, and
 `(C) inform the individual of the process established under paragraph (3)
 for the appeal of the claim denial.
 `(2) LIMITATION ON BASIS FOR DENIAL-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- No claim under such a policy may be denied on the basis
 of a failure to disclose information at the time of delivery (and issuance
 for delivery) of the policy if the application for the policy failed to
 request such information.
 `(B) TREATMENT OF INDIVIDUALS 75 YEARS OF AGE OR OLDER- In the case of
 a policyholder who was 75 years of age or older at the time of delivery
 (and issuance for delivery) of a long-term care insurance policy, no claim
 under such a policy may be denied on the basis of a failure to disclose
 information at the time of delivery (and issuance for delivery) of the
 policy if the policyholder truthfully disclosed documentation obtained
 under subsection (g).
 `(3) PROCESS FOR APPEAL OF DENIAL OF CLAIMS- Each issuer of a long-term care
 insurance policy shall establish and maintain procedures (which meets the
 Standards) under which a policyholder will be granted an opportunity for
 a fair hearing by the issuer in any case where the amount in controversy
 is at least $500 when claims under the policy are denied, when such claims
 are not acted upon with reasonable promptness, or when the amount of such
 payment is in controversy.
 `(d) LIMIT OF PERIOD OF CONTESTABILITY- An issuer of a long-term care
 insurance policy may not cancel such a policy or deny a claim under the
 policy based on fraud or misrepresentation relating to the issuance of
 the policy unless notice of such fraud or misrepresentation is provided
 within 6 months after the date of the delivery (and issuance for delivery)
 of the policy.
 `(e) Reporting of Information; Access to Information-
 `(1) REPORTING OF INFORMATION- Each issuer of a long-term care insurance
 policy shall periodically (not less often than annually) report to the
 Commissioner or superintendent of insurance of each State in which the
 policy is sold, and shall make available to the Secretary, upon request,
 information respecting the following:
 `(A) The long-term care insurance policies of the issuer that are in force.
 `(B) The most recent premiums for such policies and the premiums imposed
 for such policies during the previous 5-year period.
 `(C) The lapse rates, replacement rates, and rescission rates for policies
 (by agent). For purposes of this subparagraph, there shall not be included
 as a lapse of policy such a lapse due to the death of the policyholder.
 `(D) The claims denied (as a percentage of claims submitted) for such
 policies. For purposes of this subparagraph, there shall not be included
 as a denied claim such a claim that is denied solely because of the failure
 to meet a deductible, waiting period, or exclusionary period.
 `(E) The rate of appeal of denied claims (as a percentage of claims denied)
 for such policies.
 `(F) The rate of reversal of denied claims on appeal (as a percentage of
 claim denials appealed) for such policies.
 `(G) Such other information as is specified in the Standards.
Information under this paragraph shall be reported in a format specified in
the Standards.
 `(2) ACCESS TO INFORMATION- Each such issuer shall make available to the
 Secretary and the Commissioner or superintendent of insurance of each State
 in which the policy is sold such additional information as the Secretary,
 Commissioner, or superintendent, may request.
 `(f) PROVISION OF OUTLINE OF COVERAGE FOR RENEWALS- Each issuer of a
 long-term care insurance policy shall provide, at the time of renewal
 of such a policy or, in the case of a policy issued through a group,
 the anniversary date of purchase of the policy an outline of coverage
 described in section 2184(f)(2) to each policyholder.
 `(g) MEDICAL DOCUMENTATION FOR THE ELDERLY- Each issuer of a long-term
 care insurance policy shall, with respect to an applicant who is 75 years
 of age or older, obtain one of the following before issuing the policy:
 `(1) A report of a contemporaneous physical examination.
 `(2) A contemporaneous assessment of functional capacity.
 `(3) Copies of contemporaneous medical records.
The issuer shall maintain the information obtained in its files.
 `(h) Limits on Compensation for Sale of Policies-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- An issuer of a long-term care insurance policy may
 not provide a commission or other compensation to an agent or other
 representative for the sale of such a policy in an amount that exceeds
 200 percent of the commission or other compensation paid for selling or
 servicing such a policy in the second or subsequent year.
 `(2) COMPENSATION DEFINED- In paragraph (1), the term `compensation'
 includes pecuniary or nonpecuniary remuneration of any kind relating to
 the sale or renewal of the policy or certification, including deferred
 compensation, bonuses, gifts, prizes, awards, and finders fees.
 `(i) PENALTIES- In addition to sanctions provided under State regulatory
 programs, any issuer of a long-term care insurance policy that--
 `(1) fails to make a refund in accordance with subsection (a),
 `(2) fails to transmit a policy in accordance with subsection (b),
 `(3) fails to provide, make available, or report information in accordance
 with subsections (c) and (e),
 `(4) cancels a policy or denies a claim in violation of subsection (d),
 `(5) fails to provide an outline of coverage in violation of subsection
 (f), or
 `(6) issues a policy without obtaining certain information in violation
 of subsection (g), or
 `(7) provides a commission or compensation in violation of subsection (h),
is subject to sanctions under section 2187.
`STANDARDS RELATING TO POLICIES
 `SEC. 2186. (a) USE OF STANDARD DEFINITIONS AND TERMINOLOGY AND UNIFORM
 FORMAT- Each long-term care insurance policy shall, pursuant to the
 Standards--
 `(1) use uniform language and definitions, and
 `(2) use a uniform format for presenting the outline of coverage under
 such a policy.
 `(b) Limiting Conditions on Benefits; Minimum Benefits-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A long-term care insurance policy may not--
 `(A) condition or limit eligibility for benefits for a type of services
 to the need for or receipt of any other services;
 `(B) condition or limit eligibility for any benefit on the medical necessity
 for such benefit;
 `(C) condition or limit eligibility for benefits furnished by licensed
 providers on compliance with conditions which are in addition to those
 required for licensure under State law or required under this title; or
 `(D) deny payment for any benefits on the basis that the individual is
 eligible for or otherwise entitled to benefits under part A.
 `(2) COMMUNITY CARE- If a long-term care insurance policy provides benefits
 for community care, the policy--
 `(A) may not limit such benefits to services provided by registered nurses
 or licensed practical nurses;
 `(B) may not require benefits for such services to be provided by a nurse
 or therapist that can be provided by a home health aide or other licensed
 or certified home care worker acting within the scope of the worker's
 licensure or certification;
 `(C) may not limit such benefits to services provided by agencies or
 providers certified under title XVIII; and
 `(D) shall provide benefits for--
 `(i) home-based items and services described in paragraphs (2) and (3)
 of section 2102(b) in an individual's home,
 `(ii) community-based items and services described in section 2102(c), and
 `(iii) respite care and hospice respite care described in section 2102(d),
furnished by qualified providers (as determined for purposes of part A).
 `(3) NURSING FACILITY CARE-
 `(A) REQUIREMENT- Each long-term care insurance policy shall provide that
 in the case of a policyholder who would be entitled to benefits under part
 A with respect to long-term nursing facility care but for the individual's
 failure to have been found to be financially eligible for such care under
 section 2132, benefits under the policy shall include either--
 `(i) benefits for long-term nursing facility care of the type provided under
 part A, without regard to any coinsurance or resident-specific deductible
 established under sections 2122(a)(2) and 2133(a)(2), at a dollar level
 (for a day of nursing facility care) not less than 80 percent of the average
 cost of a day of nursing facility care in the State at the time of sale
 of the policy, increased for inflation consistent with subsection (g), or
 `(ii) payment of a dollar amount equivalent to the amount provided under
 clause (i).
 `(B) NO RESTRICTION ON COVERED FACILITIES- To the extent to which a
 long-term care insurance policy provides benefits for nursing facility
 care, the policy shall provide such benefits with respect to all nursing
 facilities (as defined in section 2104(b)).
 `(4) MINIMUM PERIOD OF COVERAGE- Each long-term care insurance policy--
 `(A) that provides benefits with respect to community care, shall provide
 benefits for such care over a period of at least 12 consecutive months, and
 `(B) shall provide benefits for nursing facility care over a period of
 at least 48 consecutive months, or, beginning with the second year that
 begins after the effective date of this title (as defined in section
 2101(d)(1)(B)), over a period of consecutive months that is not less than
 12 months and that is a multiple of 12 months.
 `(d) PROHIBITION OF DISCRIMINATION- A long-term care insurance policy
 may not treat benefits under the policy in the case of an individual with
 Alzheimer's disease, with any related progressive degenerative dementia
 of an organic origin, or with any organic or inorganic mental illness
 differently from an individual having another medical condition for which
 benefits may be made available.
 `(e) Limitation on Use of Preexisting Condition Limits-
 `(1) Initial issuance-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to subparagraph (B), a long-term care insurance
 policy may not exclude or condition benefits based on a medical condition
 for which the policyholder received treatment or was otherwise diagnosed
 before the issuance of the policy.
 `(B) 6-MONTH LIMIT- A long-term care insurance policy may exclude benefits
 under a policy, during its first 6 months, based on a condition for which
 the policyholder received treatment or was otherwise diagnosed during the
 6 months before the policy became effective.
 `(C) REFERENCE TO MEDICAL DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENT- For provision requiring
 a medical documentation for individuals 75 years of age or older at the
 time of policy issuance, see section 2185(g).
 `(2) REPLACEMENT POLICIES- If a long-term care insurance policy replaces
 another long-term care insurance policy, the replacing policy shall
 waive any time periods (including waiting periods, elimination periods,
 and probationary periods) applicable to preexisting conditions in the new
 policy for similar benefits to the extent such time was spent under the
 original policy.
 `(f) Use of Functional Assessment-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each long-term care insurance policy--
 `(A) shall provide for eligibility for, and level of, benefits available
 under the policy based on an assessment of the policyholder's functional
 ability that--
 `(i) is conducted by an assessment agency (as defined in section 2114(a)(1)),
 or by another qualified individual (as specified by the Secretary in
 regulations consistent with paragraph (2)), and
 `(ii) uses the same assessment instrument and methodology as is used in
 making assessments under section 2111;
 `(B) shall specify the level (or levels) of functional impairment required
 under such an assessment to obtain benefits under the policy; and
 `(C) shall provide for the determination of such level based on the
 individual's inability to perform (without substantial assistance from
 another individual) because of physical, cognitive, or other mental
 impairment a number (or combination) of activities of daily living specified
 in section 2101(b)(1)(A)(i) and, in the case of individuals with cognitive
 or other mental impairment or under 6 years of age, based on a standard
 of comparable level of disability described in subparagraph (A)(ii) or
 (B) of section 2101(b)(1).
 `(2) CONDUCT OF ASSESSMENT- Such assessment may not be conducted by an
 individual--
 `(A) who has a direct or indirect ownership or control interest in the
 issuer of the policy or an entity that provides services for which benefits
 are available under the long-term care insurance policy, or
 `(B) who has a direct or indirect affiliation or relationship with such
 an issuer or entity if there is a financial incentive that is related to
 the results of the assessment determination.
 `(3) APPEALS PROCESS- Each long-term care insurance policy shall provide
 for an appeals process, meeting the Standards, for individuals who dispute
 the results of an assessment conducted under this subsection, including
 any determination of eligibility, level of functional impairment, or level
 of benefits.
 `(4) DEEMED ENTITLEMENT FOR REQUIRED NURSING FACILITY CARE BENEFITS IF
 AFFIRMATIVE CERTIFICATION IS ISSUED- With respect to benefits for nursing
 facility care required to be covered under long-term care insurance policies,
 an individual covered under the policy is deemed to be eligible for such
 benefits if the individual has in effect an affirmative certification
 under section 2112.
 `(g) INFLATION PROTECTION OPTION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- At the option of the policyholder at the time of sale of
 a long-term care insurance policy, the policy shall provide, at the time of
 each annual renewal, for a percentage increase (which is not less than the
 applicable percentage increase specified in paragraph (2)) in the dollar
 payment levels and any maximum payment limit on benefit coverage above
 the levels or limit in effect during the previous policy year. In applying
 this subsection, the increases shall be compounded annually and the policy
 may provide for rounding such an increase to the nearest multiple of $1
 (in the case of dollar payment levels) or $100 (in the case of a maximum
 payment limit).
 `(2) SPECIFICATION OF PERCENTAGE INCREASE- For purposes of paragraph
 (1), with respect to policies issued each year, the applicable percentage
 increase specified in this paragraph--
 `(A) with respect to benefits for community care is the average annual
 percentage rate of increase for payment rates for community care under this
 title projected, most recently before the date of issuance of the policy,
 under section 2141(d)(1) by the Board of Trustees of the Federal Long-Term
 Care Trust Fund, and
 `(B) with respect to benefits for nursing facility care is the average
 annual percentage rate of increase for payments rates for nursing facility
 care under this title projected, most recently before the date of issuance
 of the policy, under section 2141(d)(2) by the Board of Trustees of the
 Federal Long-Term Care Trust Fund.
 `(3) OPTION TO ADJUST POLICY FOR ACTUAL INFLATION- At the option of the
 policyholder, at the time of each annual renewal, the policy may be modified
 to reflect a change in inflation projections, referred to in paragraph
 (2), with a premium adjustment as determined under the Standards.
 `(h) SPECIFICATION OF LIMITS ON PREMIUM INCREASES; LIMIT ON PREMIUM
 INCREASES AFTER AGE 75; PREMIUMS FOR POLICY UPGRADES-
 `(1) SPECIFICATION OF LIMITS ON ANNUAL PREMIUM INCREASES- Each long-term
 care insurance policy shall specify a limit on the percentage increase
 in premiums for a policy that may be made between one policy year and the
 subsequent policy year.
 `(2) LIMIT ON PREMIUM INCREASE AFTER AGE 75- Each long-term care insurance
 policy shall not provide for any increase in premiums for a policyholder
 who is 75 years of age or older other than an annual increase (of not more
 than 5 percent) at the beginning of each policy year.
 `(3) CLASSIFICATION OF PREMIUMS FOR POLICY UPGRADES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- In the case of a long-term care insurance policy issued
 to an individual who is provided an upgraded long-term care insurance
 policy by the same issuer, consistent with the Standards, the premiums
 charged with respect to such upgraded policy for those elements that are
 the same as those under the policy being replaced shall be consistent with
 the premiums that would be charged if the individual had purchased such
 upgraded policy at the time of issuance of the original (or previous) policy.
 `(B) UPGRADED POLICY DEFINED- In subparagraph (A), the term `upgraded
 policy' means a policy that, in relation to a previously issued policy,
 has benefits with an anticipated actuarial value (for individuals within
 the same actuarial class or similar demographic characteristics) that is
 greater than the actuarial value of the previously issued policy.
 `(i) NONFORFEITURE-
 `(1) PROTECTION-
 `(A) PROTECTION- Each long-term care insurance policy shall provide such
 nonforfeiture protection as shall be included in the Standards. Such
 Standards shall provide no less protection than requiring that a
 policyholder, at the time of sale of a long-term care insurance policy, be
 offered the option of nonforfeiture protection described in subparagraph (B).
 `(B) BASE NONFORFEITURE PROTECTION- The nonforfeiture protection described
 in this subparagraph under a policy would provide that if the policy
 lapses after the policy has been in effect for at least 5 years, the
 policy will provide without payment of any additional premiums benefits
 equal to a percentage (specified under the Standards) of the benefits
 otherwise available at term, or an equivalent cash amount (as determined
 under the Standards).
 `(2) ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS- The Standards may provide that the
 percentage or cash amount under paragraph (1)(B) must increase based upon
 the period of time in which the policy was in effect.
 `(j) RENEWABILITY AND UPGRADES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- No long-term care insurance policy may be canceled or
 nonrenewed for any reason other than nonpayment of premium, material
 misrepresentation or fraud.
 `(2) continuation and conversion rights for group policies-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Each group long-term care insurance policy shall provide
 covered individuals with a basis for continuation or conversion in accordance
 with this paragraph.
 `(B) BASIS FOR CONTINUATION- For purposes of subparagraph (A), a policy
 provides a basis for continuation of coverage if the policy maintains
 coverage under the existing group policy when such coverage would otherwise
 terminate or when benefits under such policy are reduced and which is
 subject only to the continued timely payment of a premium when due. A
 group policy which restricts provision of benefits and services to or
 contains incentives to use certain providers or facilities, may provide
 continuation benefits which are substantially equivalent to the benefits
 of the existing group policy.
 `(C) BASIS FOR CONVERSION- For purposes of subparagraph (A), a policy
 provides a basis for conversion of coverage if the policy entitles each
 individual--
 `(i) whose coverage under the group policy would otherwise be terminated
 for any reason or whose benefits under the group policy would otherwise
 be reduced, and
 `(ii) who has been continuously insured under the policy (or group policy
 which was replaced) for at least 6 months before the date of the termination
 or reduction,
to issuance of a policy providing benefits identical to, substantially
equivalent to, or in excess of, those of the policy being terminated (or
the benefits being reduced), without evidence of insurability.
 `(D) GROUP REPLACEMENT OF POLICIES- If a group long-term care insurance
 policy is replaced by another long-term care insurance policy purchased
 by the same policyholder, the succeeding issuer shall offer coverage
 to all individuals covered under the old group policy on its date of
 termination. Coverage under the new group policy shall not result in any
 exclusion for preexisting conditions that would have been covered under
 the group policy being replaced.
 `(3) UPGRADES FOR CURRENT POLICIES- If an issuer of a long-term care
 insurance policy continues to issue such a policy after the effective date
 specified under section 2182(b), the issuer shall permit each policyholder of
 such a policy as of such date to purchase a long-term care insurance policy
 that meets all the applicable Standards. In offering such a policy, the
 issuer may impose additional underwriting restrictions only for benefits not
 held under the previously issued policy, in accordance with the Standards.
`SECRETARIAL ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY
 `SEC. 2187. (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall exercise authority under
 this section--
 `(1) in the case of a State which does not have a regulatory program
 approved under section 2183,
 `(2) in the case of a State which has such an approved program, to
 the extent specified by the Secretary (under a look-behind program),
 to determine whether or not individual long-term health care policies in
 the State have failed to comply with the applicable requirements of this
 part and whether persons or entities are otherwise in compliance with the
 requirements of this part, and
 `(3) in carrying out sections 2184(i) and 2185(i) (relating to penalties).
 `(b) COMPLAINTS AND INVESTIGATIONS- The Secretary shall establish
 procedures--
 `(1) for individuals and entities to file written, signed complaints
 respecting alleged violations of the requirements of this part,
 `(2) for responding on a timely basis to such complaints, and
 `(3) for the investigation of--
 `(A) those complaints which, on their face, have a substantial probability
 of validity, and
 `(B) such other alleged violations of the requirements of this part as
 the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
In conducting investigations under this section, agents of the Secretary
shall have reasonable access to examine evidence of any person or entity
being investigated.
 `(c) HEARINGS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Before imposing an order described in subsection (d) against
 a person or entity under this section for a violation of the requirements
 of this part, the Secretary shall provide the person or entity with notice
 and, upon request made within a reasonable time (of not less than 30 days,
 as established by the Secretary by regulation) of the date of the notice,
 a hearing respecting the violation.
 `(2) CONDUCT OF HEARING- Any hearing so requested shall be conducted
 before an administrative law judge under section 201. If no hearing is
 so requested, the Secretary's imposition of the order shall constitute a
 final and unappealable order.
 `(3) AUTHORITY IN HEARINGS- In conducting hearings under this subsection--
 `(A) agents of the Secretary and administrative law judges shall have
 reasonable access to examine evidence of any person or entity being
 investigated, and
 `(B) administrative law judges, may, if necessary, compel by subpoena the
 attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence at any designated
 place or hearing.
In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena lawfully issued under
this paragraph and upon application of the Secretary, an appropriate district
court of the United States may issue an order requiring compliance with such
subpoena and any failure to obey such order may be punished by such court
as a contempt thereof.
 `(4) ISSUANCE OF ORDERS- If the administrative law judge determines, upon
 the preponderance of the evidence received, that a person or entity named in
 the complaint has violated the requirements of this part, the administrative
 law judge shall state the findings of fact and issue and cause to be served
 on such person or entity an order described in subsection (d).
 `(d) CEASE AND DESIST ORDER WITH CIVIL MONEY PENALTY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this subsection,
 the order under this subsection--
 `(A) shall require the person or entity--
 `(i) to cease and desist from such violations, and
 `(ii) to pay a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $25,000 for each
 such violation; and
 `(B) may require the person or entity to take such other remedial action
 as is appropriate.
The provisions of section 1128A (other than the first sentence of subsection
(a) and other than subsection (b)) shall apply to a civil money penalty
under this subparagraph in the same manner as such provisions apply to a
penalty or proceeding under section 1128A(a).
 `(2) CORRECTIONS WITHIN 30 DAYS- No order shall be imposed under this
 subsection by reason of any violation if the person or entity establishes
 to the satisfaction of the Secretary that--
 `(A) such violation was due to reasonable cause and was not intentional
 and was not due to willful neglect, and
 `(B) such violation is corrected within the 30-day period beginning on
 the earliest date the person or entity knew, or exercising reasonable
 diligence could have known, that such a violation was occurring.
 `(3) WAIVER BY SECRETARY- In the case of a violation which is due to
 reasonable cause and not to willful neglect, the Secretary may waive part
 or all of the civil money penalty imposed by paragraph (1)(A)(ii) to the
 extent that payment of such penalty would be grossly excessive relative
 to the violation involved and to the need for deterrence of violations.
 `(4) ADMINISTRATIVE APPELLATE REVIEW- The decision and order of
 an administrative law judge shall become the final agency decision and
 order of the Secretary unless, within 30 days, the Secretary modifies or
 vacates the decision and order, in which case the decision and order of
 the Secretary shall become a final order under this subsection.
 `(5) JUDICIAL REVIEW- A person or entity adversely affected by a final
 order issued under this subsection may, within 45 days after the date the
 final order is issued, file a petition in the Court of Appeals for the
 appropriate circuit for review of the order.
 `(6) ENFORCEMENT OF ORDERS- If a person or entity fails to comply with
 a final order issued under this subsection against the person or entity
 after opportunity for judicial review under paragraph (5), the Secretary
 shall file a suit to seek compliance with the order in any appropriate
 district court of the United States. In any such suit, the validity and
 appropriateness of the final order shall not be subject to review.
 `(7) USE OF AMOUNTS COLLECTED- Civil money penalties collected under this
 subsection shall be credited to the Federal Long-Term Care Trust Fund.
 `(e) ESTABLISHMENT OF TOLL-FREE TELEPHONE HOTLINE- In the case of a State
 without a regulatory program approved under section 2183(a), the Secretary
 shall provide for the establishment of the toll-free telephone information
 and complaint system described in section 2183(c) in carrying out this
 section in the State.
`LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE POLICY DEFINED
 `SEC. 2188. (a) IN GENERAL- In this part, except as otherwise provided in
 this section, the term `long-term care insurance policy' means any insurance
 policy, certificate, or rider advertised, marketed, offered, or designed
 to provide coverage for each covered individual on an expense incurred,
 indemnity, prepaid, or other basis, for one or more diagnostic, preventive,
 therapeutic, rehabilitative, maintenance or personal care services,
 provided in a setting other than an acute care unit of a hospital. Such term
 includes a group or individual annuity or life insurance policy or rider
 which provides directly (or which supplements) long-term care insurance
 described in the previous sentence.
 `(b) POLICIES EXCLUDED- Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d),
 in this part the term `long-term care insurance policy' does not include
 any medicare supplemental policy (as defined in section 1882(g)) and any
 insurance which is offered primarily to provide--
 `(1) basic hospital expense coverage, basic medical-surgical expense
 coverage, hospital confinement indemnity coverage, or major medical
 expense coverage,
 `(2) disability income or related asset-protection coverage,
 `(3) accident only coverage,
 `(4) specified disease or specified accident coverage, or
 `(5) limited benefit health coverage.
 `(c) INCLUSION OF POLICIES MARKETED AS LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE- In this
 part, the term `long-term care insurance policy' also includes any product
 which is advertised, marketed, or offered as long-term care insurance.
 `(d) DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN DISABILITY INCOME POLICIES AND
 LIFE INSURANCE POLICIES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In this part, the term `long-term care insurance policy'
 includes--
 `(A) a policy described in subsection (b)(2) under which the eligibility
 or amount of benefits are based on an assessment of functional ability
 (based on activities of daily living or otherwise) and the amount of
 benefits is paid only a per diem basis, or
 `(B) a life insurance policy described in paragraph (3),
if the disclosure requirements of paragraph (2) are not met.
 `(2) DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS- The disclosure requirements of this paragraph
 for a policy are that--
 `(A) the policy discloses (in a form and manner specified in the Standards)
 the fact that the policy is not a long-term care insurance policy;
 `(B) the policy outlines how the benefits in the policy differ from the
 benefits required to be provided under the Standards of a long-term care
 insurance policy and the benefits provided under part A; and
 `(C) in the case of a life-insurance policy described in subsection (c),
 at the time of policy delivery there is provided to the purchaser and the
 beneficiary a policy summary that includes--
 `(i) an explanation of how the long-term care benefits interact with other
 components of the policy (including deductions from death benefits);
 `(ii) a description of the amount and length of benefits and the guaranteed
 lifetime benefits (if any) for each covered individual; and
 `(iii) any exclusions, reductions, and limitations on benefits of long-term
 care.
 `(3) CERTAIN LIFE INSURANCE POLICIES- A life insurance policy described
 in this paragraph is one--
 `(A) which accelerates the death benefit specifically for--
 `(i) one or more of the qualifying events of terminal illness,
 `(ii) medical conditions requiring extraordinary medical intervention, or
 `(iii) permanent institutional confinement;
 `(B) which provides the option of a lump-sum payment for those benefits; or
 `(C) which provides benefits based on the use of nursing facility care.'.
SEC. 302. ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS UNDER THE PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 201 et seq.) is
 amended--
 (1) by redesignating title XXVII as title XXVIII;
 (2) by redesignating sections 2701 through 2714 as sections 2801 through
 2814, respectively; and
 (3) by inserting after title XXVI the following new title:
`TITLE XXVII--LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE STANDARDS
`PROMULGATION OF STANDARDS AND MODEL BENEFITS
 `SEC. 2701. (a) APPLICATION OF STANDARDS-
 `(1) NAIC- If, within 12 months after the date of the enactment of this
 title, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (in this title
 referred to as the `NAIC') promulgates model standards that incorporate the
 requirements of this title, such standards shall apply under section 2702.
 `(2) DEFAULT- If the NAIC does not promulgate the model standards under
 paragraph (1) by the deadline established in that subsection, the Secretary
 shall promulgate, within 12 months after such deadline, a regulation that
 provides standards that incorporate the requirements of this title and
 such standards shall apply under section 2702.
 `(3) SUBSEQUENT REFERENCE TO STANDARDS- In this title, the term `Standards'
 means all standards established under this section that apply in a State
 under section 2702.
 `(b) ITEMS INCLUDED IN STANDARDS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Standards promulgated under subsection (a) shall
 incorporate standards that specify the requirements of this title for
 long-term care insurance policies (as defined in section 2708(a)), for the
 approval of State regulatory programs, for the issuers of such policies,
 for the sale of such policies, for the contents of such policies, and for
 the disclosure of certain information.
 `(2) SPECIFIC STANDARDS RELATING TO STATE REGULATORY PROGRAMS- Such Standards
 shall include (with respect to State regulatory programs), the information
 to be required by such programs under section 2703(e)(2)(B) with respect
 to proposed premium increases for long-term care insurance policies.
 `(3) SPECIFIC STANDARDS RELATING TO SALES OF POLICIES- Such Standards
 shall include the following (with respect to the sale of long-term care
 insurance policies):
 `(A) The training required in order for a sales agent to be certified
 under section 2704(a).
 `(B) The information to be provided under section 2704(f)(1)(B).
 `(C) The contents of outlines of coverage under section 2704(f)(2).
 `(D) The manner of disclosure of financial arrangements under section
 2704(h).
 `(4) SPECIFIC STANDARDS RELATING TO ISSUERS- Such Standards shall include
 the following (with respect to issuers of long-term care insurance policies):
 `(A) The procedures for appeals of denied claims (under section 2705(c)(3)).
 `(B) The additional information required to be reported by issuers under
 section 2705(e)(1), and the format for reporting of such information.
 `(5) SPECIFIC STANDARDS RELATING TO POLICIES- Such Standards shall include
 the following (with respect to long-term care insurance policies):
 `(A) The uniform language and definitions and uniform format for outlines
 of coverage under section 2706(a).
 `(B) The process for appeals of assessments under section 2706(f)(3).
 `(C) The premium adjustment for those electing to modify inflation protection
 under section 2706(g)(3).
 `(D) Methods for the allocation of premium elements and means of evaluating
 actuarial value to carry out section 2706(h)(3)(A).
 `(E) The nonforfeiture protection to be provided under section 2706(i).
 `(F) Limitations on underwriting restrictions under section 2706(j)(3).
 `(6) SPECIFIC STANDARDS RELATING TO DISCLOSURE- Such standard shall include
 the disclosure required of certain policies under section 2708(d).
 `(c) MODEL BENEFITS- In order to promote consumer understanding and to
 facilitate benefit and price comparison among long-term care policies,
 the NAIC is requested to establish models for benefits (including the
 specification of benefit levels and cost-sharing as well as the grouping
 of benefits) under long-term care insurance policies which are consistent
 with the requirements of section 2706(b).
 `(d) CONSULTATION- In establishing Standards and models of benefits under
 this section, the NAIC or Secretary shall provide for and consult with
 an advisory committee chosen by the NAIC or Secretary, respectively,
 and composed of--
 `(1) a chairman (who is not a representative of issuers of long-term care
 insurance policies or providers of long-term care services);
 `(2) 3 individuals who are representatives of issuers of long-term care
 insurance policies;
 `(3) 3 individuals who are representatives of consumer groups;
 `(4) 3 representatives who are representatives of providers of long-term
 care services; and
 `(5) 3 other individuals who are not representatives of issuers of long-term
 care insurance policies or of providers of long-term care services and
 who have expertise in the delivery and financing of such services.
 `(e) RELATION TO STATE LAW-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Standards established under this section preempt
 provisions of State law which conflict with such Standards, but nothing
 in this title shall be construed as preventing a State from applying
 standards that provide greater protection to policyholders of long-term
 care insurance policies.
 `(2) GRANDPARENTING OF CURRENT POLICIES- Except as a State may provide,
 such Standards shall not apply to policies issued before the date specified
 in section 2702(b).
`APPLICATION OF LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE STANDARDS
 `SEC. 2702. (a) IN GENERAL- No long-term care insurance policy (as defined
 in section 2708(a)) may be issued, sold, or offered for sale in a State
 on or after the date specified in subsection (b) unless--
 `(1) the Secretary determines that--
 `(A) the State has established a regulatory program that meets the
 requirements of section 2703, by the date specified in subsection (b), and
 `(B) the policy has been approved by the State commissioner or superintendent
 of insurance under such program; or
 `(2) in the case of a State that does not have a regulatory program approved
 under section 2703, the policy has been certified by the Secretary (in
 accordance with such procedures as the Secretary establishes by regulation)
 as meeting the Standards (insofar as they relate to the contents of a
 long-term care insurance policy).
For purposes of this subsection, the advertising or soliciting with respect
to a long-term care insurance policy, directly or indirectly, shall be deemed
the offering for sale of the policy.
 `(b) DEADLINE FOR APPLICATION OF STANDARDS IN STATES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (2), the date specified in this
 subsection for a State is--
 `(A) the date the State adopts the Standards, or
 `(B) 1 year after the date the Standards are first established,
whichever is earlier.
 `(2) STATE REQUIRING LEGISLATION- In the case of a State which the Secretary
 identifies, in consultation with the NAIC, as--
 `(A) requiring State legislation (other than legislation appropriating
 funds) in order for the Standards to be applied, but
 `(B) having a legislature which is not scheduled to meet in 1994 in a
 legislative session in which such legislation may be considered,
the date specified in this subsection is the first day of the first calendar
quarter beginning after the close of the first legislative session of the
State legislature that begins on or after January 1, 1994. For purposes of
the previous sentence, in the case of a State that has a 2-year legislative
session, each year of such session shall be deemed to be a separate regular
session of the State legislature.
`STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL OF STATE REGULATORY PROGRAMS
 `SEC. 2703. (a) APPROVAL-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may not approve a State regulatory program
 for purposes of section 2702(a), unless the Secretary determines that
 the program--
 `(A) provides for the application and enforcement of the Standards, and
 `(B) complies with the requirements of--
 `(i) subsection (b) (relating to enforcement),
 `(ii) subsection (c) (relating to provision of toll-free telephone system),
 `(iii) subsection (d) (relating to publication and public access to
 compliance information),
 `(iv) subsection (e) (relating to a process for the approval of premiums),
 and
 `(v) subsection (f) (relating to annual reports).
 `(2) PERIODIC REVIEW OF STATE REGULATORY PROGRAMS- The Secretary periodically
 shall review State regulatory programs to determine if they continue to
 meet the requirements for approval under paragraph (1). Before making
 a final determination that a State regulatory program no longer meets
 such requirements, the Secretary shall provide the State a hearing and an
 opportunity to adopt such a plan of correction as would permit the program
 to continue to meet such requirements. If the Secretary makes a final
 determination that the State regulatory program, after such a hearing
 and opportunity, fails to meet such requirements, the Secretary shall
 assume responsibility under section 2702(a)(2) with respect to certifying
 policies in the State and shall exercise full authority under section 2707
 for persons and entities in the State.
 `(b) ENFORCEMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The enforcement process under each State regulatory
 program--
 `(A) shall be designed in a manner so as to secure compliance with the
 Standards within 30 days after the date of a finding of noncompliance with
 such Standards, and
 `(B) shall provide for notice to the Secretary in cases where such compliance
 is not secured within such 30-day period.
 `(2) PROCESS- The enforcement process under each State regulatory program
 shall provide for--
 `(A) procedures for individuals and entities to file written, signed
 complaints respecting alleged violations of the Standards;
 `(B) responding on a timely basis to such complaints;
 `(C) the investigation of--
 `(i) those complaints which, on their face, have a substantial probability
 of validity, and
 `(ii) such other alleged violations of the Standards as the program finds
 appropriate;
 `(D) notice and opportunity for a hearing before executing sanctions; and
 `(E) the imposition of appropriate sanctions (which include, in appropriate
 cases, the imposition of a civil money penalty) in the case of a person
 or entity determined to have violated the Standards.
 `(c) TOLL-FREE TELEPHONE SYSTEM- Each State regulatory program shall
 provide a toll-free telephone system which provides for--
 `(1) a mechanism for the receipt and disposition of consumer complaints
 or inquiries regarding compliance with the requirements of this title, and
 `(2) information to consumers about issuers that offer long-term health
 care policies in the area covered by the regulatory authority.
Such system shall provide for the recording of consumer complaints in
accordance with a uniform methodology developed by the NAIC or the Secretary.
 `(d) PUBLICATION AND PUBLIC ACCESS TO COMPLIANCE INFORMATION-
 `(1) PUBLICATION OF INFORMATION- Each State regulatory program shall
 publish annually a summary--
 `(A) by issuer, of (i) the types of long-term health care policies issued
 and (ii) the types of complaints filed concerning such policies, and
 `(B) of the information reported by policy under section 2705(e).
 `(2) ACCESS TO INFORMATION ON COMPLAINTS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Each State regulatory program shall provide for consumer
 access to complaints filed with the State commissioner or superintendent
 of insurance with respect to long-term care insurance policies.
 `(B) CONFIDENTIALITY- The access provided under subparagraph (A) shall
 be limited to the extent required to protect the confidentiality of the
 identity of individual policyholders.
 `(e) PROCESS FOR APPROVAL OF PREMIUMS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each State regulatory program shall--
 `(A) provide for a process for approving or disapproving proposed premium
 increases with respect to long-term care insurance policies, and
 `(B) establish a policy for receipt and consideration of public comments
 before approving such a premium increase.
 `(2) CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL- No such premium increase shall be approved
 (or deemed approved) unless the proposed increase is accompanied by an
 actuarial memorandum which--
 `(A) includes a description of the assumptions which justify the increase,
 `(B) contains such information as may be required under the Standards, and
 `(C) is made available to the public.
 `(f) ANNUAL REPORTS- Each State regulatory program shall provide for
 annual reports to the Secretary on the implementation and enforcement of
 the Standards in the State.
 `(g) INCREASE IN FUNDING FOR LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE, INFORMATION,
 COUNSELING, AND ASSISTANCE THROUGH STATE REGULATORY PROGRAMS- In addition
 to amounts otherwise authorized to be appropriated, there are authorized to
 be appropriated, under section 4360(f) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
 Act of 1990, $20,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1993, 1994, and 1995,
 to fund grant programs under such section for the purpose of providing
 information, counseling, and assistance relating to long-term care benefits
 under title XXI of the Social Security Act and the procurement of adequate
 and appropriate long-term care insurance.
`STANDARDS RELATING TO SALES PRACTICES
 `SEC. 2704. (a) CERTIFICATION OF TRAINING OF SALES AGENTS- A person may
 not sell or offer for sale a long-term care insurance policy unless the
 person has been certified under the State regulatory program or by the
 Secretary as having received training with respect to such policies in
 accordance with the Standards.
 `(b) DUTY OF GOOD FAITH AND FAIR DEALING-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each person who is selling or offering for sale a long-term
 care insurance policy has the duty of good faith and fair dealing to the
 purchaser or potential purchaser of such a policy.
 `(2) UNFAIR PRACTICES- A person is considered to have violated paragraph
 (1) if the person engages in any of the following practices:
 `(A) TWISTING- Knowingly making any misleading representation or incomplete
 or fraudulent comparison of any long-term care insurance policy, issuer
 of such a policy, or the program under part A of title XXI the Social
 Security Act or low-income assistance under part D of such title for the
 purpose of inducing, or tending to induce, any person to retain or effect
 a change with respect to a long-term care insurance policy.
 `(B) HIGH PRESSURE TACTICS- Employing any method of marketing having the
 effect of, or intending to, induce the purchase of long-term care insurance
 policy through undue pressure.
 `(C) COLD LEAD ADVERTISING- Making use directly or indirectly of any method
 of marketing which fails to disclose in a conspicuous manner that a purpose
 of the method of marketing is solicitation of insurance and that contact
 will be made by an insurance agent or insurance company.
 `(D) ADDITIONAL PRACTICES- Such sales practices as the Secretary may
 specify in regulations.
The NAIC shall periodically report to the Secretary on improper sales practices
that should be treated (under subparagraph (D)) as violations of paragraph
(1). Any additional unfair sales practices specified in regulations referred
to in subparagraph (D) shall only apply to activities occurring after the
date of promulgation of the regulations.
 `(c) PROHIBITION OF COMPLETION OF MEDICAL HISTORIES- A person who is selling
 or offering for sale a long-term care insurance policy may not complete
 the medical history portion of an application for any other individual
 (other than a relative of the person).
 `(d) PROHIBITION OF SALE OR ISSUANCE TO MEDICAID BENEFICIARIES AND
 INDIVIDUALS RECEIVING LONG-TERM CARE NURSING BENEFITS UNDER PART A- A
 person may not knowingly sell or issue a long-term care insurance policy
 to an individual who--
 `(1) is eligible for medical assistance (other than only as a qualified
 medicare beneficiary) under title XIX, or
 `(2) is a certified individual (as defined in section 2101(b)(4) of the
 Social Security Act).
 `(e) PROHIBITION OF SALE OR ISSUANCE OF DUPLICATE POLICIES- A person may
 not sell or issue a long-term care insurance policy--
 `(1) knowing that the policy provides for coverage that duplicates coverage
 already provided in another long-term care insurance policy (unless the
 policy is intended to replace such other policy), or
 `(2) for the benefit of an individual unless the individual (or a
 representative of the individual) provides a written statement to the
 effect that the coverage--
 `(A) does not duplicate other coverage in effect under a long-term care
 insurance policy, or
 `(B) will replace another long-term care insurance policy.
 `(f) PROVISION OF OUTLINE OF COVERAGE AND OTHER INFORMATION-
 `(1) OUTLINE OF COVERAGE- A person may not sell or offer for a sale a
 long-term care insurance policy for the benefit of an individual without
 providing to the individual (or a representative of the individual)--
 `(A) an outline of coverage that includes the information required under
 paragraph (2); and
 `(B) information (specified under the Standards) describing--
 `(i) benefits available under title XXI of the Social Security Act,
 `(ii) the right of individuals to turn down the policy in 3 days, and
 `(iii) the right of individuals to cancel a policy, and receive a refund
 on premiums paid, within 30 days after the date the policy is issued.
In applying this paragraph in the case of a group long-term care insurance
policy, the issuer of the policy is responsible for the provision of the
outline and information to each certificate holder before the policy takes
effect with respect to that certificate holder.
 `(2) CONTENTS OF OUTLINE OF COVERAGE- The outline of coverage for each
 long-term care insurance policy shall include (in accordance with the
 Standards) at least the following:
 `(A) A description of the principal benefits and coverage under the policy
 and how such benefits and coverage compare to the range of potential
 benefits and coverage available under such policies.
 `(B) A statement of the principal exclusions, reductions, and limitations
 contained in the policy.
 `(C) A statement of the terms under which the policy (or certificate in
 the case of a group policy) may be continued in force or discontinued,
 the terms for continuation or conversion, and any reservation in the policy
 of a right to change premiums.
 `(D) A statement that the outline of coverage is a summary only, not a
 contract of insurance, and that the policy (or master policy) contains
 the contractual provisions that govern.
 `(E) A description of the terms, specified in 2705(a)(1), under which a
 policy may be returned and the premium refunded.
 `(F) A statement of the percentage limit on annual premium increases that
 is provided under the policy pursuant to section 2706(h).
 `(G) Information on the average costs for community care and nursing facility
 care in the State of residence and information on the relationship of the
 benefits provided under the policy to such national and State average costs.
 `(H) Information (in graphic form) on the projected effect of inflation
 on the value of benefits provided under the policy during a period of at
 least 20 years.
 `(I) Information on the relationship of the benefits under the policy to
 the benefits under part A of title XXI of the Social Security Act and on
 low-income assistance available under part D of such title.
 `(J) Information on the resource value of the policy (as established under
 paragraph (3)(B) of section 2132(b) of the Social Security Act for purposes
 of that section).
 `(g) OFFERING OF POLICY WITH MINIMUM BENEFITS- A person may not sell
 or offer for sale a long-term care insurance policy to an individual
 unless the person has offered for sale to the individual a long-term care
 insurance policy that only provides the minimum benefits for long-term
 nursing facility care consistent with section 2706(b).
 `(h) INFORMATION ON FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS WITH GROUPS- A person may not
 sell or offer for sale a long-term care insurance policy with respect to
 a member of an organization with which the person (or the issuer of the
 policy) has a financial arrangement of any type unless the person discloses
 (in accordance with the Standards) the nature of the financial arrangement.
 `(i) PENALTIES- In addition to sanctions provided under State regulatory
 programs, any person who sells, offers for sale, or issues a long-term
 care insurance policy in violation of this section is subject to sanctions
 under section 2707.
`STANDARDS RELATING TO ISSUERS
 `SEC. 2705. (a) Free Look; Refund of Premiums--
 `(1) RIGHT TO RETURN (FREE LOOK)- Each applicant for a long-term care
 insurance policy shall have the right to return the policy within 30 days
 of the date of its delivery (and to have the premium refunded) if, after
 examination of the policy, the applicant is not satisfied for any reason.
 `(2) REFUND OF PREMIUMS- If an application for a long-term care insurance
 policy is denied or an applicant returns a policy within 30 days of the
 date of its issuance pursuant to paragraph (1), the issuer shall refund
 to the applicant, not later than 30 days after the date of the denial or
 return, any premiums paid with respect to such a policy.
 `(b) MAILING OF POLICY- If an application for a long-term care insurance
 policy is approved, the issuer shall transmit to the applicant the policy
 of insurance not later than 30 days after the date of the approval.
 `(c) CLAIMS DENIALS-
 `(1) INFORMATION ON DENIALS OF CLAIMS- If a claim under a long-term care
 insurance policy is denied, the issuer shall, within 60 days of the
 date of a written request by the policyholder (or a representative of
 the policyholder)--
 `(A) provide a written explanation to the individual of the reasons for
 the denial,
 `(B) make available to the individual all information directly relating
 to such denial, and
 `(C) inform the individual of the process established under paragraph (3)
 for the appeal of the claim denial.
 `(2) LIMITATION ON BASIS FOR DENIAL-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- No claim under such a policy may be denied on the basis
 of a failure to disclose information at the time of delivery (and issuance
 for delivery) of the policy if the application for the policy failed to
 request such information.
 `(B) TREATMENT OF INDIVIDUALS 75 YEARS OF AGE OR OLDER- In the case of
 a policyholder who was 75 years of age or older at the time of delivery
 (and issuance for delivery) of a long-term care insurance policy, no claim
 under such a policy may be denied on the basis of a failure to disclose
 information at the time of delivery (and issuance for delivery) of the
 policy if the policyholder truthfully disclosed documentation obtained
 under subsection (g).
 `(3) PROCESS FOR APPEAL OF DENIAL OF CLAIMS- Each issuer of a long-term care
 insurance policy shall establish and maintain procedures (which meets the
 Standards) under which a policyholder will be granted an opportunity for
 a fair hearing by the issuer in any case where the amount in controversy
 is at least $500 when claims under the policy are denied, when such claims
 are not acted upon with reasonable promptness, or when the amount of such
 payment is in controversy.
 `(d) LIMIT OF PERIOD OF CONTESTABILITY- An issuer of a long-term care
 insurance policy may not cancel such a policy or deny a claim under the
 policy based on fraud or misrepresentation relating to the issuance of
 the policy unless notice of such fraud or misrepresentation is provided
 within 6 months after the date of the delivery (and issuance for delivery)
 of the policy.
 `(e) Reporting of Information; Access to Information-
 `(1) REPORTING OF INFORMATION- Each issuer of a long-term care insurance
 policy shall periodically (not less often than annually) report to the
 Commissioner or superintendent of insurance of each State in which the
 policy is sold, and shall make available to the Secretary, upon request,
 information respecting the following:
 `(A) The long-term care insurance policies of the issuer that are in force.
 `(B) The most recent premiums for such policies and the premiums imposed
 for such policies during the previous 5-year period.
 `(C) The lapse rates, replacement rates, and rescission rates for policies
 (by agent). For purposes of this subparagraph, there shall not be included
 as a lapse of policy such a lapse due to the death of the policyholder.
 `(D) The claims denied (as a percentage of claims submitted) for such
 policies. For purposes of this subparagraph, there shall not be included
 as a denied claim such a claim that is denied solely because of the failure
 to meet a deductible, waiting period, or exclusionary period.
 `(E) The rate of appeal of denied claims (as a percentage of claims denied)
 for such policies.
 `(F) The rate of reversal of denied claims on appeal (as a percentage of
 claim denials appealed) for such policies.
 `(G) Such other information as is specified in the Standards.
Information under this paragraph shall be reported in a format specified in
the Standards.
 `(2) ACCESS TO INFORMATION- Each such issuer shall make available to the
 Secretary and the Commissioner or superintendent of insurance of each State
 in which the policy is sold such additional information as the Secretary,
 Commissioner, or superintendent, may request.
 `(f) PROVISION OF OUTLINE OF COVERAGE FOR RENEWALS- Each issuer of a
 long-term care insurance policy shall provide, at the time of renewal
 of such a policy or, in the case of a policy issued through a group,
 the anniversary date of purchase of the policy an outline of coverage
 described in section 2704(f)(2) to each policyholder.
 `(g) MEDICAL DOCUMENTATION FOR THE ELDERLY- Each issuer of a long-term
 care insurance policy shall, with respect to an applicant who is 75 years
 of age or older, obtain one of the following before issuing the policy:
 `(1) A report of a contemporaneous physical examination.
 `(2) A contemporaneous assessment of functional capacity.
 `(3) Copies of contemporaneous medical records.
The issuer shall maintain the information obtained in its files.
 `(h) Limits on Compensation for Sale of Policies-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- An issuer of a long-term care insurance policy may
 not provide a commission or other compensation to an agent or other
 representative for the sale of such a policy in an amount that exceeds
 200 percent of the commission or other compensation paid for selling or
 servicing such a policy in the second or subsequent year.
 `(2) COMPENSATION DEFINED- In paragraph (1), the term `compensation'
 includes pecuniary or nonpecuniary remuneration of any kind relating to
 the sale or renewal of the policy or certification, including deferred
 compensation, bonuses, gifts, prizes, awards, and finders fees.
 `(i) PENALTIES- In addition to sanctions provided under State regulatory
 programs, any issuer of a long-term care insurance policy that--
 `(1) fails to make a refund in accordance with subsection (a),
 `(2) fails to transmit a policy in accordance with subsection (b),
 `(3) fails to provide, make available, or report information in accordance
 with subsections (c) and (e),
 `(4) cancels a policy or denies a claim in violation of subsection (d),
 `(5) fails to provide an outline of coverage in violation of subsection
 (f), or
 `(6) issues a policy without obtaining certain information in violation
 of subsection (g), or
 `(7) provides a commission or compensation in violation of subsection (h),
is subject to sanctions under section 2707.
`STANDARDS RELATING TO POLICIES
 `SEC. 2706. (a) USE OF STANDARD DEFINITIONS AND TERMINOLOGY AND UNIFORM
 FORMAT- Each long-term care insurance policy shall, pursuant to the
 Standards--
 `(1) use uniform language and definitions, and
 `(2) use a uniform format for presenting the outline of coverage under
 such a policy.
 `(b) Limiting Conditions on Benefits; Minimum Benefits-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A long-term care insurance policy may not--
 `(A) condition or limit eligibility for benefits for a type of services
 to the need for or receipt of any other services;
 `(B) condition or limit eligibility for any benefit on the medical necessity
 for such benefit;
 `(C) condition or limit eligibility for benefits furnished by licensed
 providers on compliance with conditions which are in addition to those
 required for licensure under State law or required under title XXI of the
 Social Security Act; or
 `(D) deny payment for any benefits on the basis that the individual is
 eligible for or otherwise entitled to benefits under part A.
 `(2) COMMUNITY CARE- If a long-term care insurance policy provides benefits
 for community care, the policy--
 `(A) may not limit such benefits to services provided by registered nurses
 or licensed practical nurses;
 `(B) may not require benefits for such services to be provided by a nurse
 or therapist that can be provided by a home health aide or other licensed
 or certified home care worker acting within the scope of the worker's
 licensure or certification;
 `(C) may not limit such benefits to services provided by agencies or
 providers certified under title XVIII; and
 `(D) shall provide benefits for--
 `(i) home-based items and services described in paragraphs (2) and (3)
 of section 2102(b) of the Social Security Act in an individual's home,
 `(ii) community-based items and services described in section 2102(c)
 of such Act, and
 `(iii) respite care and hospice respite care described in section 2102(d)
 of such Act,
furnished by qualified providers (as determined for purposes of part A of
title XXI of such Act).
 `(3) NURSING FACILITY CARE-
 `(A) REQUIREMENT- Each long-term care insurance policy shall provide that
 in the case of a policyholder who would be entitled to benefits under
 part A of title XXI of the Social Security Act with respect to long-term
 nursing facility care but for the individual's failure to have been found
 to be financially eligible for such care under section 2132 of such Act,
 benefits under the policy shall include either--
 `(i) benefits for long-term nursing facility care of the type provided
 under such part A, without regard to any coinsurance or resident-specific
 deductible established under sections 2122(a)(2) and 2133(a)(2) of such
 Act, at a dollar level (for a day of nursing facility care) not less than
 80 percent of the average cost of a day of nursing facility care in the
 State at the time of sale of the policy, increased for inflation consistent
 with subsection (g), or
 `(ii) payment of a dollar amount equivalent to the amount provided under
 clause (i).
 `(B) NO RESTRICTION ON COVERED FACILITIES- To the extent to which a
 long-term care insurance policy provides benefits for nursing facility
 care, the policy shall provide such benefits with respect to all nursing
 facilities (as defined in section 2104(b) of the Social Security Act).
 `(4) MINIMUM PERIOD OF COVERAGE- Each long-term care insurance policy--
 `(A) that provides benefits with respect to community care, shall provide
 benefits for such care over a period of at least 12 consecutive months, and
 `(B) shall provide benefits for nursing facility care over a period of
 at least 48 consecutive months, or, beginning with the second year that
 begins after the effective date of title XXI of the Social Security Act (as
 defined in section 2101(d)(1)(B) of such Act), over a period of consecutive
 months that is not less than 12 months and that is a multiple of 12 months.
 `(d) PROHIBITION OF DISCRIMINATION- A long-term care insurance policy
 may not treat benefits under the policy in the case of an individual with
 Alzheimer's disease, with any related progressive degenerative dementia
 of an organic origin, or with any organic or inorganic mental illness
 differently from an individual having another medical condition for which
 benefits may be made available.
 `(e) Limitation on Use of Preexisting Condition Limits-
 `(1) Initial issuance-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to subparagraph (B), a long-term care insurance
 policy may not exclude or condition benefits based on a medical condition
 for which the policyholder received treatment or was otherwise diagnosed
 before the issuance of the policy.
 `(B) 6-MONTH LIMIT- A long-term care insurance policy may exclude benefits
 under a policy, during its first 6 months, based on a condition for which
 the policyholder received treatment or was otherwise diagnosed during the
 6 months before the policy became effective.
 `(C) REFERENCE TO MEDICAL DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENT- For provision requiring
 a medical documentation for individuals 75 years or age or older at the
 time of policy issuance, see section 2705(g).
 `(2) REPLACEMENT POLICIES- If a long-term care insurance policy replaces
 another long-term care insurance policy, the replacing policy shall
 waive any time periods (including waiting periods, elimination periods,
 and probationary periods) applicable to preexisting conditions in the new
 policy for similar benefits to the extent such time was spent under the
 original policy.
 `(f) Use of Functional Assessment-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each long-term care insurance policy--
 `(A) shall provide for eligibility for, and level of, benefits available
 under the policy based on an assessment of the policyholder's functional
 ability that--
 `(i) is conducted by an assessment agency (as defined in section 2114(a)(1)
 of the Social Security Act), or by another qualified individual (as
 specified by the Secretary in regulations consistent with paragraph (2)), and
 `(ii) uses the same assessment instrument and methodology as is used in
 making assessments under section 2111 of such Act;
 `(B) shall specify the level (or levels) of functional impairment required
 under such an assessment to obtain benefits under the policy; and
 `(C) shall provide for the determination of such level based on the
 individual's inability to perform (without substantial assistance from
 another individual) because of physical, cognitive, or other mental
 impairment a number (or combination) of activities of daily living specified
 in section 2101(b)(1)(A)(i) of the Social Security Act and, in the case
 of individuals with cognitive or other mental impairment or under 6 years
 of age, based on a standard of comparable level of disability described
 in subparagraph (A)(ii) or (B) of section 2101(b)(1) of such Act.
 `(2) CONDUCT OF ASSESSMENT- Such assessment may not be conducted by an
 individual--
 `(A) who has a direct or indirect ownership or control interest in the
 issuer of the policy or an entity that provides services for which benefits
 are available under the long-term care insurance policy, or
 `(B) who has a direct or indirect affiliation or relationship with such
 an issuer or entity if there is a financial incentive that is related to
 the results of the assessment determination.
 `(3) APPEALS PROCESS- Each long-term care insurance policy shall provide
 for an appeals process, meeting the Standards, for individuals who dispute
 the results of an assessment conducted under this subsection, including
 any determination of eligibility, level of functional impairment, or level
 of benefits.
 `(4) DEEMED ENTITLEMENT FOR REQUIRED NURSING FACILITY CARE BENEFITS IF
 AFFIRMATIVE CERTIFICATION IS ISSUED- With respect to benefits for nursing
 facility care required to be covered under long-term care insurance policies,
 an individual covered under the policy is deemed to be eligible for such
 benefits if the individual has in effect an affirmative certification
 under section 2112 of the Social Security Act.
 `(g) INFLATION PROTECTION OPTION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- At the option of the policyholder at the time of sale of
 a long-term care insurance policy, the policy shall provide, at the time of
 each annual renewal, for a percentage increase (which is not less than the
 applicable percentage increase specified in paragraph (2)) in the dollar
 payment levels and any maximum payment limit on benefit coverage above
 the levels or limit in effect during the previous policy year. In applying
 this subsection, the increases shall be compounded annually and the policy
 may provide for rounding such an increase to the nearest multiple of $1
 (in the case of dollar payment levels) or $100 (in the case of a maximum
 payment limit).
 `(2) SPECIFICATION OF PERCENTAGE INCREASE- For purposes of paragraph
 (1), with respect to policies issued each year, the applicable percentage
 increase specified in this paragraph--
 `(A) with respect to benefits for community care is the average annual
 percentage rate of increase for payment rates for community care under
 title XXI of the Social Security Act projected, most recently before the
 date of issuance of the policy, under section 2141(d)(1) of such title by
 the Board of Trustees of the Federal Long-Term Care Trust Fund, and
 `(B) with respect to benefits for nursing facility care is the average
 annual percentage rate of increase for payments rates for nursing facility
 care under this title projected, most recently before the date of issuance
 of the policy, under section 2141(d)(2) of such title by the Board of
 Trustees of the Federal Long-Term Care Trust Fund.
 `(3) OPTION TO ADJUST POLICY FOR ACTUAL INFLATION- At the option of the
 policyholder, at the time of each annual renewal, the policy may be modified
 to reflect a change in inflation projections, referred to in paragraph
 (2), with a premium adjustment as determined under the Standards.
 `(h) SPECIFICATION OF LIMITS ON PREMIUM INCREASES; LIMIT ON PREMIUM
 INCREASES AFTER AGE 75; PREMIUMS FOR POLICY UPGRADES-
 `(1) SPECIFICATION OF LIMITS ON ANNUAL PREMIUM INCREASES- Each long-term
 care insurance policy shall specify a limit on the percentage increase
 in premiums for a policy that may be made between one policy year and the
 subsequent policy year.
 `(2) LIMIT ON PREMIUM INCREASE AFTER AGE 75- Each long-term care insurance
 policy shall not provide for any increase in premiums for a policyholder
 who is 75 years of age or older other than an annual increase (of not more
 than 5 percent) at the beginning of each policy year.
 `(3) CLASSIFICATION OF PREMIUMS FOR POLICY UPGRADES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- In the case of a long-term care insurance policy issued
 to an individual who is provided an upgraded long-term care insurance
 policy by the same issuer, consistent with the Standards, the premiums
 charged with respect to such upgraded policy for those elements that are
 the same as those under the policy being replaced shall be consistent with
 the premiums that would be charged if the individual had purchased such
 upgraded policy at the time of issuance of the original (or previous) policy.
 `(B) UPGRADED POLICY DEFINED- In subparagraph (A), the term `upgraded
 policy' means a policy that, in relation to a previously issued policy,
 has benefits with an anticipated actuarial value (for individuals within
 the same actuarial class or similar demographic characteristics) that is
 greater than the actuarial value of the previously issued policy.
 `(i) NONFORFEITURE-
 `(1) PROTECTION-
 `(A) PROTECTION- Each long-term care insurance policy shall provide such
 nonforfeiture protection as shall be included in the Standards. Such
 Standards shall provide no less protection than requiring that a
 policyholder, at the time of sale of a long-term care insurance policy, be
 offered the option of nonforfeiture protection described in subparagraph (B).
 `(B) BASE NONFORFEITURE PROTECTION- The nonforfeiture protection described
 in this subparagraph under a policy would provide that if the policy
 lapses after the policy has been in effect for at least 3 years, the
 policy will provide without payment of any additional premiums benefits
 equal to a percentage (specified under the Standards) of the benefits
 otherwise available at term, or an equivalent cash amount (as determined
 under the Standards).
 `(2) ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS- The Standards may provide that the
 percentage or cash amount under paragraph (1)(B) must increase based upon
 the period of time in which the policy was in effect.
 `(j) RENEWABILITY AND UPGRADES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- No long-term care insurance policy may be canceled or
 nonrenewed for any reason other than nonpayment of premium, material
 misrepresentation or fraud.
 `(2) continuation and conversion rights for group policies-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Each group long-term care insurance policy shall provide
 covered individuals with a basis for continuation or conversion in accordance
 with this paragraph.
 `(B) BASIS FOR CONTINUATION- For purposes of subparagraph (A), a policy
 provides a basis for continuation of coverage if the policy maintains
 coverage under the existing group policy when such coverage would otherwise
 terminate or when benefits under such policy are reduced and which is
 subject only to the continued timely payment of a premium when due. A
 group policy which restricts provision of benefits and services to or
 contains incentives to use certain providers or facilities, may provide
 continuation benefits which are substantially equivalent to the benefits
 of the existing group policy.
 `(C) BASIS FOR CONVERSION- For purposes of subparagraph (A), a policy
 provides a basis for conversion of coverage if the policy entitles each
 individual--
 `(i) whose coverage under the group policy would otherwise be terminated
 for any reason or whose benefits under the group policy would otherwise
 be reduced, and
 `(ii) who has been continuously insured under the policy (or group policy
 which was replaced) for at least 6 months before the date of the termination
 or reduction,
to issuance of a policy providing benefits identical to, substantially
equivalent to, or in excess of, those of the policy being terminated (or
the benefits being reduced), without evidence of insurability.
 `(D) GROUP REPLACEMENT OF POLICIES- If a group long-term care insurance
 policy is replaced by another long-term care insurance policy purchased
 by the same policyholder, the succeeding issuer shall offer coverage
 to all individuals covered under the old group policy on its date of
 termination. Coverage under the new group policy shall not result in any
 exclusion for preexisting conditions that would have been covered under
 the group policy being replaced.
 `(3) UPGRADES FOR CURRENT POLICIES- If an issuer of a long-term care
 insurance policy continues to issue such a policy after the effective date
 specified under section 2702(b), the issuer shall permit each policyholder of
 such a policy as of such date to purchase a long-term care insurance policy
 that meets all the applicable Standards. In offering such a policy, the
 issuer may impose additional underwriting restrictions only for benefits not
 held under the previously issued policy, in accordance with the Standards.
`SECRETARIAL ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY
 `SEC. 2707. (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall exercise authority under
 this section--
 `(1) in the case of a State which does not have a regulatory program
 approved under section 2703,
 `(2) in the case of a State which has such an approved program, to
 the extent specified by the Secretary (under a look-behind program),
 to determine whether or not individual long-term health care policies in
 the State have failed to comply with the applicable requirements of this
 title and whether persons or entities are otherwise in compliance with
 the requirements of this title, and
 `(3) in carrying out sections 2704(i) and 2705(i) (relating to penalties).
 `(b) COMPLAINTS AND INVESTIGATIONS- The Secretary shall establish
 procedures--
 `(1) for individuals and entities to file written, signed complaints
 respecting alleged violations of the requirements of this title,
 `(2) for responding on a timely basis to such complaints, and
 `(3) for the investigation of--
 `(A) those complaints which, on their face, have a substantial probability
 of validity, and
 `(B) such other alleged violations of the requirements of this title as
 the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
In conducting investigations under this section, agents of the Secretary
shall have reasonable access to examine evidence of any person or entity
being investigated.
 `(c) HEARINGS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Before imposing an order described in subsection (d)
 against a person or entity under this section for a violation of the
 requirements of this title, the Secretary shall provide the person or
 entity with notice and, upon request made within a reasonable time (of
 not less than 30 days, as established by the Secretary by regulation)
 of the date of the notice, a hearing respecting the violation.
 `(2) CONDUCT OF HEARING- Any hearing so requested shall be conducted
 before an administrative law judge under section 201. If no hearing is
 so requested, the Secretary's imposition of the order shall constitute a
 final and unappealable order.
 `(3) AUTHORITY IN HEARINGS- In conducting hearings under this subsection--
 `(A) agents of the Secretary and administrative law judges shall have
 reasonable access to examine evidence of any person or entity being
 investigated, and
 `(B) administrative law judges, may, if necessary, compel by subpoena the
 attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence at any designated
 place or hearing.
In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena lawfully issued under
this paragraph and upon application of the Secretary, an appropriate district
court of the United States may issue an order requiring compliance with such
subpoena and any failure to obey such order may be punished by such court
as a contempt thereof.
 `(4) ISSUANCE OF ORDERS- If the administrative law judge determines,
 upon the preponderance of the evidence received, that a person or entity
 named in the complaint has violated the requirements of this title, the
 administrative law judge shall state the findings of fact and issue and cause
 to be served on such person or entity an order described in subsection (d).
 `(d) CEASE AND DESIST ORDER WITH CIVIL MONEY PENALTY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this subsection,
 the order under this subsection--
 `(A) shall require the person or entity--
 `(i) to cease and desist from such violations, and
 `(ii) to pay a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $25,000 for each
 such violation; and
 `(B) may require the person or entity to take such other remedial action
 as is appropriate.
The provisions of section 1128A (other than the first sentence of subsection
(a) and other than subsection (b)) shall apply to a civil money penalty
under this subparagraph in the same manner as such provisions apply to a
penalty or proceeding under section 1128A(a).
 `(2) CORRECTIONS WITHIN 30 DAYS- No order shall be imposed under this
 subsection by reason of any violation if the person or entity establishes
 to the satisfaction of the Secretary that--
 `(A) such violation was due to reasonable cause and was not intentional
 and was not due to willful neglect, and
 `(B) such violation is corrected within the 30-day period beginning on
 the earliest date the person or entity knew, or exercising reasonable
 diligence could have known, that such a violation was occurring.
 `(3) WAIVER BY SECRETARY- In the case of a violation which is due to
 reasonable cause and not to willful neglect, the Secretary may waive part
 or all of the civil money penalty imposed by paragraph (1)(A)(ii) to the
 extent that payment of such penalty would be grossly excessive relative
 to the violation involved and to the need for deterrence of violations.
 `(4) ADMINISTRATIVE APPELLATE REVIEW- The decision and order of
 an administrative law judge shall become the final agency decision and
 order of the Secretary unless, within 30 days, the Secretary modifies or
 vacates the decision and order, in which case the decision and order of
 the Secretary shall become a final order under this subsection.
 `(5) JUDICIAL REVIEW- A person or entity adversely affected by a final
 order issued under this subsection may, within 45 days after the date the
 final order is issued, file a petition in the Court of Appeals for the
 appropriate circuit for review of the order.
 `(6) ENFORCEMENT OF ORDERS- If a person or entity fails to comply with
 a final order issued under this subsection against the person or entity
 after opportunity for judicial review under paragraph (5), the Secretary
 shall file a suit to seek compliance with the order in any appropriate
 district court of the United States. In any such suit, the validity and
 appropriateness of the final order shall not be subject to review.
 `(7) USE OF AMOUNTS COLLECTED- Civil money penalties collected under this
 subsection shall be credited to the Federal Long-Term Care Trust Fund.
 `(e) ESTABLISHMENT OF TOLL-FREE TELEPHONE HOTLINE- In the case of a State
 without a regulatory program approved under section 2703(a), the Secretary
 shall provide for the establishment of the toll-free telephone information
 and complaint system described in section 2703(c) in carrying out this
 section in the State.
`LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE POLICY DEFINED
 `SEC. 2708. (a) IN GENERAL- In this title, except as otherwise provided in
 this section, the term `long-term care insurance policy' means any insurance
 policy, certificate, or rider advertised, marketed, offered, or designed
 to provide coverage for each covered individual on an expense incurred,
 indemnity, prepaid, or other basis, for one or more diagnostic, preventive,
 therapeutic, rehabilitative, maintenance or personal care services,
 provided in a setting other than an acute care unit of a hospital. Such term
 includes a group or individual annuity or life insurance policy or rider
 which provides directly (or which supplements) long-term care insurance
 described in the previous sentence.
 `(b) POLICIES EXCLUDED- Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d),
 in this title the term `long-term care insurance policy' does not include
 any medicare supplemental policy (as defined in section 1882(g)) and any
 insurance which is offered primarily to provide--
 `(1) basic hospital expense coverage, basic medical-surgical expense
 coverage, hospital confinement indemnity coverage, or major medical
 expense coverage,
 `(2) disability income or related asset-protection coverage,
 `(3) accident only coverage,
 `(4) specified disease or specified accident coverage, or
 `(5) limited benefit health coverage.
 `(c) INCLUSION OF POLICIES MARKETED AS LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE- In this
 title, the term `long-term care insurance policy' also includes any product
 which is advertised, marketed, or offered as long-term care insurance.
 `(d) DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN DISABILITY INCOME POLICIES AND
 LIFE INSURANCE POLICIES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In this title, the term `long-term care insurance policy'
 includes--
 `(A) a policy described in subsection (b)(2) under which the eligibility
 or amount of benefits are based on an assessment of functional ability
 (based on activities of daily living or otherwise) and the amount of
 benefits is paid only a per diem basis, or
 `(B) a life insurance policy described in paragraph (3),
if the disclosure requirements of paragraph (2) are not met.
 `(2) DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS- The disclosure requirements of this paragraph
 for a policy are that--
 `(A) the policy discloses (in a form and manner specified in the Standards)
 the fact that the policy is not a long-term care insurance policy;
 `(B) the policy outlines how the benefits in the policy differ from the
 benefits required to be provided under the Standards of a long-term care
 insurance policy and the benefits provided under part A; and
 `(C) in the case of a life-insurance policy described in subsection (c),
 at the time of policy delivery there is provided to the purchaser and the
 beneficiary a policy summary that includes--
 `(i) an explanation of how the long-term care benefits interact with other
 components of the policy (including deductions from death benefits);
 `(ii) a description of the amount and length of benefits and the guaranteed
 lifetime benefits (if any) for each covered individual; and
 `(iii) any exclusions, reductions, and limitations on benefits of long-term
 care.
 `(3) CERTAIN LIFE INSURANCE POLICIES- A life insurance policy described
 in this paragraph is one--
 `(A) which accelerates the death benefit specifically for--
 `(i) one or more of the qualifying events of terminal illness,
 `(ii) medical conditions requiring extraordinary medical intervention, or
 `(iii) permanent institutional confinement;
 `(B) which provides the option of a lump-sum payment for those benefits; or
 `(C) which provides benefits based on the use of nursing facility care.'.
 (b) TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- The Public Health Service Act is
 further amended--
 (1) in section 406(a)(2), by striking `2701' and inserting `2801';
 (2) in section 465(f), by striking `2701' and inserting `2801';
 (3) in section 480(a)(2), by striking `2701' and inserting `2801';
 (4) in section 485(a)(2), by striking `2701' and inserting `2801';
 (5) in section 497, by striking `2701' and inserting `2801';
 (6) in section 505(a)(2), by striking `2701' and inserting `2801'; and
 (7) in section 926(b), by striking `2711' each place it appears and inserting
 `2811'.
SEC. 303. REPORT ON SOLVENCY PROTECTION.
 Within 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary
 of Health and Human Services shall submit to Congress a report on standards
 that may be applied to assure the solvency of insurers with respect to
 long-term care insurance policies.
SEC. 304. WAIVER OF PAPERWORK REQUIREMENTS.
 Chapter 35 of title 44, United States Code, and Executive Order 12291
 shall not apply to information and regulations required for purposes of
 carrying out this subtitle and the amendments made by this subtitle.
Subtitle B--Clarification of Tax Treatment of Long-Term Care Services and
Long-Term Care Insurance Policies
PART I--GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 311. QUALIFIED LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES TREATED AS MEDICAL CARE.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Paragraph (1) of section 213(d) of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (defining medical care) is amended by striking `or' at the
 end of subparagraph (B), by redesignating subparagraph (C) as subparagraph
 (D), and by inserting after subparagraph (B) the following new subparagraph:
 `(C) for qualified long-term care services (as defined in subsection
 (g)), or'.
 (b) QUALIFIED LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES DEFINED- Section 213 of such Code
 (relating to deduction for medical, dental, etc. expenses) is amended by
 adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(g) QUALIFIED LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The term `qualified long-term care services' means community
 care and nursing facility care (as defined for purposes of title XXI of
 the Social Security Act) for an individual who--
 `(A) is 6 years of age or older and (i) needs substantial assistance or
 supervision from another individual with at least 2 activities of daily
 living (described in section 2101(b)(5) of such Act), (ii) needs substantial
 supervision due to cognitive or other mental impairment and needs substantial
 assistance or supervision from another individual with at least 1 activity
 of daily living or in complying with a daily drug regimen, or (iii) needs
 substantial supervision of another individual due to behaviors that are
 dangerous (to themselves or others), disruptive, or difficult to manage; or
 `(B) is under 6 years of age and suffers from any medically determinable
 physical, cognitive, or other mental impairment of comparable severity to
 that which would make an adult meet the standard described in subparagraph
 (A).
 `(2) CERTAIN SERVICES PROVIDED BY RELATIVES NOT INCLUDED- The term `qualified
 long-term care services' shall not include any services provided to an
 individual by a relative unless the relative is a physician, registered
 professional nurse, or other licensed health care practitioner with respect
 to such services. For purposes of this paragraph, the term `relative'
 means an individual bearing a relationship to another individual which is
 described in paragraphs (1) through (8) of section 152(a).'.
 (c) TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Subparagraph (D) of section 213(d)(1) of such Code (as redesignated
 by subsection (a)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(D) for insurance (including amounts paid as premiums under part B of
 title XVIII of the Social Security Act, relating to supplementary medical
 insurance for the aged)--
 `(i) covering medical care referred to in subparagraphs (A) and (B), or
 `(ii) covering medical care referred to in subparagraph (C), but only
 if such insurance is provided under a qualified long-term care insurance
 contract (as defined in section 7702B(b)).'.
 (2) Paragraph (6) of section 213(d) of such Code is amended--
 (A) by striking `subparagraphs (A) and (B)' and inserting `subparagraphs
 (A), (B), and (C)', and
 (B) by striking `paragraph (1)(C)' in subparagraph (A) and inserting
 `paragraph (1)(D)'.
SEC. 312. TREATMENT OF LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE OR PLANS.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Chapter 79 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating
 to definitions) is amended by inserting after section 7702A the following
 new section:
`SEC. 7702B. TREATMENT OF LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE OR PLANS.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- For purposes of this title--
 `(1) a qualified long-term care insurance contract shall be treated as an
 accident or health insurance contract,
 `(2) any plan of an employer providing coverage of qualified long-term
 care services shall be treated as an accident or health plan with respect
 to such services,
 `(3) amounts received under such a contract or plan with respect to qualified
 long-term care services, including payments described in subsection (b)(5),
 shall be treated--
 `(A) as amounts received for personal injuries or sickness, and
 `(B) for purposes of section 105(c), as amounts received for the permanent
 loss of a function of the body, and
 `(4) payments described in subsection (b)(5) shall be treated as payments
 made with respect to qualified long-term care services.
Paragraph (3)(B) shall not apply in the case of amounts attributable to
(and not in excess of) deductions allowed under section 213 (relating to
medical etc., expenses) for any prior taxable year and also shall not apply
for purposes of section 105(f).
 `(b) QUALIFIED LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE CONTRACT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this title, the term `qualified long-term
 care insurance contract' means any insurance contract if--
 `(A) the only insurance protection provided under such contract is coverage
 of qualified long-term care services, and
 `(B) such contract meets the requirements of paragraphs (2), (3), and (4).
 `(2) PREMIUM REQUIREMENTS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The requirements of this paragraph are met with respect
 to a contract if such contract provides that--
 `(i) premium payments may not be made earlier than the date such payments
 would have been made if the contract provided for level annual payments
 over the life of the contract (or, if shorter, 20 years), and
 `(ii) all refunds of premiums, and all policyholder dividends or similar
 amounts, under such contract are to be applied as a reduction in future
 premiums or to increase future benefits.
A contract shall not be treated as failing to meet the requirements of clause
(i) solely by reason of a provision providing for a waiver of premiums if
the insured becomes an individual described in section 213(g)(1).
 `(B) REFUNDS UPON DEATH OR COMPLETE SURRENDER OR CANCELLATION- Subparagraph
 (A)(ii) shall not apply to any refund on the death of the insured, or
 on any complete surrender or cancellation of the contract, if, under the
 contract, the amount refunded may not exceed the amount of the premiums
 paid under the contract. For purposes of this title, any refund described
 in the preceding sentence shall be includable in gross income to the extent
 that any deduction or exclusion was allowed with respect to the refund.
 `(3) BORROWING, PLEDGING, OR ASSIGNING PROHIBITED- The requirements of this
 paragraph are met with respect to a contract if such contract provides that
 no money may be borrowed under such contract and that such contract (or
 any portion thereof) may not be assigned or pledged as collateral for a loan.
 `(4) COORDINATION WITH MEDICARE- The requirements of this paragraph are met
 with respect to a contract if such contract does not reimburse expenses
 incurred to the extent that such expenses are reimbursable under title
 XVIII of the Social Security Act.
 `(5) PER DIEM AND OTHER PERIODIC PAYMENTS PERMITTED- For purposes of
 paragraphs (3) and (4) of subsection (a), payments are described in this
 paragraph for any calendar year if, under the contract, such payments are
 made to (or on behalf of) an individual described in section 213(g)(1) on
 a per diem or other periodic basis without regard to the expenses incurred
 during the period to which the payments relate.
 `(c) SPECIAL RULES FOR TAX TREATMENT OF POLICYHOLDERS- For purposes of
 this title, solely with respect to the policyholder under any qualified
 long-term care insurance contract, such contract shall not be treated as a
 qualified long-term care insurance contract during any period on or after
 the date on which the contract (or any portion thereof) is assigned or
 pledged as collateral for a loan.
 `(d) TREATMENT OF COVERAGE AS PART OF A LIFE INSURANCE CONTRACT- Except as
 provided in regulations, in the case of coverage of qualified long-term care
 services provided as part of a life insurance contract, the requirements
 of this section shall apply as if the portion of the contract providing
 such coverage was a separate contract.
 `(e) QUALIFIED LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES- For purposes of this section,
 the term `qualified long-term care services' has the meaning given such
 term by section 213(g).
 `(f) SPECIAL RULES-
 `(1) CONTINUATION COVERAGE RULES NOT TO APPLY- The health care continuation
 rules contained in section 4980B (and contained in part 6 of subtitle B
 of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 and in
 title II of the Public Health Service Act) shall not apply to--
 `(A) qualified long-term care insurance contracts, or
 `(B) plans described in subsection (a)(2).
 `(2) EMPLOYER PLANS NOT TREATED AS DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLANS- For
 purposes of this title, a plan of an employer providing coverage of
 qualified long-term care services shall not be treated as a plan which
 provides for deferred compensation by reason of providing such coverage.
 `(3) CONTRACTS COVERING PARENTS- For purposes of this title, if a qualified
 long-term care insurance contract purchased by or provided to a taxpayer
 provides coverage with respect to one or more of the taxpayer's parents
 (or, in the case of a joint return, of either spouse), such coverage and
 all payments made pursuant to such coverage shall be treated in the same
 manner as if the parents were dependents (as defined in section 152) of the
 taxpayer. For purposes of this paragraph, the term `parent' includes any
 step-mother or step-father, and any relationship that exists by virtue of
 a legal adoption shall be recognized to the same extent as relationships
 by blood.
 `(4) WELFARE BENEFIT RULES NOT TO APPLY- For purposes of subpart D of part
 I of subchapter D of chapter 1 (relating to treatment of welfare benefit
 funds), qualified long-term care services shall not be treated as a welfare
 benefit or a medical benefit.
 `(5) DEDUCTIBILITY- For purposes of this title, no payment of a premium for
 a long-term care insurance contract shall fail to be deductible in whole
 or in part merely because such premium is paid pursuant to a schedule that
 satisfies subsection (b)(2).
 `(g) REGULATIONS- The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may
 be necessary to carry out the requirements of this section, including
 regulations to prevent the avoidance of this section by providing qualified
 long-term care services under a life insurance contract.'
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for chapter 79 of such Code is
 amended by inserting after the item relating to section 7702A the following
 new item:
`Sec. 7702B. Treatment of long-term care insurance or plans.'
SEC. 313. EFFECTIVE DATES.
 (a) SECTION 311- The amendments made by section 311 shall apply to taxable
 years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) SECTION 312-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The amendments made by section 312 shall apply to contracts
 issued after the date which is 6 months after the date of the enactment
 of this Act.
 (2) CONTRACTS ISSUED BEFORE EFFECTIVE DATE- Pursuant to rules issued by the
 Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate, a contract issued on or before
 the date which is 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act shall
 be treated as meeting the requirements of section 7702B of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by section 312) if such contract satisfies
 requirements reasonably similar to the requirements of such section 7702B.
 (c) TRANSITION RULE- If, after the date of the enactment of this Act and
 before January 1, 1994, a contract--
 (1) which is similar to a qualified long-term care insurance contract
 (as defined in section 7702B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986), and
 (2) which is issued on or before January 1, 1993,
is exchanged for a qualified long-term care insurance contract (as so defined),
such exchange shall be treated as an exchange to which section 1035 of such
Code applies.
PART II--TREATMENT OF ACCELERATED DEATH BENEFITS, DISABILITY INCOME PAYMENTS,
AND CERTAIN OTHER BENEFITS
SEC. 321. TAX TREATMENT OF ACCELERATED DEATH BENEFITS, DISABILITY INCOME
PAYMENTS, AND CERTAIN OTHER BENEFITS.
 Section 101 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to certain
 death benefits) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new subsection:
 `(g) TREATMENT OF CERTAIN PRE-DEATH BENEFITS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this section, any amount paid or advanced
 to an individual under--
 `(A) a life insurance contract on the life of an insured who is a terminally
 ill individual,
 `(B) a policy described in section 2188(b)(2) of the Social Security Act
 under which the eligibility or amount of benefits are based on an assessment
 of functional ability (based on activities of daily living or otherwise)
 and the amount of benefits is paid only a per diem basis, or
 `(C) a life insurance contract described in section 2188(d)(3) of the
 Social Security Act,
shall be treated as an amount paid by reason of the death of such insured
if the disclosure requirements of section 2188(d)(2) of such Act are met
with respect to the contract or policy.
 `(2) SPOUSAL CONSENT-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any payment or advance
 unless--
 `(i) the spouse of the insured who is a qualified beneficiary consents to
 such payment or advance, or
 `(ii) it is established that the consent required under clause (i) may
 not be obtained because such spouse may not be located, or because of such
 other circumstances as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe.
 `(B) TIME FOR CONSENT- Any consent under subparagraph (A) shall occur during
 the 90-day period ending on the date of the payment (or in the case of a
 series of periodic payments, the date of the first of such payments).
 `(C) QUALIFIED BENEFICIARY- For purposes of this paragraph, the term
 `qualified beneficiary' means an individual who--
 `(i) is the spouse of the individual on the last day of the period described
 in subparagraph (B), and
 `(ii) at any time during the 1-year period ending on such last day, was
 a beneficiary under the life insurance contract.
 `(3) TERMINALLY ILL INDIVIDUAL- For purposes of this subsection, the term
 `terminally ill individual' means an individual who has been certified by
 a physician as having an illness or physical condition which can reasonably
 be expected to result in death in 12 months or less.
 `(4) PHYSICIAN- For purposes of this subsection, the term `physician'
 has the meaning given to such term by section 213(d)(4).'
SEC. 322. TAX TREATMENT OF COMPANIES ISSUING RIDERS PROVIDING QUALIFIED
ACCELERATED DEATH BENEFITS, DISABILITY INCOME PAYMENTS, AND CERTAIN OTHER
BENEFITS.
 (a) CERTAIN BENEFIT RIDERS TREATED AS LIFE INSURANCE- Section 818 of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to other definitions and special
 rules) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(g) CERTAIN BENEFIT RIDERS TREATED AS LIFE INSURANCE- For purposes of
 this part--
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Any reference to a life insurance contract shall be treated
 as including a reference to a qualified benefit rider on such contract.
 `(2) QUALIFIED BENEFIT RIDERS- For purposes of this subsection, the term
 `qualified benefit rider' means any rider or addendum on, or other provision
 of a life insurance contract--
 `(A)(i) which provides for payments to an individual upon the insured
 becoming a terminally ill individual (as defined in section 101(g)(2)),
 `(ii) which is described in section 2188(b)(2) of the Social Security Act and
 under which the eligibility or amount of benefits are based on an assessment
 of functional ability (based on activities of daily living or otherwise), or
 `(iii) which is described in section 2188(d)(3) of the Social Security
 Act, and
 `(B) which meets the disclosure requirements of section 2188(d)(2) of
 such Act.
 `(3) SPOUSAL CONSENT-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- A rider or addendum on, or other provision of, a life
 insurance contract shall not be treated as a qualified benefit rider unless
 such contract provides that--
 `(i) the spouse of the insured who is a qualified beneficiary must consent
 to such rider, or
 `(ii) it is established that the consent required under clause (i) may
 not be obtained because such spouse may not be located, or because of such
 other circumstances as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe.
 `(B) TIME FOR CONSENT- Any consent under subparagraph (A) shall occur during
 the 90-day period ending on the date of the payment (or in the case of a
 series of periodic payments, the date of the first of such payments).
 `(C) QUALIFIED BENEFICIARY- For purposes of this paragraph, the term
 `qualified beneficiary' means an individual who--
 `(i) is the spouse of the individual on the last day of the period described
 in subparagraph (B), and
 `(ii) at any time during the 1-year period ending on such last day, was
 a beneficiary under the life insurance contract.'
 (b) DEFINITIONS OF LIFE INSURANCE AND MODIFIED ENDOWMENT CONTRACTS-
 (1) RIDER TREATED AS QUALIFIED ADDITIONAL BENEFIT- Paragraph (5)(A) of
 section 7702(f) of such Code is amended by striking `or' at the end of
 clause (iv), by redesignating clause (v) as clause (vi), and by inserting
 after clause (iv) the following new clause:
 `(v) any qualified benefit rider (as defined in section 818(g)(2)), or'.
 (2) TRANSITIONAL RULE- For purposes of determining whether section 7702 or
 7702A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 applies to any contract, the
 issuance of any qualified benefit rider (as defined in section 818(g)(2)
 of such Code (as added by this section) on a life insurance contract or of
 any other provision of a life insurance contract permitting benefits which
 may be provided by such a rider shall not be treated as a modification or
 material change of such contract.
SEC. 323. APPLICANTS OR RECIPIENTS UNDER PUBLIC ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS NOT TO
BE REQUIRED TO MAKE ELECTION RESPECTING CERTAIN PRE-DEATH BENEFITS UNDER
LIFE INSURANCE POLICIES.
 Part A of title XI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1301 et seq.) is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`TREATMENT OF CERTAIN PRE-DEATH BENEFITS
 `SEC. 1144. (a) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
 no individual who is an applicant for or recipient of aid or assistance
 under a State plan approved under title IV, X, XIV, XVI, or XIX, of
 assistance funded by payments under title V or XX, or of benefits under
 the Supplemental Security Income program established by title XVI shall--
 `(1) be required, as a condition of eligibility for (or of continuing to
 receive) such aid, assistance, or benefits, to make an election to receive
 any specified pre-death benefit under a policy of life insurance, or
 `(2) by reason of failure to make such an election, be denied (or suffer
 a reduction in the amount of) such aid, assistance, or benefits.
 `(b) SPECIFIED PRE-DEATH BENEFIT- For purposes of this section, the term
 `specified pre-death benefit' means any payment made under the terms
 of a life insurance policy, while the insured individual is alive, as a
 result of--
 `(1) a recalculation of the insured individual's life expectancy,
 `(2) an assessment of the individual's functional ability (based on
 activities of daily living or otherwise), or
 `(3) any circumstance for which benefits may be paid during such individual's
 life under a policy described in section 2188(b)(3).'
SEC. 324. EFFECTIVE DATES.
 (a) SECTIONS 321 AND 322- The amendments made by--
 (1) section 321 shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31,
 1993, and
 (2) section 322 shall apply to contracts issued before, on, or after
 December 31, 1993,
except that any spousal consent requirement shall not apply before January
1, 1994.
 (b) SECTION 323- The amendment made by section 323 shall take effect on
 January 1, 1994.
TITLE IV--ADDITIONAL GRANTS AND DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS
SEC. 401. ESTABLISHMENT OF GRANT PROGRAM IN PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT.
 Subpart IV of part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42
 U.S.C. 255) is amended by adding at the end the following new section:
`COMMUNITY CARE AGENCIES
 `SEC. 339A. (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may make grants to community
 care agencies for the purpose of assisting such agencies in providing
 community care to low-income individuals.
 `(b) REQUIREMENT OF AVAILABILITY OF EACH COMMUNITY CARE SERVICE-
 The Secretary may not make a grant under subsection (a) unless the
 community care agency involved agrees to make available, directly or
 through contracts with other public or private nonprofit entities, each
 of the services described in section 2102(a) of the Social Security Act.
 `(c) ELIGIBLE SERVICE AREAS- The Secretary may not make a grant under
 subsection (a) unless the community care agency involved agrees to provide
 community care under the grant in a medically underserved area (designated
 under section 330(a)(4)).
 `(d) MINIMUM QUALIFICATION OF GRANTEES FOR CERTAIN FISCAL YEARS- The
 Secretary may not make a grant under subsection (a) after the effective date
 of title XXI of the Social Security Act (as defined in section 2101(d)(1)(B)
 of such Act), unless the community care agency involved is a community
 care agency with a participation agreement in effect under title XXI of
 the Social Security Act.
 `(e) PREFERENCES IN MAKING GRANTS- In making grants under subsection (a),
 the Secretary shall give preference to any community care agency that is a
 migrant health center or a community health center, as defined in sections
 329(a) and 330(a), respectively.
 `(f) LIMITATION ON IMPOSITION OF CHARGE FOR SERVICES- The Secretary may
 not make a grant under subsection (a) unless the community care agency
 involved agrees that, if the agency will routinely impose a charge for
 the delivery of community care, such charge--
 `(1) will be made according to a schedule of charges that is made available
 to the public;
 `(2) will be adjusted to reflect the income and resources of the individual
 involved; and
 `(3) will not be imposed on any individual with an income less than 100
 percent of the official poverty level.
 `(g) RELATIONSHIP TO SERVICES UNDER OTHER PROGRAMS- The Secretary may
 not make a grant under subsection (a) unless the community care agency
 involved agrees that the agency will not expend the grant to pay for any
 community care to the extent that payment has been made, or can reasonably
 be expected to be made, with respect to such care--
 `(1) under any State compensation program, under an insurance policy,
 or under any Federal or State health benefits program; or
 `(2) by an entity that provides health services on a prepaid basis.
 `(h) REQUIREMENT OF APPLICATION- The Secretary may not make a grant under
 subsection (a) unless--
 `(1) an application for the grant is submitted to the Secretary;
 `(2) with respect to carrying out the purpose for which the grant is to
 be made, the application provides assurances of compliance satisfactory
 to the Secretary; and
 `(3) the application otherwise is in such form, is made in such manner,
 and contains such agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary
 determines to be necessary to carry out such subsection.
 `(i) TEMPORARY TREATMENT AS COMMUNITY CARE AGENCY UNDER TITLE XXI- For
 purposes of title XXI of the Social Security Act, an entity with a grant
 under subsection (a) shall be deemed to meet the requirements to be a
 community care agency, but only for services furnished before October
 1, 1995.
 `(j) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section:
 `(1) The term `community care' has the meaning given such term in section
 2102(a) of the Social Security Act.
 `(2) The term `community care agency' means a public or nonprofit private
 entity that is a community care agency (within the meaning of section
 2102(e) of the Social Security Act) or that will provide community care
 pursuant to receiving a grant under subsection (a).
 `(3) The term `official poverty level' means the official poverty line
 established by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and
 revised by the Secretary in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus
 Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981.
 `(k) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- For the purpose of carrying out this
 section, there are authorized to be appropriated $200,000,000 for fiscal
 year 1994, $250,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, $300,000,000 for fiscal year
 1996, and such sums as may be appropriate for fiscal years 1997 and 1998.'.
SEC. 402. GRANTS FOR LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES.
 Title III of the Public Health Service Act is amended by adding at the
 end the following new part:
`Part M--Long-Term Care Services
`GRANTS FOR PROVIDERS OF HOME HEALTH, HOMEMAKER, AND PERSONAL ASSISTANCE
SERVICES
 `SEC. 399D. (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall make grants to public or private entities
 to develop and conduct programs to train individuals in the provision of
 homemaker and home health aide services and personal assistance services
 for which payment may be made under title XXI of the Social Security Act.
 `(2) PREFERENCES- In awarding grants under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall
 give preference to entities that establish programs that are affiliated
 with one or more community care agencies (as defined in section 2102(e)
 of the Social Security Act), nursing care facilities (as defined in section
 2104(a) of such Act), senior citizen centers, adult day health care centers,
 and other institutions providing health and social services to persons
 with physical, cognitive, or other mental impairments, for the purpose of
 providing in-service training to individuals receiving training under the
 program and for providing technical assistance to the agency, facility,
 or other institution.
 `(b) PROGRAM QUALIFICATIONS- The Secretary may not make a grant under
 subsection (a) for the development and conduct of a program that--
 `(1) trains homemaker/home health aides unless the entity has provided the
 Secretary satisfactory assurances that the program will meet the minimum
 standards established by the Secretary under section 1891(a)(3)(A) of the
 Social Security Act, or
 `(2) trains personal attendants unless the entity has provided the Secretary
 satisfactory assurances that the program will meet standards established by
 the Secretary, including requirements relating to areas to be covered in
 the program, content of the curriculum, minimum course hours, qualification
 of instructors, and competency evaluation.
 `(c) LIMITATION ON ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES- The Secretary may not make
 a grant under subsection (a) unless the entity agrees that not more than
 10 percent of the grant will be expended for administrative expenses with
 respect to the grant.
 `(d) REQUIREMENT OF APPLICATION- The Secretary may not make a grant under
 subsection (a) unless--
 `(1) an application for the grant is submitted to the Secretary;
 `(2) with respect to carrying out the purpose for which the grant is to
 be made, the application provides assurances of compliance satisfactory
 to the Secretary; and
 `(3) the application otherwise is in such form, is made in such manner,
 and contains such agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary
 determines to be necessary to carry out such subsection.
 `(e) AUTHORIZATIONS OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be
 appropriated to carry out this section $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1994,
 $20,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, and
 such sums as may be appropriate for each of fiscal years 1996 and 1997.'.
SEC. 403. ADDITIONAL FUNDING FOR LONG-TERM CARE OMBUDSMEN PROGRAMS UNDER
THE OLDER AMERICANS ACT.
 (a) EXPANDING ACTIVITIES TO COVER TITLE XXI- Section 307(a)(12)(A)(i) of
 the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 U.S.C. 3027(a)(12)(A)(i)) is amended
 by inserting `(including nursing facilities under title XXI of the Social
 Security Act) or receiving community care under such title' after `long-term
 care facilities'.
 (b) AUTHORIZATION OF ADDITIONAL APPROPRIATIONS- Section 303(a)(2) of such
 Act (42 U.S.C. 3023(a)(2) is amended by adding at the end the following new
 sentence: `In addition to amounts otherwise authorized to be appropriated,
 there are authorized to be appropriated an additional $10,000,000 for each
 fiscal year to carry out section 307(a)(12).'.
SEC. 404. ADDITIONAL FUNDING FOR INFORMATION AND REFERRAL SERVICES FOR
PERSONS UNDER THE DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES ACT.
 (a) EXPANDING ACTIVITIES TO COVER TITLE XXI- Section 142(a)(2)(A)(ii)
 of the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act (42
 U.S.C. 6042(a)(2)(A)(ii)) is amended by inserting `(including the program
 under title XXI of the Social Security Act)' after `programs'.
 (b) AUTHORIZATION OF ADDITIONAL APPROPRIATIONS- Section 143 of such Act
 is amended by adding at the end the following: `In addition to the amounts
 authorized by the previous sentence, there are authorized to be appropriated
 for each fiscal year such additional amounts as may be necessary to increase
 the amount of the allotments to provide for the systems to provide for
 information on and referral to the program established under title XXI of
 the Social Security Act.'.
SEC. 405. EXPANSION OF INFORMATION AND COUNSELING UNDER THE PROTECTION AND
ADVOCACY FOR THE MENTALLY ILL ACT.
 Section 105(a)(1) of the Protection and Advocacy for Mentally Ill Individuals
 Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 10805(a)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of subparagraph (B),
 (2) by adding `and' at the end of subparagraph (C), and
 (3) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the following new subparagraph:
 `(D) provide information on and referral to programs (including the program
 established under title XXI of the Social Security Act) and services
 addressing the needs of mentally ill individuals;'.
TITLE V--REVIEW OF PHARMACEUTICAL BENEFITS
SEC. 501. PHARMACEUTICAL PAYMENT ASSESSMENT AND POLICY REVIEW COMMISSION.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Director of the Congressional Office of Technology
 Assessment shall provide for the appointment of a Pharmaceutical Payment
 Assessment and Policy Review Commission (in this section referred to as the
 `Commission'), to be composed of individuals with expertise in the provision
 and financing of inpatient and outpatient drugs and biologicals. The
 provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in
 the competitive service shall not apply to the appointment of members of
 the Commission.
 (b) COMPOSITION- (1) The Commission shall consist of 11 individuals. Members
 of the Commission shall first be appointed no later than one year after the
 date of the enactment of this Act, for a term of 3 years, except that the
 Director may provide initially for such shorter terms as will insure that
 (on a continuing basis) the terms of no more than 4 members expire in any
 one year.
 (2) The membership of the Commission shall include--
 (A) recognized experts in the fields of health care economics and quality
 assurance, medicine, pharmacology, pharmacy, pharmaceutical pricing,
 patent law, and prescription drug reimbursement,
 (B) other health care professionals, and
 (C) at least one individual who is an advocate of recipients of services
 from Federal government health care programs.
 (c) ANNUAL REPORT- The Commission shall submit to the Congress an annual
 report (by not later than January 1 of each year beginning with 1994)
 which shall include information and recommendations regarding national and
 international drug policy issues. Such report shall include, if appropriate,
 information concerning the following:
 (1) Trends and changes in prices, and cost containment mechanisms, for
 prescription and nonprescription drugs in inpatient and outpatient settings
 in the United States.
 (2) Trends and changes in prices for prescription drugs in other
 industrialized nations.
 (3) The scope of coverage, reimbursement, and financing under Federal
 health care programs, and other programs that directly provide or receive
 Federal funds to provide coverage for or reimbursement of prescription drugs.
 (4) The availability and affordability of prescription drugs for various
 population groups in the United States, and the accessibility and
 affordability of public and private insurance programs for prescription
 drugs for such population groups.
 (5) Changes in the level and nature of use of prescription drugs by
 recipients of benefits under Federally-funded health care programs, taking
 into account the impact of such changes on aggregate expenditures under
 such programs.
 (6) Suggestions to make prescription drugs more affordable and cost-effective
 for third-party insurers, including State-based pharmaceutical assistance
 and general assistance programs.
 (7) Evaluation of technologies available for efficient third-party
 prescription drug program administration, including electronic claims
 management and payment technologies.
 (8) Methods of providing reimbursement under Federal health care programs
 to providers for drug products and pharmacists' services.
 (9) Evaluation of the use and efficiency of all Federal tax credits and
 subsidies given to the pharmaceutical industry for various purposes,
 including the research and development tax credit and the tax credit
 allowed under section 936 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (10) Evaluation of the impact on total health care expenditures in other
 industrialized nations of switching prescription drugs to non-prescription
 status, and the role of various health professionals in the distribution
 of such non-prescription drugs.
 (d) SPECIAL REPORTS- The Commission shall submit to the Congress special
 reports as requested by the Congress.
 (e) ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS- Section 1845(c)(1) of the Social Security
 Act shall apply to the Commission in the same manner as it applies to the
 Physician Payment Review Commission.
 (f) APPROPRIATIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- There are appropriated equally from the Federal Hospital
 Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance
 Trust Fund an amount determined under paragraph (2) for each fiscal year
 to carry out the purposes of this section.
 (2) AMOUNT DETERMINED-
 (A) IN GENERAL- For purposes of paragraph (1), the amount determined under
 this paragraph is--
 (i) for fiscal year 1993, $3,000,000, and
 (ii) for each fiscal year beginning after fiscal year 1993, the dollar
 amount under this subparagraph for the previous fiscal year, increased by
 the administrative adjustment under subparagraph (B).
 (B) ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENT- For purposes of subparagraph (A), the
 administrative adjustment for any fiscal year is the percentage increase
 in the consumer price index for all urban consumers (all items; U.S. city
 average) for the previous year.
SEC. 502. ESTABLISHMENT OF LONG-TERM CARE PHARMACEUTICAL BENEFITS DEMONSTRATION
PROJECTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Not later than one year after the date of the enactment
 of this Act, the Secretary shall establish no fewer than 10 demonstration
 projects to assess the impact on cost, quality of care, and access to
 prescription drugs and pharmaceutical services of developing a prescription
 drug benefit for individuals that are receiving benefits for long-term
 care under title XXI of the Social Security Act.
 (b) DESIGN- The demonstration projects shall use various eligibility
 criteria, delivery mechanisms, and program designs, including eligibility
 based on inability to perform certain activities of daily living, total
 annual expenses for prescription drugs, and certification for benefits
 under such title.
 (c) ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMITTEE- The Secretary shall establish a Long-Term
 Care Prescription Drug Use Review Committee, which shall consist of
 physicians, pharmacists, and other health care professionals knowledgeable
 in the use of chronic medications in special populations, including the
 elderly. The Committee shall advise the Secretary regarding the demonstration
 projects under this section and shall be responsible for--
 (1) overseeing the development and implementation of demonstration projects
 under this section,
 (2) educating practitioners regarding trends in the prescribing and
 dispensing of prescription drug products to individuals in need of long-term
 care services,
 (3) developing appropriate criteria for drug utilization for chronic
 medications,
 (4) establishing a retrospective drug use review program for the projects,
 and
 (5) evaluating and reporting on the relative efficacy of currently-available
 pharmaceutical and biological products (and new products) for chronic
 medical conditions, and making recommendations for the appropriate use of
 these products.
 (d) REIMBURSEMENT FOR MEDICATION MANAGEMENT- In no less than 5 of the
 demonstration projects, the Secretary shall provide for a separate payment
 to pharmacists for providing ongoing drug utilization management (including
 medication management and regimen review) to insure that prescriptions
 are appropriate, medically necessary, and unlikely to result in adverse
 medical results.
 (e) DURATION OF PROJECTS- The projects under this section shall be conducted
 for a period of 5 fiscal years, except that the Secretary may terminate a
 project before the end of such period if the Secretary determines that the
 project is not in compliance with the terms of the application approved
 by the Secretary.
 (f) REQUIREMENT OF APPLICATION- The Secretary may not make a grant for a
 demonstration project under subsection (a) unless--
 (1) an application for the grant is submitted to the Secretary;
 (2) with respect to carrying out the purpose for which the grant is to be
 made, the application provides assurances of compliance satisfactory to
 the Secretary; and
 (3) the application otherwise is in such form, is made in such manner,
 and contains such agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary
 determines to be necessary to carry out such subsection.
 (g) EVALUATION AND REPORT- The Secretary shall fund an independent evaluation
 of the demonstration projects under this section and shall report to Congress
 on the results of the evaluation by not later than 5 years after the date
 of the enactment of this Act. The report shall include recommendations
 on the most cost effective benefit design to provide pharmaceuticals and
 pharmaceutical services to individuals receiving services under title XXI
 of the Social Security Act.
 (h) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 equally from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal
 Supplemental Medical Insurance Trust Fund $100,000,000 for each of fiscal
 years 1993 through 1997 to carry out the demonstration projects established
 under this section.