HR 5686 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5686
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to require tax-exempt hospitals to
provide sufficient charity care and community benefits, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
September 21, 1990
Mr. ROYBAL introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the
Committees on Ways and Means and Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to require tax-exempt hospitals to
provide sufficient charity care and community benefits, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Charity Care and Hospital Tax-Exempt Status
 Reform Act of 1990'.
SEC. 2. DETERMINATION OF TAX-EXEMPT STATUS FOR HOSPITALS TO BE BASED ON
PROVISION OF CHARITY CARE AND COMMUNITY BENEFITS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating
 to exemption from tax on corporations, certain trusts, etc.) is amended
 by redesignating subsection (n) as subsection (o) and by inserting after
 subsection (m) the following new subsection:
 `(n) CERTAIN CRITERIA INCLUDED IN DETERMINING EXEMPT STATUS OF HOSPITALS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- An organization which operates a hospital shall not be
 exempt from tax under this section unless--
 `(A) each hospital operated by such organization has an open-door policy
 toward Medicare and Medicaid patients and serves in a nondiscriminatory
 manner a reasonable number of such patients, and
 `(B) each such hospital provides in a nondiscriminatory manner sufficient
 qualified charity care and provides sufficient qualified community benefits.
 `(2) STANDARDS-
 `(A) SERVICE TO MEDICARE AND MEDICAID PATIENTS- The determination under
 paragraph (1)(A) of whether the number of Medicare and Medicaid patients
 served is a reasonable number shall be based on whether the proportion of
 the hospital's patients which are Medicare patients, and the proportion
 of the hospital's patients which are Medicaid patients, are reasonable
 under the facts and circumstances.
 `(B) QUALIFIED CHARITY CARE AND QUALIFIED COMMUNITY BENEFITS-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- The determination under paragraph (1)(B) shall be based
 on whether--
 `(I) the hospital's unreimbursed qualified charity care costs are 50
 percent or more of the value of the hospital's exempt status for the
 taxable year, and
 `(II) the hospital's unreimbursed qualified community benefits costs are
 35 percent or more of the value of the hospital's exempt status for the
 taxable year.
 `(ii) QUALIFIED CHARITY CARE COSTS- For purposes of this subparagraph,
 the term `qualified charity care costs' means the aggregate of--
 `(I) the hospital's costs in providing health care without charge to persons
 with no or a limited ability to pay or at a discount based on the ability
 to pay,
 `(II) the hospital's costs in providing health care for which the charge
 was deducted as a bad debt,
 `(III) the excess of the hospital's costs in providing health care to
 Medicaid patients over the reimbursements for such care; and
 `(IV) if the community has too few charity care patients in need of charity
 hospital care, the hospital's costs in providing (either directly or by
 contract or other financial arrangement) health care and other health-related
 services designed to improve the health of members of the community who
 are medically underserved and disadvantaged.
There shall not be taken into account under subclause (II) debts payable by
third parties.
 `(iii) QUALIFIED COMMUNITY BENEFITS COSTS- For purposes of this subparagraph,
 the term `qualified community benefits costs' means the aggregate of--
 `(I) the hospital's unreimbursed costs in providing those community benefits
 not customarily provided by hospitals which are not exempt from tax under
 subsection (a), and
 `(II) the excess of the hospital's unreimbursed qualified charity care
 costs over 50 percent of the value of the hospital's exempt status for
 the taxable year.
 `(C) VALUE OF EXEMPT STATUS-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- The value of a hospital's exempt status for any taxable
 year shall be the amount equal to the national target percentage of the
 hospital's gross receipts for the taxable year.
 `(ii) NATIONAL TARGET PERCENTAGE- For purposes of this subparagraph, the term
 `national target percentage' means, with respect to taxable years beginning
 in a calendar year, the percentage estimated by the Secretary which, when
 applied to the estimated average gross receipts of tax-exempt hospitals
 in the United States for such taxable years, will yield an amount equal
 to the average Federal, State, and local tax revenues which are foregone
 by reason of their exempt status.
 `(iii) PERCENTAGE MODIFIED IF FEWER THAN 75 PERCENT OF PRIVATE HOSPITALS
 QUALIFY- If the Secretary determines that fewer than 75 percent of the
 private tax-exempt hospitals will meet the requirements of subparagraph
 (B) using the national target percentage determined under clause (ii),
 the Secretary shall modify such percentage so that 75 percent of such
 hospitals will meet such requirements.
 `(iv) CASE-BY-CASE DETERMINATION- If, by reason of a hospital's financial
 ability or other factors determined by the Secretary, the application of
 the national target percentage to any hospital is--
 `(I) inappropriately high, the Secretary shall prescribe a lower percentage
 which is more appropriate for such hospital, or
 `(II) inappropriately low, the Secretary may prescribe a higher percentage
 which is more appropriate for such hospital.
 `(3) MEDICARE PATIENT- For purposes of this subsection, the term `Medicare
 patient' means any individual entitled to medical assistance under title
 XVIII of the Social Security Act.
 `(4) MEDICAID PATIENT- For purposes of this subsection, the term `Medicaid
 patient' means any individual entitled to medical assistance under title
 XIX of the Social Security Act.
 `(5) HOSPITAL- For purposes of this subsection, the term `hospital' includes
 any facility which the Secretary determines was part of a hospital but which
 ceases to be part of a hospital to avoid the purposes of this subsection.'
 (b) INFORMATION REPORTING- Section 6033 of such Code is amended by
 redesignating subsection (e) as subsection (f) and by inserting after
 subsection (d) the following new subsection:
 `(e) SPECIAL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR HOSPITALS- Every organization which
 is exempt from tax under section 501(a) and which operates any hospital
 shall, notwithstanding any other provision of this section, be subject to
 the requirements of subsection (a) and shall include in its annual return,
 with respect to each such hospital--
 `(1) the number of Medicare and Medicaid patients served by each hospital
 during the taxable year to which the return relates, a detailed description
 (and documentation) as to whether that number is a reasonable number
 for that hospital and as to whether care provided to such patients was
 nondiscriminatory,
 `(2) the total number of patients served by each hospital during such year,
 `(3) the total number of charity care patients served by each hospital
 during such year and a detailed description (and documentation) as to
 whether such care was nondiscriminatory,
 `(4) the hospital's unreimbursed qualified charity care costs during
 such year,
 `(5) the hospital's unreimbursed qualified community benefits costs during
 such year,
 `(6) the community benefits provided by such hospital during such year which
 are not customarily provided by hospitals which are not exempt from tax under
 section 501(a) and which are not taken into account under paragraph (5), and
 `(7) a statement from the appropriate official of the State in which the
 hospital is located that--
 `(A) the official administering the program under title XIX of the Social
 Security Act in such State has determined that during such year--
 `(i) the hospital has openly served individuals receiving benefits under
 such program and has not discriminated against such individuals, or
 `(ii) the program limited the hospitals that provide services under contract
 with the program, the hospital made reasonable efforts to be awarded such
 a contract, and the State did not award the hospital such a contract, and
 `(B) to the best of the appropriate official's knowledge, the hospital is
 expected to meet the requirements of section 501(n) during the following
 year.
Terms which are used in this subsection which are also used in section 501(n)
shall have the respective meanings given terms by section 501(n).'
 (c) REPORTS-
 (1) SPECIAL TREATMENT FOR HOSPITALS WHICH CONSISTENTLY MEET REQUIREMENTS-
 Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the
 Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of Health and
 Human Services, shall submit to the Congress recommendations on rewarding
 hospitals which clearly and consistently meet the requirements of section
 501(n) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by this section),
 including recommendations on exemptions from the reporting requirements
 imposed by section of 6033(e) of such Code (as added by this section).
 (2) METHODOLOGY FOR MEASURING VALUE OF EXEMPT STATUS- Not later than 2
 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the
 Treasury shall implement, if feasible, a methodology for measuring the
 Federal, State, and local tax revenues foregone by reason of the tax-exempt
 status of a hospital. If implemented, such Secretary shall submit to the
 Congress recommendations (if any) for modifying the standards under section
 501(n)(2)(B) of such Code (as added by this section).
SEC. 3. EXCISE TAX ON FAILURE TO MEET CHARITY CARE AND COMMUNITY BENEFIT
REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Chapter 41 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 4913. FAILURE OF HOSPITAL TO MEET CHARITY CARE AND COMMUNITY BENEFIT
REQUIREMENTS.
 `(a) TAX IMPOSED-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- There is hereby imposed on any hospital which is operated
 by an organization exempt from tax under section 501(a) and which has a
 charity care/community benefit shortfall for the taxable year a tax equal
 to such shortfall.
 `(2) HOSPITAL ORGANIZATION LIABLE FOR TAX- The organization which operates
 the hospital shall pay the tax imposed by paragraph (1).
 `(3) EXCEPTION FOR 1ST TAXABLE YEAR OF NONCOMPLIANCE- The tax imposed
 by paragraph (1) shall not apply to the first taxable year for which
 the hospital has a charity care/community benefit shortfall. As soon as
 practicable after the close of such taxable year, the Secretary shall
 publish in the Federal Register a notice that the hospital has a charity
 care/community benefit shortfall for such taxable year.
 `(b) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) CHARITY CARE/COMMUNITY BENEFIT SHORTFALL- The term `charity
 care/community benefit shortfall' means the sum of--
 `(A) the excess of--
 `(i) 50 percent of the value of the hospital's exempt status for the
 taxable year, over
 `(ii) the hospital's unreimbursed qualified charity care costs for such
 year, and
 `(B) the excess of--
 `(i) 35 percent of the value of the hospital's exempt status for the
 taxable year, over
 `(ii) the hospital's unreimbursed qualified community benefits costs for
 such year.
 `(2) HIGHER TAX IN CERTAIN CASES- If the Secretary determines that, because
 of unusual circumstances, the tax imposed by this section should exceed the
 charity care/community benefits shortfall of any hospital, the tax imposed by
 this section shall be increased to the amount specified by the Secretary (but
 not in excess of 1 percent of the hospital's gross receipts for such year).
 `(3) OTHER DEFINITIONS- Terms which are used in this section which are also
 used in section 501(n) shall have the respective meanings given terms by
 section 501(n).
 `(c) COORDINATION WITH REVOCATION OF EXEMPT STATUS- Except in cases of
 egregious failures to meet the requirements of section 501(n), this section
 shall apply to a hospital in lieu of revoking the exemption from tax under
 section 501(a) of the organization operating the hospital.
 `(d) USE OF REVENUES- Revenues received in the Treasury which are
 attributable to taxes imposed by this section on hospitals in a State may
 only be used for the purpose of providing for additional payments to the
 State under section 1903(w) of the Social Security Act.'
 (b) USE OF REVENUES- Section 1903 of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1396b) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1) by striking `and (j)' and inserting `, (j) and
 (w)', and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(w) The Federal medical assistance percentage for a State for calendar
 quarters in a fiscal year, insofar as it applies to hospital services, shall
 be increased by such a percent as will provide for additional payments to
 the State under subsection (a) in an amount not to exceed--
 `(1) the amount of revenues received in the Treasury during the previous
 fiscal year which are attributable to section 4913 of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 for hospitals in the State, or
 `(2) the amount of payments (in addition to amounts provided for as of
 the date of the enactment of this subsection) made under the State's plan
 during the fiscal year for charity hospital services furnished by public
 hospitals or by tax-exempt private, nonprofit hospitals,
whichever is less. The amount described in paragraph (2) shall be documented
by the State to the satisfaction of the Secretary'.
 (c) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for such chapter 41 is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`Sec. 4913. Failure of hospital to meet charity care and community benefit
requirements.'
SEC. 4. STATE REVIEW AND COMMENT ON APPLICATION FOR TAX-EXEMPT STATUS FOR
HOSPITALS.
 Section 508 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to special rules
 with respect to section 501(c)(3) organizations) is amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(f) ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR HOSPITALS- A hospital organization
 shall not be treated as satisfying the notice requirement of subsection
 (a) unless the notice is accompanied by a statement from the appropriate
 official of the State in which the hospital is located that--
 `(1) the official administering the program under title XIX of the Social
 Security Act in such State has determined that (A) the hospital is expected
 to openly serve individuals receiving benefits under such program and does
 not discriminate against such individuals, or (B) the program has limited
 the hospitals that provide services under contract with the program, the
 hospital made reasonable efforts to be awarded such a contract, and the
 State did not award the hospital such a contract, and
 `(2) to the best of the appropriate official's knowledge, the hospital is
 expected to meet the requirements of section 501(n).'
SEC. 5. EFFECTIVE DATES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this section, the amendments
 made by this Act shall apply to taxable years beginning after December
 31, 1992.
 (b) REPORTING REQUIREMENTS- The amendment made by section 2(b) shall apply
 to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1991.
 (c) STATE REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS FOR TAX-EXEMPT STATUS- Section 4 shall
 apply to hospitals with respect to which notice is given under section
 508(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 after December 31, 1991.