S 195 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 195
To reform the tort law doctrine of joint and several liability.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
January 14 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1991
Mr. PRESSLER introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on the Judiciary
A BILL
To reform the tort law doctrine of joint and several liability.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION. 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Joint and Several Liability Reform Act
 of 1991'.
SEC. 2. SEVERABLE LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.
 SEC. 2. (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, in any civil
 action alleging injury to a person, damage to property, or death of a
 person, the liability of each defendant for damages shall be several
 only and shall not be joint. Each defendant shall be liable only for the
 amount of damages allocated to such defendant in direct proportion to such
 defendant's percentage of responsibility as determined under subsection
 (b) of this section. A separate judgment shall be rendered against such
 defendant for that amount.
 (2) In any case where the parties are found to have engaged in concerted
 action, the liability of each defendant shall be joint and several.
 (b) PORTION OF RESPONSIBILITY- For purposes of this section, the trier of
 fact shall determine the proportion of responsibility of each party for
 the claimant's harm.
 (c) DEFENDANTS NOT PARTIES-
 (1) If a claimant has released any defendant or potential defendant from
 liability for the claimant's harm, or if a defendant is unable (despite
 exercising all practicable means) to join any other person as a defendant
 in such action the trier of fact shall, in determining the proportion of
 responsibility under subsection (b) of this section, consider the liability
 of any person not a party to the action if the defendant is able to prove
 that any such person caused the claimant's harm.
 (2) If a claimant has released any defendant or potential defendant from
 liability for the claimant's harm, the total amount of responsibility for
 the claimant's harm shall be reduced by the proportion of responsibility
 of any such released defendant or potential defendant.
 (d) DEFINITION- As used in this section, the term `concerted action' means
 any action consciously and intentionally taken by two or more defendants
 which resulted in the harm alleged in such civil action. Such term does
 not mean consciously parallel action.