HR 3826 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3826
To amend title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 to ensure carriage on
cable television of local news and other programming and to restore the
right of local regulatory authorities to regulate cable television rates,
and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
November 21, 1989
Mr. COOPER (for himself and Mr. SHAYS) introduced the following bill; which
was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 to ensure carriage on
cable television of local news and other programming and to restore the
right of local regulatory authorities to regulate cable television rates,
and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SHORT TITLE
 SECTION 1. This Act may be cited as the `Cable Television Consumer Protection
 Act of 1989'.
FINDINGS
 SEC. 2. The Congress finds and declares the following:
 (1) Pursuant to the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, rates for cable
 television services have been deregulated in approximately 97 percent of
 all franchises since December 29, 1986. Since rate deregulation, monthly
 rates for the lowest priced basic cable service have increased by 40
 percent or more for 28 percent of cable television subscribers. Although
 the average number of basic channels has increased from about twenty-four
 to thirty, average monthly rates have increased by 29 percent during the
 same period. The average monthly cable rate has increased almost three
 times as much as the Consumer Price Index since rate deregulation.
 (2) Due to the extraordinary expense of constructing more than one cable
 television system to serve a particular geographic area, and because of
 local franchising requirements, most cable television subscribers have no
 opportunity to select between competing cable systems.
 (3) There is a substantial governmental and first amendment interest in
 promoting a diversity of views provided through multiple technology media.
 (4) There is a substantial governmental and first amendment interest
 in ensuring that cable subscribers have access to local noncommercial
 educational stations which Congress has authorized, as expressed in section
 396(a)(5) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 396(a)(5)), for the
 specific purpose of encouraging `public telecommunications services which
 will be responsive to the interests of people both in particular localities
 and throughout the United States, which will constitute an expression of
 diversity and excellence, and which will constitute a source of alternative
 telecommunications services for all the citizens of the Nation'.
 (5) A primary objective and benefit of our Nation's system of regulation
 of television and radio broadcasting is the local origination of
 programming. There is a substantial governmental interest in ensuring
 its continuation.
 (6) Broadcast television stations continue to be an important source
 of local news and public affairs programming and other local broadcast
 services critical to an informed electorate.
 (7) Broadcast television programming is supported by revenues generated from
 advertising broadcast over stations. Such programming is otherwise free
 to those who own television sets and do not require cable transmission to
 receive broadcast signals. There is a substantial governmental interest in
 promoting the continued availability of such free television programming,
 especially for viewers who are unable to afford other means of receiving
 programming.
 (8) There has been substantial increase in the penetration of cable
 television systems over the past decade, with cable television services now
 available to 73,900,000 of the 90,400,000 households with televisions. Over
 56 percent of the households with televisions subscribe to cable television,
 and this percentage is likely to increase.
 (9) As a result of the growth of cable television, there has been a marked
 shift in market share from broadcast television to cable television services.
 (10) Cable television systems and broadcast television stations increasingly
 compete for television advertising revenues. As the proportion of households
 subscribing to cable television increases, proportionately more advertising
 revenues will be reallocated from broadcast to cable television systems.
 (11) A cable television system which carries the signal of a local television
 broadcaster is assisting the broadcaster to increase its viewership,
 and thereby attract additional advertising revenues that otherwise might
 be earned by the cable system operator. As a result, there is an economic
 incentive for cable systems to terminate the retransmission of the broadcast
 signal, refuse to carry new signals, or to reposition a broadcast signal to
 a disadvantageous channel position. There is a substantial likelihood that
 absent the reimposition of such a requirement, additional local broadcast
 signals will be deleted, repositioned, or not carried.
 (12) As a result of the economic incentive that cable systems have to
 delete, reposition, or not carry local broadcast signals, coupled with the
 absence of a requirement that such systems carry local broadcast signals,
 the economic viability of free local broadcast television and its ability
 to originate quality local programming will be seriously jeopardized.
 (13) Consumers who subscribe to cable television often do so to obtain local
 broadcast signals which they otherwise would not be able to receive, or to
 obtain improved signals. Most subscribers to cable television systems do
 not or cannot maintain antennas to receive broadcast television services,
 do not have input selector switches to convert from a cable to antenna
 reception system, or cannot otherwise receive broadcast television services.
 (14) Cable television systems often are the single most efficient
 distribution system for television programming. A government mandate for
 a substantial societal investment in alternative distribution systems
 for cable subscribers, such as the `A/B' input selector antenna system,
 is not an enduring or feasible method of distribution and is not in the
 public interest.
 (15) The compulsory license was created by Congress as part of a delicate
 balance between cable television systems and broadcast television stations
 that included mandatory carriage obligations for cable systems. Cable
 systems are able to procure programming through the compulsory license
 at a cost substantially below the cost paid by the broadcast television
 stations. Cable systems, however, may rely upon the compulsory license as
 an alternative to negotiating for such programming in the marketplace,
 but are no longer subject to mandatory carriage obligations. This has
 created a competitive imbalance between the two industries.
 (16) The cable industry has become highly concentrated. The potential
 effects of such concentration are barriers to entry for new programmers
 and a reduction in the number of media voices available to consumers.
 (17) The cable television industry has become vertically integrated; cable
 operators and cable programmers often have common ownership. As a result,
 cable operators have the incentive and ability to favor their affiliated
 programmers. This makes it more difficult for non-cable-affiliated
 programmers to secure carriage on cable systems. Vertically integrated
 program suppliers also have the incentive and ability to favor their
 affiliated cable operators over nonaffiliated cable operators and programming
 distributors using other technologies.
 (18) The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, in its amendments to the
 Communications Act of 1934, limited the regulatory authority of franchising
 authorities over cable operators. Franchising authorities are finding it
 difficult under the current regulatory scheme to deny renewals to cable
 systems that are not adequately serving cable subscribers. Franchising
 authorities have been constrained from imposing technical standards
 more stringent than the minimal standards of the Federal Communications
 Commission.
 (19) Cities are increasingly being subjected to first amendment challenges
 by cable operators and potential cable operators. Given the lack of clear
 guidelines in applying the first amendment to cable franchise decisions,
 cities are unreasonably exposed to potential damage claims.
DEFINITIONS
 SEC. 3. (a) Section 602(2) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 522(2)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(2) the term `basic cable service' means any service tier or tiers which
 include the retransmission of local television broadcast signals or any
 public, educational, or governmental access channel;'.
 (b) Section 602(8) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 522(8))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(8) the term `franchise' means any authorization issued by a franchising
 authority, including a renewal of an authorization which has been granted
 subject to section 626, whether such authorization is designated as a
 franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement,
 or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable
 system;'.
 (c) Section 602 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 522)
 is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (15);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (16) and inserting in
 lieu thereof a semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
 `(17) the term `available to a household' or `available to a home' when
 used in reference to a multichannel video programming distributor means a
 particular household which is a subscriber or customer of the distributor
 or a particular household which is actively and currently sought as a
 subscriber or customer by a multichannel video programming distributor;
 `(18) the term `cable community' means the households in the geographic
 area in which a cable system provides cable service;
 `(19) the term `multichannel video programming distributor' means a person
 such as, but not limited to, a cable system, a multichannel multipoint
 distribution service, or a television receive-only satellite program
 distributor, who makes available for purchase, by subscribers or customers,
 multiple channels of video programming;'.
REGULATION OF CABLE RATES
 SEC. 4. (a) Section 623(b) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 543(b)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(b)(1) A franchising authority is authorized to regulate rates of a
 cable system for the provision of basic cable service and for installing
 or renting equipment necessary for the receipt of basic cable service if
 the franchise authority determines that the cable system is not subject
 to effective competition.
 `(2) Under this subsection, cable systems shall be presumed to be subject
 to effective competition if--
 `(A) fewer than 30 percent of the households in the cable community
 subscribe to the cable service of such cable system; or
 `(B) the cable community is served by more than one multichannel video
 programming distributor.
For purposes of subparagraph (B), a cable community shall be considered as
served by more than one multichannel video programming distributor if (i)
comparable video programming is available at comparable rates to at least 67
percent of the households in the cable community from a competing cable system,
multichannel multipoint distribution service, direct broadcast satellite
program distributor, television receive-only satellite program distributor,
or other competing multichannel video programming distributor, and (ii)
the number of households subscribing to programming services offered by such
competing multichannel video programming distributor, or by a combination of
such distributors, is in the aggregate at least 30 percent of the households
in the cable community.'.
 (b) Section 623(c) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 543(c))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(c) A franchising authority authorized to regulate rates under this
 section shall, in consultation with the Commission and the operator of
 any affected cable system and other relevant persons, establish a fair
 and efficient method for such regulation.'.
REQUIREMENT TO CARRY LOCAL BROADCAST SIGNALS
 SEC. 5. (a) Part II of title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 531 et seq.) is amended by inserting immediately after section 613
 the following new section:
`CARRIAGE OF LOCAL BROADCAST SIGNALS
 `SEC. 614. (a) Each cable operator that relies upon compulsory licensing
 pursuant to section 111 of title 17, United States Code, for secondary
 transmissions by its cable system (hereafter in this section referred to
 as a `participating operator') shall carry the signals of qualified local
 broadcast stations in accordance with the provisions of this section.
 `(b)(1) A participating operator of a cable system with twelve or fewer
 usable activated channels shall carry the signals of a minimum of three
 qualified local broadcast stations.
 `(2) A participating operator of a cable system with more than twelve and
 fewer than one hundred twenty-five usable activated channels shall carry
 the signals of qualified local broadcast stations, at a minimum, as follows:
--Number of
--Television
Number of cable channels
--signals
13 to 20
-- 4
21 to 29
-- 7
30 to 33
--10
34 to 37
--11
38 to 41
--13
42 to 45
--14
46 to 49
--15
50 to 53
--17
54 to 57
--18
58 to 61
--19
62 to 65
--21
66 to 69
--22
70 to 73
--23
74 to 77
--25
78 to 81
--26
82 to 85
--27
86 to 89
--29
90 to 93
--30
94 to 97
--31
98 to 101
--33
102 to 105
--34
106 to 109
--35
110 to 113
--37
114 to 117
--38
118 to 121
--39
122 to 125
--41
 `(3) A participating operator of a cable system with more than one hundred
 twenty-five usable activated channels shall carry, at a minimum, the number
 of signals of qualified local broadcast stations that is equal to one-third
 of the aggregate number of usable activated channels of such system.
 `(c) Among the signals of qualified local broadcast stations which a
 participating operator of a cable system is required to carry under this
 section--
 `(1) the signal of at least one qualified noncommercial educational
 television station or translator shall be carried by a participating operator
 of a cable system with fewer than fifty-four usable activated channels; and
 `(2) the signals of at least two qualified noncommercial educational
 television stations or translator shall be carried by a participating
 operator of a cable system with fifty-four or more usable activated channels.
 `(d)(1) Whenever the number of qualified local broadcast stations exceeds
 the minimum number of signals of such stations that a participating operator
 of a cable system is required to carry under this section, the participating
 operator shall have discretion in selecting which signals shall be carried
 on its cable system in order to meet the carriage requirements of this
 section; except that (A) carriage of qualified noncommercial educational
 television station signals pursuant to subsection (c) is nondiscretionary
 and (B) if the participating operator elects to carry an affiliate of
 a broadcast network entity, such operator shall carry the affiliate of
 such broadcast network entity whose city of license reference point, as
 defined in section 76.53 of title 47, Code of Federal Regulations, or any
 successor regulations thereto, is closest to the principal headend of the
 cable system. The carriage of each signal of a qualified local broadcast
 station shall be included in determining whether a participating operator
 of a cable system has complied with the requirements of this section, even
 if the signal of one such station substantially duplicates that of another
 station. For purposes of this paragraph, the term `broadcast network entity'
 means an organization which produces programs available for simultaneous
 transmission by 10 or more affiliated broadcast stations and which has
 distribution locality or circuits available to such affiliated stations
 at least twelve hours each day.
 `(2) Each signal carried in fulfillment of carriage obligations of a
 participating operator of a cable system under this section shall be
 carried on the cable system channel number on which the qualified local
 broadcast station is broadcast over the air, or on the channel on which
 it was carried on July 19, 1985, at the election of the broadcaster, or on
 such other channel number a mutually agreed upon by the broadcaster and the
 participating operator. Any disputes regarding the positioning of a qualified
 local broadcast station shall be resolved by the franchising authority.
 `(3) A participating operator of a cable system shall carry in its
 entirety the primary video and accompanying audio transmission of each of
 the qualified local broadcast stations the operator selects to carry in
 accordance with this section. Retransmission of material in the vertical
 blanking interval or other enhancements of the primary video and audio
 signal (including multichannel sound, teletext, and materials carried on
 subcarriers) shall be within the discretion of the participating operator.
 `(4) The signals of a qualified local broadcast station that are carried
 on the cable system of a participating operator shall be carried without
 material degradation.
 `(5) A participating operator of a cable system shall not be required to
 carry the signal of any qualified local broadcast station that substantially
 duplicates the signal of another qualified local broadcast station that
 is carried by the operator.
 `(6) Signals carried in fulfillment of carriage obligations of
 a participating operator under this section shall be available on
 the lowest priced tier of service separately available to each cable
 subscriber to which subscription is required for access to all other tiers
 of service. Such signals shall be viewable via cable on all television
 receivers of a subscriber connected to a cable system by a cable operator. If
 a participating operator of a cable system authorizes subscribers to install
 additional receiver connections, but does not provide the subscriber with
 such connections, or with the equipment or materials for such connections,
 the operator shall notify such subscribers in writing of all broadcast
 stations within fifty miles of the principal headend of the cable system
 that are not available without a cable converter box and shall offer to
 sell or lease such a converter box to such subscribers.
 `(7) A participating operator shall identify, upon request by any person,
 those signals carried in fulfillment of the signal carriage obligations
 of the operator under this section.
 `(8) A participating operator of a cable system shall provide written notice
 to a qualified local broadcast station, the franchising authority of such
 cable system, and subscribers of such cable system at least thirty days
 prior to either deleting from carriage or repositioning the signal of a
 qualified local broadcast station. No such deletion or repositioning shall
 occur during a sweeps period in which major television rating services
 measure the size of audience of qualified local broadcast stations.
 `(9) A participating operator of a cable system shall not accept monetary
 payment or other valuable consideration in exchange for carriage of the
 signal of any qualified local broadcast station carried in fulfillment of
 signal carriage obligations of the operator under this section, except
 that any such station may be required to bear any cost associated with
 delivering to the headend of the cable system a signal of the quality
 defined in section 602(24).
 `(e)(1) Whenever a qualified local broadcast station believes that a
 participating operator of a cable system has failed to comply with the
 signal carriage requirements of this section, except requirements under
 subsection (d)(2) regarding station positioning, the station may file a
 complaint with the Commission. Such complaint shall allege the manner in
 which such cable system has failed to comply with such requirements and
 state the basis for such allegations.
 `(2) The Commission shall afford such participating operator an opportunity
 to present data, views, and arguments to establish that the operator has
 complied with the signal carriage requirements of this section.
 `(3) Within one hundred-twenty days after the date a complaint is
 filed under this subsection, the Commission shall determine whether
 the participating operator has complied with the requirements of this
 section. If the Commission determines that the participating operator has
 failed to comply with such requirements, the Commission shall state with
 particularity the basis for such findings and order the operator to take
 such remedial action as is necessary to meet such requirements. If the
 Commission determines that the participating operator has fully complied
 with such requirements, the Commission shall dismiss the complaint.'.
 (b)(1) Section 602 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 522),
 as amended by section 3 of this Act, is further amended by adding at the
 end the following new paragraphs:
 `(20) `activated channels' means those channels engineered at the headend
 of a cable system for the provision of services generally available to
 residential subscribers of the cable system, regardless of whether such
 services actually are provided, including any channel designated for public,
 educational, or governmental use;
 `(21) `headend' means the location of any equipment of a cable system used
 to process the signals of television broadcast stations for redistribution
 to subscribers;
 `(22) `principal headend' means--
 `(A) the headend, in the case of a cable system with a single headend, or
 `(B) in the case of a cable system with more than one headend, the headend
 designated by the participating operator as the principal headend, except
 that such designation shall not undermine or evade the requirements of
 section 614;
 `(23) `qualified commercial station' means any television broadcast station
 which is not a qualified noncommercial educational television station and
 which is determined by the Commission to be a commercial station; such
 term shall not include low-power television stations, television translator
 stations, and other passive repeaters which operate pursuant to part 74 of
 title 47, Code of Federal Regulations, or any successor regulations thereto;
 `(24) `qualified local broadcast station' means any television broadcast
 station licensed and operating on a channel regularly assigned to its
 community by the Commission (except where such station would be considered
 a distant signal under section 111 of title 17, United States Code) that,
 with respect to a particular cable system--
 `(A) is licensed to a community whose reference point, as defined in section
 76.53 of title 47, Code of Federal Regulations, or any successor regulations
 thereto, is within fifty miles of the principal headend of the cable system,
 and which delivers to the cable system principal headend either a signal
 level of -45 dBm for UHF signals and -49 dBm for VHF signals at the input
 terminals of the signal processing equipment, or a baseband video signal, and
 `(B) is either a qualified commercial station or a qualified noncommercial
 educational television station;
 `(25) `qualified noncommercial educational television station' means any
 television broadcast station which--
 `(A) under the rules and regulations of the Commission is eligible to
 be licensed by the Commission as a noncommercial educational television
 broadcast station and which is owned and operated by a public agency or
 nonprofit private foundation, corporation, or association; or
 `(B) is owned or operated by a municipality and transmits only noncommercial
 programs for educational purposes;
such term includes (i) the translator of any noncommercial educational
television station with five watts or higher power serving the cable community,
(ii) a full service station or translator if such station or translator is
licensed to a channel reserved for noncommercial educational use pursuant to
section 73.606 of title 47, Code of Federal Regulations, or any successor
regulations thereto, and (iii) such stations and translators operating
on channels not so reserved as the Commission determines are qualified as
noncommercial educational stations; and
 `(26) `usable activated channels' means activated channels of a cable
 system, except those channels whose use for the distribution of broadcast
 signals would conflict with technical and safety regulations as determined
 by the Commission.'.
 (2) Paragraph 5 of section 612(b) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 532(b)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(5) For the purposes of this section, the term `commercial use' means
 the provision of video programming, whether or not for profit.'.
FRANCHISE RENEWAL; NEW FRANCHISE ISSUANCE
 SEC. 6. (a) Section 626(a) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 546(a)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `the franchise expiration' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `any franchise expires'; and
 (2) by inserting `incumbent' immediately after `request of the'.
 (b) Subsection (b)(1) of section 626 of the Communications Act of 1934
 (47 U.S.C. 546) is amended to read as follows:
 `(b)(1) Upon completion of a proceeding under subsection (a), the franchising
 authority shall issue written requests for--
 `(A) a renewal proposal from the incumbent cable operator; and
 `(B) proposals for a new franchise from any other person who shall have
 notified the franchising authority in writing of its interests in providing
 cable service over a cable system in the relevant area.'.
 (c) Section 626(b)(3) is amended by striking `proposal' and inserting in
 lieu thereof `proposals'.
 (d) Subsection (c) of section 626 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 546) is amended to read as follows:
 `(c)(1) After the expiration of the date for the receipt of franchise
 proposals under subsection (b)(3), the franchising authority shall
 provide prompt public notice of such proposals and, at the request of an
 interested party, including subscribers, or on its own initiative, commence
 an administrative proceeding, after providing prompt public notice of such
 proceeding, in accordance with paragraph (2), to determine the disposition
 of the proposals in light of community needs and interests. In determining
 the disposition of the proposals, the franchising authority may consider--
 `(A) whether the incumbent cable operator has substantially complied
 with the material terms of the existing franchise and with applicable law
 and regulations;
 `(B) whether the quality of the incumbent cable operator's service, including
 signal quality, rate making history, response to consumer complaints,
 and billing practices, has been reasonable in light of community needs;
 `(C) whether the parties submitting proposals pursuant to subsection
 (b), including the incumbent cable operator, have the financial, legal,
 and technical ability to provide the services, facilities, and equipment
 as set forth in their proposals;
 `(D) whether the proposals submitted pursuant to subsection (b), including
 the incumbent's renewal proposal, are reasonable to meet the community's
 future cable-related needs and interests, taking into account the cost of
 meeting such needs and interests; and
 `(E) any other factors reasonably determined by the franchising authority
 to be necessary to advance and protect the public interest in the operation
 of a cable system.
 `(2) In any proceeding under paragraph (1), parties submitting proposals
 and other interested parties, including subscribers, shall be afforded
 adequate notice, and the franchising authority and parties submitting
 proposals shall be afforded a fair opportunity for participation.
 `(3) At the completion of a proceeding under this subsection, the franchising
 authority shall issue a written decision based upon the record of such
 proceeding, and transmit a copy of such decision to parties submitting
 proposals. Such decision may grant or deny any or all of the proposals
 and shall state the reasons therefor; except that if the franchising
 authority finds that the performance of the incumbent cable operator under
 the franchise during the then current franchise term and the renewal proposal
 of the incumbent cable operator satisfy the standards specified in paragraph
 (1), the franchising authority shall grant the incumbent cable operator's
 renewal proposals.'.
 (e) Section 626 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 546) is amended
 by striking subsections (d) and (g) and by redesignating subsections (e),
 (f), and (h) as subsections (d), (e), and (f), respectively.
 (f) Subsection (d) of section 626 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 546), as so redesignated, is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) by striking `cable operator whose proposal for renewal has been
 denied' and inserting in lieu thereof `person submitting a proposal who
 is aggrieved';
 (B) by inserting `who' immediately before `has been adversely'; and
 (C) by striking `appeal' and inserting in lieu thereof `seek judicial
 review of'; and
 (2) in paragraph (2), by amending subparagraph (B) to read as follows:
 `(B) the final decision of the franchising authority is not arbitrary
 or capricious.'.
 (g) Subsection (e) of section 626 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 546), as so redesignated, is amended by striking `for renewal'.
 (h) Subsection (f) of section 626 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 546), as so redesignated, is amended to read as follows:
 `(f) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) through (e), an
 incumbent cable operator may submit a renewal proposal pursuant to this
 subsection at any time before the expiration of the time period specified
 in subsection (a), and a franchising authority may, after affording the
 public adequate notice and opportunity for comment, grant or deny such
 renewal proposal at any time thereafter (including after proceedings
 pursuant to this section have commenced). The provisions of subsections
 (a) through (e) shall not apply to a decision to grant or deny a renewal
 proposal under this subsection.'.
 (i) The heading for section 626 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 546) is amended to read as follows:
`RENEWAL; NEW FRANCHISE ISSUANCE'.
LIMITATIONS ON FRANCHISING AUTHORITY LIABILITY
 SEC. 7. Part III of title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 621
 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new section:
`LIMITATIONS ON LIABILITY
 `SEC. 628. (a) In any claim asserting constitutional rights under the First
 Amendment against a franchising authority or other governmental entity,
 or any official, member, employee, or agent of such authority or entity,
 arising from the regulation of cable communications or a decision to grant or
 not grant a franchise or to otherwise regulate a cable operator in a manner
 permitted by this title or other Federal, State, or local law, any relief,
 to the extent such relief is required by any other provision of law, shall
 be limited to injunctive relief, declaratory relief, and attorney's fees.
 `(b) Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the relief
 authorized with respect to any claim against a franchising authority or
 other governmental entity, or any official, member, employee, or agent of
 such authority or entity, to the extent such claim involves activities of
 such authority or entity as an owner of a cable system.
 `(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed as creating or authorizing
 liability of any kind, under any law, for any action or failure to act
 relating to cable communications or the granting of a franchise by any
 franchising authority or other governmental entity, or any official,
 member, employee, or agent of such authority or entity.'.
REGULATION OF SERVICES, FACILITIES, AND EQUIPMENT
 SEC. 8. (a) Section 624(a) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 544(a)) is amended by striking `not' and `except'.
 (b)(1) Section 624(b)(1) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 544(b)(1)) is amended--
 (A) by striking `, but may not establish requirements' and inserting in
 lieu thereof `and'; and
 (B) by striking `information'.
 (2) Section 624(b)(2) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 544(b)(2))
 is amended--
 (A) by inserting `such' immediately before `requirements'; and
 (B) by striking all after `franchise' and insert in lieu thereof a period.
 (3) Section 624(b) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 544(b))
 is amended by adding at the end the following: `In establishing such
 requirements under paragraph (1), a franchising authority shall, in its
 discretion and based upon the needs and interests of the cable community,
 specifically identify those broad categories of programming and other
 services that are essential to the operation of a cable system in the
 public interest in that community. The required broad categories of
 video programming may include, but are not limited to, broadcast or other
 programming that is in a particular foreign language or is of particular
 interest to a minority group comprising a significant portion of the
 population in the cable community.'.
 (c) Section 624(e) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 544(e))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(e) The Commission shall establish minimum technical standards relating to
 the facilities and equipment of cable systems suitable to ensure adequate
 technical operation and signal quality, and periodically shall update such
 standards to reflect improvements in technology. A franchising authority
 may require and enforce these standards, adjusted as appropriate for the
 particular circumstances of the local cable system and cable community. Any
 person, including but not limited to a cable subscriber or franchising
 authority, who is aggrieved by failure of a cable operator to meet the
 technical standards requirements of a franchise may petition the Commission
 for an order compelling compliance with the franchise; except that nothing
 in this subsection shall be construed to limit the ability of such a person
 to seek any other remedy that may be available under the franchise agreement
 or State or Federal law or regulation.'.
 (d) Subsection (f) of section 624 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 544) is repealed.
NONDISCRIMINATION WITH RESPECT TO VIDEO PROGRAMMING
 SEC. 9. Title VII of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 701 et
 seq.) is amended by inserting immediately after section 705 the following
 new section:
`NONDISCRIMINATION WITH RESPECT TO VIDEO PROGRAMMING
 `SEC. 705A. (a) No person engaged in the production, creation, or
 distribution of video programming who is owned or controlled by, or
 affiliated through substantial common ownership with, one or more cable
 systems shall discriminate in the price, terms, conditions, or availability
 of sale of its programming among cable systems, cable operators, or other
 multichannel video programming distributors who purchase such programming
 for the purpose of delivery to consumers; except that (1) such person may
 impose reasonable, non-discriminatory requirements for creditworthiness,
 service, and financial stability and (2) nothing in this section shall
 prohibit price differentials which are attributable to differences in cost
 in the creation, sale, delivery, or transmission of such programming or
 which are made in good faith to meet the equally low price of a competitor.
 `(b) As used in this section, the terms `cable system', `cable operator',
 `multichannel video programming distributor', and `video programming'
 have the meaning given such terms in section 602 of this Act.'.
ACQUISITION LIMITATIONS
 SEC. 10. Subsection (f) of section 613 of the Communications Act of 1934
 (47 U.S.C. 533) is amended to read as follows:
 `(f)(1) On and after November 1, 1989, except as provided in paragraphs (2)
 and (3), no cable operator shall control, directly or indirectly, any cable
 system or systems that individually or collectively provide service to more
 that 15 percent of all cable television subscribers in the United States.
 `(2) A cable operator that controls, as of November 1, 1989, any cable
 system or systems that exceed the percentage of service described in
 paragraph (1) shall be deemed not to be in violation of paragraph (1)
 if the cable operator--
 `(A) does not acquire any additional interest in any cable system until
 the cable system or systems under the control of the cable operator do
 not exceed such percentage; and
 `(B) reduces its interests in cable systems so that, no later than three
 hundred sixty days after the date of enactment of this subsection, the
 cable system or systems under the control of the cable operator do not
 exceed such percentage.
 `(3) If at any time the Commission determines that enforcement of the
 requirements of paragraph (1) with respect to a cable operator would, due
 to no fault of the operator, cause severe economic harm or substantial
 disruption of service to subscribers, the Commission may waive such
 requirements for a reasonable period not to exceed six months.
 `(4) For purposes of this subsection, in determining the extent of control a
 cable operator has with respect to any cable system, the Commission shall,
 to the extent practicable, follow the principles reflected in notes 1
 through 4 of section 73.3555 of title 47, Code of Federal Regulations,
 as in effect on the date of enactment of this subsection.'.
JUDICIAL REVIEW
 SEC. 11. Section 635 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 555)
 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(c)(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any civil action
 challenging the constitutionality of section 614 of this Act or any provision
 thereof shall be heard by a district court of three judges convened pursuant
 to the provisions of section 2284 of title 28, United States Code.
 `(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an interlocutory or final
 judgment, decree, or order of the court of three judges in an action under
 paragraph (1) holding section 614 of this Act or any provision thereof
 unconstitutional shall be reviewable as a matter of right by direct appeal
 to the Supreme Court. Any such appeal shall be filed not more than twenty
 days after entry of such judgment, decree, or order.'.
SEPARABILITY
 SEC. 12. If any provision of this Act, or the application of such provision
 to any person or circumstance, shall be held invalid, the remainder of
 this Act, or the application as to which it is held invalid, shall not be
 affected thereby.
EFFECTIVE DATE
 SEC. 13. Except as otherwise specified in this Act, the requirements of
 this Act shall be effective sixty days after the enactment of this Act. The
 Commission may promulgate such regulations as it determines necessary to
 interpret such requirements that are not inconsistent herewith.