S 1098 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1098
To amend the Agricultural Act of 1949 to authorize the Secretary of Agriculture
to purchase dairy cows and heifers for certain purposes, to increase the
milk price support rate and provide an offset, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
MAY 17 (legislative day, APRIL 25), 1991
Mr. JEFFORDS (for himself and Mr. LEAHY) introduced the following bill;
which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition,
and Forestry
A BILL
To amend the Agricultural Act of 1949 to authorize the Secretary of Agriculture
to purchase dairy cows and heifers for certain purposes, to increase the
milk price support rate and provide an offset, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. PURCHASE OF DAIRY COWS AND HEIFERS.
 Section 204 of the Agricultural Act of 1949 (7 U.S.C. 1446e) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsections (i), (j), and (k) as subsections (j),
 (l), and (m), respectively;
 (2) by inserting after subsection (j) (as redesignated) the following
 new subsection:
 `(k) PURCHASE OF DAIRY COWS AND HEIFERS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall purchase from milk producers a quantity
 of lactating dairy cows and heifers that is sufficient to reduce the total
 quantity of milk produced in the United States by at least 5,000,000,000
 pounds (milk equivalent, total milk solids basis).
 `(2) DISPOSAL OF STOCKS- In disposing of stocks acquired under paragraph
 (1), the Secretary may--
 `(A) export stocks to foreign countries;
 `(B) permit the milk producers to dispose of the purchased dairy cows and
 heifers in accordance with K(4)(A); and
 `(C) make payments to the milk producers in an amount equal to the
 difference between--
 `(i) the value of the purchased dairy cows and heifers for milking
 purposes; and
 `(ii) the value of the purchased dairy cows and heifers for beef purposes.
 `(3) MILK SUPPLY REDUCTION- Subject to paragraph (4), the Secretary shall
 carry out this subsection in a manner that will reduce the production of
 domestic milk, with emphasis on regions of the United States that have
 surplus milk production.
 `(4) NO ADVERSE EFFECT ON BEEF PRICES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall carry out this subsection in a manner
 that will avoid disrupting usual marketings of United States beef and
 beef products.
 `(B) PURCHASES OF BEEF- The Secretary may purchase beef from the domestic
 beef market if the Secretary considers such action to be necessary to
 avoid an adverse effect on beef prices.
 `(C) FUNDING- Subparagraph (B) may be carried out using--
 `(i) funds made available under clause (2) of section 32 of the Act entitled
 `An Act to amend the Agricultural Adjustment Act, and for other purposes'
 (7 U.S.C. 612c), approved August 14, 1935; or
 `(ii) funds described in paragraph (6).
 `(D) EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE- The Secretary may transfer beef acquired
 under this paragraph to the Administrator of the Agency for International
 Development to meet emergency food needs in accordance with title II of the
 Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954 (7 U.S.C. 1721
 et seq.).
 `(5) COMPENSATION FUND-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to subparagraph (C), the Secretary shall use amounts
 realized from purchasing cattle under this subsection to establish a fund
 to compensate beef producers that sold beef during the period beginning
 March 31, 1986, and ending April 11, 1986, when prices were temporarily
 lowered, in an amount determined by the Secretary.
 `(B) DEADLINE FOR APPLICATIONS- To be eligible to receive compensation
 under subparagraph (A), a beef producer must apply to the Secretary for
 the compensation not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of
 this section.
 `(C) MIGRATION AND REFUGEE ASSISTANCE- All funds that are not used to
 compensate eligible beef producers in accordance with this paragraph shall
 be transferred by the Secretary to the `Migration and Refugee Assistance
 account' of the Department of State, and shall be merged with, and used
 for the purposes of, the Account.
 `(6) FUNDING- Subject to paragraph (4)(C), this subsection shall be
 carried out using savings in federal reimbursement for the Commodity
 Credit Corporation that result from carrying out the program established
 by this section.
 `(7) TERMINATION- The authority provided by this subsection shall terminate
 on December 31, 1991.'.
SEC. 2. MILK PRICE SUPPORT RATE AND OFFSET.
 (a) RATE- Effective June 1, 1991, subsection (b) of section 204 of the
 Agricultural Act of 1949 (7 U.S.C. 1446e) is amended to read as follows:
 `(b) RATE-
 `(1) INITIAL RATE- During the period beginning on January 1, 1991, and
 ending June 30, 1991, the price of milk shall be supported at a rate not
 less than $10.10 per hundredweight for milk containing 3.67 percent milkfat.
 `(2) SUBSEQUENT RATE- During the period beginning on July 1, 1991, and ending
 December 31, 1991, the price of milk shall be supported at a rate not less
 than $11.10 per hundredweight for milk containing 3.67 percent milkfat.'.
 (b) REDUCTION IN PRICE RECEIVED- Effective January 1, 1992, section 204
 of the Agricultural Act of 1949 (as amended by section 1(1) of this Act)
 is further amended--
 (1) by inserting after subsection (h) the following new subsection:
 `(i) REDUCTION IN PRICE RECEIVED TO OFFSET RATE INCREASE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Beginning January 1, 1992, the Secretary shall provide
 for a reduction in the price received by producers for all milk produced
 in the United States and marketed by producers for commercial use, in
 addition to any reduction in price required under subsections (g) and (h).
 `(2) AMOUNT- The amount of the reduction under paragraph (1) in the price
 received by producers shall be an amount determined by the Secretary that
 is sufficient to offset the increase in the rate of milk price support
 from the rate prescribed in subsection (b)(1) to the rate prescribed in
 subsection (b)(2).'; and
 (2) in subsection (j), by striking `subsection (g) or (h)' each place it
 appears and inserting `subsection (g), (h), or (i)'.
SEC. 3. STUDY OF HEIFER AND LACTATING COW EXPORT PROGRAMS.
 (a) STUDY- The Secretary shall conduct a study of dairy cattle exporting
 programs and evaluate existing infrastructure to export heifers and lactating
 cows. The study shall include, but not be limited to, evaluations of--
 (1) existing and likely future worldwide market for dairy cattle and the
 specific need of relevant foreign countries;
 (2) existing infrastructure to carry out a dairy cattle export program;
 (3) previous exporting initiatives and the benefits and problems associated
 with such programs;
 (4) dairy cattle export programs carried out by other foreign countries; and
 (5) benefits of post sale advisory program in the country of purchase.
 (b) RECOMMENDATIONS- Based on information compiled by such study, the
 Secretary shall make recommendations on ways to improve dairy cow exports
 carried out by this country.
 (c) TRANSMITTAL TO CONGRESS- Not later than 1 year after the date of
 enactment of this act, the Secretary shall transmit such study to the
 Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry of the United States
 Senate and the Committee on Agriculture of the United States House of
 Representatives.
 (d) FUNDING- The Secretary is authorized to expend up to $500,000 of the
 funds described in 4(C) in order to carry out the study required by this
 subsection.