S 839 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 839
To provide for the safe operation of tanker traffic in Puget Sound, to
improve the ability to respond to tanker vessel accidents in Puget Sound,
and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
April 19 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. ADAMS introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
A BILL
To provide for the safe operation of tanker traffic in Puget Sound, to
improve the ability to respond to tanker vessel accidents in Puget Sound,
and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Puget Sound Tanker Safety Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. CONGRESSIONAL FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds and declares that--
 (1) Puget Sound is a unique and irreplaceable marine environment, and of
 paramount importance to the economy of Washington State and the Pacific
 Northwest;
 (2) transport by water of oil through Puget Sound poses an ongoing threat
 to this unique environment.
 (3) in light of several oil spills in the area over the past several years,
 there is concern about the adequacy of the existing regulatory regime for
 vessels carrying oil on Puget Sound; and
 (4) in light of inadequate response to the tragic oil tanker accident
 in Prince William Sound, Alaska, there is concern about the adequacy of
 existing contingency response plans for oil spills in Puget Sound.
 (b) PURPOSE- It is the purpose of this Act--
 (1) to authorize new regulations to better ensure the safety of vessels
 carrying oil in Puget Sound;
 (2) to improve existing contingency plans for oil spill response in Puget
 Sound; and
 (3) to ensure that the people of Washington State are informed about the
 adequacy of existing oil spill contingency plans.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act, the term--
 (a) `barge' has the meaning given to such term in section 2101 of title
 46 of the United States Code;
 (b) `major conversion' has the meaning given to such term in section 3701
 of title 46 of the United States Code;
 (c) `new tanker' means a tanker--
 (1) for which a contract for construction has not been entered into prior
 to the date of enactment of this Act;
 (2) on which, in the absence of a contract for construction, construction
 begins after the date of enactment of this Act; or
 (3) which undergoes a major conversion under a contract made after the
 date of enactment of this Act, or construction work that begins after the
 date of enactment of this Act;
 (d) `Puget Sound' means all navigable waters within the jurisdiction of
 Washington State and the United States east of Cape Flattery, and all
 navigable waters within Grays Harbor and Willapa Bay: Provided, That the
 Secretary is directed to publish within one month of the date of enactment
 of this Act regulations defining the precise boundaries of the area covered
 by this Act;
 (e) `Secretary' means the Secretary of the Department in which the Coast
 Guard is operating;
 (f) `spill' includes any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting,
 emptying, or dumping;
 (g) `tank vessel' means a vessel that is constructed or adapted to carry,
 or that carries, oil in bulk as cargo or cargo residue; and
 (h) `tanker' means a self-propelled tank vessel constructed or adapted
 primarily to carry oil in bulk in the cargo spaces.
SEC. 4. DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR VESSELS CARRYING CERTAIN CARGOES IN BULK.
 (a) APPLICABILITY- Subject to subsection (b) of this section, this section
 applies to any new tanker of at least twenty thousand gross tons which
 carries oil in bulk as cargo or in residue; and--
 (1) operates on the navigable waters of the United States; or
 (2) transfers oil in a port or place subject to the jurisdiction of the
 United States.
 (b) EXCEPTIONS- This section shall not apply to any public vessel as
 defined in section 2101 of title 46 of the United States Code.
 (c) TANKER MINIMUM STANDARDS- All tankers to which this section applies
 shall be equipped with a double hull, which includes both double sides
 and a double bottom fitted throughout the cargo length of such vessel.
 (d) CONFORMITY WITH INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS- The Secretary shall, at the
 earliest possible opportunity, enter into discussions with the International
 Maritime Organization (IMO) on requiring additional safety standards for
 tankers operating in environmentally sensitive areas. Such discussions
 shall include a review of the comparative safety records worldwide of
 tankers with double hulls or double bottoms, and tankers without these
 features. The Secretary shall report to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
 and Transportation of the Senate and the Merchant Marine and Fisheries
 Committee of the House of Representatives on progress on these negotiations
 no later than one year after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (e) STUDIES- The Secretary shall, not later than one year after the date
 of enactment of this Act, submit to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
 and Transportation of the Senate and the Merchant Marine and Fisheries
 Committee of the House of Representatives reports--
 (1) on all recent oil spills in Puget Sound involving barges, whether any of
 these spills could have been prevented by requiring double hulls or double
 bottoms on barges, or requiring additional safety lines between towing
 vessels in Puget Sound, and a specific recommendation on the desirability of
 requiring double bottoms or double hulls on barges carrying oil in Puget
 Sound; and a specific recommendation on the desirability of requiring
 additional safety lines between towing vessels in Puget Sound; and
 (2) on individual tank size in tankers carrying oil in bulk, changes in tank
 size over the last twenty years, and a specific recommendation on whether
 limits should be placed on the size of individual tanks within tankers.
SEC. 5. INDIVIDUALIZED VESSEL SPILL PREVENTION PLANS.
 (a) APPLICABILITY- Subject to the exceptions in subsection (b) of section 4,
 this section applies to all tank vessels which--
 (1) carry oil in bulk as cargo or in residue in Puget Sound; or
 (2) transfer oil in any port or place in Puget Sound.
 (b) REGULATORY MEASURES- Not later than one year after the date of enactment
 of this Act, the Secretary shall issue a final rule requiring all vessels
 subject to this section to prepare an individualized spill prevention and
 countermeasure plan. At a minimum, such plan must include:
 (1) procedures for timely notification of appropriate authorities of a spill;
 (2) identification of personnel responsible for taking corrective action
 in the case of a spill;
 (3) a description of procedures used to minimize the damage from a spill
 and to make immediate repairs if possible;
 (4) a description of countermeasure and response equipment and its location
 on the vessel; and
 (5) minimum standards for crew training.
 (c) EQUIPMENT STANDARDS- Not later than one year after the date of enactment
 of this Act, the Secretary shall issue a final rule listing the equipment
 that must be carried by vessels subject to this section to carry out the
 spill prevention and countermeasure plans described in subsection (b)
 of this section.
 (d) INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE- Subsequent to issuance of the rules
 described in this section, the Secretary shall implement regulations
 providing for annual inspection of vessels covered by this section to ensure
 that the vessel is in compliance with the plan described in subsection (b)
 of this section, and to ensure that the equipment required by subsection
 (c) of this section is on board and in good working order.
SEC. 6. OIL SPILL CONTINGENCY PLANS.
 (a) APPLICABILITY- This section applies to owners or operators of vessels
 described in section 5(a), and owners or operators of oil-producing,
 refining, or transportation facilities that, due to their location,
 reasonably could be expected to spill oil into or upon the navigable waters
 of Puget Sound or adjoining shorelines.
 (b) CONTINGENCY PLANS- Not later than one year after the date of enactment
 of this Act, the Secretary shall issue a final rule requiring persons
 subject to this section to prepare and submit to the Secretary for approval
 a contingency plan for the prevention, containment, and cleanup of oil
 spills from vessels or facilities described in subsection (a). At a minimum,
 such plans must include--
 (1) an analysis of the `maximum probable spill' from the facility or vessel
 determined in accordance with the guidelines established under subsection
 (e) of this section;
 (2) a description of the amount, type, and location of all countermeasure
 equipment maintained or readily available and the time required for its
 deployment;
 (3) procedures for early detection and timely notification regarding
 oil spills;
 (4) procedures to assess the severity of the oil spill, plan countermeasures,
 and begin cleanup efforts;
 (5) identification of trained, prepared, and available personnel for
 responding to an oil spill; and
 (6) provisions for disposal of recovered spill material.
 (c) COOPERATIVE EFFORTS- In complying with this section, an owner or
 operator of a vessel or facility may rely on his participation in a
 cooperative effort with other persons subject to this section to develop
 satisfactory contingency plans.
 (d) Approval of Plans-
 (1) In approving the contingency plans required by this section, the
 Secretary shall consider the adequacy of risk analysis in the determination
 of maximum probable spill, the estimated response time, and the adequacy
 of trained personnel and communications equipment.
 (2) No plan shall be approved unless the Secretary determines that the
 equipment listed in the plan is sufficient to respond to the maximum
 probable spill from the vessel or facility in question.
 (3) The Secretary may enter into a cooperative agreement with the State
 of Washington to delegate the approval of contingency plans under this
 section to the State of Washington.
 (f) GUIDELINES FOR MAXIMUM PROBABLE SPILL- The Secretary shall publish
 guidelines for the determination of maximum probable spill from a vessel
 or facility, taking into account the amount of oil being transported,
 stored, or transferred, and the risk of a spill.
SEC. 7. PUBLIC AWARENESS AND PRACTICE DRILLS.
 (a) The Secretary shall annually publish an up-to-date description of the
 contingency plans prepared for oil spills in Puget Sound, and an inventory
 of equipment available for responding to such spills.
 (b) The Secretary shall annually conduct practice drills of the contingency
 plans prepared for oil spills in Puget Sound. The Secretary shall publish
 a report on such drills including an assessment of actual response time,
 available equipment as compared to equipment listed in the contingency
 plans, and requirements, if necessary, for changes in the plans.
SEC. 8. IMPACT ON OTHER LAW.
 Nothing in this Act shall be construed or interpreted as changing,
 diminishing, or preempting in any way the authority of a State, or any
 political subdivision thereof, to regulate vessels carrying oil or other
 hazardous materials and to provide for oil spill contingency response
 planning and activities, in State waters.
SEC. 9. PENALTIES.
 (a) A person violating this Act or a regulation prescribed under this Act
 is liable to the United States Government for a civil penalty of not more
 than $25,000. Each day of a continuing violation is a separate violation.
 (b) Each vessel to which this Act applies that is operated in violation
 of this Act or a regulation prescribed under this Act is liable in rem
 for a civil penalty as prescribed in subsection (a) of this section.
 (c) A person willfully and knowingly violating this Act or a regulation
 prescribed under this Act shall be fined not more than $50,000, imprisoned
 for not more than five years, or both.
 (d) The district courts of the United States have jurisdiction to restrain
 a violation of this Act or a regulation prescribed under this Act.