S 418 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 418
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to repeal the income taxation
of corporations, to impose a 10-percent tax on the earned income (and only
the earned income) of individuals, to repeal the estate and gift taxes,
and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
February 22 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. HELMS introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Finance
A BILL
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to repeal the income taxation
of corporations, to impose a 10-percent tax on the earned income (and only
the earned income) of individuals, to repeal the estate and gift taxes,
and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE
 This Act may be cited as the `Tithe Tax Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. REPEAL OF TAXATION OF CORPORATIONS.
 The following provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 are hereby
 repealed:
 (1) section 11 (relating to corporate income tax),
 (2) section 55 (relating to alternative minimum tax) to the extent it
 applies to corporations,
 (3) section 511 (relating to unrelated business income tax),
 (4) section 531 (relating to accumulated earnings tax),
 (5) section 541 (relating to personal holding company tax),
 (6) section 594 (relating to alternative tax for certain mutual savings
 banks),
 (7) section 801 (relating to tax imposed on life insurance companies),
 (8) section 821 (relating to tax imposed on certain mutual insurance
 companies),
 (9) section 831 (relating to tax on certain other insurance companies),
 (10) section 852 (relating to tax on regulated investment companies),
 (11) section 857 (relating to tax on real estate investment trusts), and
 (12) section 882 (relating to tax on income of foreign corporations
 connected with United States business).
SEC. 3. 10 PERCENT INCOME TAX RATE FOR INDIVIDUALS.
 Section 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to tax imposed
 on individuals) is amended to read as follows:
`SECTION 1. TAX IMPOSED.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- There is hereby imposed on the income of every individual
 a tax equal to 10 percent of the excess of the earned income of such
 individual for the taxable year over the exemption amount for such year.
 `(b) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) EXEMPTION AMOUNT-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `exemption amount' means, for any taxable year,
 $10,000 increased (for taxable years beginning after December 31, 1989)
 by an amount equal to $10,000 multiplied by the cost-of-living adjustment
 for the calendar year in which the taxable year begins.
 `(B) COST-OF-LIVING ADJUSTMENT- For purposes of this paragraph--
 `(i) IN GENERAL- The cost-of-living adjustment for any calendar year is
 the percentage (if any) by which--
 `(I) the CPI for October of the preceding calendar year, exceeds
 `(II) the CPI for October of 1988.
 `(ii) CPI- The term `CPI' means the last Consumer Price Index for all-urban
 consumers published by the Department of Labor.
 `(C) ROUNDING- If the increase determined under this paragraph is not a
 multiple of $10, such increase shall be rounded to the nearest multiple
 of $10 (or if such increase is a multiple of $5, such increase shall be
 increased to the next highest multiple of $10).
 `(2) EARNED INCOME-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the term `earned
 income' means--
 `(i) wages, salaries, and other employee compensation,
 `(ii) the amount of the taxpayer's net earnings from self-employment for
 the taxable year, and
 `(iii) the amount of dividends which are from a personal service corporation
 or which are otherwise directly or indirectly compensation for services.
 `(B) EXCEPTIONS- The term `earned income' does not include--
 `(i) any amount received as a pension or annuity, or
 `(ii) any tip unless the amount of the tip is not within the discretion
 of the service-recipient.
 `(C) FRINGE BENEFITS VALUED AT EMPLOYER COST- The amount of any fringe
 benefit which is included as earned income shall be the cost to the employer
 of such benefit.'
SEC. 4. REPEAL OF SPECIAL DEDUCTIONS, CREDITS, AND EXCLUSIONS FROM INCOME
FOR INDIVIDUALS.
 Chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking out
 all specific exclusions from gross income, all deductions, and all credits
 against income tax to the extent related to the computation of individual
 income tax liability.
SEC. 5. REPEAL OF ESTATE AND GIFT TAXES.
 Subtitle B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to estate, gift,
 and generation-skipping taxes) is hereby repealed.
SEC. 6. EFFECTIVE DATES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b), the amendments made
 by this Act shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the
 enactment of this Act.
 (b) REPEAL OF ESTATE AND GIFT TAXES- The repeal made by section 5 shall
 apply to estates of decedents dying, and transfers made, after the date
 of the enactment of this Act.
 (c) TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING CHANGES- The Secretary of the Treasury or his
 delegate shall, as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 90
 days after the date of enactment of this Act, submit to the Committee on
 Ways and Means of the House of Representatives a draft of any technical
 and conforming changes in the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 which are
 necessary to reflect throughout such Code the changes in the substantive
 provisions of law made by this Act.