HR 5582 IH
101st CONGRESS
 2d Session
 H. R. 5582
To protect the national security by prohibiting profiteering of essential
commodities during periods of national emergency.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
September 11, 1990
Mr. DURBIN (for himself, Mr. ANNUNZIO, Mr. ATKINS, Mrs. COLLINS, Mr. COSTELLO,
Mr. EVANS, Mr. FEIGHAN, Mr. GUNDERSON, Mr. DE LUGO, Mr. JOHNSON of South
Dakota, Mr. JONTZ, Mr. KOLTER, Mr. MILLER of California, Mr. MORRISON
of Connecticut, Mr. NEAL of Massachusetts, Mr. PALLONE, Mr. PARRIS,
Mr. PEASE, Mr. SHAYS, Mr. TRAFICANT, Mr. UDALL, Mr. YATES, Mr. HAYES of
Illinois, Mr. COLEMAN of Missouri, Mr. HUGHES, Mrs. UNSOELD, Ms. KAPTUR,
and Mrs. BOXER) introduced the following bill; which was referred to the
Committee on the Judiciary
A BILL
To protect the national security by prohibiting profiteering of essential
commodities during periods of national emergency.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `National Emergency Anti-Profiteering Act
 of 1990'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress makes the following findings:
 (1) The United States is dependent on certain commodities, such as oil and
 petroleum products, which are essential to the functioning of the United
 States economy and to the public health, safety and welfare.
 (2) A shortage or threatened shortage or increase in the price of such
 commodities can significantly injure or threaten the United States economy or
 public health, safety or welfare, thereby endangering the national security.
 (3) Some suppliers of these essential commodities can use abnormal market
 disruptions, including unexpected changes in weather conditions, acts
 of nature, civil disorders, war or other military actions, catastrophic
 loss of an energy source or other extraordinary adverse circumstances,
 to profiteer in these essential products, even when these actions may
 undermine the United States economy or otherwise threaten public health,
 safety and welfare.
 (4) Existing Federal laws as presently enforced do not sufficiently control
 such profiteering in emergency situations. Profiteering can occur and injure
 the United States economy even in the absence of a provable violation of
 the antitrust or unfair trade practice laws.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 For the purpose of this Act:
 (1) `National economic emergency' means, as determined by the President,
 an abnormal market disruption (whether actual or imminently threatened)
 resulting from extraordinary weather conditions, acts of nature, catastrophic
 failure of a source of energy, strike, civil disorder, war or other military
 action, or national emergency, that--
 (A) causes an actual or threatened shortage, or an actual or threatened
 increase in the price of an essential commodity, and
 (B) is likely to significantly injure the economy of the United States or
 the public health, safety or welfare.
When the President declares a national economic emergency, he shall designate
the essential commodities with respect to which that national economic
emergency exists. Notice of the President's determination that a national
economic emergency exists and his designation of the essential commodities
with respect to which that national economic emergency exists shall be given
by immediate publication of a Presidential proclamation.
 (2) An `essential commodity' is--
 (A) crude oil, propane, gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene, home heating oil,
 aviation fuel, or other petroleum distillate, or
 (B) a commodity that the President, in his sole discretion, determines to
 be a commodity--
 (i) of significant importance to the American economy, or
 (ii) vital or necessary to the public health, safety or welfare,
a disruption in the supply, or sudden increase in the price, of which is likely
to significantly injure the economy of the United States or public health,
safety or welfare, and thereby threaten the national security. Notice of such
determination shall be given by publication of a Presidential proclamation.
 (3) `Listed essential commodity' means any essential commodity with
 respect to which the President has designated that a national economic
 emergency exists.
 (4) `Profiteer' means to offer for sale, sell, transport, or deliver
 an essential commodity at an excessive price, or to place excessive
 restrictions or conditions upon the sale, delivery or transportation of
 an essential commodity.
 (5) An `excessive price' is one that is not justified by the seller's actual
 costs of acquiring, producing, selling, transporting, and delivering the
 actual product sold, plus a reasonable profit. In calculating the seller's
 actual costs, no allowance shall be made for the replacement costs of an
 essential commodity if the seller is reasonably assured of recouping the
 replacement costs as a part of the price of subsequent sales of an essential
 commodity. It shall be prima facie evidence of an excessive price that the
 increase in the seller's price for a listed essential commodity during a
 national economic emergency exceeds the increase in the seller's actual
 costs for actual product sold.
SEC. 4. PROHIBITION OF HOARDING OR PROFITEERING DURING A NATIONAL ECONOMIC
EMERGENCY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Following publication of a Presidential proclamation
 declaring a national economic emergency and designating the essential
 commodities with respect to which that national economic emergency exists,
 for the duration of that national economic emergency, no person shall
 profiteer with respect to any listed essential commodity.
 (b) PENALTY- Any person who profiteers in a listed essential commodity
 in violation of subsection (a), with the knowledge that he or she is
 engaging in profiteering of a listed commodity, shall be subject to up to
 5 years imprisonment and a fine of up to $500,000, and shall be required
 to disgorge all profits earned on essential commodities with respect to
 which profiteering occurred.
SEC. 5. CIVIL REMEDIES.
 (a) JURISDICTION- The district courts of the United States shall have
 jurisdiction to prevent and restrain violations of section 4(a) of this
 Act by issuing, upon proof by a preponderance of the evidence, appropriate
 orders, including necessary injunctive or declaratory relief or restitution
 or other damages.
 (b) COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS; INTERIM RELIEF- The Attorney General and
 the States may institute proceedings under this section. Pending final
 determination thereof, the court may at any time enter such restraining
 orders or prohibitions, or take such other actions, including the acceptance
 of satisfactory performance bonds, as it shall deem proper.
 (c) DOUBLE DAMAGES- In any case brought by the United States or a State
 under this section, the defendant shall be liable for damages in the
 amount of twice the amount of all profits earned on the listed essential
 commodities with respect to which profiteering occurred.
SEC. 6. DURATION OF A NATIONAL ECONOMIC EMERGENCY.
 (a) LIMITATION ON LENGTH OF EMERGENCY; EXTENSIONS- A national economic
 emergency, as declared by the President pursuant to section 3(1) of this
 Act, shall be in effect for not more than 180 days from the date such
 emergency is declared, unless extended by Presidential declaration that a
 national economic emergency continues to exist, notice of which shall be
 immediately published as a Presidential proclamation. Each extension thereof
 shall last for not more than 90 days, but there shall be no limit on the
 number of times the President may extend a national economic emergency.
 (b) CONGRESSIONAL TERMINATION- A national economic emergency, or a
 designation of one or more essential commodities with respect to which
 the national economic emergency exists, may be terminated by passage of a
 joint resolution of Congress. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the
 President, through published Presidential proclamation, from terminating
 a national economic emergency or a designation of one or more essential
 commodities with respect to which said emergency exists.
SEC. 7. JUDICIAL REVIEW.
 (a) STANDARD OF REVIEW- The President's determination that a national
 economic emergency exists or continues to exist, designation of essential
 commodities to which the national economic emergency exists, or determination
 that a commodity is an essential commodity pursuant to section 3(2)(B)
 of this Act, shall not be overturned, except on a showing, by clear and
 convincing evidence, that the President acted arbitrarily or capriciously
 or not otherwise in accordance with the law.
 (b) JURISDICTION- The United States District Court for the District of
 Columbia shall have exclusive original jurisdiction over all actions
 against the United States challenging the constitutionality of this Act,
 the President's determination that a national emergency exists or continues
 to exist, the President's designation of the essential commodities to which
 that emergency exists, or the President's determination that a commodity
 is an essential commodity under section 3(2)(B) of this Act.
SEC. 8. EFFECT ON STATE LAWS.
 Nothing in this Act shall be construed as altering or preempting any
 provisions of State law, except to the extent that State law mandates
 hoarding or profiteering of a listed commodity during a national economic
 emergency.