HR 2586 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2586
To amend the Clean Air Act to provide further controls of certain stationary
sources of sulfur dioxides and nitrogen oxides to reduce acid deposition,
to provide for the commercialization of clean coal technologies for existing
stationary sources, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
June 8, 1989
Mr. BILIRAKIS introduced the following bill; which was referred to the
Committee on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Clean Air Act to provide further controls of certain stationary
sources of sulfur dioxides and nitrogen oxides to reduce acid deposition,
to provide for the commercialization of clean coal technologies for existing
stationary sources, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Comprehensive Acid Rain Enforcement Act
 of 1989'.
SEC. 2. ACID DEPOSITION CONTROL PROGRAM.
 Title I of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following new parts
 at the end thereof:
`PART E--ACID DEPOSITION CONTROL
`SEC. 181. REDUCTIONS IN EMISSIONS OF SULFUR DIOXIDE AND OXIDES OF NITROGEN.
 `(a) 10,000,000-TON SULFUR DIOXIDE REDUCTION; 3,000,000-TON REDUCTION
 IN OXIDES OF NITROGEN- The goal of this part is to achieve a nationwide
 reduction in annual emissions of sulfur dioxide from fossil fuel-fired
 generating units and industrial process emitters which are major stationary
 sources and to also achieve a reduction in emissions of oxides of nitrogen
 from those units.
 `(b) PHASED SO2 REDUCTIONS- The nationwide reduction in sulfur dioxide
 and oxides of nitrogen to be obtained under this part shall be achieved
 in two phases. In the first phase each State shall obtain such reductions
 from the units covered by this part as may be necessary to ensure that
 statewide emissions of sulfur dioxide (per million Btu of heat input)
 from the total of all fossil fuel-fired generating units and industrial
 process emitters which are major stationary sources in the State shall
 not exceed an average annual rate of 2.0 pounds per million Btu of heat
 input. The first phase shall be completed by December 31, 1996. In the
 second phase each State shall obtain such additional reductions from the
 units covered by this part as are necessary for the State to ensure that
 statewide emissions from the total of all fossil fuel-fired generating
 units and industrial process emitters which are major stationary sources
 in the State shall not exceed the average annual emissions rates provided
 in Table 1. The second phase shall be completed by December 31, 2003.
Table 1
-----------------------------------------
 Pollutant Average Annual Rate*
-----------------------------------------
 Sulfur Dioxide 1.2
 Oxides of Nitrogen 0.6
-----------------------------------------
*Expressed in pounds per million Btu of heat input.
 `(c) CERTAIN UNITS NOT COVERED- Nothing in this part shall be construed
 to require any limitation on emissions from any sources other than fossil
 fuel-fired generating units and industrial process emitters which are
 major stationary sources. Nothing in this part shall be construed to
 require any limitation on emissions from any source which is subject to a
 standard of performance for sulfur dioxide emissions under section 111,
 except to the extent necessary to enforce emissions reductions required
 under any provision of this part.
 `(d) SCOPE- This part shall apply only in the forty-eight contiguous States
 in the continental United States and the District of Columbia.
`SEC. 182. STATE PLANS FOR SULFUR DIOXIDE AND OXIDES OF NITROGEN.
 `(a) Submission Deadlines-
 `(1) FIRST PHASE OF SO2 RATE REDUCTIONS- Not later than twenty-four
 months after promulgation of regulations implementing this part, each
 State required to reduce emissions of such air pollutant under this part
 shall submit to the Administrator a State plan under this part. The plan
 shall establish emissions rate limitations, compliance schedules, and such
 other enforceable measures as may be necessary to achieve, and maintain
 thereafter, the affected State's first phase sulfur dioxide emissions
 rate reductions specified by section 181. The plan shall also provide
 necessary assurances that the State will have adequate personnel, funding,
 and authority to carry out and enforce the plan. In preparing such plan,
 the State shall consider the measures which may be necessary to meet the
 emissions rate reductions required under the second phase.
 `(2) SECOND PHASE SULFUR DIOXIDE AND OXIDES OF NITROGEN EMISSIONS RATE
 REDUCTIONS- Within twenty-four months after enactment of this part,
 the Administrator shall propose a rule prescribing when each State shall
 submit to the Administrator State plan revisions establishing emissions
 rate limitations, compliance schedules, and such other enforceable measures
 as may be necessary to achieve the sulfur dioxide and oxides of nitrogen
 emissions rate reductions required by section 181 to be obtained by each
 State for the second phase. The rule shall be promulgated within eighteen
 months after the date of its proposal.
 `(b) APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL- The Administrator shall approve or disapprove
 each State plan or plan revision under this part, by rule in accordance
 with the same requirements as apply under this Act for approval of State
 implementation plans or plan revisions submitted under section 110 except
 that such plan or revision shall be approved or disapproved within twelve
 months after submission. The Administrator shall approve the plan or plan
 revision if he determines that it contains provisions, including enforceable
 increments of progress, adequate to assure that the State emissions rate
 reductions required under section 181 will be achieved by the required
 deadline and that it otherwise meets the requirements of this part. The
 Administrator may approve an individual measure of a plan even if he has
 disapproved or not yet acted on the plan as a whole. If the Administrator
 disapproves a plan or plan revision he shall notify the State of the reasons
 for such disapproval and the State may resubmit such plan or revision
 with amendments within twelve months from the date of such notice. A State
 plan may be revised at any time to include compliance via approved clean
 coal technology projects pursuant to section 184. The Administrator shall
 consult with the Secretary of Energy and the Federal Energy Regulatory
 Commission in approving or disapproving a plan or plan revision under this
 section. If the Administrator has not approved or disapproved a State plan
 or plan revision submitted under this section within twelve months after
 such submittal, the plan or plan revision shall be treated as approved
 and in effect. It is the intent of Congress that each such plan shall,
 notwithstanding such time requirements for approval, not be disapproved
 without adequate opportunity for public participation as required by
 the Administrative Procedures Act. The requirements of such Act shall be
 paramount in the case of a conflict with such deadlines for approval.
 `(c) Plan Provisions-
 `(1) MEANS OF COMPLIANCE- The State implementation plan or plan revisions
 under this part may provide for compliance with the requirements of this
 section through may action which results in emissions rate reductions from
 fossil fuel-fired generating units and industrial process emittors which
 are major stationary sources and which are not subject to standards of
 performance under section 111 and which the State and the Administrator
 deem appropriate. Such means may include, but shall not be limited to,
 the use of technological systems of continuous emissions reduction, clean
 coal demonstration projects under section 184, energy conservation programs,
 fuel switching, retirement, changes in utility dispatch designed to reduce
 emissions, precombustion cleaning of fuels, and emissions trading pursuant
 to section 183. Each plan may, to the extent appropriate, consider the mix
 and source of generation serving ratepayers in the State, the location of
 the generation, the extent of each utility's service area in the State
 and in other States, reliability, interconnection of the utilities,
 pooling arrangements in the State and in the applicable regional power
 pool, and the need to meet emergencies and normal shutdowns and other
 relevant factors. Each plan may also contain utility commitments to provide
 significant financial incentives to encourage ratepayers to use energy
 efficient appliances and other energy efficient installations.
 `(2) CONSULTATION REGARDING UTILITIES SERVING RATEPAYERS IN THE STATE-
 In developing plan provisions under this part, the State shall consult
 with electric utilities within the State. The State shall make cost impact
 information regarding the various control options available to the public
 for comment before adoption of the final plan and shall consider such
 information, together with any public comments, in developing the emissions
 control requirements to be included in the final plan.
 `(3) CONSULTATION REGARDING OTHER AFFECTED UTILITIES- To the extent
 utilities in the State affected by the plan are part of an electric
 utility system or holding company serving ratepayers in other States, the
 State shall consult with such other States in order to ensure that the
 plans of each State are coordinated to the greatest extent practicable
 to ensure system reliability, cost effective emissions control, proper
 functioning of power dispatch systems, and ratepayer fairness. The State
 shall provide for the participation of the regulated electric utilities,
 the State public utility commissions, State environmental agencies, State
 energy offices, nonutility major stationary sources, and the nonregulated
 electric utilities in the development of the plans.
 `(4) EXTENSIONS AND REVISIONS- Upon request of the Governor of any State,
 the Administrator may extend the time for submittal of any plan to the
 Administrator an additional six months, unless he finds that such State
 has been dilatory. Plans approved under this part may be revised from time
 to time in accordance with this part.
 `(5) AUDITING AND FINDINGS OF INADEQUACY- Each State plan submitted under
 this part shall contain provisions requiring the State biannually to quantify
 the then current level of emissions subject to limitation under this part
 and report its findings to the Administrator on a source-by-source basis. The
 Administrator may make such findings at any time on his own initiative.
 `(6) STATE AUTHORITY TO IMPOSE PENALTIES- Any State is authorized to
 include provisions in a plan or plan revision submitted under this part
 pursuant to which penalties are imposed on emissions of sulfur dioxide or
 oxides of nitrogen from stationary sources which fail or refuse to comply,
 in whole or in part, with emissions rate limitations or other applicable
 requirements of the State plan or plan revision.
 `(7) STATE UTILITY LAWS- Nothing in this part shall be construed as requiring
 a change of any kind in State laws regulating electric utility rates.
 `(d) Default-
 `(1) FAILURE BY STATE TO SUBMIT PLAN WHICH IS APPROVED- If no State plan or
 plan revision is submitted under this part within the applicable deadline or
 if a plan or plan revision which has been submitted within such deadline
 has been disapproved and amendments to the plan or plan revision have
 not been submitted to the Administrator within twelve months after such
 disapproval or if no extension has been granted by the Administrator,
 the Administrator shall declare such State in default. In such instance
 each utility system or company owning or operating stationary source(s)
 within the State to which this subsection applies shall comply with the
 requirements of this part.
 `(2) FAILURE TO ENFORCE APPROVED PLAN- (A) If a State fails to enforce any
 requirement of an approved plan or plan revision under this part against
 any emissions unit, and if the State failure results in statewide emissions
 rates in excess of those provided herein, the Administrator shall declare
 such State in default. In such instance each utility system or company
 owning or operating stationary source(s) within the State to which this
 subsection applies shall comply with the requirements of this part.
 `(B) If a covered unit is a party to an emissions trading agreement involving
 more than one State and if such unit fails to comply with any emissions
 limitation applicable to such unit, the Administrator shall declare such unit
 in default and allow the affected States to amend their State plans within
 twelve months of such default. The defaulting unit would be individually
 responsible for achieving the emissions rate targets specified in section
 181 as well as for all costs associated with the State plan revisions and
 alternative compliance scenarios necessary due to such unit's default.
 `(3) COVERED SOURCES- This subsection applies to any fossil fuel-fired
 generating unit or industrial process emitter which is a major stationary
 source which burns natural gas, petroleum, coal (including lignite),
 or any fuel derived from the foregoing that produces electricity or steam.
 `(4) AMOUNT OF PENALTY- (A) The amount of the noncompliance penalty
 imposed by this subsection shall be based on the number of pounds of sulfur
 dioxide emitted during the period beginning with the failure referred to
 in paragraphs (1) and (2) by reason of which the penalty is imposed and
 ending with the date on which such failure is remedied. The number of
 pounds of pollutant emitted shall be determined using the actual average
 annual rate of emissions for the utility system or company concerned.
 `(B) In the case of a penalty imposed under paragraph (1)(A) for a utility
 or industrial processor whose covered sources have an average annual sulfur
 dioxide emissions rate of less than 2.0 pounds per million Btu's, the penalty
 shall be equal to 30 cents for each pound of sulfur dioxide emitted during
 the applicable period in excess of 1.2 pounds per million Btu's and for a
 utility or industrial processor whose covered sources have an average annual
 sulfur dioxide emissions rate of 2.0 pounds per million Btu's or more, the
 penalty shall be equal to 45 cents for each pound of sulfur dioxide emitted
 during the applicable period in excess of 1.2 pounds per million Btu's.
 `(C) In the case of a penalty imposed under paragraph (2) for a utility or
 industrial processor whose covered sources have an average annual sulfur
 dioxide emissions rate of less than 2.0 pounds per million Btu's, the penalty
 shall be equal to 30 cents for each pound of sulfur dioxide emitted during
 the applicable period in excess of the emissions limitation by reason of
 which the penalty is imposed and for a utility or industrial processor whose
 covered sources have an average annual sulfur dioxide emissions rate of 2.0
 pounds per million Btu's or more, the penalty shall be equal to 45 cents
 for each pound of sulfur dioxide emitted during the applicable period in
 excess of the emissions limitation by reason of which the penalty is imposed.
 `(5) LIABILITY FOR DEFAULT- The requirements imposed by this subsection
 shall be borne by the person owning or operating the source or sources
 which emitted the pollutants on which such penalty is imposed. No part of
 the costs due to any such penalty may be included in the rates and charges
 imposed on persons purchasing electric energy from the person on which
 such penalty is imposed.
 `(6) EXEMPTION FOR SMALL BOILERS- No penalty shall be imposed by this
 subsection on the emissions from any boiler if such boiler has a heat
 input rate of not more than one hundred million Btu's per hour.
 `(e) ENFORCEMENT- Each requirement of a State plan approved under this
 section shall be treated, for purposes of sections 113, 114, 116, 120,
 and 304, as a requirement of an applicable implementation plan.
`SEC. 183. EMISSIONS REDUCTION TRADING.
 `(a) TRADING UNDER STATE PLANS- State plans under this part may provide
 for trading of emissions rate reduction requirements--
 `(1) among electric utility units within a State,
 `(2) among electric utility units in more than one State which participate
 in the same power pool or which are owned or operated by a single electric
 utility,
 `(3) between electric utility units within a State and other fossil
 fuel-fired generating units within the State; and
 `(4) between electric utility units within a State and major sources within
 the State with process emissions greater than one hundred tons per year.
The Administrator may promulgate any rules respecting such trading deemed
necessary by the Administrator, including but not limited to rules regarding
enforcement and monitoring and the allocation among the States involved in
such trading of emissions rate reduction credits towards each such State's
emissions rate reductions required under section 181. Such rules shall
ensure that the total aggregate tonnage of emissions reduction (measured
from the 1980 baseline) is no less than the total that would be achieved
absent such trading. Trading or reduction requirements shall require that
actual reductions of emissions occur as a result of the use of technological
systems of continuous emissions reduction, clean coal demonstration projects
under section 184, energy conservation programs, fuel switching, retirement,
changes in utility dispatch designed to reduce emissions, or precombustion
cleaning of fuels. In the case of fossil fuel fired generating units other
than electric utility units and covered sources of process emissions, the
emissions reduction credits allowed under this section shall be based on
a baseline which utilizes 1985 emissions from such units. This subsection
shall not apply to fugitive emissions.
 `(b) EPA MONITORING; RECORDKEEPING- Under rules promulgated by the
 Administrator, each fossil fuel-fired electric utility generating unit shall
 be required to install and operate emissions monitoring for sulfur dioxide
 and oxides of nitrogen. Such rules shall also require the owner or operator
 of each such unit, and each nonutility fossil fuel fired generating units,
 and each major source of process emissions to maintain, and make available
 to the Administrator, such records as may be necessary to determine (1) the
 hours of operation of the unit, and (2) the actual annual average rate of
 emissions of sulfur dioxide and oxides of nitrogen from the unit. Whenever
 emissions reduction trading involves units in more than one State, the
 Administrator shall determine and certify to the affected States the total
 emissions reductions achieved by each unit involved in the trade.
`SEC. 184. TIME EXTENSION FOR CLEAN COAL TECHNOLOGY PROJECTS.
 `Any State having a plan approved under this part may extend the deadline
 required for compliance by any stationary source with any emissions
 reduction requirement applicable under such plan for a period of not to
 exceed twenty-four months beyond the required deadline if the source to
 which such requirement applies is subject to an enforceable commitment to
 utilize clean coal technology as defined in section 190 for purposes of
 meeting such requirement. Not more than one such extension may be granted
 to any stationary source. A State plan shall not be treated as failing
 to comply with the requirements of this part notwithstanding the failure
 of plan provisions to assure compliance by the required deadline with the
 State share of emissions reduction requirements under section 182 if such
 failure is solely attributable to one or more extensions granted under
 this section or to failure to achieve anticipated reductions from approved
 clean coal technology projects.
`SEC. 185. EMISSIONS RATE CAP FOR EXISTING PLANTS.
 `No State implementation plan revision for phase II may be approved under
 this part unless the plan provides that the annual statewide average rate
 of emissions of sulfur dioxide and oxides of nitrogen from all the fossil
 fuel fired electric utility generating units in the State not subject to
 any standard of performance in effect under section 111 shall be prohibited
 from increasing above the emissions rates required to be achieved by such
 units as of December 31, 2003.
`SEC. 187. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
 `(a) RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REQUIREMENTS- Nothing in this part shall be
 construed to affect the requirements of section 110 (or of any applicable
 State implementation plan in effect in any State), except as provided in
 this part, or of any other provision of this Act, except that any person
 subject to any requirements under any other provision of this Act may also
 be subject to additional requirements under this part.
 `(b) USE OF TERMS- The terms `steam generating unit', `electric utility steam
 generating unit', and `fossil fuel' have the same meaning when used in this
 part as when used in regulations promulgated by the Administrator under
 section 111 and set forth in 40 CFR 60.41a. The term `fossil fuel-fired
 generating unit' shall include utility and nonutility steam and nonsteam
 electric generating systems as defined in regulations promulgated by the
 Administrator and set forth in 40 CFR 60.41a and subpart GG. The term
 `major stationary source' has the same meaning when used in this part as
 when used in regulations promulgated by the Administrator and set forth
 in 40 CFR 52.21b.
 `(c) FORCE MAJEURE- In order to prevent unemployment of coal miners,
 nothing in this part or in any State implementation plan revision submitted
 and approved under this part shall be considered by any person or court as
 triggering the provisions of any fossil fuel supply contract in effect as of
 March 31, 1989, where such provisions permit the early termination of such
 contract on the basis of force majeure or any governmental regulatory action.
`PART F--CLEAN COAL TECHNOLOGIES
`SEC. 190. DEFINITIONS.
 `For purposes of this part:
 `(1) The term `clean coal technology' means any technology, including
 technologies applied at the precombustion, combustion, or postcombustion
 stage, at a new or existing facility which will achieve significant
 reductions in air emissions of sulfur dioxide or oxides of nitrogen
 associated with the utilization of coal in the generation of electricity
 or industrial process steam which is not in widespread use as of the date
 of enactment of this part.
 `(2) The term `coal' means anthracite, bituminous or subbituminous coal,
 lignite, or any fuel derivative thereof.
 `(3) The term `conventional technology' means any technology, including
 technologies applied at the precombustion, combustion, or postcombustion
 stage, which achieves a significant reduction in air emissions of sulfur
 dioxide or oxides of nitrogen associated with the utilization of coal
 in the generation of electricity or industrial process steam which is in
 widespread use at commercial scale on the date of enactment of this part.
 `(4) The term `high-sulfur coal' means coal with a heat value of at least
 ten million British thermal units per ton which has a sulfur content
 greater than 1 per centum sulfur by weight or coal with an equivalent or
 greater sulfur content after adjustment for the heat value of the coal.
 `(5) The term `precursors of acid deposition' means air pollutants
 including sulfur dioxide, sulfates, oxides of nitrogen and nitrates and
 their transformation products which may be deposited in a wet or dry form
 and which when deposited contribute to the acidification of aquatic and
 other ecosystems.
 `(6) The term `clean coal technology project' means the design, construction,
 or operation of equipment and facilities at the location of a specific
 installation which generates electricity or industrial process steam but
 only to the extent that the equipment and facilities are necessary to
 achieve emissions reduction through application of a generic clean coal
 technology or technologies and shall not include the design, construction,
 or operation of any other equipment or facilities associated with the
 installation which are not directly related to emissions reduction.
 `(7) The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of the United States Department
 of Energy.
`SEC. 191. PROGRAM.
 `(a) GENERAL AUTHORITY- The Secretary, pursuant to applicable provisions
 of law, acting jointly with the Administrator is authorized and directed
 to carry out a program on an expedited basis for the construction and
 operation of facilities to acquire further experience with respect to the
 commercial application of clean coal technologies which significantly
 reduce air emissions of sulfur dioxide or oxides of nitrogen resulting
 from the utilization of coal by existing stationary sources in the
 generation of electricity or industrial process steam. The Secretary and
 the Administrator may enter into contracts or cooperative agreements with,
 or provide financial assistance in the form of grants to, the owner or
 operator of any such facility to assure the application of clean coal
 technologies. The program established by this section shall include--
 `(1) solicitations for proposed projects to apply such technologies;
 `(2) selection of suitable projects from among those proposed;
 `(3) supervision of the construction and operation of such projects;
 `(4) monitoring and evaluation of the results of the projects which are
 conducted; and
 `(5) dissemination of information on the effectiveness and feasibility of
 the clean coal technologies which are operated.
Not later than one hundred and eighty days after the date of enactment of
this part the Secretary acting jointly with the Administrator shall publish
regulations to assure the satisfactory implementation of each element of
the program authorized by this part.
 `(b) SOLICITATION- Not later than two hundred and ten days after the
 enactment of this part, the Secretary acting jointly with the Administrator
 shall publish a solicitation for proposals to apply clean coal technologies
 which will significantly reduce air emissions of sulfur dioxide or oxides
 of nitrogen resulting from the utilization of coal by existing stationary
 sources in the generation of electricity or industrial process steam. The
 solicitation notice shall provide for a ninety-day application period and
 shall prescribe the information to be included in the proposal, including
 technical and economic information sufficient to permit the Secretary and
 the Administrator to assess the potential effectiveness and feasibility of
 the technology to be applied and the reductions in air emissions of sulfur
 dioxide or oxides of nitrogen which can be expected to be achieved through
 use of the technology. A second solicitation shall be conducted not later
 than twenty one months after the date of enactment of this part.
 `(c) APPLICATIONS- Any person or any public or private entity which is the
 owner or operator of a major source of air emissions as defined in this
 Act may submit an application to the Secretary and the Administrator
 in response to the solicitations required by subsection (c) of this
 section. The application shall contain a plan setting forth the various
 phases of the project and such other information as the Secretary and the
 Administrator may require. Such plan shall provide that the technology
 will be installed and operational as expeditiously as practicable, but in
 no case later than thirty six months after the date on which the project
 is selected for assistance by the Secretary.
 `(d) SELECTION CRITERIA- The Secretary, acting jointly with the
 Administrator, may provide assistance under this part to a project which
 utilizes a clean coal technology, if the Secretary and the Administrator
 determine that the project will provide experience with respect to the
 operation of such technology at commercial scale and only if the project
 satisfies each of the following criteria:
 `(1) The project will utilize technology applicable to existing coal-fired
 plants which is appropriate for retrofit.
 `(2) The extent to which the technology expands the number of clean coal
 technology options available to existing facilities using coal.
 `(3) The technology will significantly reduce air emissions of sulfur
 dioxide or oxides or nitrogen (measured as a percentage removed) associated
 with coal utilization or, if providing less than significant reductions
 (measured as a percentage removed), the technology will achieve reductions
 at a cost per ton of reductions which is substantially less than the cost
 associated with conventional technology or will efficiently reduce sulfur
 dioxides or oxides of nitrogen measured in terms of compliance cost per
 kilowatt hour of electricity generated or per pound of steam produced.
 `(4) The technology will result in a reduction of emissions of sulfur dioxide
 or oxides of nitrogen at a cost which is equal to or less than the cost
 of achieving comparable emissions reductions with conventional technology.
 `(5) The project will utilize as a feedstock coal mined in the United
 States and the location of the facility will be in the United States.
 `(6) The extent to which the technology may reduce the global warming
 effect or help to reduce emissions of nitrogen oxide and carbon dioxide.
In selecting among projects for assistance which have similar reduction
potential, both with respect to the rate of emissions and the transboundary
movement of air pollutants which may be the precursors of acid deposition,
the Secretary acting jointly with the Administrator shall give priority
to those projects which achieve reductions at the least cost per ton of
reductions achieved. The Secretary and the Administrator shall assure that,
consistent with the criteria of this subsection, projects are selected that
represent a broad variety of coal types and reasonable geographic diversity.
 `(e) STATE SELECTION- In determining whether to provide assistance under
 this title to a project located in a State, the Secretary shall consider the
 extent to which the State regulatory authorities have, prior to commencement
 of construction, determined the utility's decision to undertake the project
 is prudent.
 `(f) REVIEW BY THE ADMINISTRATOR- The Secretary shall not select any project
 for assistance under this part unless the Administrator shall first have
 made a determination that the proposed project satisfies each of the
 criteria established by subsection (d) of this section.
 `(g) NOTIFICATION- The Secretary and the Administrator shall select or refuse
 to select a project for assistance under this section within ninety days
 of receiving the completed application. In the case of a refusal to select
 a project for assistance, the Secretary and the Administrator shall notify
 the applicant within such ninety-day period of the reasons for refusal.
 `(h) COST-SHARING- In providing financial assistance under this part
 to a clean coal technology project, the Secretary acting jointly with
 the Administrator shall endeavor to enter into agreements and make other
 arrangements for maximum possible cost-sharing with State and local agencies,
 utility companies, technology vendors, and other persons. Total Federal
 funds for any project shall not exceed 50 per centum of the cost of the
 project (including the entire capital cost and operating costs over a
 2-year period beginning on the date on which operation of the technology
 commences) estimated at the time of the award of such assistance or such
 lesser percentage as may be adequate, based on the Secretary's estimate
 of the financial risks involved. Any funds provided by the Tennessee
 Valley Authority shall not be treated as Federal funds for purposes of
 the preceding sentence.
 `(i) Further Provisions-
 `(1) TITLE- The Secretary may vest fee title or other property interests
 acquired through assistance of any clean coal technology project in any
 entity including the United States.
 `(2) COST-SHARING- Cost-sharing by the owner or operator of the facility
 (or other project sponsor) is required in each of the design, construction,
 and operating phases of the project.
 `(3) EXCESS COSTS- Financial assistance for costs in excess of those
 estimated as of the date of the award of original financial assistance
 may not be provided in excess of the proportion of costs borne by the
 Government in the original agreement and only up to 20 per centum of the
 original financial assistance.
 `(4) OTHER FEDERAL FUNDS- Other appropriated Federal funds may not be
 used for cost-sharing by the owner or operator of the facility (or other
 project sponsor).
 `(5) EXCLUSION- Existing facilities, equipment, and supplies or previously
 expended research and development funds are not cost-sharing for purposes
 of this part except as amortized, depreciated, or expensed in normal
 business practice.
 `(j) RECONSTRUCTION- No project which receives financial assistance under
 this part shall be deemed to be a significant modification or reconstruction
 which would require compliance with a new source performance standard
 promulgated pursuant to section 111 of this Act by the source at which
 the project is carried out.
`SEC. 193. AUTHORIZATIONS.
 `There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out the provisions of
 this part not more than $300,000,000 in each of the fiscal years 1990,
 1991, 1992, and 1993.'.
SEC. 3. REVISION OF NEW SOURCE PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
 Section 111 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following new
 subsection at the end thereof:
 `(k) EMISSIONS FROM CERTAIN ELECTRIC UTILITY SOURCES- The Administrator
 shall revise the standards of performance for emissions of sulfur dioxide
 and oxides of nitrogen from fossil fuel fired electric utility steam
 generating units. Such revised standard shall take effect with respect
 to units which commence construction or modification after December 31,
 1996. Such revised standards of performance shall reflect improvements in
 methods for the reduction of emissions of sulfur dioxide and oxides of
 nitrogen. As used in this subsection, the terms `electric utility steam
 generating unit', and `fossil fuel' have the same meanings as when used
 in 40 CFR part 60, subpart Da, as in effect on January 1, 1983.'.