S 2408 IS
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2408
To establish a system for labeling of plastic resin products, and to promote
recycling of plastics and use of degradable plastics.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
April 3 (legislative day, JANUARY 23), 1990
Mr. GLENN introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Environment and Public Works
A BILL
To establish a system for labeling of plastic resin products, and to promote
recycling of plastics and use of degradable plastics.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) reduction of solid waste through recycling and use of biodegradable
 plastics can have a positive impact on the problem of solid waste
 accumulation in municipal landfills, and can conserve resources and
 save money;
 (2) there are presently no national standards for labeling plastic products
 to distinguish resin type, or whether the product is biodegradable;
 (3) the existence of national standards and requirements for labeling
 resin type and biodegradability will promote recycling and encourage use
 of biodegradable products; and
 (4) the Federal Government should assist in promotion of recycling and
 use of degradable plastic products.
SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act--
 (1) PLASTIC CONTAINER- The term `Plastic Container' means a vessel with
 a capacity of 8 fluid ounces or more, made of plastic designed to hold
 some commodity, including, but not limited to, plastic bottles and plastic
 garbage and leaf bags.
 (2) DEGRADABLE- The term `degradable' means the ability of a material
 to be reduced, by exposure to microorganisms, light or chemicals,
 to environmentally benign subunits within the shortest period of time
 consistent with the material's intended use, but in no event greater than
 a 5-year period.
 (3) PLASTIC- The term `plastic(s)' means a material that contains as an
 essential ingredient one or more organic polymeric substances of large
 molecular weight, and at some stage in the manufacture or processing into
 finished articles can be shaped by flow.
SEC. 3. LABELING.
 (a) IDENTIFICATION OF PLASTIC RESIN- Within the 12-month period following the
 date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency shall issue such regulations as may be necessary to
 require manufacturers of plastic containers, manufactured or offered
 for sale in the United States to take such action as may be necessary to
 assure that such containers are labeled to identify the plastic resin used
 in its manufacturer in accordance with this Act.
 (b) SYMBOL- The label required under subsection (a) shall consist of
 a triangular-shaped symbol comprised of three equal-length arrows, such
 arrows being curved at the apexes of the triangular-shaped symbol with the
 heads of the arrows pointing in a clockwise direction. A specific number
 within the symbol and a series of letters immediately below the base of
 the symbol, will identify the specific type of plastic resin from which
 the container was produced, as follows:
 (1) The number `1' and the letters `PETE' for polyethelene terephthalate.
 (2) The number `2' and the letters `HDPE' for high density polyethlene.
 (3) The number `3' and the letter `V' for vinyl.
 (4) The number `4' and the letters `LDPE' for low density polyethylene.
 (5) The number `5' and the letters `PP' for polypropylene.
 (6) The number `6' and the letters `PS' for polystyrene.
 (7) The number `7' and the word `OTHER' for other resins or multiple resins.
 (8) The number `8' and the word `DEGRADABLE' for degradable resins.
 (c) LABELING UNIFORMITY- No State or political subdivision thereof may
 enforce any requirement of State or local law applicable to the labeling
 of any plastic container required by this Act, including any penalties
 for violations thereof, unless such requirement is equally as stringent as
 the provisions of this Act. No State or political subdivision thereof may
 enforce any ban under State or local law on manufacture, sale, distribution,
 or use of any plastic container if such container displays a label in
 conformance with the requirements of this Act.
SEC. 4. PENALTY.
 (a) CIVIL PENALTY- Any person or entity which violates this Act shall be
 subject to a civil penalty assessed by the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency of not more than $5,000 for each offense.
 (b) CRIMINAL PENALTY- Any person or entity which knowingly violates this
 Act shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined
 under title 18, United States Code, imprisoned for not more than one year,
 or both, for each offense.
SEC. 5. MONITORING.
 The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall, by regulation
 establish and implement a system for monitoring compliance and enforcement
 of the provisions of this Act.
SEC. 6. REPORT.
 Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, and
 annually thereafter, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
 Agency shall prepare and submit, to the Committee on Governmental Affairs
 of the Senate and the Committee on Government Operations of the House of
 Representatives, a progress report that contains the following information:
 (1) information as to the extent of enforcement and compliance with the
 provisions of this Act;
 (2) information as to the problems, if any, incurred in the administration
 of the provisions of this Act;
 (3) statistics on the number and type of violations detected and prosecuted
 by the Federal Government and by the States; and
 (4) a summary of personnel and financial resources required to implement
 this Act.
SEC. 7. AUTHORIZATION.
 There is authorized to be appropriated such sum as may be necessary to
 carry out this Act.