[Congressional Bills 118th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 5057 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

<DOC>

118th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 S. 5057

 To establish minimum Federal standards for sports betting, and for 
 other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 September 16, 2024

Mr. Blumenthal introduced the following bill; which was read twice and 
 referred to the Committee on the Judiciary

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To establish minimum Federal standards for sports betting, and for 
 other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Supporting 
Affordability and Fairness with Every Bet Act''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Definitions.
 TITLE I--MINIMUM FEDERAL STANDARDS FOR SPORTS BETTING

Sec. 101. General prohibition on sports wagering.
Sec. 102. State sports wagering program.
Sec. 103. State sports wagering program standards.
 TITLE II--PUBLIC HEALTH IN SPORTS BETTING

Sec. 201. Annual nationwide survey on sports betting.
Sec. 202. National Self-Exclusion List.
Sec. 203. Surgeon General's Report on Public Health Challenges 
 Associated with Sports Betting.
Sec. 204. Surveillance of gambling addiction.
 TITLE III--GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sec. 301. State and Tribal authority.
Sec. 302. Severability.

SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act:
 (1) Amateur athletic competition.--The term ``amateur 
 athletic competition'' has the meaning given the term in 
 section 220501 of title 36, United States Code.
 (2) Anonymized sports wagering data.--With respect to a 
 sports wager accepted by a sports wagering operator, the term 
 ``anonymized sports wagering data'' means--
 (A) a unique identifier for the transaction and, if 
 available, the individual who placed the sports wager, 
 except that such identifier shall not include any 
 personally identifiable information of such individual;
 (B) the amount and type of sports wager;
 (C) the date and time at which the sports wager was 
 accepted;
 (D) the location at which the sports wager was 
 placed, including the internet protocol address, if 
 applicable; and
 (E) the outcome of the sports wager.
 (3) Gambling disorder.--The term ``gambling disorder'' 
 means--
 (A) gambling disorder, as the term is used by the 
 American Psychiatric Association in the publication 
 entitled ``Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
 Disorders, 5th Edition'' (or a successor edition);
 (B) pathological gambling;
 (C) gambling addiction; and
 (D) compulsive gambling.
 (4) Governmental entity.--The term ``governmental entity'' 
 means--
 (A) a State;
 (B) a political subdivision of a State; and
 (C) an entity or organization, including an Indian 
 Tribe, that has governmental authority within the 
 territorial boundaries of the United States, including 
 Indian lands.
 (5) Indian lands.--The term ``Indian lands'' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 4 of the Indian Gaming 
 Regulatory Act (25 U.S.C. 2703)).
 (6) Indian tribe.--The term ``Indian Tribe'' has the 
 meaning given the term ``Indian tribe'' in section 4 of the 
 Indian Gaming Regulatory Act (25 U.S.C. 2703).
 (7) Interactive sports wagering platform.--The term 
 ``interactive sports wagering platform'' means a person or 
 entity that offers licensed sports wagering over the internet, 
 including through an internet website and mobile devices, on 
 behalf of a licensed gaming facility.
 (8) Interstate sports wagering compact.--The term 
 ``interstate sports wagering compact'' means a compact to offer 
 sports wagering in accordance with this Act between--
 (A) 2 or more States with a State sports wagering 
 program;
 (B) 1 or more States with a State sports wagering 
 program and 1 or more Indian Tribes; or
 (C) 2 or more Indian Tribes.
 (9) Licensed gaming facility.--The term ``licensed gaming 
 facility'' means a person licensed by a State regulatory entity 
 or an Indian Tribe licensed by a State regulatory agency for 
 the conduct of gaming.
 (10) Microbet.--The term ``microbet'' means a wager placed 
 on an outcome or occurrence within a sporting event which may 
 or may not be related to the ultimate result of the sporting 
 event.
 (11) National self-exclusion list.--The term ``national 
 self-exclusion list'' means the list maintained under section 
 553A of the Public Health Service Act, as added by section 202 
 of this Act, in cooperation with State regulatory entities, 
 under sections 103(b)(6)(A)(ii) of this Act.
 (12) Official.--The term ``official'' means a referee, 
 umpire, judge, reviewer, or any other individual authorized to 
 administer the rules of a sporting event.
 (13) Proposition bet.--The term ``proposition bet'' means a 
 side wager on a part of a sporting event that does not concern 
 the final outcome of the sporting event.
 (14) Reasonable lender standard.--The term ``reasonable 
 lender standard'' means application of underwriting criteria 
 that would be applied by a lender that is an insured depository 
 institution (as defined under section 3 of the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813)) for an unsecured loan extended 
 to a consumer.
 (15) Sporting event.--The term ``sporting event'' means any 
 athletic competition.
 (16) Sports organization.--The term ``sports organization'' 
 means--
 (A) a person or governmental entity that--
 (i) sponsors, organizes, schedules, or 
 conducts a sporting event; and
 (ii) with respect to the sporting event and 
 the participants in the sporting event--
 (I) prescribes final rules; and
 (II) enforces a code of conduct; 
 and
 (B) a league or association of 1 or more persons or 
 governmental entities described in subparagraph (A).
 (17) Sports wager.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
 (C), the term ``sports wager'' means the staking or 
 risking by any person of something of value upon the 
 outcome of a sporting event, including the outcome of 
 any portion or aspect thereof, upon an agreement or 
 understanding that the person or another person will 
 receive something of value in the event of a certain 
 outcome.
 (B) Inclusion.--With respect to an amateur or 
 professional sporting event, the term ``sports wager'' 
 includes--
 (i) a straight bet;
 (ii) a teaser;
 (iii) a variation of a teaser;
 (iv) a parlay;
 (v) a total or over-under;
 (vi) a moneyline;
 (vii) a betting pool;
 (viii) exchange wagering;
 (ix) in-game wagering, including in-game 
 wagering on--
 (I) a final or interim game score;
 (II) statistics; or
 (III) a discrete in-game event;
 (x) a sports lottery; and
 (xi) a proposition bet.
 (C) Exceptions.--The term ``sports wager'' does not 
 include--
 (i) any activity excluded from the 
 definition of the term ``bet or wager'' under 
 section 5362 of title 31, United States Code; 
 or
 (ii) any activity that does not violate a 
 provision of the Interstate Horseracing Act of 
 1978 (15 U.S.C. 3001 et seq.).
 (18) Sports wagering.--The term ``sports wagering'' means 
 the acceptance of a sports wager by a sports wagering operator.
 (19) Sports wagering operator.--The term ``sports wagering 
 operator'' means--
 (A) a licensed gaming facility that offers sports 
 wagering; and
 (B) an interactive sports wagering platform.
 (20) Sports wagering opt-in state.--The term ``sports 
 wagering opt-in State'' means a State that administers a State 
 sports wagering program.
 (21) State.--The term ``State'' means--
 (A) a State;
 (B) the District of Columbia; and
 (C) any commonwealth, territory, or possession of 
 the United States.
 (22) State regulatory entity.--The term ``State regulatory 
 entity'' means the governmental entity--
 (A) established or designated by a sports wagering 
 opt-in State under section 102(a)(2)(A)(ii); and
 (B) responsible, solely or in coordination with 1 
 or more other governmental entities, for the regulation 
 of sports wagering in the applicable sports wagering 
 opt-in State.
 (23) State social gambling law.--The term ``State social 
 gambling law'' means a State law that allows sports wagering 
 that--
 (A) is not conducted as a business;
 (B) involves 2 or more players who compete on equal 
 terms; and
 (C) does not provide a benefit to--
 (i) a player, other than the winnings of 
 the player; or
 (ii) a person who is not involved in a 
 sports wager.
 (24) State sports wagering program.--The term ``State 
 sports wagering program'' means a program administered and 
 overseen by a State pursuant to an application approved by the 
 Attorney General under subsection (b) or (e) of section 102.
 (25) Suspicious transaction.--The term ``suspicious 
 transaction'' means a transaction or an arrangement that a 
 sports wagering operator knows or has reason to know, as 
 determined by a director, officer, employee, or agent of the 
 sports wagering operator is or would be if completed--
 (A) a violation of, or part of a plan to violate or 
 evade, any Federal, State, or local law (including 
 regulations); or
 (B) sports wagering by or on behalf of an 
 individual described in subparagraph (C), (D), or (E) 
 of section 103(b)(4).
 (26) Suspicious transaction report.--The term ``suspicious 
 transaction report'' means a report submitted to a State 
 regulatory entity or a sports organization under section 
 103(b)(13).
 (27) Tribal-state compact.--The term ``Tribal-State 
 compact'' means a compact entered into between a State and an 
 Indian Tribe pursuant to section 11(d)(3) of the Indian Gaming 
 Regulatory Act (25 U.S.C. 2710(d)(3)).

 TITLE I--MINIMUM FEDERAL STANDARDS FOR SPORTS BETTING

SEC. 101. GENERAL PROHIBITION ON SPORTS WAGERING.

 (a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), it shall be 
unlawful for any person to knowingly accept a sports wager.
 (b) Exceptions.--It shall not be a violation of subsection (a) 
for--
 (1) a sports wagering operator located in a sports wagering 
 opt-in State to accept a sports wager in accordance with State 
 law; or
 (2) a person to accept a sports wager in accordance with an 
 applicable State social gambling law.
 (c) Injunctions.--
 (1) In general.--If the Attorney General believes a person 
 has violated, is violating, or will violate subsection (a), the 
 Attorney General may bring a civil action in the appropriate 
 district court of the United States or the appropriate United 
 States court of a territory or possession of the United States, 
 which shall have jurisdiction in proceedings in accordance with 
 the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure to enjoin a violation of 
 subsection (a).
 (2) Jury trial.--In the case of an alleged violation of an 
 injunction or restraining order issued under paragraph (1), 
 trial shall be, on demand of the accused, by a jury in 
 accordance with the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
 (d) Civil Penalties.--
 (1) In general.--Any person who violates subsection (a) 
 shall be, with respect to any such violation, subject to a 
 civil penalty of not more than the greater of $10,000 or 3 
 times the amount of the applicable sports wager.
 (2) Separate violations.--A separate violation occurs for 
 each sports wager accepted in violation of subsection (a).
 (3) Jurisdiction.--The district courts of the United States 
 and appropriate United States courts of the territories and 
 possessions of the United States shall have jurisdiction to 
 enforce this subsection in accordance with section 1355 of 
 title 28, United States Code.
 (4) Effect of law.--A violation of subsection (a) shall not 
 constitute a crime, and a judgment for the United States and 
 imposition of a civil penalty pursuant to paragraph (1) shall 
 not give rise to any disability or legal disadvantage based on 
 conviction for a criminal offense.
 (e) Civil Penalty Not Exclusive of Criminal Penalty.--A civil 
penalty, injunction, or temporary restraining order imposed under this 
section shall be independent of, and not in lieu of, criminal 
prosecutions or any other proceedings under any other law of the United 
States, including sections 1084 and 1955 of title 18, United States 
Code.
 (f) Effective Date.--Subsection (a) shall take effect on the date 
that is 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 102. STATE SPORTS WAGERING PROGRAM.

 (a) Initial Application.--
 (1) In general.--To request approval to administer a State 
 sports wagering program, a State shall submit an application to 
 the Attorney General at such time, in such manner, and 
 accompanied by such information as the Attorney General may 
 require.
 (2) Contents.--An application under paragraph (1) shall 
 include--
 (A) a full and complete description of the State 
 sports wagering program the State proposes to 
 administer under State law, including--
 (i) each applicable State law relating to 
 sports wagering; and
 (ii) an identification of the State 
 regulatory entity; and
 (B) an assurance from the attorney general or chief 
 legal officer of the State that the laws of the State 
 provide adequate authority to carry out the proposed 
 State sports wagering program.
 (b) Approval by Attorney General.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date on 
 which the Attorney General receives a complete application 
 under this section, the Attorney General shall approve the 
 application unless the Attorney General determines that the 
 proposed State sports wagering program does not meet the 
 standards set forth in section 103.
 (2) Denial of application.--A decision of the Attorney 
 General to deny an application submitted under this section 
 shall--
 (A) be made in writing; and
 (B) specify the 1 or more standards under section 
 103 that are not satisfied by the proposed State sports 
 wagering program.
 (c) Notice of Material Changes.--In the case of a material change 
to a State law relating to sports wagering, the State regulatory 
entity, or other information included in an application submitted 
pursuant to subsection (a) or (e), not later than 30 days after the 
date on which the change is made, the State shall submit to the 
Attorney General a notice of such change.
 (d) Duration.--A State sports wagering program shall be valid for a 
fixed 3-year period beginning on the date on which the Attorney General 
approves the application of the applicable State under subsection (a) 
or (e).
 (e) Renewal Application and Approval.--Not later than the date on 
which the 3-year period referred to in subsection (d) ends, a State 
seeking to renew the approval of the State sports wagering program may 
submit to the Attorney General a renewal application that--
 (1) includes the information described in subsection (a); 
 and
 (2) shall be subject to the approval process under 
 subsection (b).
 (f) Revocation and Review.--
 (1) Emergency revocation of approval.--The Attorney General 
 shall promulgate regulations that provide procedures by which 
 the Attorney General may revoke the approval of a State to 
 administer a State sports wagering program before the date on 
 which the 3-year term described in subsection (d) expires if 
 the Attorney General finds that the sports wagering program 
 does not meet 1 or more standards set forth in section 103.
 (2) Administrative review.--The Attorney General shall 
 promulgate regulations that provide procedures by which a State 
 may seek administrative review of any decision by the Attorney 
 General--
 (A) to deny an application under subsection (b);
 (B) to deny a renewal application under subsection 
 (e); or
 (C) to revoke an approval under paragraph (1) of 
 this subsection.

SEC. 103. STATE SPORTS WAGERING PROGRAM STANDARDS.

 (a) In General.--The Attorney General shall approve an application 
under section 102 unless the Attorney General determines that the 
proposed State sports wagering program does not meet the standards set 
forth in subsection (b).
 (b) Standards for State Sports Wagering Programs.--A State sports 
wagering program shall meet each of the following standards:
 (1) State regulatory entity.--Establish or designate a 
 public entity in the applicable State as the State regulatory 
 entity for the purposes of regulating sports wagering operators 
 and enforcing sports wagering laws in the State.
 (2) Permissible sports wagering.--
 (A) In-person sports wagering.--Provide that in-
 person sports wagering may be offered only by a sports 
 wagering operator.
 (B) Internet sports wagering.--
 (i) In general.--With respect to any 
 authorization of sports wagering on an 
 interactive sports wagering platform, provide 
 that such sports wagering, as available, is 
 available only to--
 (I) individuals located in the 
 State; or
 (II) in the case of an interstate 
 sports wagering compact approved by the 
 Attorney General, individuals located 
 in States and on Indian lands of Indian 
 Tribes that are party to the compact.
 (ii) Location verification.--Include 
 location verification requirements reasonably 
 designed to prevent an individual from placing 
 a sports wager on an interactive sports 
 wagering platform from a location other than a 
 location described in clause (i).
 (C) Sports wager approval.--
 (i) In general.--Provide that a sports 
 wagering operator shall not accept a sports 
 wager unless such sports wager or class of 
 sports wagers is expressly approved by the 
 State regulatory entity.
 (ii) Approval criteria.--Direct the State 
 regulatory entity to establish criteria for 
 decisions with respect to the approval of a 
 sports wager or a class of sports wagers, such 
 as whether the outcome of the event or 
 contingency on which the sports wager is placed 
 is--
 (I) verifiable;
 (II) generated by a reliable and 
 independent process; and
 (III) unlikely to be affected by 
 any sports wager placed.
 (D) Prohibition on amateur or intercollegiate 
 proposition bets.--Prohibit the State regulatory entity 
 from approving, or a sports wagering operator from 
 accepting, a proposition bet on--
 (i) any amateur athletic competition; or
 (ii) any intercollegiate sport (as defined 
 in the Sports Agent Responsibility and Trust 
 Act (15 U.S.C. 7801)).
 (E) Prohibition of sports wagering on sporting 
 events that have commenced.--Prohibit the State 
 regulatory entity from approving, or a sports wagering 
 operator from accepting, a sports wager on any sporting 
 event, once such event has commenced.
 (3) Restrictions on sports wagering to protect contest 
 integrity.--
 (A) Definition of necessary to maintain contest 
 integrity.--In this paragraph, the term ``necessary to 
 maintain contest integrity'' means that, in the absence 
 of a restriction, there is a reasonably foreseeable 
 risk that the outcome of the sporting event or 
 contingency on which the wager is placed would be 
 affected by the wager.
 (B) Contest integrity.--Prohibit a sports wagering 
 operator from accepting a sports wager in violation of 
 a notice of restriction received by the sports wagering 
 operator under subparagraph (E)(i).
 (C) Request to restrict sports wagering.--
 (i) In general.--With respect to a sporting 
 events sponsored, organized, or conducted by a 
 sports organization, permit the sports 
 organization to submit to the State regulatory 
 entity a request to restrict, limit, or exclude 
 wagers on 1 or more sporting events, including 
 by restricting, limiting, and excluding sports 
 wagers on 1 or more performances of an athlete 
 in 1 or more sporting events in which such 
 athlete participates, if the applicable sports 
 organization determines that such restriction 
 is necessary to maintain contest integrity.
 (ii) Deadlines for submission.--Provide 
 that the State regulatory entity shall 
 establish reasonable deadlines for the 
 submission of a request under clause (i) in 
 advance of the applicable sporting event.
 (D) Determination by the state regulatory entity.--
 Provide that the State regulatory entity shall 
 promptly--
 (i) approve a request described in 
 subparagraph (C)(i) unless the State regulatory 
 entity determines, considering any information 
 provided by the sports organization and any 
 other relevant information, that a restriction 
 is not necessary to maintain contest integrity;
 (ii) provide a written explanation of a 
 determination under clause (i) to approve or 
 deny a request;
 (iii) make such written explanation 
 available to the public; and
 (iv) provide a process by which the sports 
 organization that submitted the request may 
 seek review of such determination.
 (E) Notice of restriction.--Provide that the State 
 regulatory entity shall establish a process--
 (i) to provide to sports wagering operators 
 prompt notice of any restriction approved by 
 the State regulatory entity; and
 (ii) to make such notice publicly 
 available.
 (4) Prevention of sports wagering by prohibited 
 individuals.--Prohibit a sports wagering operator from 
 accepting sports wagers from any--
 (A) individual younger than 21 years of age;
 (B) individual on the national self-exclusion list;
 (C) athlete, coach, official, or employee of a 
 sports organization or any club or team of a sports 
 organization, with respect to a sporting event 
 sponsored, organized, or conducted by the sports 
 organization;
 (D) employee of a player or an official union of a 
 sports organization, with respect to a sporting event 
 sponsored, organized, or conducted by the sports 
 organization;
 (E) individual who, with respect to a sporting 
 event sponsored, organized, or conducted by a sports 
 organization, is--
 (i) credentialed or accredited by the 
 sports organization; and
 (ii) prohibited from placing a sports wager 
 by the terms of such credential or 
 accreditation; or
 (F) individual convicted of an offense under 
 subsection (a) or (b) of section 224 of title 18, 
 United States Code.
 (5) Authorized data.--
 (A) Result of a sports wager.--
 (i) Market transition period.--With respect 
 to any sports wager accepted on or before 
 December 31, 2024, provide that a sports 
 wagering operator shall determine the result of 
 a sports wager only with data that is licensed 
 and provided by--
 (I) the applicable sports 
 organization; or
 (II) an entity expressly authorized 
 by the applicable sports organization 
 to provide such information.
 (ii) Post-transition period.--With respect 
 to any sports wager accepted after December 31, 
 2024, provide that a sports wagering operator 
 shall determine the result of a sports wager 
 only with data that is obtained from a source 
 that the State regulatory entity has--
 (I) found to provide--
 (aa) data of substantially 
 similar speed, accuracy, and 
 consistency to the data 
 available under clause (i); and
 (bb) only data that is--

 (AA) legally 
 obtained; and

 (BB) in full 
 compliance with the 
 terms of any applicable 
 contract or license;

 (II) expressly authorized to 
 provide such data to sports wagering 
 operators; and
 (III) identified in the application 
 of the State regulatory entity under 
 section 102.
 (B) Other purposes.--Provide that the statistics, 
 result, outcome, or other data used by a sports 
 wagering operator for a purpose other than to determine 
 the result of a sports wager shall be in the public 
 domain or otherwise legally obtained.
 (6) Consumer protections.--
 (A) Self-exclusion.--
 (i) State self-exclusion list.--Provide a 
 process by which an individual may restrict 
 himself or herself from placing a sports wager 
 with a sports wagering operator located in the 
 State, including by imposing sports wager 
 limits.
 (ii) National self-exclusion list.--
 Provide, through the State regulatory entity 
 acting in cooperation with the Assistant 
 Secretary for Mental Health and Substance Use, 
 a process by which an individual may restrict 
 himself or herself from placing a sports wager 
 with a sports wagering operator located in any 
 sports wagering opt-in State, including by 
 imposing sports wager limits, and placing 
 himself or herself on the national self-
 exclusion list.
 (iii) Reasonable steps required.--Provide 
 that a sports wagering operator may not accept 
 a sports wager by an individual who is--
 (I) described in clause (i); or
 (II) included on the national self-
 exclusion list.
 (B) Withdrawal restrictions.--Prohibit a sports 
 wagering operator from--
 (i) requiring an individual engaged in 
 sports wagering to participate in a publicity 
 or an advertising activity of the sports 
 wagering operator as a condition of withdrawal 
 of the winnings of the individual; and
 (ii) imposing on any individual engaged in 
 sports wagering--
 (I) a minimum or maximum withdrawal 
 limit for the account of the 
 individual;
 (II) any restriction on the right 
 of the individual to make a withdrawal 
 from the account of the individual 
 based on the extent of the sports 
 wagering by the individual;
 (III) an unreasonable deadline for 
 the provision of information relating 
 to the identity of the individual as a 
 condition of withdrawal from the 
 account of the individual; or
 (IV) a dormancy charge for an 
 account of the individual that is not 
 used to place a sports wager.
 (C) Disclosure.--
 (i) Restrictions or conditions.--Provide 
 that a sports wagering operator shall provide 
 an individual with adequate and clear 
 information relating to any applicable 
 restriction or condition before the individual 
 opens an account with the sports wagering 
 operator.
 (ii) Bonuses offered.--Provide that a 
 sports wagering operator shall provide to an 
 individual engaged in sports wagering clear 
 information relating to any bonus offered, 
 including the terms of withdrawal of the bonus.
 (iii) Public availability.--Provide that 
 the information described in clauses (i) and 
 (ii) be available to the public.
 (D) Treatment and education funding.--Provide that 
 a sports wagering operator shall allocate an 
 appropriate percentage of the revenue from sports 
 wagering to--
 (i) treatment for gambling disorder; and
 (ii) education on responsible gaming.
 (E) Reserve requirement.--Provide that a sports 
 wagering operator shall maintain a reserve in an amount 
 not less than the sum of--
 (i) the amounts held by the sports wagering 
 operator for the account of patrons;
 (ii) the amounts accepted by the sports 
 wagering operator as sports wagers on 
 contingencies the outcomes of which have not 
 been determined; and
 (iii) the amounts owed but unpaid by the 
 sports wagering operator on winning wagers 
 during the period for honoring winning wagers 
 established by State law or the sports wagering 
 operator.
 (F) Affordability protections.--Provide that a 
 sports wagering operator--
 (i) may not accept more than 5 deposits 
 from an individual during a 24-hour period;
 (ii) may not accept deposits made using a 
 credit card; and
 (iii) shall be required, before accepting 
 sport wagers from an individual in an amount 
 that is more than $1,000 during a 24-hour 
 period or $10,000 during a 30-day period, to 
 conduct an affordability check which shall be 
 satisfied by 1 or both of the following ways:
 (I) Verification that the proposed 
 deposit is not greater than 30 percent 
 of the monthly income of the 
 individual.
 (II) Verification through a 
 reasonable lender standard based on 
 issuance of an unsecured loan for the 
 proposed deposit through methods 
 normally used by consumer lenders.
 (G) Artificial intelligence restriction.--Provide 
 that a sports wagering operator may not use artificial 
 intelligence to--
 (i) track the sports wagers of an 
 individual;
 (ii) create an offer or promotion targeting 
 a specific individual; or
 (iii) create a gambling product, such as a 
 microbet.
 (7) Advertising.--Provide that advertisements for a sports 
 wagering operator--
 (A) shall--
 (i) disclose the identity of the sports 
 wagering operator; and
 (ii) provide information about how to 
 access resources relating to gambling 
 addiction;
 (B) shall not recklessly or purposefully target--
 (i) problem gamblers;
 (ii) individuals suffering from gambling 
 disorder; or
 (iii) individuals who are ineligible to 
 place a sports wager, including individuals 
 younger than 21 years of age;
 (C) may not be broadcasted--
 (i) between the hours of 8:00am and 10:00pm 
 local time; or
 (ii) during a live broadcast of a sporting 
 event; and
 (D) may not include--
 (i) odds boosts or similar offers, 
 including advertising that contains the phrase 
 ``bonus'', ``no sweat'', ``bonus bet'', or any 
 other similar term; or
 (ii) any information on how to place a 
 sports wager or how sports wagers work.
 (8) Licensing requirement.--
 (A) In general.--Provide that a sports wagering 
 operator located in the State shall be licensed by the 
 State regulatory entity.
 (B) Suitability for licensing.--
 (i) In general.--Provide that before 
 granting a license to a prospective sports 
 wagering operator, the State regulatory entity 
 shall make a determination, based on a 
 completed background check and investigation, 
 with respect to whether the prospective sports 
 wagering operator and any person considered to 
 be in control of the prospective sports 
 wagering operator is suitable for license in 
 accordance with suitability standards 
 established by the State regulatory entity.
 (ii) Associates of applicants.--Provide 
 that if a prospective sports wagering operator 
 is a corporation, partnership, or other 
 business entity, a background check and 
 investigation shall occur with respect to--
 (I) the president or other chief 
 executive of the corporation, 
 partnership, or other business entity; 
 and
 (II) any other partner or senior 
 executive and director of the 
 corporation, partnership, or other 
 business entity, as determined by the 
 State regulatory entity.
 (iii) Background check and investigation.--
 Establish standards and procedures for 
 conducting the background checks and 
 investigations described in this subparagraph.
 (C) Unsuitability for licensing.--With respect to 
 the suitability standards under subparagraph (B)(i), 
 provide that a prospective sports wagering operator 
 shall not be determined to be suitable for licensing as 
 a sports wagering operator if the prospective sports 
 wagering operator--
 (i) has failed to provide information and 
 documentary material for a determination of 
 suitability for licensing as a sports wagering 
 operator;
 (ii) has supplied information which is 
 untrue or misleading as to a material fact 
 pertaining to any such determination;
 (iii) has been convicted of an offense 
 punishable by imprisonment of more than 1 year;
 (iv) is delinquent in--
 (I) filing any applicable Federal 
 or State tax returns; or
 (II) the payment of any taxes, 
 penalties, additions to tax, or 
 interest owed to the United States or a 
 State;
 (v) on or after October 13, 2006--
 (I) has knowingly participated in, 
 or should have known the prospective 
 sports wagering operator was 
 participating in, an illegal internet 
 gambling activity, including--
 (aa) taking an illegal 
 internet wager;
 (bb) payment of winnings on 
 an illegal internet wager;
 (cc) promotion through 
 advertising of an illegal 
 internet gambling website or 
 service; or
 (dd) collection of any 
 payment on behalf of an entity 
 operating an illegal internet 
 gambling website; or
 (II) has knowingly been owned, 
 operated, managed, or employed by, or 
 should have known the prospective 
 sports wagering operator was owned, 
 operated, managed, or employed by, any 
 person who was knowingly participating 
 in, or should have known the person was 
 participating in, an illegal internet 
 gambling activity, including an 
 activity described in items (aa) 
 through (dd) of subclause (I);
 (vi) has--
 (I) received any assistance, 
 financial or otherwise, from a person 
 who has, before the date of enactment 
 of this Act, knowingly accepted bets or 
 wagers from any other person who is 
 physically present in the United States 
 in violation of Federal or State law; 
 or
 (II) provided any assistance, 
 financial or otherwise, to a person who 
 has, before the date of enactment of 
 this Act, knowingly accepted bets or 
 wagers from any other person who is 
 physically present in the United States 
 in violation of Federal or State law;
 (vii) with respect to any other entity that 
 has accepted a bet or wager from any individual 
 in violation of United States law, has 
 purchased or otherwise obtained--
 (I) such entity;
 (II) a list of the customers of 
 such entity; or
 (III) any other part of the 
 equipment or operations of such entity; 
 or
 (viii) fails to certify in writing, under 
 penalty of perjury, that the applicant or other 
 such person, and all affiliated business 
 entities (including all entities under common 
 control), during the entire history of such 
 applicant or other such person and all 
 affiliated business entities--
 (I) have not committed an 
 intentional felony violation of Federal 
 or State sports wagering law; and
 (II) have used diligence to prevent 
 any United States person from placing a 
 sports wager on an internet site in 
 violation of Federal or State sports 
 wagering laws.
 (D) Revocation and suspension.--Establish standards 
 and procedures for suspending or revoking the license 
 of a sports wagering operator.
 (9) Employee background checks.--Provide that a sports 
 wagering operator--
 (A) shall ensure that each existing and newly hired 
 employee or contractor of the sports wagering operator 
 undergo an annual criminal history background check; 
 and
 (B) shall not employ or enter into a contract with 
 any individual who has been convicted of a Federal or 
 State crime relating to sports wagering.
 (10) Recordkeeping requirements.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B), with respect to each sports wager accepted by a 
 sports wagering operator or attempted to be placed by 
 an individual with a sports wagering operator, provide 
 that the sports wagering operator shall secure and 
 maintain a record of the following:
 (i) The name, permanent address, date of 
 birth, and social security number or passport 
 number of the individual who placed, or 
 attempted to place, the sports wager, which the 
 sports wagering operator shall verify in 
 accordance with the requirements for 
 verification of identity in parts 1010.312 and 
 1021.312 of title 31, Code of Federal 
 Regulations (or any successor regulation).
 (ii) The amount and type of the sports 
 wager.
 (iii) The date and time at which the sports 
 wager was placed or attempted to be placed.
 (iv) The location at which the sports wager 
 was placed or attempted to be placed, including 
 the internet protocol address, if applicable.
 (v) The outcome of the sports wager.
 (B) Exception.--Provide that a sports wagering 
 operator shall not be required to maintain a record of 
 the information described in subparagraph (A) if--
 (i) the sports wager is not placed by an 
 individual through an account with the sports 
 wagering operator;
 (ii) the amount of the sports wager does 
 not exceed $10,000;
 (iii) the sports wagering operator and any 
 officer, employee, or agent of the sports 
 wagering operator does not have knowledge, or 
 would not in the ordinary course of business 
 have reason to have knowledge, that the sports 
 wager is 1 of multiple sports wagers placed by 
 an individual or on behalf of an individual 
 during 1 day that are, in the aggregate, in 
 excess of $10,000; and
 (iv) the sports wagering operator is not 
 required, pursuant to section 31.3402(q)-1 of 
 title 26, Code of Federal Regulations (or a 
 successor regulation), to furnish a Form W-2G 
 to the individual who placed the sports wager 
 with respect to winnings from the sports wager.
 (C) Records relating to suspicious transactions.--
 Provide that, in addition to the records required to be 
 maintained pursuant paragraph (A), a sports wagering 
 operator shall be required to maintain any other 
 records relating to a suspicious transaction, including 
 video recordings, in the possession, custody, or 
 control of the sports wagering operator.
 (D) Duration of recordkeeping obligation.--Provide 
 that a sports wagering operator shall be required to 
 maintain each record required under this paragraph for 
 not fewer than 5 years after the date on which the 
 record is created.
 (11) Data security.--Provide that a sports wagering 
 operator and the State regulatory entity shall take reasonable 
 steps to prevent unauthorized access to, or dissemination of, 
 sports wagering and customer data.
 (12) Real-time information sharing.--Provide that a sports 
 wagering operator shall provide to the State regulatory entity 
 anonymized sports wagering data in real-time or as soon as 
 practicable, but not later than 24 hours, after the time at 
 which a sports wager is accepted by the sports wagering 
 operator.
 (13) Suspicious transaction reporting.--
 (A) Reporting to state regulatory entity.--Provide 
 that each sports wagering operator located in the State 
 shall promptly report the information described in 
 paragraph (10)(A) for any suspicious transaction to the 
 State regulatory entity, in such manner and accompanied 
 by such additional information as the State regulatory 
 entity may require.
 (B) Reporting to sports organizations.--
 (i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), 
 provide that a sports wagering operator shall 
 simultaneously transmit to the applicable 
 sports organization, and any component of the 
 Department of Justice or other Federal law 
 enforcement entity designated by the Attorney 
 General to receive such reports, any suspicious 
 transaction report submitted to a State 
 regulatory entity under subparagraph (A).
 (ii) Personally identifiable information.--
 (I) In general.--Except as provided 
 in subclause (II), a suspicious 
 transaction report submitted to a 
 sports organization shall not contain 
 any personally identifiable information 
 relating to any individual who placed, 
 or attempted to place, a sports wager.
 (II) Exception.--A suspicious 
 transaction report submitted to a 
 sports organization shall include any 
 available personally identifiable 
 information relating to an individual 
 described in subparagraph (C), (D), or 
 (E) of paragraph (4).
 (14) Monitoring and enforcement.--
 (A) In general.--Provide that the State regulatory 
 entity, in consultation with law enforcement, shall 
 develop and implement a strategy to enforce the sports 
 wagering laws of the State.
 (B) Authority to monitor and enforcement.--Provide 
 adequate authority to the State regulatory entity and 
 law enforcement, as appropriate, to monitor compliance 
 with and enforce the sports wagering laws of the State, 
 including--
 (i) the authority and responsibility to 
 conduct periodic audits and inspect the books 
 and records of each sports wagering operator 
 located or operating in the State; and
 (ii) a requirement that the State 
 regulatory entity shall refer evidence of 
 potential criminal violations to the 
 appropriate law enforcement entity.
 (15) Cooperation with investigations.--
 (A) Sports wagering operators.--Provide that any 
 sports wagering operator located or operating in the 
 State shall cooperate with any lawful investigation 
 conducted by--
 (i) the State regulatory entity;
 (ii) Federal or State law enforcement; or
 (iii) a sports organization, with respect 
 to a sports wager--
 (I) on a sporting event sponsored, 
 organized, or conducted by the sports 
 organization;
 (II) placed by or on behalf of an 
 individual described in subparagraph 
 (C), (D), or (E) of paragraph (4); and
 (III) accepted by the sports 
 wagering operator.
 (B) State regulatory entity.--Provide that the 
 State regulatory entity shall cooperate with any lawful 
 investigation conducted by--
 (i) Federal or State law enforcement; or
 (ii) a sports organization, with respect to 
 a sports wager--
 (I) on a sporting event sponsored, 
 organized, or conducted by the sports 
 organization; and
 (II) accepted by a sports wagering 
 operator located or operating in the 
 State.
 (16) Internal controls.--
 (A) In general.--Provide that each sports wagering 
 operator shall devise and maintain a system of internal 
 controls sufficient to provide reasonable assurances 
 that sports wagers are accepted in accordance with all 
 applicable laws, regulations, and policies.
 (B) Minimum standards.--Provide that the State 
 regulatory entity shall adopt and publish minimum 
 standards for internal control procedures.
 (C) Report.--Provide that each sports wagering 
 operator shall submit to the State regulatory entity 
 not less frequently than annually the written system of 
 internal controls of the sports wagering operator.
 (D) Audit.--Provide that system of internal 
 controls of a sports wagering operator shall be 
 evaluated on a periodic basis, but not less frequently 
 than every 3 years, by the State regulatory entity or 
 an independent third-party auditor.

 TITLE II--PUBLIC HEALTH IN SPORTS BETTING

SEC. 201. ANNUAL NATIONWIDE SURVEY ON ONLINE SPORTS BETTING.

 Part D of title V of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 290dd 
et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 553. ANNUAL NATIONWIDE SURVEY ON ONLINE SPORTS BETTING.

 ``(a) In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of this section, and annually thereafter, the Secretary 
shall--
 ``(1) conduct a nationwide survey designed to provide 
 quantitative data regarding the scope of problem gambling and 
 gambling-related harm experienced by individuals using online 
 sports betting; and
 ``(2) make available to the public summaries and analyses 
 of the data collected pursuant to surveys under paragraph (1).
 ``(b) Issues To Be Surveyed.--Each survey under subsection (a) 
shall include--
 ``(1) a survey of the rates and outcomes of online sports 
 betting; and
 ``(2) examination of the rates of potential problem 
 gambling and gambling-related harm by administering the Problem 
 Gambling Severity Index (Ferris and Wynne, 2001) to a select 
 sample of individuals engaged in online sports betting over the 
 12-month period covered by the survey.
 ``(c) Requirements.--The Secretary shall ensure that each survey 
under subsection (a) is--
 ``(1) conducted by qualified researchers; and
 ``(2) not conducted, funded, or instructed by the gambling 
 industry.''.

SEC. 202. NATIONAL SELF-EXCLUSION LIST.

 Part D of title V of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 290dd 
et seq.), as amended by section 201, is further amended by adding at 
the end the following:

``SEC. 553A. NATIONAL SELF-EXCLUSION LIST.

 ``(a) In General.--In cooperation with State regulatory entities, 
the Secretary shall maintain and administer--
 ``(1) a list (to be known as the `national self-exclusion 
 list') of individuals who, by placing themselves on the list, 
 restrict themselves from placing a sports wager with a sports 
 wagering operator located in any sports wagering opt-in State, 
 including by imposing sports wager limits; and
 ``(2) a process by which an individual may add or remove 
 himself or herself from the national self-exclusion list.
 ``(b) Definitions.--In this section, the terms `sports wager', 
`sports wagering operator' and `sports wagering opt-in State' have the 
meanings given to such terms in section 2 of the Supporting 
Affordability and Fairness with Every Bet Act.''.

SEC. 203. SURGEON GENERAL'S REPORT ON PUBLIC HEALTH CHALLENGES 
 ASSOCIATED WITH SPORTS BETTING.

 Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
Surgeon General shall submit a report to Congress on the public health 
challenges associated with widespread sports betting.

SEC. 204. SURVEILLANCE OF GAMBLING DISORDER.

 Title III of the Public Health Service Act is amended by inserting 
after section 317V (42 U.S.C. 247b-24) the following:

``SEC. 317W. SURVEILLANCE OF GAMBLING ADDICTION.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and in coordination with 
other appropriate agencies, shall, as appropriate--
 ``(1) enhance and expand infrastructure and activities to 
 track the epidemiology of gambling addiction; and
 ``(2) incorporate information obtained through such 
 infrastructure and activities into an integrated surveillance 
 system, which may consist of or include a registry, to be known 
 as the `National Gambling Addiction Surveillance System'.
 ``(b) Research.--The Secretary shall ensure that the National 
Gambling Addiction Surveillance System, if established, is designed in 
a manner that facilitates further research on gambling addiction.
 ``(c) Public Access.--Subject to subsection (d), the Secretary 
shall ensure that information and analysis in the National Gambling 
Addiction Surveillance System, if established, are available, as 
appropriate, to the public, including researchers.
 ``(d) Privacy.--The Secretary shall ensure that information and 
analysis in the National Gambling Addiction Surveillance System, if 
established, are made available only to the extent permitted by 
applicable Federal and State law, and in a manner that protects 
personal privacy, to the extent required by applicable Federal and 
State privacy law, at a minimum.''.

 TITLE III--GENERAL PROVISIONS

SEC. 301. STATE AND TRIBAL AUTHORITY.

 (a) Relation to Indian Gaming Regulatory Act.--
 (1) In general.--For purposes of the Indian Gaming 
 Regulatory Act (25 U.S.C. 2701 et seq.), a sports wager made 
 through an interactive sports wagering platform shall be deemed 
 to be made at the physical location of the server or other 
 equipment used to accept the sports wager.
 (2) Server on indian lands.--With respect to a sports wager 
 described in paragraph (1) accepted through a server or other 
 equipment located on Indian lands, the sports wager shall be 
 considered to be exclusively occurring on Indian lands if--
 (A) the sports wager and the server are in the same 
 State; and
 (B) the applicable State and Indian Tribe have 
 entered into a Tribal-State compact authorizing the 
 placing of sports wagers through interactive sports 
 wagering platforms.
 (b) No Preemption.--Nothing in this Act preempts or limits the 
authority of a State or an Indian Tribe to enact, adopt, promulgate, or 
enforce any law, rule, regulation, or other measure with respect to 
sports wagering that is in addition to, or more stringent than, the 
requirements of this Act.
 (c) Taxation of Sports Wagering.--Nothing in this Act limits or 
otherwise affects the taxation of sports wagering by a State, an Indian 
Tribe, or a locality.

SEC. 302. SEVERABILITY.

 If a provision of this Act, an amendment made by this Act, a 
regulation promulgated under this Act or under an amendment made by 
this Act, or the application of any such provision, amendment, or 
regulation to any person or circumstance, is held to be invalid, the 
remaining provisions of this Act, amendments made by this Act, 
regulations promulgated under this Act or under an amendment made by 
this Act, or the application of such provisions, amendments, and 
regulations to any person or circumstance--
 (1) shall not be affected by the invalidity; and
 (2) shall continue to be enforced to the maximum extent 
 practicable.
 <all>