[Congressional Bills 115th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 3671 Introduced in House (IH)]

<DOC>

115th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 3671

 To justly transition away from fossil fuel sources of energy to 100 
 percent clean energy by 2035, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 September 1, 2017

 Ms. Gabbard (for herself, Mr. Raskin, Ms. Lee, Ms. Barragan, and Mr. 
 Ted Lieu of California) introduced the following bill; which was 
 referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce, and in addition to 
 the Committees on Ways and Means, Transportation and Infrastructure, 
Education and the Workforce, Science, Space, and Technology, Financial 
 Services, and Foreign Affairs, for a period to be subsequently 
 determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such 
 provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To justly transition away from fossil fuel sources of energy to 100 
 percent clean energy by 2035, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Off Fossil Fuels 
for a Better Future Act''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Definitions.
 TITLE I--ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE, 100 PERCENT RENEWABLE ENERGY AND OUR 
 CLEAN ENERGY FUTURE

Sec. 101. Findings.
Sec. 102. Sense of Congress.
 TITLE II--CLEAN ENERGY FOR ALL MANDATE

Sec. 201. Clean Energy Mandates.
Sec. 202. Zero-emission vehicle mandate.
Sec. 203. Electrified trains.
 TITLE III--OFF FOSSIL FUELS

Sec. 301. Moratorium on new major fossil fuel projects.
Sec. 302. Ending fossil fuel subsidies.
Sec. 303. Low-income weatherization and retrofit assistance.
 TITLE IV--ONSHORE WIND, OFFSHORE WIND AND SOLAR ENERGY TAX CREDIT 
 EXTENSION

Sec. 401. Extension of credits for wind facilities.
Sec. 402. Extension of election to treat qualified facilities as energy 
 property.
Sec. 403. Extension and omission of phaseout of solar energy credit.
 TITLE V--BAN ON CRUDE OIL AND LNG EXPORTS

Sec. 501. Ban on crude oil and LNG exports.
 TITLE VI--JUST TRANSITION AND WORKER PROTECTION

Sec. 601. The Center for Clean Energy Workforce Development.
Sec. 602. Equitable transition fund.
 TITLE VII--FUNDING

Sec. 701. Creation of ``Off Fossil Fuels Fund''.
Sec. 702. Recapture of revenue from ``fossil fuel credit'' repeal.

SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act:
 (1) Clean energy.--The term ``clean energy'' means energy 
 efficiency, energy conservation, demand response, energy 
 storage, and energy derived from solar, onshore wind, offshore 
 wind, geothermal, and ocean tidal sources.
 (2) Fossil fuel.--The term ``fossil fuel'' means coal, 
 petroleum, natural gas, or any derivative of coal, petroleum, 
 or natural gas that is used for fuel.
 (3) Retail electric supplier.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``retail electric 
 supplier'' means an entity that sold not less than 
 1,000 megawatt hours of electric energy to electric 
 consumers for purposes other than resale during the 
 preceding calendar year.
 (B) Inclusion.--The term ``retail electric 
 supplier'' includes an entity that generates not less 
 than 1,000 megawatt hours of electric energy for use by 
 the entity.
 (4) Disadvantaged community.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``disadvantaged 
 community'' means a community that is disadvantaged 
 based on geographic, public health, environmental 
 hazard, or socioeconomic criteria.
 (B) Inclusions.--The term ``disadvantaged 
 community'' includes--
 (i) an area burdened by cumulative 
 environmental pollution or other hazard that 
 can lead to a negative public health effect;
 (ii) an area with a concentration of people 
 that--
 (I) are low-income;
 (II) have high unemployment;
 (III) have a high rent burden;
 (IV) have a low level of home 
 ownership;
 (V) have a low level of educational 
 attainment;
 (VI) are members of groups that 
 have historically experienced 
 discrimination on the basis of race or 
 ethnicity;
 (VII) lack access to safe, reliable 
 transit;
 (VIII) lack access to quality, 
 affordable healthcare;
 (IX) live in a high Medicaid 
 population; and
 (X) do not live in reasonable 
 proximity to healthy food outlets; and
 (iii) an area that is vulnerable to the 
 impact of climate change such as flooding, 
 storm surges, and urban heat island effects.
 (5) Low-income community.--The term ``low-income 
 community'' means a census or tribal block group in which not 
 less than 50 percent of households have an annual income that 
 is less than 80 percent of the greater of--
 (A) as determined by the Secretary of Housing and 
 Urban Development, the annual median gross income for 
 the area in which the census or tribal block group is 
 located; and
 (B) as determined by the Secretary of Housing and 
 Urban Development, the annual median gross income for 
 the State in which the census or tribal block group is 
 located.
 (6) State.--The term ``State'' means--
 (A) a State;
 (B) the District of Columbia;
 (C) the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico;
 (D) any other territory or possession of the United 
 States; and
 (E) a Native Hawaiian community-based organization.
 (7) Native hawaiian community-based organization.--The term 
 ``Native Hawaiian community-based organization'' means any 
 organization that is composed primarily of Native Hawaiians 
 from a specific community and assist with housing and 
 healthcare, as well as social, cultural, economic and 
 educational development of Native Hawaiians in that community.

 TITLE I--ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE, 100 PERCENT RENEWABLE ENERGY AND OUR 
 CLEAN ENERGY FUTURE

SEC. 101. FINDINGS.

 Congress finds the following:
 (1) According to the National Aeronautics and Space 
 Administration (NASA), 97 percent or more of actively 
 publishing climate scientists agree that climate-warming trends 
 over the past century are extremely likely due to human 
 activities. Additionally, most of the leading scientific 
 organizations worldwide have issued public statements endorsing 
 this position.
 (2) People of color comprise almost half of the 11,400,000 
 people nationwide who live near dangerous, polluting 
 facilities, and are twice as likely to live in those areas as 
 White Americans. African-Americans are 79 percent more likely 
 than White Americans to live in communities where industrial 
 pollution poses the greatest health danger. The fact that 
 people of color breathe 46 percent more nitrogen dioxide than 
 White Americans, a pollutant that causes respiratory diseases 
 and heart conditions, is one of the reasons why children of 
 color go to the emergency room for asthma attacks at nearly 
 triple the rate than White children do.
 (3) Similarly, in the poor, mostly Latino community of 
 Corpus Christi, Texas, the overall rate of birth defects is 84 
 percent higher than the rest of the State. The city ranks 
 number one in the State for benzene pollution generated by 
 refineries and petrochemical plants--a serious concern, as 
 benzene is a powerful cancer-causing agent. The odds are now an 
 incredible 3 to 1 that a Latino immigrant will reside in an 
 area with dangerously high levels of toxic pollution. It should 
 come as no surprise, then, that Latino families have placed as 
 much importance on clean air and clean water in their 
 communities as they have on immigration issues.
 (4) Tribal lands are only 4 percent of the United States 
 land base, yet of the 1,322 Superfund hazardous waste sites, 25 
 percent are in Indian country. The vast majority--75 percent--
 of abandoned uranium mines are on Indian lands, with little 
 effort made to remediate the harms they cause.
 (5) A full 20 percent of people living in First Nations 
 communities located next to tar sands extraction sites were 
 diagnosed with cancer--Keystone XL and the Enbridge Alberta 
 Clipper expansion were one of many pipelines attempting to 
 bring this tar sands, toxic and corrosive crude oil into the 
 United States, directly through tribal treaty lands.
 (6) Federal leasing of public lands for fossil fuels 
 extraction significantly impacts numerous American Indian 
 Tribes, Alaska Native Tribes, Native Hawaiian communities and 
 indigenous communities that share more than 3,000 miles of 
 contiguous border with National Forest lands. The resource 
 exploitation of fossil fuel energy extraction has run a long 
 and deadly course in tribal lands.
 (7) Fracking operations adversely impact public health 
 through threats to water and air quality from multiple sources 
 including leaks from pipes and related transportation of fossil 
 fuel that results in disproportionate increases in 
 hospitalization due to premature births, asthma and 
 cardiovascular disease near fracking sites. People of color 
 living in proximity of truck traffic, fracking wells, and 
 experience increased exposure to ultra fine particulate matter 
 from exhaust and emissions near well pads.
 (8) President Obama joined other world leaders from the 
 Group of Twenty in 2009, and again in 2013, in pledging to 
 phase out wasteful fossil-fuel subsidies.
 (9) The Environmental Law Institute found that from 2002 
 through 2008, Federal fossil-fuel subsidies in the United 
 States totaled over $72,000,000,000, while Federal renewable-
 energy investments totaled $12,200,000,000.
 (10) According to the group Taxpayers for Common Sense, the 
 5 largest oil corporations have made more than 
 $1,000,000,000,000 in profits during the past decade.
 (11) According to the Center for American Progress, the 5 
 largest oil corporations posted more than $89,700,000,000 in 
 profits in 2014 alone.
 (12) According to the Center for Responsive Politics, the 
 oil and gas, coal, utility, and other natural resource 
 extraction industries spent more than $1,800,000,000 on 
 lobbying during the period of 2010 to 2014, which was an 
 effective investment in protecting their extraordinary tax 
 loopholes and subsidies.

SEC. 102. SENSE OF CONGRESS.

 It is the sense of Congress that:
 (1) The United States must transition to a 100 percent 
 clean energy economy.
 (2) It is not in the national interest for taxpayers in the 
 United States to subsidize highly profitable, polluting fossil-
 fuel companies.
 (3) It is imperative that the United States Government make 
 extensive investments in grid modernization projects across the 
 country. According to the Hawaii State Energy Office, ``grid 
 modernization refers to computer-based control and automation 
 technology to bring current utility electricity delivery 
 systems into the 21st century. The benefits of grid 
 modernization include improvements in efficiency, reliability, 
 economics, and sustainability of the production and 
 distribution of electricity all the way from electricity 
 generation to the user's home and workplace''. This will help 
 States like Hawaii that already have a 100 percent renewable 
 portfolio standard achieve its goals on a more aggressive 
 timeline and will assist cities like: Burlington, Vermont; 
 Aspen, Colorado; Baltimore City, Maryland; Greensburg, Kansas, 
 and every other city and State achieve 100 percent renewable 
 energy standards in a timely fashion.
 (4) To meet the demands of a zero carbon economy using only 
 renewable generation by 2035, significant investments in early 
 stage energy technology breakthroughs, grid scale storage 
 technologies, and loan guarantees for utility scale projects 
 will be essential to meet the country's energy needs by 2035. 
 The most pressing need will be replacing base load power with a 
 wide range of storage technologies during times of intermittent 
 renewable power generation. These technologies are mostly in 
 their early stages and will require a significant amount of 
 funding to scale them for commercial or utility scale 
 deployment.
 (5) We must significantly increase Federal R&D funding to 
 develop and deploy the technologies needed for deep 
 decarbonization in our economy. This was a proposal announced 
 at the Paris Climate Accord with Bill Gates called Mission 
 Innovation, which committed to double government investment in 
 energy technology.
 (6) Funding should be spread throughout the innovation 
 pipeline at the U.S. Department of Energy as well as other 
 Federal agencies and departments including the National Science 
 Foundation, NASA, and the Department of Defense.
 (7) We must invest in early-stage proof of concept 
 technologies and basic scientific research at the Department of 
 Energy's Office of Science through the 17 U.S. National 
 Laboratories will be needed to discover the scientific 
 properties needed to produce proof of concept or prototype 
 technologies. The U.S. National Laboratories are centers of 
 basic scientific research already working on technology 
 programs such as grid modernization and security, battery 
 storage, solar and wind technology efficiency, efficient 
 transmission and distribution technologies, and hard and 
 software control systems for the grid. Focus on investing in 
 early-stage breakthrough energy technologies. Funding these 
 technologies could lead to innovations that could dramatically 
 change how energy is generated, stored, and distributed.
 (8) To rapidly move the country towards a 100 percent 
 carbon free economy, it is crucial that the country deploys 
 existing utility and grid scale technologies. Frequently, 
 companies seeking to deploy prototype commercial scale power 
 plants cannot secure large traditional loans. DOE's Loan 
 Guarantee Program must receive increased funding to provide 
 loans for large renewable energy power plants.
 (9) Data released last year by the U.S. Energy and 
 Information Administration (EIA), shows that the transportation 
 sector has become the largest producer of carbon emissions as 
 compared to other sectors of the economy. For this reason, 
 Congress must incentivize the transition to clean energy 
 transportation technology as it pertains to ground, air, rail, 
 sea transportation and shipping in the most efficient, 
 economically friendly methods possible to ensure that jobs are 
 protected and the cost of products remains affordable.
 (10) Permitting rules that allow polluters to target poor 
 communities for industrial facilities, chemical plants, and 
 power plants must end immediately. Cumulative environmental 
 impacts on human health and ecosystem impacts must be 
 considered and remediated. Precaution for the health and safety 
 of our children and planet should be valued above profit and 
 must be updated.
 (11) We must achieve civil rights protections to ensure 
 full access to the courts for siting poor and minority 
 communities to seek legal protections by working to overturn 
 the Sandoval Supreme Court decision that set an unreasonable 
 burden of proof of racism for claims of environmental racism, 
 including disparate and cumulative exposure to environmental 
 health risks must be extended.
 (12) We strongly endorse the Principles of Environmental 
 Justice adopted at the First National People of Color 
 Environmental Leadership Summit. The goals and outcomes of any 
 environmental justice plan should continue to be developed 
 under the Jemez Principles for Democratic Organizing with 
 strong and consistent consultation with the communities most 
 affected by the often-unequal enforcement of environmental 
 laws.
 (13) We must ensure that funding for parks and open spaces 
 are distributed equitably in urban, suburban, and rural areas.
 (14) We must increase incentives for consumers who purchase 
 zero emission vehicles, from single use of HOV lanes, to 
 reduced registration fees.
 (15) We must continue to support State, tribe and local 
 campaigns that resist the current administration's efforts to 
 undercut the efforts of States like Hawaii, and local 
 governments that continue to support the Paris Climate 
 Agreement like Baltimore City, Maryland, Burlington, Vermont, 
 and any other city or State that is working to achieve a 100 
 percent clean energy standard.
 (16) The United States is on the cusp of becoming a net 
 exporter of natural gas. Any continued build-out of natural gas 
 infrastructure and the use of eminent domain to take private 
 land for transporting gas is not to benefit citizens of the 
 United States. Instead it allows for massive profits for fossil 
 fuel companies.
 (17) In addition to the specific changes made by this Act, 
 we must also explore the methods used in regenerative 
 agriculture that provide healthier, grass-fed cows, chickens 
 and pigs that also restore farmland to its original condition. 
 This is vital if we hope to expand the market of regenerative 
 farming and work to phase out harmful, conventional practices 
 that contaminate our water and deplete essential topsoil. 
 Conventional, large-scale farming is the cause of widespread 
 topsoil depletion, and is a contributor to greenhouse gas 
 emissions. There are better alternatives and sustainable 
 solutions in the form of regenerative agricultural practices. 
 We should incentivize farmers who provide healthier food, 
 sustain the land and sequester carbon dioxide and methane.
 (18) In addition, while the Food and Drug Administration 
 (FDA) has implemented a voluntary plan with industry to 
 regulate the use of certain antibiotics for enhanced food 
 production, this program must be made mandatory. The United 
 States Government, and governments around the world openly 
 recognize the public health concerns associated with 
 antimicrobial-resistant bacteria. The illnesses connected to 
 the use of drug-resistant strains of bacteria are on the rise, 
 becoming more common, with potentially fatal consequences.
 (19) It is in the best interest of the country that 
 Congress establish permanent tax credits and start-up grants to 
 encourage the production of Geothermal, Ocean Thermal Energy 
 Conversion (OTEC), and Ocean Tidal energy.
 (20) Falling oil prices, coal company bankruptcies and 
 other factors are contributing to a loss of extractive industry 
 jobs. For these reasons, it is our responsibility to ensure 
 comprehensive and just worker protection measures that 
 guarantee future financial security for all workers affected by 
 these economic downturns.
 (21) Just transition to a clean energy economy will create 
 jobs by fixing the market externality and creating a free and 
 fair market for renewables, which currently creates three times 
 as many jobs as the fossil fuel industry. These jobs must 
 include the ability for workers to collectively bargain, 
 organize and otherwise enjoy facilitated access to 
 unionization. Additionally, investment in training in the 
 growing portfolio of trades in the renewable sector is vital.
 (22) We know that green collar jobs are the present and 
 future of industry from manufacturing and fabrication to solar 
 installation and wind technicians which can fill the void of 
 fossil fuel jobs which are never coming back.
 (23) This transition will improve the health of the 
 citizenry by promoting energy choice that eliminates extractive 
 processes that threaten natural resources including water 
 quality, air quality and needlessly shorten the lives of those 
 threatened by the last vestiges of the fossil fuel economy.
 (24) Any attempts to transition United States military 
 equipment and infrastructure to renewable fuels must be done, 
 without exception, with the safety and well-being of our men 
 and women in uniform and the safety of our Nation as the 
 primary focus.
 (25) Regardless of the overall effects of this Act, it is 
 the duty of Congress to ensure that any transition to a 100 
 percent clean energy economy does not adversely affect the 
 economy of the United States. We are committed to providing the 
 necessary financial assistance to energy produces, energy 
 workers and energy technology creators in our combined efforts 
 to save our planet from the adverse effects of global climate 
 change.
 (26) Without equivocation, we must not only create new jobs 
 for workers who have lost work, but we must ensure that those 
 new jobs are good jobs, meaning they pay a family-sustaining 
 wage, they provide health care and retirement benefits, they 
 are safe, and the workers who hold them have a powerful voice 
 on the job through union organizing and the collective 
 bargaining process, especially those in the auto and fossil 
 fuel industries. Moreover, we must create these jobs in the 
 same communities that are suffering. While workers are 
 transitioning to new employment, they must receive protections 
 to maintain family-level wages, healthcare, and pensions until 
 they are able to start their new jobs. Further, workers need 
 support in connecting with new jobs and the opportunity to 
 learn new skills through vocational education programs. In 
 addition, communities must have the infrastructure to attract 
 new investment that provides those jobs.
 (27) We have the technology to transition to 100 percent 
 renewable energy right now, all that is missing is the 
 political and social will.

 TITLE II--CLEAN ENERGY FOR ALL MANDATE

SEC. 201. CLEAN ENERGY MANDATES.

 (a) Minimum Annual Percentage.--The minimum annual percentage of 
the quantity of electricity sold by a retail electric supplier that 
must be generated from clean energy resources shall be--
 (1) in 2027, 80 percent; and
 (2) in 2035, and every year following, 100 percent.
 (b) Reporting.--Beginning in 2019, by April 1 of each year, each 
retail electric supplier shall submit a report to the Administrator 
containing:
 (1) Documentation of purchases or generation by the retail 
 electricity supplier of clean energy source electricity as a 
 percentage of the total retail electricity sales of the retail 
 electricity provider in the preceding year.
 (2) Documentation of plans for the purchase or generation 
 by the retail electricity supplier of clean energy sourced 
 electricity equal to the percentage required by this Act for 
 retail electricity sales in 2027 and in 2035.

SEC. 202. ZERO-EMISSION VEHICLE MANDATE.

 Part A of title II of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7521 et seq.) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 220. ZERO-EMISSION VEHICLE MANDATE.

 ``(a) In General.--The minimum annual percentage of the quantity of 
new motor vehicle sales of a vehicle manufacturer that shall be zero-
emission vehicles shall be--
 ``(1) in 2027, 80 percent; and
 ``(2) in 2035, and every year following, 100 percent.
 ``(b) Reporting.--Beginning in 2019, by April 1st of each year, 
each vehicle manufacturer shall submit a report to the Administrator 
containing:
 ``(1) Documentation of sales by the vehicle manufacturer of 
 zero-emission vehicles as a percentage of the total sales 
 vehicles of the vehicle manufacturer in the preceding year.
 ``(2) Documentation of plans to achieve sales by the 
 vehicle manufacturer of zero-emission vehicles equal to the 
 percentage required by this Act for 2027 and for 2035.
 ``(c) Car Allowance Rebate Program.--The Secretary of 
Transportation is instructed to establish the `Car Allowance Rebate' 
system to provide economic incentives for United States consumers to 
purchase new, clean energy vehicles.
 ``(d) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Vehicle manufacturer.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `vehicle manufacturer' 
 means an entity that--
 ``(i) engaged in the manufacturing of new 
 motor vehicles; and
 ``(ii) sold not fewer than 100 new motor 
 vehicles to ultimate purchasers, either 
 directly or through an affiliate, such as a 
 dealer.
 ``(B) Exclusions.--The term `vehicle manufacturer' 
 does not include--
 ``(i) a motor vehicle parts supplier; or
 ``(ii) a dealer.
 ``(2) Zero-emission vehicle.--The term `zero-emission 
 vehicle' means a vehicle that produces zero exhaust emissions 
 of any criteria pollutant, precursor pollutant, or greenhouse 
 gas in any mode of operation or condition, as determined by the 
 Administrator.''.

SEC. 203. ELECTRIFIED TRAINS.

 (a) Electrified Train Mandate.--
 (1) Electrified rail lines.--The minimum percentage of 
 electrified rail lines in the United States shall be--
 (A) in 2027, 80 percent; and
 (B) in 2035, and every year following, 100 percent.
 (2) Electrified train engines.--The minimum percentage of 
 electrified train engines in the United States shall be--
 (A) in 2027, 80 percent; and
 (B) in 2035, and every year following, 100 percent.
 (b) Prohibition.--Beginning in 2035 and every year after no train 
engines running on fossil fuels may operate within the United States.

 TITLE III--OFF FOSSIL FUELS

SEC. 301. MORATORIUM ON NEW MAJOR FOSSIL FUEL PROJECTS.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Fossil fuel energy.--The term ``fossil fuel energy'' 
 means electric energy generated, in whole or in part, by a 
 fossil fuel resource.
 (2) Fossil fuel resource.--The term ``fossil fuel 
 resource'' means all forms of coal, oil, and gas.
 (3) Gathering line.--The term ``gathering line'' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 195.2 of title 49, Code of 
 Federal Regulations (as in effect on the date of enactment of 
 this Act).
 (4) Interstate pipeline.--The term ``interstate pipeline'' 
 has the meaning given the term in section 195.2 of title 49, 
 Code of Federal Regulations (as in effect on the date of 
 enactment of this Act).
 (b) Moratorium.--Subject to subsection (e), beginning on January 1, 
2018, there shall be a moratorium on Federal permit approval for--
 (1) any new electric generating facility that generates 
 fossil fuel energy through the combustion of any fossil fuel 
 resource;
 (2) any new gathering line or interstate pipeline for the 
 transport of any fossil fuel resource that--
 (A) crosses Federal land or navigable water; or
 (B) requires the use of eminent domain on private 
 property;
 (3) any maintenance activity relating to an existing 
 gathering line or interstate pipeline for the transport of a 
 fossil fuel resource that expands the carrying capacity of the 
 gathering line or interstate pipeline by more than 5 percent;
 (4) any new or expanding import or export terminal for 
 fossil fuel resources;
 (5) any maintenance activity relating to an existing import 
 or export terminal for a fossil fuel resource that expands the 
 import or export capacity for a fossil fuel resource;
 (6) any new refinery of a fossil fuel resource; and
 (7) any exploration for any type of fossil fuel.
 (c) Enforcement.--The Administrator may seek an injunction on the 
construction of any facility described in subsection (b) that begins on 
or after January 1, 2018.
 (d) Federal Permits.--The Administrator, in coordination with the 
head of the applicable Federal agency, shall deny any application 
submitted to the head of that Federal agency on or after January 1, 
2018, for a permit for any facility described in subsection (b).
 (e) Tribal Consultation.--
 (1) In general.--If an application for routing or siting 
 approval, or permit or right-of-way was granted, approved, or 
 issued on or after February 8, 2017, for any facility described 
 in subsection (b) without the consultation required under 
 Executive Order 13175 (25 U.S.C. 5301 note; relating to tribal 
 consultation), or without the informed and express consent of 
 the applicable Indian tribe, the Administrator or appropriate 
 agency head shall order an immediate suspension of any 
 preconstruction, construction, or any other activity within, 
 on, under, or through the approved route or right-of-way or 
 permitted area.
 (2) Duration.--The suspension described in paragraph (1) 
 shall remain in full force and effect until conclusion of the 
 appropriate administrative proceeding.
 (f) Eminent Domain.--Any application, permit, or right-of-way 
granted or issued for any facility described in subsection (b) that, on 
or after February 8, 2017, triggers the use of eminent domain shall be 
null and void.

SEC. 302. ENDING FOSSIL FUEL SUBSIDIES.

 (a) Repeal of Expensing and 60-Month Amortization of Intangible 
Drilling Costs.--Subsection (c) of section 263 of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 is amended by striking the period at the end of the third 
sentence and inserting ``, or to any costs paid or incurred after 
December 31, of the fiscal year in which this legislation is 
enacted.''.
 (b) Repeal of Percentage Depletion for Oil and Gas Wells.--
 (1) In general.--Section 613 of the Internal Revenue Code 
 of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(f) Termination of Percentage Depletion for Oil and Gas 
Properties.--In the case of oil and gas properties, this section shall 
not apply to any taxable year beginning after December 31, of the 
fiscal year in which this legislation is enacted.''.
 (2) Limitations on percentage depletion in case of oil and 
 gas wells.--Section 613A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(f) Termination.--This section shall not apply to any taxable 
year beginning after December 31, of the fiscal year in which this 
legislation is enacted.''.
 (c) Denial of Deduction for Income Attributable to Domestic 
Production of Oil, Natural Gas, or Primary Products Thereof.--
 (1) In general.--Subparagraph (B) of section 199(c)(4) of 
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended--
 (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (ii);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of clause 
 (iii) and inserting ``, or''; and
 (C) by inserting after clause (iii) the following 
 new clause:
 ``(iv) the production, refining, 
 processing, transportation, or distribution of 
 oil, natural gas, or any primary product 
 thereof.''.
 (2) Primary product.--Section 199(c)(4)(B) of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the 
 following flush sentence:
 ``For purposes of clause (iv), the term `primary 
 product' has the same meaning as when used in section 
 927(a)(2)(C), as in effect before its repeal.''.
 (3) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Section 199(c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code 
 of 1986 is amended--
 (i) in subparagraph (A)(i)(III), by 
 striking ``electricity, natural gas,'' and 
 inserting ``electricity''; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (B)(ii), by striking 
 ``electricity, natural gas,'' and inserting 
 ``electricity''.
 (B) Section 199(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986 is amended by striking paragraph (9) and by 
 redesignating paragraph (10) as paragraph (9).
 (4) Effective date.--The amendments made by this section 
 shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, of 
 the fiscal year in which this legislation is enacted.

SEC. 303. LOW-INCOME WEATHERIZATION AND RETROFIT ASSISTANCE.

 (a) Community Assistance Fund.--
 (1) Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury a 
 fund, to be known as the ``Community Assistance Fund'' (in this 
 section referred to as the ``Fund'').
 (2) Deposits to fund.--In each fiscal year, there shall be 
 deposited in the Fund amounts made available in section 701.
 (3) Expenditures.--Amounts deposited in the Fund shall be 
 available without further appropriation in a fiscal year, as 
 follows:
 (A) Amounts as needed, shall be made available to 
 the Secretary of Commerce for the Hollings 
 Manufacturing Extension Partnership under section 25 of 
 the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act 
 (15 U.S.C. 278k).
 (B) Twenty percent of such amounts shall be made 
 available to the Secretary of Energy, to be used, in 
 consultation with the Secretary of Commerce, for 
 activities of the Advanced Manufacturing Office of the 
 Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy.
 (C) Thirty percent of such amounts shall be made 
 available to the Secretary of Energy for the State 
 Energy Program, to be used exclusively by energy 
 offices of States and territories to promote energy 
 efficiency projects at industrial facilities within the 
 jurisdiction of such States and territories.
 (D) Any of such amounts remaining after 
 distributions under subparagraphs (1), (2), and (3) 
 shall be made available to the Secretary of Energy for 
 industrial energy efficiency programs authorized under 
 part E of the Energy Policy and Conservation Act (42 
 U.S.C. 6341 et seq.) or subtitle D of title IV of the 
 Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 (Public 
 Law 110-140; 121 Stat. 1623).
 (b) Weatherization Assistance Program.--
 (1) In general.--Part A of title IV of the Energy 
 Conservation and Production Act is amended by striking section 
 422 (42 U.S.C. 6872) and inserting the following:

``SEC. 422. FUNDING.

 ``(a) In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, on 
October 1, 2018, and on each October 1 thereafter, out of any funds in 
the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, the Secretary of the Treasury 
shall transfer to the Secretary for the cost of grants to carry out 
this part $1,500,000,000, to remain available until expended.
 ``(b) Receipt and Acceptance.--The Secretary shall be entitled to 
receive, shall accept, and shall use to carry out this part funds made 
available in section 701 of the Off Fossil Fuels for a Better Future 
Act.''.
 (2) Technical correction.--Section 415 of the Energy 
 Conservation and Production Act (42 U.S.C. 6865) is amended, in 
 subsections (d) and (e)(1)(A), by striking ``section 422(b)'' 
 each place it appears and inserting ``section 422''.
 (3) Energy efficiency and conservation block grant 
 program.--Section 548 of the Energy Independence and Security 
 Act of 2007 (42 U.S.C. 17158) is amended by striking subsection 
 (a) and inserting the following:
 ``(a) In General.--
 ``(1) Grants.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 
 on October 1, 2018, and on each October 1 thereafter, out of 
 any funds in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, the 
 Secretary of the Treasury shall transfer to the Secretary for 
 the cost of grants to carry out this section $30,000,000, to 
 remain available until expended.
 ``(2) Receipt and acceptance.--The Secretary shall be 
 entitled to receive, shall accept, and shall use to carry out 
 this section the funds transferred under paragraph (1), without 
 further appropriation.''.

 TITLE IV--ONSHORE WIND, OFFSHORE WIND AND SOLAR ENERGY TAX CREDIT 
 EXTENSION

SEC. 401. EXTENSION OF CREDITS FOR WIND FACILITIES.

 (a) Extension.--Paragraph (1) of section 45(d) of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``, and the construction of 
which begins before January 1, 2020.''.
 (b) Delete Phaseout.--Subsection (b) of section 45 of such Code is 
amended by deleting paragraph (5) and inserting the following:
 ``(5) all credits in this subsection shall be 
 refundable.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on January 1, 2018.
 (d) Clarification.--This section shall cover both onshore and 
offshore wind energy production.

SEC. 402. EXTENSION OF ELECTION TO TREAT QUALIFIED FACILITIES AS ENERGY 
 PROPERTY.

 (a) In General.--Clause (ii) of section 48(a)(5)(C) is amended by 
inserting ``(January 1, 2020, in the case of any facility which is 
described in paragraph (1) of section 45(d))'' before ``, and''.
 (b) Extension for Wind Facilities.--Paragraph (5) of section 48(a) 
is amended by adding the following subparagraph:
 ``(E) Phaseout of credit for wind facilities.--In 
 the case of any facility using wind to produce 
 electricity, the amount of the credit determined under 
 this section (determined after the application of 
 paragraphs (1) and (2) and without regard to this 
 subparagraph) shall be reduced by--
 ``(i) in the case of any facility the 
 construction of which begins after December 31, 
 2016, and before January 1, 2018, 20 percent,
 ``(ii) in the case of any facility the 
 construction of which begins after December 31, 
 2017, and before January 1, 2019, 40 percent, 
 and
 ``(iii) in the case of any facility the 
 construction of which begins after December 31, 
 2018, and before January 1, 2020, 60 
 percent.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on January 1, 2018.

SEC. 403. EXTENSION AND OMISSION OF PHASEOUT OF SOLAR ENERGY CREDIT.

 (a) Extension.--Subclause (II) of section 48(a)(2)(A)(i) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``but only with 
respect to property the construction of which begins before January 1, 
2022''.
 (b) Phaseout for Solar Energy Property.--Subsection (a) of section 
48 of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (6).
 (c) Conforming Amendment.--Subparagraph (A) of section 48(a)(2) of 
such Code is amended by striking ``Except as provided in paragraph (6), 
the energy percentage'' and inserting ``The energy percentage''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.

 TITLE V--BAN ON CRUDE OIL AND LNG EXPORTS

SEC. 501. BAN ON CRUDE OIL AND LNG EXPORTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 101 of title I of division O of the 
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2016 (42 U.S.C. 6212a) is amended to 
read as follows:

``SEC. 101. PROHIBITION ON EXPORTS OF CRUDE OIL AND NATURAL GAS.

 ``Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, exports of 
domestically produced crude oil and natural gas, including liquefied 
natural gas, are prohibited. Except the Secretary of Commerce may, with 
the approval of the President, approve the export of crude oil for--
 ``(1) exchanges in similar quantity for convenience or 
 increased efficiency of transportation with persons or the 
 government of a foreign state;
 ``(2) temporary exports for convenience or increased 
 efficiency of transportation across parts of an adjacent 
 foreign state which exports reenter the United States; and
 ``(3) the historical trading relations of the United States 
 with Canada and Mexico.''.
 (b) Repeal Relating to Exportation or Importation of Natural Gas.--
Subsections (a) and (c) of section 3 of the Natural Gas Act (15 U.S.C. 
717b) are repealed.

 TITLE VI--JUST TRANSITION AND WORKER PROTECTION

SEC. 601. THE CENTER FOR CLEAN ENERGY WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT.

 (a) Establishment of Center for Workforce Development.--
 (1) This Act hereby establishes the Center for Clean Energy 
 Workforce Development within the Department of Labor. The 
 Center shall identify the employment potential of the energy 
 efficiency and renewable energy industry and the skills and 
 training needed for workers in those fields, and make 
 recommendations to the President and Congress for policies to 
 promote employment growth and access to jobs. The council shall 
 prioritize maximizing employment opportunities for fossil fuel 
 workers displaced in the transition to renewable energy, and 
 residents of areas identified as Environmental Justice.
 (2) The Center shall establish, in consultation with 
 communities over represented on unemployment rolls, a target 
 for the number of new renewable energy jobs to be created in 
 the United States and shall also set a target for the number of 
 new renewable energy jobs to be created for fossil fuel workers 
 displaced in the transition to renewable energy, and residents 
 of areas identified as environmental justice communities.
 (3) The Center shall work with labor unions and other 
 relevant community stakeholders to establish job training and 
 workforce development programs sufficient to meet renewable 
 energy and energy efficiency workforce demands. Relocation 
 assistance will be prioritized for fossil fuel workers 
 displaced in the transition to renewable energy, and residents 
 of disadvantaged communities and low-income communities.
 (4) States may apply for Federal resources to extend 
 unemployment benefits for fossil fuel workers displaced in the 
 transition to renewable energy.
 (5) States, local units of government or businesses 
 applying for Federal resources to support the transition to 100 
 percent renewable energy must create an advisory council to 
 develop a comprehensive plan for their transition. The council 
 must include American Indian, Alaska Native Tribes, Native 
 Hawaiian Leaders, Native Organizations and Indigenous 
 communities, low-income communities, people of color, 
 immigrants, environmental justice organizations and networks 
 and those who are disproportionately burdened by pollution. 
 People from these communities shall have a leading role in the 
 development and implementation of a clean energy plan and 
 related regulations.
 (b) Eligibility.--
 (1) Workers are eligible when transitioning between jobs or 
 are underemployed, they maintain eligibility until they have a 
 salary, pension, and health care benefits package within 10 
 percent of the previous benefits package.
 (2) For the first 5 years, coal workers are eligible. Then, 
 if 20 percent or more jobs are lost in other energy sectors, 
 eligibility opens for those workers as well.
 (c) Benefits.--
 (1) For up to three years, workers may receive unemployment 
 insurance, health care, and pension based on their previous 
 salary.
 (2) Workers may also receive job training, healthcare, and 
 living expenses for up to four years.
 (3) If a worker is ready to retire, they may opt for 
 pension support and health care.
 (4) Employers shall receive tax credits to incentivize 
 hiring transitioning employees.
 (d) Investments in Coal Country.--Once thirty-five or more workers 
in a county become eligible for the program created by this Act, that 
county becomes eligible to apply for targeted, need-based development 
funds through an interagency effort spearheaded by the Department of 
Commerce Economic Development Administration (EDA). Funds will be 
allocated through:
 (1) Appalachian Regional Commission (ARC) to assist 
 economic growth in Appalachian communities. Appalachian 
 communities most affected by coal economy transition will 
 receive $40,000,000 annually for a range of economic 
 development planning and implementation activities.
 (2) Department of Commerce, Economic Development Assistance 
 Programs (EDAP) to assist economically distressed communities 
 by fostering an environment conducive to job creation and 
 economic growth. The Act includes $10,000,000 annually to 
 coordinate Federal economic development funds governmentwide. 
 The agency will take a leadership role in planning and 
 coordination to communities and Federal agencies.
 (3) In order to address the continuing legacy of coal 
 abandoned mine lands (AML) on the health, safety, environment 
 and economic development potential of communities, the Act 
 provides $250,000,000 annually to States and tribes for the 
 reclamation of abandoned coal mine land sites and associated 
 polluted waters in a manner that promotes sustainable 
 redevelopment in economically distressed coal country 
 communities. OSMRE will seek input from States, tribes and 
 other stakeholders as it finalizes details of this proposal.
 (4) The remainder ($7 billion over 10 years) goes to 
 eligible counties for water, broadband, and electric grid 
 infrastructure investments.
 (e) Workplace Protections for All.--
 (1) Workers eligible for benefits under this section shall 
 have the right unionize by requiring only a majority of 
 eligible workers to sign authorizations with the National Labor 
 Relations Board.
 (2) Workers eligible for benefits under this section shall 
 have the right to negotiate within 10 days of union 
 certification and provides the option of mediation after 90 
 days and the option of arbitration after 30 days following.

SEC. 602. EQUITABLE TRANSITION FUND.

 (a) Establishment.--In order to facilitate a just transition to a 
clean energy economy and to mitigate the impact of fossil fuel worker 
transition away from energy-intensive, fossil fuel industry jobs and 
trade-exposed facilities, an equitable transition fund shall be created 
within the Department of the Treasury.
 (b) Purpose.--The purpose of the fund is to ensure that impacted 
workers are made substantially whole during a career transition period. 
Impacted workers will have access to--
 (1) retraining costs;
 (2) peer counseling services;
 (3) employment placement services;
 (4) relocation expenses; and
 (5) other services as deemed necessary by the Secretary of 
 Labor.
 (c) Funding.--Allocation of full financial support to this fund in 
an amount sufficient to meet the needs of workers who may lose their 
jobs to the transition to the clean energy economy. Any funds relegated 
to the account may only be spent after appropriation.

 TITLE VII--FUNDING

SEC. 701. CREATION OF ``OFF FOSSIL FUELS FUND''.

 (a) In General.--In the Department of the Treasury, there shall be 
created the ``OFF Fossil Fuels Fund''.
 (b) Funding To Execute the Provisions of This Act.--
 (1) Repeal of offshore tax deferment.--Section 952 of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end 
 the following:
 ``(f) Special Application of Subpart.--
 ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 this subpart, the term `subpart F income' means, in the case of 
 any controlled foreign corporation, the income of such 
 corporation derived from any foreign country.
 ``(2) Applicable rules.--Rules similar to the rules under 
 the last sentence of subsection (a) and subsection (d) shall 
 apply to this subsection.''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by this subsection 
 shall apply to taxable years of foreign corporations beginning 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act, and to taxable 
 years of United States shareholders with or within which such 
 taxable years of a foreign corporation's end.
 (c) Appropriation of Funds.--
 (1) Congress shall appoint a Federal council of 12 
 representatives from American Indian, Alaska Native Tribes, 
 Native Hawaiian Organizations, Native Organizations and 
 Indigenous communities, low-income communities, people of 
 color, immigrants, environmental justice organizations and 
 networks and those who are disproportionately burdened by 
 pollution, to determine the most effective ways to appropriate 
 funds to support the provisions of titles I, II, III, and IV of 
 this Act.
 (2) The makeup of this council must be fully representative 
 of each of the groups listed in paragraph (1).

SEC. 702. RECAPTURE OF REVENUE FROM ``FOSSIL FUEL CREDIT'' REPEAL.

 Pursuant to section 302 of this Act, the fossil fuel tax credits 
that are repealed will be utilized in the following ways:
 (1) Funds recaptured from the repeal of fossil fuel 
 production tax credits shall be used to fund the programs and 
 activities associated with this Act.
 (2) Any funds from section 302 of this Act shall be 
 transferred to the ``OFF Fossil Fuels Fund'' established in 
 section 701 of this Act.
 <all>