[Congressional Bills 119th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 5321 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

<DOC>

119th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 S. 5321

 To amend title XIX of the Social Security Act to require coverage of, 
 and expand access to, home and community-based services under the 
 Medicaid program to award grants for the creation, recruitment, 
 training and education, retention, and advancement of the direct care 
 workforce and to award grants to support family caregivers and for 
 other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 August 6, 2026

 Mr. Lujan (for himself, Mr. Kaine, Ms. Baldwin, Ms. Duckworth, Mrs. 
 Gillibrand, Ms. Hassan, Mr. Blumenthal, Mr. Merkley, Mr. Sanders, Ms. 
Warren, Mr. Reed, Mr. Markey, Mrs. Shaheen, Mr. Fetterman, Mr. Kim, and 
 Mrs. Murray) introduced the following bill; which was read twice and 
 referred to the Committee on Finance

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To amend title XIX of the Social Security Act to require coverage of, 
 and expand access to, home and community-based services under the 
 Medicaid program to award grants for the creation, recruitment, 
 training and education, retention, and advancement of the direct care 
 workforce and to award grants to support family caregivers and for 
 other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``HCBS Access Act''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Definitions.
TITLE I--REQUIRING AND EXPANDING ACCESS TO HCBS COVERAGE UNDER MEDICAID

Sec. 101. Purpose.
Sec. 102. Requiring coverage of home and community-based services under 
 the Medicaid program.
Sec. 103. Medicaid eligibility modifications.
Sec. 104. Home and community-based services implementation plan.
Sec. 105. Quality of services.
Sec. 106. Reports; technical assistance; other administrative 
 requirements.
Sec. 107. Quality measurement and improvement.
Sec. 108. Making permanent the extended protection under medicaid for 
 recipients of home and community-based 
 services against spousal impoverishment.
Sec. 109. Permanent extension of money follows the person rebalancing 
 demonstration.
Sec. 110. Liens, adjustments, and recoveries for medical assistance.
Sec. 111. HCBS provider tax.
Sec. 112. Medicare amendment.
 TITLE II--RECOGNIZING THE ROLE OF DIRECT SUPPORT PROFESSIONALS

Sec. 201. Findings.
Sec. 202. Revision of standard occupational classification system.
 TITLE III--SUPPORT FOR THE DIRECT CARE WORKFORCE

Sec. 301. Definitions.
Sec. 302. Authority to establish a technical assistance center for 
 building the direct care workforce.
Sec. 303. Authority to award grants.
Sec. 304. Project plans.
Sec. 305. Evaluations and reports; technical assistance.
Sec. 306. Authorization of appropriations.
 TITLE IV--EVALUATION

Sec. 401. Evaluation of impact on access to HCBS.

SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act:
 (1) Demographics.--The term ``demographics'' means 
 information relating to the races, ethnicities, genders, sexual 
 orientations, gender identities, geographic locations, incomes, 
 primary languages, types of service setting, and disability 
 types represented within a particular group of individuals.
 (2) Secretary.--Except as otherwise provided, the term 
 ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.

TITLE I--REQUIRING AND EXPANDING ACCESS TO HCBS COVERAGE UNDER MEDICAID

SEC. 101. PURPOSE.

 It is the purpose of this title to require coverage of home and 
community-based services (in this section referred to as ``HCBS'') 
under a State plan (or waiver of such plan) under title XIX of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) for the following reasons:
 (1) To eliminate waiting lists for HCBS, which delay access 
 to necessary services and deny access to the promise of 
 community inclusion guaranteed under the Americans with 
 Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.) for 
 individuals with disabilities and older adults.
 (2) To build on decades of progress in serving individuals 
 with disabilities and older adults through access to HCBS.
 (3) To fulfill the purposes of the Medicaid program to 
 provide medical assistance for individuals whose income and 
 resources are insufficient to meet the costs of necessary 
 medical services, and to provide rehabilitation, long-term 
 services and supports, and other services to help such 
 individuals attain or retain capacity for independence or self-
 care.
 (4) To ensure that individuals with all kinds of 
 disabilities and with multiple disabilities, including 
 intellectual disabilities, cognitive disabilities, 
 developmental disabilities, behavioral health disabilities, 
 physical disabilities, and substance use disorders, and older 
 adults, receive the services they need to live in their 
 communities.
 (5) To streamline access to HCBS by eliminating the need 
 for States to repeatedly apply for waivers of their respective 
 State plans for medical assistance.
 (6) To continue to increase the capacity of community 
 services to ensure individuals with disabilities and older 
 adults have high-quality, safe, and meaningful options to 
 receive care in their community and are not at risk of 
 unnecessary institutionalization.
 (7) To act on the decades of research and practice that 
 show that everyone, including individuals with the most severe 
 disabilities, can live in the community with the right services 
 and supports.
 (8) To eliminate the race, gender, sexual orientation, and 
 gender identity disparities that exist in accessing information 
 and HCBS and to prevent the unnecessary impoverishment and 
 institutionalization of black and brown individuals with 
 disabilities and older adults.
 (9) To support over 63,000,000 unpaid family caregivers, 
 who are disproportionately women and often providing complex 
 services and supports to older adults and individuals with 
 disabilities because of a lack of affordable services, 
 workforce shortages, and other inefficiencies.
 (10) To improve direct care quality and ensure access to 
 services by improving workforce standards for the nearly 
 3,200,000 direct care workers, who are primarily women, people 
 of color, and immigrants facing heightened risks of 
 discrimination in employment, providing support to individuals 
 with disabilities and older adults in their homes and 
 communities.

SEC. 102. REQUIRING COVERAGE OF HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES UNDER 
 THE MEDICAID PROGRAM.

 (a) Definition of Home and Community-Based Services.--
 (1) Inclusion as medical assistance.--Section 1905(a) of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (31), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) by redesignating paragraph (32) as paragraph 
 (33); and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (31) the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(32) home and community-based services (as defined in 
 subsection (ll)); and''.
 (2) Home and community-based services defined.--Section 
 1905 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d) is amended by 
 adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(ll) Home and Community-Based Services.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this title, the term 
 `home and community-based services' means those services 
 specified in paragraph (2) furnished to an eligible individual 
 (as defined in paragraph (3)), based on an individualized 
 assessment (as described in paragraph (4)) and person-centered 
 service plan (as described in paragraph (4)(D)) for such 
 individual, in a setting that--
 ``(A) meets the qualities specified in paragraph 
 (1) of section 441.710(a) of title 42, Code of Federal 
 Regulations (or a successor regulation);
 ``(B) is not described in paragraph (2) of such 
 section (or a successor regulation); and
 ``(C) meets such other qualities as the Secretary 
 determines appropriate in line with recommendations for 
 additional services made by the advisory panel 
 described in paragraph (2)(B) of this subsection.
 ``(2) Services specified.--
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (1), 
 the services specified in this paragraph are services 
 described in any of paragraphs (7), (8), (13)(C), (19), 
 (20), (22), (24), (29), and (33) of subsection (a) of 
 this section or in any of subsections (c)(4)(B), 
 (c)(5), (k)(1)(A), (k)(1)(B), or (k)(1)(D) of section 
 1915, including the following:
 ``(i) Supported employment and integrated 
 day services.
 ``(ii) Personal assistance, including 
 personal care attendants, direct support 
 professionals, home health aides, private duty 
 nursing, homemakers and chore assistance, and 
 companionship services.
 ``(iii) Services that enhance independence, 
 inclusion, and full participation in the 
 broader community.
 ``(iv) Non-emergency, non-medical 
 transportation services to facilitate community 
 integration.
 ``(v) Respite services provided in the 
 individual's home or broader community.
 ``(vi) Caregiver and family support 
 services.
 ``(vii) Case management, including 
 intensive case management, fiscal intermediary, 
 and support brokerage services.
 ``(viii) Services that support person-
 centered planning and self-direction.
 ``(ix) Direct support services during acute 
 hospitalizations.
 ``(x) Necessary medical and nursing 
 services not otherwise covered that are 
 necessary in order for the individual to remain 
 in their home and community, including hospice 
 services.
 ``(xi) Home and community-based intensive 
 behavioral health and crisis intervention 
 services.
 ``(xii) Peer support services.
 ``(xiii) Housing support, including 
 transitional housing or transitional support 
 services for individuals who are unhoused, and 
 wrap-around services.
 ``(xiv) Necessary home modifications and 
 assistive technology, including those that 
 substitute for human assistance.
 ``(xv) Transition services to support an 
 individual who is transitioning from an 
 institutional setting to the community, 
 including appropriate services for individuals 
 who are unhoused or at risk of becoming 
 unhoused, and including such transition 
 services provided while the individual resides 
 in an institution.
 ``(xvi) Nutrition services.
 ``(xvii) Assisted living services.
 ``(xviii) Any other service approved by the 
 Secretary, pursuant to the recommendation of 
 the advisory panel convened under subparagraph 
 (B).
 ``(B) Specification of recommended services.--
 ``(i) In general.--Not later than 6 months 
 after the date of the enactment of this 
 subparagraph, and not less frequently than once 
 every 5 years thereafter, the Secretary shall 
 appoint an advisory panel for purposes of 
 recommending additional services which may be 
 included as home and community-based services 
 under this paragraph.
 ``(ii) Composition.--
 ``(I) Selection.--The advisory 
 panel shall be comprised of not less 
 than 50 members and include 
 representatives of the following 
 categories, with the majority of all 
 members being selected from the 
 categories described in items (aa), 
 (bb), and (cc):
 ``(aa) Individuals with 
 disabilities receiving home and 
 community-based services under 
 this title and individuals with 
 disabilities in need of such 
 services, including those with 
 physical disabilities, 
 behavioral health disabilities, 
 or intellectual or 
 developmental disabilities, and 
 including older adults, that 
 are representative of multiple 
 States, geographical locations, 
 races, ethnicities, and other 
 demographic factors.
 ``(bb) Beneficiary-led 
 disability rights 
 organizations.
 ``(cc) Disability-led 
 organizations.
 ``(dd) Disabled veterans 
 organizations.
 ``(ee) Disability 
 organizations representing 
 families.
 ``(ff) Organizations 
 serving individuals with 
 disabilities, including 
 intellectual or developmental 
 disabilities.
 ``(gg) Organizations 
 serving older adults.
 ``(hh) Direct care workers 
 and the labor organizations 
 that represent such workers.
 ``(ii) The Protection and 
 Advocacy System.
 ``(jj) The Centers for 
 Independent Living.
 ``(kk) Health care 
 providers.
 ``(ll) The National 
 Association of Medicaid 
 Directors.
 ``(mm) The National 
 Association of State Directors 
 of Developmental Disabilities 
 Services.
 ``(nn) The National 
 Association of State Mental 
 Health Program Directors.
 ``(oo) Advancing States.
 ``(pp) The Centers for 
 Medicare & Medicaid Services.
 ``(qq) The Administration 
 for Community Living of the 
 Department of Health and Human 
 Services.
 ``(rr) Members of federally 
 recognized tribes and tribally 
 led organizations.
 ``(ss) Other relevant 
 Federal, State, and local home 
 and community-based service 
 systems, as determined by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(II) Requirement for 
 proportionate representation.--The 
 Secretary shall seek to ensure 
 proportionate representation among each 
 category described in items (dd) 
 through (ss) of subclause (I) in 
 convening the advisory panel.
 ``(iii) Duties.--
 ``(I) In general.--Not later than 2 
 years after an advisory panel is 
 convened under clause (i), the advisory 
 panel shall submit to the Secretary and 
 to Congress a report recommending 
 additional services which may be 
 included as home and community-based 
 services under this paragraph with the 
 goal of increasing community 
 integration and self-determination for 
 individuals with disabilities receiving 
 such services.
 ``(II) Considerations.--In 
 developing recommendations, the 
 advisory panel shall consider--
 ``(aa) available data on 
 coverage gaps of needed home 
 and community-based services, 
 including compliance reporting 
 required by section 441.311(d) 
 of title 42, Code of Federal 
 Regulations;
 ``(bb) new technology or 
 innovations that could promote 
 access to home and community-
 based services for individuals 
 with disabilities and older 
 adults;
 ``(cc) relevant data based 
 on the latest Home and 
 Community-Based Services 
 Quality Measure Set established 
 and updated by the Secretary 
 pursuant to section 441.312 of 
 title 42, Code of Federal 
 Regulations; and
 ``(dd) other relevant 
 research, data, or information 
 that will help inform the 
 adoption of home and community-
 based services for individuals 
 with disabilities and older 
 adults.
 ``(iv) Implementation of recommended 
 additional services.--
 ``(I) In general.--The Secretary 
 shall consider the recommendations made 
 in a report submitted by the advisory 
 panel pursuant to clause (iii)(I), and 
 review any other relevant information, 
 to identify additional services as home 
 and community-based services pursuant 
 to subparagraph (A)(xviii).
 ``(II) Considerations.--In 
 determining which recommendations of 
 the advisory panel to implement, the 
 Secretary shall consider--
 ``(aa) available data on 
 coverage gaps of needed home 
 and community-based services, 
 including compliance reporting 
 required by section 411.311(d) 
 of title 42, Code of Federal 
 Regulations;
 ``(bb) new technology or 
 innovations that could promote 
 access to home and community-
 based services for individuals 
 with disabilities;
 ``(cc) relevant data based 
 on the latest Home and 
 Community-Based Services 
 Quality Measure Set established 
 and updated by the Secretary 
 pursuant to section 441.312 of 
 title 42, Code of Federal 
 Regulations;
 ``(dd) public comment about 
 additional home and community-
 based services obtained through 
 the public notice and comment 
 process described in subclause 
 (III); and
 ``(ee) other relevant 
 research, data, or information 
 that will help inform the 
 adoption of home and community-
 based services for individuals 
 with disabilities.
 ``(III) Notice and comment.--Not 
 later than 1 year after an advisory 
 panel is convened under clause (i), the 
 Secretary shall establish a process for 
 public notice and comment, including 
 public hearings, sufficient to ensure a 
 meaningful level of public input.
 ``(IV) Notification to state 
 medicaid directors.--Not later than 1 
 year after the conclusion of the notice 
 and comment process established by the 
 Secretary pursuant to subclause (III), 
 the Secretary shall issue a State 
 Medicaid Director Letter to notify 
 States of any additional home and 
 community-based services approved by 
 the Secretary for purposes of 
 subparagraph (A)(xviii).
 ``(C) Private duty nursing defined.--For purposes 
 of this paragraph, the term `private duty nursing' 
 means nursing services that are sufficient to meet the 
 needs of an individual who requires more individualized 
 and continuous care than is available from a visiting 
 nurse or routinely provided by the nursing staff of a 
 hospital or skilled nursing facility, and includes 
 services provided to an individual in the individual's 
 own home by a registered nurse or licensed practical 
 nurse under the direction of a physician.
 ``(3) Eligible individual.--
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (1), 
 the term `eligible individual' means--
 ``(i) an individual who is determined, on 
 an annual basis or on a longer basis specified 
 by the State, by a health care provider 
 approved by the State under a process described 
 in subparagraph (C) to have a functional 
 impairment (as defined in subparagraph (B)) 
 (not taking into account any items or services, 
 or any other ameliorative measures, furnished 
 to such individual to mitigate such impairment) 
 that is expected to last at least 90 days;
 ``(ii) during the period that ends on the 
 day before the first day of the first calendar 
 quarter beginning on or after the date that is 
 5 years after the date of the enactment of this 
 subsection, an individual who, as of such date 
 of enactment, is receiving or has been 
 determined to be eligible for home and 
 community-based services under this title (or 
 under a waiver or State plan option in effect 
 under section 1915 or 1115, provided that the 
 individual continues to meet any level of care 
 requirement applicable under such waiver or 
 State plan option); or
 ``(iii) an individual who is eligible under 
 the State plan or a waiver of such plan and is 
 under the age of 21.
 ``(B) Functional impairment.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A)(i), the term `functional impairment' 
 means, with respect to an individual, the inability of 
 such individual to perform, without assistance--
 ``(i) 2 or more activities of daily living 
 (as described in section 7702B(c)(2)(B) of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986);
 ``(ii) 2 or more instrumental activities of 
 daily living (as defined for purposes of 
 section 1915(k)(1)(A)); or
 ``(iii) 1 activity of daily living (as so 
 described) and 1 instrumental activity of daily 
 living (as so defined).
 ``(C) Health care provider state approval.--For 
 purposes of subparagraph (A)(i), a process described in 
 this subparagraph is a process established by the State 
 to approve a health care provider to make a 
 determination of functional impairment in accordance 
 with such standards as the Secretary may prescribe.
 ``(4) Individualized assessment.--
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (1), 
 an individualized assessment described in this 
 paragraph is an independent assessment, with respect to 
 an eligible individual--
 ``(i) to determine a necessary level of 
 services and supports to be provided, 
 consistent with the individual's physical and 
 health condition, including any functional 
 impairments;
 ``(ii) to identify needed medical and non-
 medical services and supports;
 ``(iii) to inform development of a person-
 centered care plan (as described in 
 subparagraph (D)) for the individual;
 ``(iv) that includes each of the elements 
 described in clauses (ii) through (v) of 
 section 1915(i)(1)(F); and
 ``(v) that occurs not later than 30 days 
 after such individual is determined to be an 
 eligible individual.
 ``(B) Reassessments.--An individualized assessment 
 shall be conducted at least once every 12 months, and 
 as needed when the individual's support needs or 
 circumstances change significantly, and an individual's 
 person-centered service plan shall be revised as 
 necessary to reflect the results of the most recent 
 individualized assessment.
 ``(C) Presumption.--The individualized assessment 
 described in subparagraph (A) shall be conducted with 
 the presumption--
 ``(i) that each eligible individual, 
 regardless of type or level of disability or 
 service need, can be served in the individual's 
 own home and community; and
 ``(ii) at the option of the individual, 
 that services may be self-directed (as defined 
 in section 1915(i)(1)(G)(iii)(II)).
 ``(D) Person-centered care plan.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A)(iii), a person-centered care plan 
 described in this subparagraph is a written plan with 
 respect to an individual that is developed in 
 accordance with, and meets the requirements of, 
 paragraphs (1) through (3) of section 441.301(c) of 
 title 42, Code of Federal Regulations.
 ``(E) Standards.--An individualized assessment 
 shall be conducted in accordance with standards 
 specified by the Secretary to--
 ``(i) safeguard against conflicts of 
 interest;
 ``(ii) specify qualifications for who may 
 perform any such assessment;
 ``(iii) ensure transparency in the 
 conducting of any such assessment, including 
 ensuring the provision of the results of the 
 assessment and, in plain language, any 
 information necessary to interpret the 
 methodology and results of the assessment;
 ``(iv) ensure that the methodology used in 
 any such assessment is sound and evidence-
 based;
 ``(v) require such methodology to be made 
 available on the public website of the State 
 and tested for reliability and validity by an 
 independent evaluator;
 ``(vi) require assessment tools to include 
 language assistance services and compliance 
 with Federal non-discrimination requirements, 
 including--
 ``(I) the availability of such 
 assessments in the individual's primary 
 language or with a qualified 
 interpreter;
 ``(II) accessibility for 
 individuals who are blind or have low-
 vision;
 ``(III) accessibility for deaf and 
 hard-of-hearing individuals; and
 ``(IV) accessibility for 
 individuals who cannot rely on speech 
 to communicate; and
 ``(vii) ensure that any services and 
 supports necessary for community integration 
 are identified, involve professionals 
 knowledgeable about the range of services and 
 supports available in the community, and allow 
 individuals getting assessed to present their 
 own independent evidence of the appropriateness 
 of an integrated setting.''.
 (b) Mandatory Benefit.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1902(a)(10)(A) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(A)) is amended by striking 
 ``and (30)'' and inserting ``(30), and (32)''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by this subsection 
 shall take effect on the first day of the first calendar 
 quarter that begins on or after the date that is 5 years after 
 the date of enactment of this Act.
 (c) Ensuring Coverage of HCBS for All Medicaid-Eligible 
Individuals.--Section 1902(a)(10)(D) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(A)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(i)'' after ``(D)'';
 (2) by adding ``and'' after the semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 ``(ii) beginning on the first day of the 
 first calendar quarter that begins on or after 
 the date that is 5 years after the date of 
 enactment of this clause (or at such earlier 
 date as the State may elect) for the inclusion 
 of home and community-based services (as 
 defined in section 1905(ll)) for any individual 
 who--
 ``(I) is eligible for medical 
 assistance under the State plan (or 
 waiver of such plan);
 ``(II) is an eligible individual 
 (as defined in such section); and
 ``(III) elects to receive such 
 services.''.
 (d) Federal Medical Assistance Percentage for Home and Community-
Based Services.--Section 1905 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396d), as amended by subsection (a), is further amended--
 (1) in subsection (b), by striking ``and (ii)'' and 
 inserting ``(ii), and (mm)''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsections:
 ``(mm) Specified Federal Medical Assistance Percentage for Home and 
Community-Based Services.--
 ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 law and except as provided in paragraph (3), the Federal 
 medical assistance percentage for amounts expended for medical 
 assistance for home and community-based services (as defined in 
 subsection (ll)), including any such services furnished under a 
 waiver in effect under section 1915 or 1115, on or after the 
 date of the enactment of this subsection shall be equal to 100 
 percent for any State that meets the requirements of paragraph 
 (2).
 ``(2) Access to essential home and community-based 
 services.--As a condition of receiving the Federal medical 
 assistance percentage described in paragraph (1), a State shall 
 enhance, expand, or strengthen the level of and access to home 
 and community-based services offered under the State plan under 
 this title (or a waiver of such plan) as of the date of 
 enactment of this subsection by doing each of the following:
 ``(A) Lowering or eliminating access barriers and 
 disparities in access or utilization identified in the 
 implementation plan described in section 1902(zz).
 ``(B) Using a program to ensure that an individual 
 is not denied services based on the fact that the 
 individual contacts the wrong entity (commonly referred 
 to as a `No Wrong Door Program'), providing presumptive 
 eligibility for home and community-based services, and 
 improving home and community-based services counseling 
 and education programs.
 ``(C) Providing supports to family caregivers, 
 which shall include providing respite care and may 
 include providing such services as caregiver 
 assessments, peer supports, access to assistive 
 technology, or paid family caregiving.
 ``(D) Adopting processes to ensure that payments 
 for home and community-based services (including any 
 payment to a direct care worker who delivers such 
 services) are sufficient to ensure that care and 
 services are available to the extent described in the 
 implementation plan described in section 1902(zz). In 
 carrying out this subparagraph, the State shall review 
 and update payment rates for home and community-based 
 services at least every 2 years, with an emphasis on 
 ensuring that rates are adequate to recruit and retain 
 a sufficient workforce to ensure access to the full set 
 of services for eligible individuals as determined 
 under subsection (ll) and through a transparent process 
 involving meaningful input from stakeholders, including 
 recipients of home and community-based services, family 
 caregivers of such recipients, providers, health plans, 
 direct care workers, chosen representatives of direct 
 care workers, and aging, disability, and workforce 
 advocates.
 ``(E) Developing a process to ensure that increases 
 in payment rates for home and community-based services 
 are--
 ``(i) at a minimum, proportionately passed 
 through to direct care workers and in a manner 
 that is determined with input from the 
 stakeholders described in subparagraph (D); and
 ``(ii) incorporated into payment rates for 
 home and community-based services provided 
 under this title by a managed care entity (as 
 defined in section 1932(a)(1)(B)) or a prepaid 
 inpatient health plan or prepaid ambulatory 
 health plan, as such terms are defined in 
 section 438.2 of title 42, Code of Federal 
 Regulations (or any successor regulation), 
 under a contract with the State.
 ``(F) Updating, developing, and adopting 
 qualification standards and training opportunities for 
 the continuum of providers of home and community-based 
 services, including programs for independent providers 
 of such services and agency direct care workers, as 
 well as unique programs and resources for family 
 caregivers.
 ``(G) Establishing an entity to strengthen the 
 infrastructure supporting the delivery of home and 
 community-based services under consumer-directed models 
 of care in accordance with the requirements of 
 subsection (nn).
 ``(3) Exception.--The Federal medical assistance percentage 
 applicable to medical assistance for home and community-based 
 services furnished to an individual who is only eligible for 
 medical assistance under a State plan or waiver on the basis of 
 section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XXIV) shall be determined without 
 regard to this subsection.
 ``(4) Administrative costs.--Notwithstanding the per centum 
 specified in section 1903(a)(7), with respect to amounts 
 expended for the first 4 fiscal quarters during which this 
 subsection is implemented and each of the succeeding 16 fiscal 
 quarters, for administrative costs for expanding and enhancing 
 home and community-based services, including for enhancing the 
 Medicaid data and technology infrastructure, modifying rate 
 setting processes, adopting, using, and reporting quality 
 measures, adopting or improving training programs for direct 
 care workers and family caregivers, and adopting, carrying out, 
 or enhancing programs that register qualified direct care 
 workers or connect beneficiaries to qualified direct care 
 workers under subsection (nn), such per centum shall be 80 
 percent.
 ``(nn) HCBS Infrastructure To Support Self-Directed Care Models for 
the Delivery of Services.--For the purposes of paragraph (2)(G) of 
subsection (mm), the requirements of this subsection, with respect to a 
State and fiscal quarter, are that the State establishes, directly or 
by contract with 1 or more non-profit entities, a program to support 
self-directed models for the delivery of services for the performance 
of each of the following functions:
 ``(1) Registering qualified direct care workers and 
 assisting beneficiaries in finding direct care workers to 
 furnish home and community-based services.
 ``(2) Undertaking activities to recruit and train 
 independent providers to enable beneficiaries to direct their 
 own care, including by providing or coordinating training for 
 beneficiaries on self-directed care.
 ``(3) Ensuring the safety of, and supporting the quality 
 of, care provided to beneficiaries, such as by conducting 
 background checks and addressing complaints reported by 
 recipients of home and community-based services.
 ``(4) Facilitating coordination between State and local 
 agencies and direct care workers for matters of public health, 
 training opportunities, changes in program requirements, 
 workplace health and safety, or related matters.
 ``(5) Supporting beneficiary hiring of independent 
 providers of home and community-based services through an 
 agency with choice or similar model, including by processing 
 applicable tax information, collecting and processing 
 timesheets, submitting claims, and processing payments to such 
 providers.
 ``(6) To the extent a State permits beneficiaries to hire a 
 family member or individual with whom they have an existing 
 relationship to provide home and community-based services, 
 providing support to beneficiaries who wish to hire a caregiver 
 who is a family member or individual with whom they have an 
 existing relationship, such as by facilitating enrollment of 
 such family member or individual as a provider of home and 
 community-based services under the State plan or a waiver of 
 such plan.
 ``(7) Ensuring that program policies and procedures allow 
 for cooperation with labor organizations that bargain on behalf 
 of direct care workers in the case of a State in which the 
 direct care workers in the State have elected to join, or form, 
 such a labor organization, or, in the case of a State in which 
 such workers have not joined or formed such a labor 
 organization, are neutral with regard to such workers joining 
 or forming such a labor organization.''.
 (e) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) In general.--Title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) is amended--
 (A) in section 1905(a), in the matter preceding the 
 first numbered paragraph--
 (i) in each of clauses (xvi) and (xviii), 
 by moving the left margin 2 ems to the left; 
 and
 (ii) in clause (xvii), by inserting ``or 
 who are described in section 1902(a)(10)(D)'' 
 after ``a State plan amendment under such 
 subsection''; and
 (B) in section 1943(b)(5), by striking ``the 
 State'' and all that follows through the period at the 
 end and inserting ``a determination be conducted on an 
 annual basis (or on such longer basis as specified by 
 the State) in accordance with section 1905(ll) for 
 purposes of providing home and community-based services 
 under the State plan (or waiver of such plan).''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall take effect on the first day of the first calendar 
 quarter that begins on or after the date that is 5 years after 
 the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 103. MEDICAID ELIGIBILITY MODIFICATIONS.

 Section 1902 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a) is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in paragraph (10)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A)(i)--
 (I) in subclause (VIII), by 
 striking ``; or'' and inserting a 
 semicolon;
 (II) in subclause (IX)(dd), by 
 striking the semicolon at the end and 
 inserting ``; or''; and
 (III) by inserting after subclause 
 (IX) the following new subclause:
 ``(X) beginning with the first 
 calendar quarter that begins on or 
 after the date that is 5 years after 
 the date of enactment of this subclause 
 (or such earlier date as the State may 
 elect), who are eligible individuals 
 described in section 1905(ll)(3)(A) and 
 are not described in a previous 
 subclause of this clause and whose 
 income does not exceed the greater of--
 ``(aa) 150 percent of the 
 poverty line (as defined in 
 section 2110(c)(5)) applicable 
 to a family of the size 
 involved; or
 ``(bb) 300 percent of the 
 supplemental security income 
 benefit rate established by 
 section 1611(b)(1);''; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (A)(ii)--
 (I) in subclause (XXII), by 
 striking ``; or'' and inserting a 
 semicolon;
 (II) in subclause (XXIII), by 
 striking the semicolon at the end and 
 inserting ``; or''; and
 (III) by inserting after subclause 
 (XXIII) the following new subclause:
 ``(XXIV) who are eligible 
 individuals who would be described in 
 clause (i)(X) but for the fact that 
 their income exceeds the income levels 
 established under such clause but is 
 less than such income level as the 
 State may establish for purposes of 
 this subclause;''; and
 (B) by amending paragraph (34) to read as follows:
 ``(34) provides that in the case of an individual eligible 
 for home and community-based services (as described in section 
 1905(ll)(3)(A)), such services will be made available and 
 furnished in or after the third month before the month in which 
 such individual made application (or application was made on 
 behalf of such individual in the case of a deceased individual) 
 for such services if such individual was (or upon application 
 would have been) eligible for such services at the time such 
 services were furnished and, that if services are provided 
 through a service plan or any similar document, including 
 services provided under the authority of any provision of 
 section 1115 or 1915, such services shall be available pursuant 
 to this subsection without regard to whether the service plan 
 or similar document was developed before or after the services 
 were provided;''; and
 (2) in subsection (xx)(9)(A)(ii)--
 (A) in subclause (VIII), by striking ``or'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in subclause (IX), by striking the period and 
 inserting ``; or''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 subclause:
 ``(X) who is described in subclause 
 (X) of subsection (a)(10)(A)(i) or 
 subclause (XXIV) of subsection 
 (a)(10)(A)(ii).''.

SEC. 104. HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES IMPLEMENTATION PLAN.

 (a) In General.--Section 1902 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396a) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in paragraph (89), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in paragraph (90)(C), by striking the period at 
 the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (90) the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(91) provide that, prior to the beginning of the first 
 calendar quarter beginning on or after the date that is 5 years 
 after the date of the enactment of this paragraph (or such 
 earlier date at the State may elect), the State shall submit to 
 the Secretary the implementation plan described in subsection 
 (zz).''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(zz) Implementation Plan.--For purposes of subsection (a)(91), an 
implementation plan described in this subsection is a plan developed by 
a State that includes the following:
 ``(1) An explanation of how the State will operationalize 
 the definition of an eligible individual under section 
 1905(ll), including the process for any determination specified 
 in paragraph (3)(A)(i) of such section.
 ``(2) A description of the characteristics of the State's 
 direct care workforce that provides home and community-based 
 services, including the number of workers, the average and 
 range of direct care worker wages or service payments, the 
 health and other workplace benefits provided to direct care 
 workers, turnover and vacancy rates, and an explanation of the 
 State's plan to ensure a stable and high quality workforce and 
 that compensation for individuals furnishing home and 
 community-based services is sufficient to ensure an appropriate 
 supply of workers to provide services to all eligible 
 individuals and plans to identify and address any additional 
 workforce issues.
 ``(3) A list of any home and community-based services 
 provided under the State Medicaid plan (including any waiver of 
 such plan) as of the date of enactment of this subsection, 
 including a breakdown of use of such services by demographics 
 (as defined in section 2 of the HCBS Access Act), compared to 
 such services that are required under the amendments made by 
 section 102 of such Act, and a description of numerical goals 
 to increase access to such services that have barriers to 
 access for populations in need of such services.
 ``(4) A description of how the State will incorporate 
 existing State disability and aging agencies into the new 
 unified provision of home and community-based services and how 
 such State will ensure that such services address all 
 functional impairments.
 ``(5) A plan for carrying out outreach and education 
 activities with respect to the availability of such services 
 through appropriate entities, including a program to ensure 
 that an individual is not denied such services based on the 
 fact that the individual contacts the wrong entity (commonly 
 referred to as a `No Wrong Door Program').
 ``(6) A plan for how such services will be coordinated with 
 other relevant State agencies, such as housing, transportation, 
 child welfare, food and income security, and employment 
 agencies.
 ``(7) A State with federally recognized Indian tribes, 
 Indian health programs, or urban Indian health organizations 
 shall include a process to consult with the Indian tribes and 
 seek advice from Indian health programs and urban Indian health 
 organizations in the State.
 ``(8) A description of how the State will build capacity 
 prior to the implementation of the requirements described in 
 subclause (X) of subsection (a)(10)(A)(i) and subclause (XXIV) 
 of subsection (a)(10)(A)(ii) to ensure that such services are 
 available to every eligible individual under the State Medicaid 
 program, how the State will ensure an adequate provider network 
 to provide access to and choice of provider, and how the State 
 will ensure that such services are provided in a setting that 
 meets the requirements specified in paragraph (1) of section 
 1905(ll), as added by section 102 of the HCBS Access Act.
 ``(9) A plan for how the State will prioritize individuals 
 who have already met eligibility requirements but are on 
 waiting lists to receive home and community-based services and 
 ensure those individuals do not experience an increase in the 
 amount of time they will wait to receive such services.
 ``(10) In the case of a State that utilizes an alternative 
 benefit plan, a description of how the State will ensure that 
 all individuals who are eligible individuals (as defined in 
 section 1905(ll)) are appropriately identified as medically 
 frail and exempted from such plan.
 ``(11) How the State will coordinate eligibility for such 
 services with other disability eligibility programs, such as 
 disability buy-in programs.
 ``(12) Data and milestone requirements to ensure community 
 integration, including such requirements with respect to 
 utilization of such services by demographics (as defined in 
 section 2 of the HCBS Access Act).
 ``(13) A description of how the State will evaluate and 
 address disparities based on age, disability, race, ethnicity, 
 sexual orientation, gender identity, and geographic equity.''.
 (b) FMAP Increase.--Section 1903(a)(3) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1396b(a)(3)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (F)(ii), by striking ``plus'' at the 
 end and inserting ``and''; and
 (2) by inserting after subparagraph (F)(ii) the following 
 new subparagraph:
 ``(G) an amount equal to 100 percent of the sums 
 expended during the quarter which are attributable to 
 the costs of developing the implementation plan 
 described in section 1902(zz); and''.

SEC. 105. QUALITY OF SERVICES.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Development of metrics.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health 
 and Human Services, in consultation with State Medicaid 
 Directors, shall develop standardized, State-level 
 metrics regarding access to, and satisfaction with, 
 providers, including primary care and specialist 
 providers, with respect to individuals who are enrolled 
 in a State Medicaid plan under title XIX of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) (or under a 
 waiver of such plan), broken down by demographics (as 
 defined in section 2) and any other category determined 
 appropriate by the Secretary.
 (B) Inclusions.--The metrics developed under 
 subparagraph (A) shall include metrics on the total 
 number of individuals enrolled in the State plan or 
 under a waiver of such plan during a fiscal year that 
 required the level of care provided in a nursing 
 facility, intermediate care facility for individuals 
 with intellectual disabilities, institution for mental 
 disease, or other similarly restrictive or 
 institutional setting.
 (2) Process.--The Secretary shall develop the metrics 
 described in paragraph (1) through a public process, which 
 shall provide opportunities for stakeholders to participate.
 (b) Updating Metrics.--The Secretary, in consultation with the 
Deputy Administrator and Director for the Center for Medicaid and CHIP 
Services and State Medicaid Directors, shall update the metrics 
developed under subsection (a) not less than once every 3 years.
 (c) State Implementation Funding.--The Secretary may award funds, 
from the amount appropriated under subsection (d), to States for the 
purpose of implementing the metrics developed under this section.
 (d) Appropriation.--There is appropriated to the Secretary, out of 
any funds in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, $200,000,000 for 
fiscal year 2027, to remain available until expended, for the purpose 
of carrying out this section.

SEC. 106. REPORTS; TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE; OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE 
 REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) Reports.--The Secretary shall submit to the Committee on 
Finance of the Senate, the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and 
Pensions of the Senate, the Special Committee on Aging of the Senate, 
the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives, 
and the Committee on Education and Workforce of the House of 
Representatives the following reports relating to the home and 
community-based services implementation plan established under section 
104:
 (1) Interim report.--Not later than 2 years after the date 
 of enactment of this Act, a report that describes--
 (A) State efforts to develop their home and 
 community-based services implementation plans as 
 described in section 1902(zz) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(zz)) (as added by section 104); 
 and
 (B) the funds awarded to States for any 
 administrative costs associated with the development of 
 such implementation plans.
 (2) First implementation report.--Not later than 4 years 
 after the date of enactment of this Act, a report that includes 
 the following:
 (A) A description of the home and community-based 
 services implementation plans approved by the Secretary 
 under section 1902(zz) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396a(zz)) (as added by section 104).
 (B) A description of the national landscape with 
 respect to gaps in coverage of home and community-based 
 services, disparities in access to such services, 
 utilization of such services, and barriers to accessing 
 such services.
 (C) A description of the national landscape with 
 respect to the direct care workforce that provides home 
 and community-based services, including with respect to 
 compensation, benefits, and challenges to the 
 availability of such workers.
 (3) Subsequent reports.--Not later than 7 years after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, and every 3 years thereafter, a 
 report that includes the following:
 (A) The number of States awarded funding, and the 
 funds awarded to such States, to develop an 
 implementation plan described in section 1902(zz) of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(zz)) (as added 
 by section 104).
 (B) A summary of the progress being made by such 
 States with respect to strengthening and expanding 
 access to home and community-based services and the 
 direct care workforce that provides such services and 
 meeting the benchmarks for demonstrating improvements 
 required under section 1905(ll)(5) of the Social 
 Security Act (as added by section 102).
 (C) A summary of outcomes related to home and 
 community-based services core quality measures and 
 beneficiary and family caregiver surveys.
 (D) A summary of the challenges and best practices 
 reported by States in expanding access to home and 
 community-based services and supporting and expanding 
 the direct care workforce that provides such services.
 (b) Technical Assistance; Guidance; Regulations.--The Secretary 
shall provide States awarded funding to develop an implementation plan 
described in section 1902(zz) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396a(zz)) (as added by section 104) with technical assistance related 
to carrying out the home and community-based services implementation 
plans approved by the Secretary under such section and meeting the 
requirements and benchmarks for demonstrating improvements required 
under section 1905(mm) of the Social Security Act (as added by section 
102) and shall issue such guidance or regulations as necessary to carry 
out this title and the amendments made by this title, including 
guidance specifying how States shall assess and track the availability 
of home and community-based services over time.
 (c) Recommendations To Guide HCBS Implementation.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 18 months after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in coordination with the 
 Secretary of Labor and the Administrator of the Centers for 
 Medicare & Medicaid Services, shall issue recommendations 
 regarding how the Federal Government and States can strengthen 
 the direct care workforce that provides home and community-
 based services, including with respect to how the Federal 
 Government should classify the direct care workforce, how such 
 Administrator and State Medicaid programs can enforce and 
 support the provision of competitive wages and benefits across 
 the direct care workforce, including for workers with 
 particular skills or expertise, and how State Medicaid programs 
 can support training opportunities and other related efforts 
 that support the provision of quality home and community-based 
 services.
 (2) Stakeholder consultation.--
 (A) In general.--In developing the recommendations 
 required under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall 
 ensure that such recommendations are informed by 
 consultation with recipients of home and community-
 based services, family caregivers of such recipients, 
 providers, health plans, direct care workers, chosen 
 representatives of direct care workers, educational 
 agencies, and aging, disability, and workforce 
 advocates.
 (B) Consultation with current and potential hcbs 
 beneficiaries and family caregivers.--In consulting 
 with stakeholders under subparagraph (A), the Secretary 
 shall--
 (i) hold at least 1 meeting solely with 
 current and potential recipients of home and 
 community-based services and family caregivers 
 of such recipients for the purpose of 
 developing the recommendations required under 
 paragraph (1); and
 (ii) seek to achieve parity in terms of the 
 level of participation in the development of 
 such recommendations between--
 (I) current and potential 
 recipients of home and community-based 
 services and family caregivers of such 
 recipients; and
 (II) other categories of 
 stakeholder described in subparagraph 
 (A).
 (d) Funding.--Out of any funds in the Treasury not otherwise 
appropriated, there is appropriated to the Secretary for purposes of 
carrying out this section, $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2027, to remain 
available until expended.

SEC. 107. QUALITY MEASUREMENT AND IMPROVEMENT.

 (a) Development and Publication of Core and Supplemental Sets of 
HCBS Quality Measures.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall identify and publish a 
 core set and supplemental set of home and community-based 
 services quality measures for use by State Medicaid programs, 
 health plans and managed care entities that enter into 
 contracts with such programs, and providers of items and 
 services under such programs.
 (2) Regular reviews and updates.--The Secretary shall 
 review and update the core set and supplemental set of home and 
 community-based services quality measures published under 
 paragraph (1) not less frequently than annually.
 (3) Requirements.--
 (A) Interagency collaboration; stakeholder input.--
 In developing the core set and supplemental set of home 
 and community-based services quality measures under 
 paragraph (1), and subsequently reviewing and updating 
 such core and supplemental sets, the Secretary shall--
 (i) collaborate with subagency heads 
 determined appropriate by the Secretary; and
 (ii) ensure that such core and supplemental 
 sets are informed by input from stakeholders, 
 including recipients of home and community-
 based services, family caregivers of such 
 recipients, providers, health plans, direct 
 care workers, chosen representatives of direct 
 care workers, and aging, disability, and 
 workforce advocates, with the goal that at 
 least half of such input is from current and 
 potential recipients of home and community-
 based services and family caregivers.
 (B) Reflective of full array of services.--Such 
 core set and supplemental set of home and community-
 based services quality measures shall--
 (i) reflect the full array of home and 
 community-based services and recipients of such 
 services, including adults and children; and
 (ii) include--
 (I) outcomes-based measures;
 (II) measures of availability of 
 services;
 (III) measures of provider capacity 
 and availability;
 (IV) measures related to person-
 centered care;
 (V) measures specific to self-
 directed care;
 (VI) measures related to 
 transitions to and from institutional 
 care;
 (VII) beneficiary and family 
 caregiver surveys; and
 (VIII) measures related to outcomes 
 by race and ethnicity, language, sex, 
 gender identity, geography, and other 
 demographic factors to track and reduce 
 health disparities.
 (C) Demographics.--Such core set and supplemental 
 set of home and community-based services quality 
 measures shall allow for the collection of data that is 
 disaggregated by demographics (as defined in section 2 
 and including any additional category determined by the 
 Secretary).
 (4) Funding.--Out of any funds in the Treasury not 
 otherwise appropriated, there is appropriated to the Secretary 
 for purposes of carrying out this subsection, $10,000,000 for 
 fiscal year 2027, to remain available until expended.
 (b) State Adoption and Reports.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the date on 
 which the Secretary publishes the core set and supplemental set 
 of home and community-based services quality measures under 
 subsection (a)(1), and annually thereafter, each State Medicaid 
 program shall use such core and supplemental sets (or an 
 alternative set of quality measures approved by the Secretary) 
 to report information to the Secretary regarding the quality of 
 home and community-based services provided under such program.
 (2) Process.--The information required under paragraph (1) 
 shall be reported using a standardized format and procedures 
 established by the Secretary. Such procedures shall allow a 
 State Medicaid program to report such information separately or 
 as part of the annual reports required under sections 1139A(c) 
 and 1139B(d) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320b-9a, 
 1320b-9b).
 (3) Publication of quality measures.--Each State Medicaid 
 program shall annually make the information reported to the 
 Secretary under paragraph (1) available to the public.
 (4) Increased federal matching rate for adoption and 
 reporting.--Section 1903(a)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396b(a)(3)), as amended by section 104(b), is amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (H)(ii), by striking ``plus'' 
 after the semicolon and inserting ``and''; and
 (B) by inserting after subparagraph (H)(ii) the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(I) 80 percent of so much of the sums expended 
 during such quarter as are attributable to the 
 reporting of information regarding the quality of home 
 and community-based services in accordance with section 
 107(b) of the HCBS Access Act; plus''.
 (c) Ombudsman.--Each State shall establish a home and community-
based services ombudsman office that--
 (1) operates independently from the State Medicaid agency 
 and managed care entities;
 (2) provides direct assistance to beneficiaries and their 
 families with respect to accessing home and community-based 
 services; and
 (3) identifies and reports systemic problems to State 
 officials, the public, and the Secretary with respect to the 
 provision of or access to home and community-based services.

SEC. 108. MAKING PERMANENT THE EXTENDED PROTECTION UNDER MEDICAID FOR 
 RECIPIENTS OF HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES AGAINST 
 SPOUSAL IMPOVERISHMENT.

 (a) In General.--Section 1924(h)(1)(A) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1396r-5(h)(1)(A)) is amended by striking ``(at the option of 
the State) is described in section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(VI)'' and 
inserting ``is an eligible individual (as defined in section 
1905(ll)(3))''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 2404 of the Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-5 note) is amended by striking 
``September 30, 2027'' and inserting ``the date of enactment of the 
HCBS Access Act''.

SEC. 109. PERMANENT EXTENSION OF MONEY FOLLOWS THE PERSON REBALANCING 
 DEMONSTRATION.

 Section 6071(h)(1)(L) of the Deficit Reduction Act of 2005 (42 
U.S.C. 1396a note) is amended by striking ``each of fiscal years 2024 
through 2027'' and inserting ``fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year 
thereafter''.

SEC. 110. LIENS, ADJUSTMENTS, AND RECOVERIES FOR MEDICAL ASSISTANCE.

 (a) Liens.--Section 1917(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396p(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by 
 striking ``plan, except--'' and inserting ``plan, 
 except, subject to paragraph (4)--''; and
 (B) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``in the case 
 of'' and inserting ``with respect to liens imposed 
 before the date of the enactment of the HCBS Access 
 Act, in the case of''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4) Notwithstanding any preceding provision of this subsection, 
not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this 
paragraph, a State shall--
 ``(A) withdraw any lien imposed under paragraph (1)(B) that 
 is in effect as of such date; and
 ``(B) notify each individual (or legal representative of 
 such individual (or of such individual's estate)) subject to 
 such a lien so withdrawn of the withdrawal of such lien.''.
 (b) Adjustments and Recoveries.--Section 1917(b) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396p(b)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``except that'' and 
 inserting ``except that, subject to paragraph (6),''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(6) Notwithstanding any preceding provision of this subsection, 
no adjustment or recovery of any medical assistance correctly paid on 
behalf of an individual under the State plan may be initiated, 
maintained, or collected on or after the date of the enactment of this 
paragraph. Not later than 90 days after such date, a State shall--
 ``(A) withdraw any lien in effect as of such date with 
 respect to such medical assistance correctly paid; and
 ``(B) notify each individual (or legal representative of 
 such individual (or of such individual's estate)) subject to 
 such a lien so withdrawn of the withdrawal of such lien and the 
 prohibition on adjustment or recovery under this paragraph.''.

SEC. 111. HCBS PROVIDER TAX.

 Section 1903(w) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(w)) is 
amended--
 (1) in paragraph (7)(A)--
 (A) by redesignating clause (ix) as clause (x); and
 (B) by inserting after clause (viii) the following 
 new clause:
 ``(ix) home and community-based 
 services.''; and
 (2) in paragraph (4)(C)(ii), by inserting ``for a class of 
 health care items and services other than the class described 
 in paragraph (7)(A)(ix),'' after ``2026,''.

SEC. 112. MEDICARE AMENDMENT.

 Section 1860D-14(a)(1)(D)(i) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395w-114) is amended by striking ``or subsection (c) or (d) of section 
1915 or under a State plan amendment under subsection (i) of such 
section'' and inserting ``, section 1915, 1115A, or under a State plan 
amendment''.

 TITLE II--RECOGNIZING THE ROLE OF DIRECT SUPPORT PROFESSIONALS

SEC. 201. FINDINGS.

 Congress finds the following:
 (1) Direct support professionals play a critical role in 
 the care provided to children and adults with intellectual and 
 developmental disabilities.
 (2) Providers of home and community-based services are 
 experiencing difficulty hiring and retaining direct support 
 professionals, with a national turnover rate of 39 percent as 
 identified in a 2023 study by the National Core Indicators.
 (3) High turnover rates can lead to instability for 
 individuals receiving services, and this may result in 
 individuals not receiving enough personalized care to help them 
 reach their goals for independent living.
 (4) A discrete occupational category for direct support 
 professionals will help States and the Federal Government--
 (A) better interpret the shortage in the labor 
 market of direct support professionals; and
 (B) collect data on the high turnover rate of 
 direct support professionals.
 (5) The Standard Occupational Classification system is 
 designed and maintained solely for statistical purposes, and is 
 used by Federal statistical agencies to classify workers and 
 jobs into occupational categories for the purpose of 
 collecting, calculating, analyzing, or disseminating data.
 (6) Occupations in the Standard Occupational Classification 
 system are classified based on work performed and, in some 
 cases, on the skills, education, or training needed to perform 
 the work.
 (7) Establishing a discrete occupational category for 
 direct support professionals will--
 (A) correct an inaccurate representation in the 
 Standard Occupational Classification system;
 (B) recognize these professionals for the critical 
 and often times overlooked work that they perform for 
 the disabled community, which work is different than 
 the work of a home health aide or a personal care aide; 
 and
 (C) better align the Standard Occupational 
 Classification system with related classification 
 systems.

SEC. 202. REVISION OF STANDARD OCCUPATIONAL CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM.

 (a) In General.--The Director of the Office of Management and 
Budget (in this Act referred to as the ``Director'') shall, as part of 
the first revision process of the Standard Occupational Classification 
system occurring after the date of enactment of this Act, consider 
establishing a separate code for direct support professionals as a 
subset of healthcare support occupations.
 (b) Report to Congress.--If the Director decides not to establish 
the separate code for direct support professionals described in 
subsection (a), the Director shall, not later than 30 days after the 
Director announces in the Federal Register the final decision of the 
revision process described in such subsection, submit to the Committee 
on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate and the 
Committee on Education and Workforce of the House of Representatives a 
report explaining why such separate code was not established.

 TITLE III--SUPPORT FOR THE DIRECT CARE WORKFORCE

SEC. 301. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Apprenticeship program.--The term ``apprenticeship 
 program'' means an apprenticeship program registered under the 
 Act of August 16, 1937 (commonly known as the ``National 
 Apprenticeship Act''; 50 Stat. 664, chapter 663; 29 U.S.C. 50 
 et seq.), including any requirement, standard, or rule 
 promulgated under such Act.
 (2) Community college.--The term ``community college'' 
 means a public institution of higher education at which the 
 highest degree that is predominantly awarded to students is an 
 associate's degree, including Tribal Colleges or Universities 
 receiving grants under section 316 of the Higher Education Act 
 of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1059c) that offer a 2-year program for 
 completion of such degree and State public institutions of 
 higher education that offer such a 2-year program.
 (3) Direct care professional.--The term ``direct care 
 professional''--
 (A) means an individual who, in exchange for 
 compensation, provides services to a person with a 
 disability or an older adult that promote the 
 independence of such person or adult, including--
 (i) services that enhance the independence 
 and community inclusion for such person or 
 adult, including traveling with such person or 
 individual or attending and assisting such 
 person or adult while visiting friends and 
 family, shopping, or socializing;
 (ii) services such as coaching and 
 supporting such person or adult in 
 communicating needs, achieving self-expression, 
 pursuing personal goals, living independently, 
 and participating actively in employment or 
 voluntary roles in the community;
 (iii) services such as providing assistance 
 with activities of daily living (such as 
 feeding, bathing, toileting, and ambulation) 
 and with tasks such as meal preparation, 
 shopping, light housekeeping, and laundry;
 (iv) services that support such person or 
 adult at home, work, or school, or in any other 
 community setting; or
 (v) services that promote health and 
 wellness, including scheduling and taking such 
 person or adult for or to health care 
 appointments, communicating with health and 
 allied health professionals administering 
 medications, implementing health and behavioral 
 health interventions and treatment plans, and 
 monitoring and recording health status and 
 progress; and
 (B) includes--
 (i) a service provider supporting people 
 with intellectual disabilities, developmental 
 disabilities, or other disabilities;
 (ii) a home and community-based services 
 manager or direct support professional manager;
 (iii) a self-directed care worker;
 (iv) a personal care service worker;
 (v) a direct care worker, as defined in 
 section 799B of the Public Health Service Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 295p); or
 (vi) any worker in another position or job 
 related to the home care or direct care 
 workforce, such as positions or jobs in respite 
 care, palliative care, community support, or 
 peer support, as determined by the Secretary, 
 in consultation with the Administrator of the 
 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services and 
 the Secretary of Labor.
 (4) Direct care workforce.--The term ``direct care 
 workforce'' means the broad workforce of direct care 
 professionals.
 (5) Eligible entity.--The term ``eligible entity'' means an 
 entity--
 (A) that is--
 (i) a State;
 (ii) a labor organization, joint labor-
 management organization, or employer, of direct 
 care professionals;
 (iii) an organization or a nonprofit entity 
 with experience in aging or disability, or in 
 supporting the rights and interests of, 
 training, or educating direct care 
 professionals or family caregivers;
 (iv) an Indian Tribe, Tribal organization, 
 or Urban Indian organization;
 (v) a community college or other 
 institution of higher education; or
 (vi) a consortium of entities listed in any 
 of clauses (i) through (v);
 (B) that agrees to include, as applicable with 
 respect to the type of grant the entity is seeking 
 under this title and the activities supported through 
 such grant, older adults, people with disabilities, 
 direct care professionals, and family caregivers, as 
 advisors and trainers in such activities; and
 (C) that agrees to consult with the State Medicaid 
 agency of the State (or each State) served by the grant 
 on the grant activities, to the extent that such agency 
 (or each such agency) is not the eligible entity.
 (6) Employer.--The terms ``employ'' and ``employer'' have 
 the meanings given the terms in section 3 of the Fair Labor 
 Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 203).
 (7) Family caregiver.--The term ``family caregiver'' has 
 the meaning given such term in section 2 of the RAISE Family 
 Caregivers Act (42 U.S.C. 3030s note) and includes paid and 
 unpaid family caregivers.
 (8) Indian tribe; tribal organization.--The terms ``Indian 
 Tribe'' and ``Tribal organization'' have the meanings given 
 such terms in section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination and 
 Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 5304).
 (9) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 ``institution of higher education'' means--
 (A) an institution of higher education defined in 
 section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 1001); or
 (B) an institution of higher education defined in 
 section 102(a)(1)(B) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 
 1002(a)(1)(B)).
 (10) Older adult.--The term ``older adult'' means an 
 individual who is 60 years of age or older.
 (11) Person with a disability.--The term ``person with a 
 disability'' means an individual with a disability, as defined 
 in section 3 of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 
 U.S.C. 12102).
 (12) Project participant.--The term ``project participant'' 
 means an individual participating in a project or activity 
 assisted with a grant under this title, including (as 
 applicable for the category of the grant) a direct care 
 professional, or an individual seeking to be such a 
 professional, or a family caregiver.
 (13) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services, acting through the Administrator 
 for Community Living.
 (14) Self-directed care professional.--The term ``self-
 directed care professional'' means a direct care professional 
 who is employed by an individual who is an older adult, a 
 person with a disability, or a representative of such older 
 adult or person with a disability, and such older adult or 
 person with a disability has the decisionmaking authority over 
 certain supports and services provided by the direct care 
 professional and takes direct responsibility to manage those 
 supports and services.
 (15) Supportive services.--The term ``supportive services'' 
 means services that are necessary to enable an individual to 
 participate in activities assisted with a grant under this 
 title, such as transportation, child care, dependent care, 
 housing, workplace accommodations, employee benefits such as 
 paid sick leave and child care, workplace health and safety 
 protections, wages and overtime pay, and needs-related 
 payments.
 (16) Urban indian organization.--The term ``urban Indian 
 organization'' has the meaning given the term in section 4 of 
 the Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1603).
 (17) Workforce innovation and opportunity act terms.--The 
 terms ``career pathway'', ``career planning'', ``in-demand 
 industry sector or occupation'', ``individual with a barrier to 
 employment'', ``local board'', ``on-the-job training'', 
 ``recognized postsecondary credential'', ``region'', and 
 ``State board'' have the meanings given such terms in section 3 
 of the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 
 3102).
 (18) Work-based learning.--The term ``work-based learning'' 
 has the meaning given the term in section 3 of the Carl D. 
 Perkins Career and Technical Education Act of 2006 (20 U.S.C. 
 2302).

SEC. 302. AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH A TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CENTER FOR 
 BUILDING THE DIRECT CARE WORKFORCE.

 (a) Program Authorized.--The Secretary shall, in consultation with 
the Secretary of Labor, the Secretary of Education, the Administrator 
of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, and the heads of other 
entities as necessary, establish a national technical assistance center 
(referred to in this section as the ``Center'') for--
 (1) supporting direct care workforce creation, training and 
 education, recruitment, retention, and advancement; and
 (2) supporting family caregivers and activities of family 
 caregivers as a critical part of the support team for older 
 adults or people with disabilities.
 (b) Advisory Council.--The Secretary shall establish an advisory 
council to provide recommendations to the Center with respect to the 
duties of the Center under this section and may engage individuals and 
entities described in paragraphs (3)(B), and (12), of section 304(b) 
(without regard to a specific project described in such paragraphs) for 
service on the advisory council.
 (c) Activities.--The Center may--
 (1) develop recommendations for training and education 
 curricula and programs for direct care professionals, which 
 recommendations may include recommendations for curricula for 
 higher education, postsecondary credentials, and programs with 
 community colleges;
 (2) develop learning and dissemination strategies to--
 (A) engage States and other entities in activities 
 supported by grants under this title and in use of 
 related best practices; and
 (B) distribute findings from activities supported 
 by grants under this title;
 (3) develop recommendations for training and education 
 curricula and other strategies for supporting family 
 caregivers;
 (4) explore the national data gaps, workforce shortage 
 areas, and data collection strategies for direct care 
 professionals and make recommendations to the Director of the 
 Office of Management and Budget for an occupation category in 
 the Standard Occupational Classification system for direct care 
 professionals as a health care support occupation;
 (5) recommend career development and advancement 
 opportunities for direct care professionals, which may include 
 recommendations for occupational frameworks, national 
 standards, recruitment campaigns, pre-apprenticeship and on-
 the-job training opportunities, apprenticeship programs, career 
 ladders or pathways, specializations or certifications, or 
 other activities; and
 (6) develop strategies for assisting with reporting and 
 evaluation of grant activities under section 305.

SEC. 303. AUTHORITY TO AWARD GRANTS.

 (a) Grants.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 12 months after the date of 
 enactment of this title, the Secretary, in consultation with 
 the Administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
 Services, the Secretary of Labor, and the Secretary of 
 Education, shall award grants described in paragraph (2) to 
 eligible entities. A grant awarded under this section may be in 
 more than 1 category described in such paragraph.
 (2) Categories of grants.--The categories of grants 
 described in this paragraph are each of the following:
 (A) Direct care professional grants.--Grants to 
 eligible entities to create and carry out projects for 
 the purposes of recruiting, retaining, or providing 
 advancement opportunities for direct care professionals 
 who are not described in subparagraph (B) or (C), 
 including through education or training programs for 
 such professionals or individuals seeking to become 
 such professionals.
 (B) Direct care professional managers grants.--
 Grants to eligible entities to create and carry out 
 projects for the purposes of recruiting, retaining, or 
 providing advancement opportunities for direct care 
 professionals who are managers or supervisory staff and 
 who have coaching, training, managerial, supervisory, 
 or other oversight responsibilities, including through 
 education or training programs for such individuals 
 professionals or individuals seeking to become such 
 professionals.
 (C) Self-directed care professionals grants.--
 Grants to eligible entities to create and carry out 
 projects for the purposes of recruiting, retaining, or 
 providing advancement opportunities for self-directed 
 care professionals, including through education or 
 training programs for such professionals or individuals 
 seeking to become such professionals.
 (D) Family caregiver grants.--Grants to eligible 
 entities to create and carry out projects for providing 
 support to paid or unpaid family caregivers through 
 educational, training, or other resources, including 
 resources for caregiver self-care or educational or 
 training resources for individuals newly in a 
 caregiving role or seeking additional support in the 
 role of a family caregiver.
 (3) Projects for advancement opportunities.--Not less than 
 30 percent of projects assisted with grants under this title 
 shall be projects to provide career pathways that offer 
 opportunities for professional development and advancement 
 opportunities to direct care professionals.
 (b) Treatment of Continuation Activities.--An eligible entity that 
carries out activities described in subsection (a)(2) prior to receipt 
of a grant under this title may use such grant to continue carrying out 
such activities, and, if the entity uses such grant to continue such 
activities, the entity shall be treated as an eligible entity carrying 
out a project through a grant under this title and the activities shall 
be considered to be such a project.

SEC. 304. PROJECT PLANS.

 (a) In General.--An eligible entity seeking a grant under this 
title shall submit to the Secretary a project plan for each project to 
be developed and carried out (including activities to be continued as 
described in section 303(b)) with the grant at such time, in such 
manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
 (b) Contents.--A project plan submitted by an eligible entity under 
subsection (a) shall include a description of information determined 
relevant by the Secretary for purposes of the category of the grant and 
the activities to be carried out through the grant. Such information 
shall include (as applicable) each of the following:
 (1) The demographics (as defined in section 2) of the 
 population in the State or relevant geographic area, including 
 a description of the populations likely to need long-term care 
 services, such as people with disabilities and older adults.
 (2) Projections of unmet need for services provided by 
 direct care professionals based on enrollment waiting lists 
 under home and community-based waivers under section 1115 of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1315) or section 1915 of 
 such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396n) and other relevant data to the 
 extent practicable and feasible, such as direct care workforce 
 vacancy rates and crude separation rates, and the number of 
 direct care professionals, including such professionals who are 
 managers or supervisors, in the region.
 (3) Information on an advisory committee to advise the 
 eligible entity on activities to be carried out through the 
 grant. Such advisory committee--
 (A) may include entities listed in paragraph (12); 
 and
 (B) shall include--
 (i) older adults or persons with a 
 disability;
 (ii) organizations representing the rights 
 and interests of people receiving services by 
 the direct care professionals or family 
 caregivers targeted by the project;
 (iii) individuals who are direct care 
 professionals or family caregivers targeted by 
 the project and organizations representing the 
 rights and interests of direct care 
 professionals or family caregivers;
 (iv) as applicable, employers of 
 individuals described in clause (iii) and labor 
 organizations representing such individuals;
 (v) representatives of the State Medicaid 
 agency, the State agency defined in section 102 
 of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 U.S.C. 
 3002), the State developmental disabilities 
 office, and the State behavioral health agency, 
 in the State (or each State) to be served by 
 the project; and
 (vi) representatives reflecting diverse 
 racial, cultural, ethnic, geographic, 
 socioeconomic, and gender identity and sexual 
 orientation perspectives.
 (4) Information on current or projected job openings for, 
 or relevant labor market information related to, the direct 
 care professionals targeted by the project in the State or 
 geographic area to be served by the project, and the geographic 
 scope of the workforce to be served by the project.
 (5) Information on specific efforts and strategies that the 
 entity carrying out the project will undertake to reduce 
 barriers to recruitment, retention, or advancement of the 
 direct care professionals targeted by the project, including an 
 assurance that such efforts will include--
 (A) an assessment of the wages or other 
 compensation or benefits necessary to recruit and 
 retain the direct care professionals targeted by the 
 project;
 (B) a description of the project's projected 
 compensation or benefits for the direct care 
 professionals targeted by the project at the State or 
 local level, including a comparison of such projected 
 compensation or benefits to regional and national 
 compensation or benefits and a description of how wages 
 and benefits received by project participants will be 
 impacted by the participation in and completion of the 
 project; and
 (C) a description of the projected impact of 
 workplace safety issues on the recruitment and 
 retention of direct care professionals targeted by the 
 project, and a description of the availability of 
 personal protective equipment.
 (6) In the case of a project offering an education or 
 training program for direct care professionals, a description 
 of such program (including how the core competencies identified 
 by the Administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
 Services will be incorporated, curricula, models, and standards 
 used under the program, and any associated recognized 
 postsecondary credentials for which the program provides 
 preparation, as applicable), which shall include an assurance 
 that such program will provide to each project participant in 
 such program--
 (A) relevant education or training regarding the 
 rights of recipients of home and community-based 
 services, including their rights to--
 (i) receive services in integrated settings 
 that provide access to the broader community;
 (ii) exercise self-determination;
 (iii) be free from all forms of abuse, 
 neglect, or exploitation; and
 (iv) person-centered planning and 
 practices, including participation in planning 
 activities;
 (B) relevant education or training to ensure that 
 each project participant has the necessary skills to 
 recognize abuse and understand their obligations with 
 regard to reporting and responding to abuse 
 appropriately in accordance with relevant Federal and 
 State law;
 (C) relevant education or training regarding the 
 provision of culturally competent and disability 
 competent supports to recipients of services provided 
 by the direct care professionals targeted by the 
 project;
 (D) an apprenticeship program, work-based learning, 
 or on-the-job training opportunities;
 (E) supervision or mentoring; and
 (F) for any on-the-job training portion of the 
 program, a progressively increasing, clearly defined 
 schedule of wages to be paid to each such participant 
 that--
 (i) is consistent with skill gains or 
 attainment of a recognized postsecondary 
 credential described in the plan and received 
 as a result of participation in or completion 
 of such program; and
 (ii) ensures the entry wage is not less 
 than the greater of--
 (I) the minimum wage required under 
 section 6(a) of the Fair Labor 
 Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 
 206(a)); or
 (II) the applicable wage required 
 by other applicable Federal or State 
 law, or a collective bargaining 
 agreement.
 (7) A description of any innovative models or processes, 
 not described in another paragraph of this subsection, the 
 eligible entity will implement to support the retention and 
 career advancement of the direct care professionals targeted by 
 the project.
 (8) A description of the supportive services and benefits 
 to be provided to the project participants in order to support 
 the employment, retention, or career advancement of the direct 
 care professionals targeted by the project.
 (9) A description of how the eligible entity will make use 
 of career planning to support the identification of advancement 
 opportunities and career pathways for the direct care 
 professionals in the State or geographic area to be served by 
 the project.
 (10) A description of how the eligible entity will collect 
 and submit to the Secretary workforce data and outcomes of the 
 project.
 (11) A description of how the project--
 (A) will--
 (i) provide adequate and safe equipment and 
 facilities for training and supervision, 
 including a safe work environment free from 
 discrimination, which may include the provision 
 of personal protective equipment and other 
 necessary equipment to prevent the spread of 
 infectious disease among the direct care 
 professionals targeted by the project and 
 recipients of services provided by such 
 professionals;
 (ii) incorporate remote training and 
 education opportunities or technology-supported 
 opportunities;
 (iii) for training and education curricula, 
 incorporate evidenced-supported practices for 
 adult learners and universal design for 
 learning and ensure recipients of services 
 provided by the direct care professionals or 
 family caregivers targeted by the project 
 participate in the development and 
 implementation of such training and education 
 curricula;
 (iv) use outreach, recruitment, and 
 retention strategies designed to reach and 
 retain a diverse workforce;
 (v) incorporate methods to monitor 
 satisfaction with project activities for 
 project participants and individuals receiving 
 services from such participants;
 (vi) incorporate evidence-supported 
 practices for family caregiver engagement; and
 (vii) incorporate core competencies 
 identified by the Administrator of the Centers 
 for Medicare & Medicaid Services; and
 (B) may incorporate continuing education programs 
 and specialty training, with a specific focus on--
 (i) trauma-informed care;
 (ii) behavioral health, including co-
 occurring behavioral health conditions and 
 intellectual or developmental disabilities;
 (iii) Alzheimer's and dementia care;
 (iv) chronic disease management; or
 (v) the use of supportive or assistive 
 technology.
 (12) A description of how the eligible entity will consult 
 on the implementation of the project, or coordinate the project 
 with, each of the following entities, to the extent that each 
 such entity is not the eligible entity:
 (A) The State Medicaid agency, State agency defined 
 in section 102 of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 
 U.S.C. 3002), and the State developmental disabilities 
 office for the State (or each State) to be served by 
 the project.
 (B) The local board and State board for each 
 geographic area, or State, to be served by the project.
 (C) In the case of a project that carries out an 
 education or training program, a nonprofit organization 
 with demonstrated experience in the development or 
 delivery of curricula or coursework.
 (D) A nonprofit organization, which may be a labor 
 organization, that fosters the professional development 
 and collective engagement of the direct care 
 professionals or family caregivers targeted by the 
 project.
 (E) Area agencies on aging, as defined in section 
 102 of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 U.S.C. 
 3002).
 (F) Centers for independent living, as described in 
 part C of chapter 1 of title VII of the Rehabilitation 
 Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 796f et seq.).
 (G) The State Council on Developmental Disabilities 
 (as such term is used in subtitle B of title I of the 
 Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of 
 Rights Act of 2000 (42 U.S.C. 15021 et seq.)) for the 
 State (or each State) to be served by the project.
 (H) Aging and Disability Resource Centers (as 
 defined in section 102 of the Older Americans Act of 
 1965 (42 U.S.C. 3002)).
 (I) A nonprofit State provider association that 
 represents providers who employ the direct care 
 professionals or family caregivers targeted by the 
 project, where such an association exists.
 (J) An entity that employs the direct care 
 professionals or family caregivers targeted by the 
 project.
 (K) University Centers for Excellence in 
 Developmental Disabilities Education, Research, and 
 Service supported under subtitle D of title I of the 
 Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of 
 Rights Act of 2000 (42 U.S.C. 15061 et seq.).
 (L) The State protection and advocacy system 
 described in section 143 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 15043) 
 of the State (or each State) to be served by the 
 project.
 (M) Direct care professionals or family caregivers 
 targeted by the project, or workforce organizations for 
 such professionals or caregivers as applicable, 
 representing underserved communities.
 (13) A description of how the eligible entity will consult 
 throughout the project with--
 (A) individuals employed or working as the direct 
 care professionals or family caregivers targeted by the 
 project;
 (B) representatives of such professionals or 
 caregivers;
 (C) individuals assisted by such professionals or 
 caregivers;
 (D) the families of such professionals or 
 caregivers; and
 (E) individuals receiving education or training to 
 become such professionals or caregivers.
 (14) A description of outreach efforts to individuals for 
 participation in such project, including targeted outreach 
 efforts to--
 (A) individuals who are recipients of assistance 
 under a State program funded under part A of title IV 
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 601 et seq.) or 
 individuals who are eligible for such assistance; and
 (B) individuals with barriers to employment.
 (c) Considerations.--In selecting eligible entities to receive a 
grant under this title, the Secretary shall ensure--
 (1) equitable geographic diversity, including by selecting 
 recipients serving rural areas and selecting recipients serving 
 urban areas; and
 (2) that selected eligible entities will serve areas where 
 the occupation of a direct care professional, or a related 
 occupation, is an in-demand industry sector or occupation.
 (d) Uses of Funds; Supplement, Not Supplant.--
 (1) Uses of funds.--
 (A) In general.--Each eligible entity receiving a 
 grant under this title shall use the funds of such 
 grant to carry out at least 1 project described in 
 section 303(a)(2).
 (B) Administrative costs.--Each eligible entity 
 receiving a grant under this title shall not use more 
 than 5 percent of the funds of such grant for costs 
 associated with the administration of activities under 
 this title.
 (C) Direct support.--Each eligible entity receiving 
 a grant under this title shall use not less than 5 
 percent of the funds of such grant to provide direct 
 financial benefits or supportive services to project 
 participants who are direct care professionals or paid 
 or unpaid family caregivers to support the financial 
 needs of such participants during the duration of the 
 project activities.
 (2) Supplement, not supplant.--An eligible entity receiving 
 a grant under this title shall use such grant only to 
 supplement, and not supplant, the amount of government funds 
 that, in the absence of such grant, would be available to 
 address the recruitment, training and education, retention, and 
 advancement of direct care professionals or provide support for 
 family caregivers, in the State or geographic area served by 
 the eligible entity.
 (3) Prohibition.--No amounts made available under this 
 title may be used for any activity that is subject to the 
 reporting requirements set forth in section 203(a) of the 
 Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959 (29 
 U.S.C. 433(a)).

SEC. 305. EVALUATIONS AND REPORTS; TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.

 (a) Reporting Requirements by Grant Recipients.--
 (1) In general.--An eligible entity receiving a grant under 
 this title shall cooperate with the Secretary and annually 
 provide a report to the Secretary that includes any relevant 
 data requested by the Secretary in a manner specified by the 
 Secretary.
 (2) Contents.--The data requested by the Secretary for an 
 annual report may include any of the following (as determined 
 relevant by the Secretary with respect to the category of the 
 grant and each project supported through the grant):
 (A) The number of individuals and the demographics 
 categories served by each project supported by the 
 grant, including--
 (i) the number of individuals recruited 
 through each such project to be employed as a 
 direct care professional;
 (ii) the number of individuals who through 
 each such project attained employment as a 
 direct care professional; and
 (iii) the number of individuals who 
 enrolled in each such project and withdrew or 
 were terminated from that project without 
 completing training or attaining employment as 
 a direct care professional.
 (B) The number of family caregivers participating 
 in an education or training program through each 
 project supported by the grant.
 (C) The number of project participants who through 
 each such project participated in and completed--
 (i) work-based learning;
 (ii) on-the-job training;
 (iii) an apprenticeship program; or
 (iv) a professional development or 
 mentoring program.
 (D)(i) Other services, benefits, or supports (other 
 than the services, benefits, or supports described in 
 subparagraph (C)) provided through each such project to 
 assist in the recruitment, retention, or advancement of 
 direct care professionals (including through education 
 or training for such professionals or individuals 
 seeking to become such professionals);
 (ii) the number of individuals who accessed such 
 services, benefits, or supports; and
 (iii) the impact of such services, benefits, or 
 supports.
 (E) The crude separation and vacancy rates of 
 direct care professionals, and such rates for those 
 professionals who are managers or supervisors, in the 
 geographic area for a number of years before the grant 
 was awarded, as the number of years is determined by 
 the Secretary, and annually thereafter for the duration 
 of the grant period.
 (F) How each project supported by the grant 
 assessed satisfaction with respect to--
 (i) project participants assisted by the 
 project;
 (ii) individuals receiving services 
 delivered by project participants, including 
 satisfaction regarding--
 (I) any impact on the health or 
 health outcomes of such individuals; 
 and
 (II) any impact on the ability of 
 individuals to transition to or remain 
 in the community in an environment that 
 has the qualities established in 
 section 441.301(c)(4) of title 42, Code 
 of Federal Regulations (or successor 
 regulations); and
 (iii) employers of such project 
 participants.
 (G) The performance of the eligible entity with 
 respect to the indicators of performance on 
 unsubsidized employment, median earnings, credential 
 attainment, measurable skill gains, and employer 
 satisfaction.
 (H) Any other information with respect to outcomes 
 of the project as determined by the Secretary.
 (b) Annual Report to Congress by Secretary.--Not later than 2 years 
after the date of enactment of this title, and each year thereafter 
until all projects supported through a grant under this title are 
completed, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to Congress an annual 
report on the progress of each project supported through a grant under 
this title and the activities of the technical assistance center 
established under section 302.
 (c) GAO Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date on which all 
projects supported through a grant under this title are completed, the 
Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct a study and 
submit to Congress a report including--
 (1) an assessment of how the technical assistance center 
 established under section 302 and the projects supported 
 through a grant under this title assisted in the creation, 
 recruitment, training and education, retention, and advancement 
 of the direct care workforce or in providing support for family 
 caregivers; and
 (2) recommendations for such legislative or administrative 
 actions needed for improving the assistance described in 
 paragraph (1), as the Comptroller General determines 
 appropriate.
 (d) Independent Evaluations.--Not later than 6 months after the 
date of enactment of this title, the Secretary shall enter into a 
contract with an independent entity to provide independent evaluations 
of activities supported by grants under this title and activities of 
the technical assistance center established under section 302.

SEC. 306. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 (a) In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated--
 (1) for the establishment and activities of the technical 
 assistance center under section 302, $2,000,000 for each of 
 fiscal years 2029 through 2030; and
 (2) for grants under section 303, $1,000,000,000 for fiscal 
 year 2029.
 (b) Availability.--Amounts made available under this title shall 
remain available through September 30, 2038.

 TITLE IV--EVALUATION

SEC. 401. EVALUATION OF IMPACT ON ACCESS TO HCBS.

 (a) National Survey on Expanded HCBS Access.--The Administrator of 
the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, in coordination with the 
National Academy of Medicine, shall, not later than 7 years after the 
date of enactment of this Act, conduct or contract for a national 
survey of States, direct care professionals, family caregivers, and 
providers and recipients of home and community-based services, to 
determine the effects of the implementation of this Act and the 
amendments made by this Act on--
 (1) the availability and access to home and community-based 
 services under the Medicaid program nationally and in each 
 State;
 (2) the capacity of the direct service workforce to provide 
 home and community-based services and information on the 
 demographics (as defined in section 2) of such workforce;
 (3) the compensation and working conditions, including 
 scheduling and benefits, of direct care workers;
 (4) the economic effects on beneficiaries and on families 
 with a member receiving home and community-based services 
 through Medicaid;
 (5) the availability of direct care workers and services 
 for people needing long-term services and supports who are not 
 Medicaid eligible;
 (6) family caregivers; and
 (7) recommendations for measures to further expand and 
 enhance access home and community-based services.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 9 years after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
Services shall publish a report containing the results of the survey 
conducted under subsection (a).
 (c) American Community Survey Addition.--The Secretary of Commerce, 
acting through the Bureau of the Census, shall add to the American 
Community Survey a question designed to identify the need for long-term 
services and supports by residents of the United States.
 (d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to the Secretary such sums as are necessary to carry out 
this section.
 <all>