HR 2466 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2466
To assure due process and equal protection of the law by permitting the use of
statistical and other evidence to challenge the death penalty on the grounds
of disproportionate patterns of imposition with respect to racial groups,
to prohibit such patterns, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
May 24, 1989
Mr. CONYERS (for himself, Mr. BUSTAMANTE, Mr. TORRES, Mr. LEWIS of Georgia,
Ms. PELOSI, Mr. LELAND, Mr. DYMALLY, Mr. PANETTA, Mr. ROYBAL, Mr. UDALL,
Mr. SLATTERY, and Mr. DELLUMS) introduced the following bill; which was
referred to the Committee on the Judiciary
A BILL
To assure due process and equal protection of the law by permitting the use of
statistical and other evidence to challenge the death penalty on the grounds
of disproportionate patterns of imposition with respect to racial groups,
to prohibit such patterns, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Racial Justice Act'.
SEC. 2. PROHIBITION OF DEATH PENALTY IN DISPROPORTIONATE PATTERN.
 (a) IN GENERAL- A government shall not impose or carry out the penalty
 of death in criminal cases in a racially disproportionate pattern. An
 individual shall not be put to death in execution of a death sentence
 imposed under law administered in violation of this subsection.
 (b) DISPROPORTIONATE PATTERN- For purposes of subsection (a), a racially
 disproportionate pattern occurs when the penalty of death is imposed--
 (1) more frequently upon persons of one race than upon persons of other
 races convicted of crimes for which such penalty may be imposed; or
 (2) more frequently as punishment for crimes against persons of one race
 than as punishment for crimes against persons of another race;
and the greater frequency is not explained by relevant non-racial
circumstances.
SEC. 3. PROOF REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) ESTABLISHING PATTERN- To establish that a racially disproportionate
 pattern exists for the purposes of this Act--
 (1) ordinary methods of statistical proof suffice; and
 (2) it shall not be necessary to show discriminatory motive, intent,
 or purpose on the part of any individual or institution.
 (b) PRIMA FACIE CASE- To establish a prima facie showing that a racially
 disproportionate pattern exists for purposes of this Act, it suffices to
 show that death sentences are being imposed or executed--
 (1) upon persons of one race with a frequency that is disproportioned
 to their representation among the total numbers of persons arrested for,
 charged with, or convicted of, death eligible crimes; or
 (2) as punishment for crimes against persons of one race with a frequency
 that is disproportioned to their representation among the numbers of
 persons against whom death eligible crimes have been the subject of arrests,
 charges, or convictions.
 (c) REBUTTAL OF PRIMA FACIE CASE- To rebut a prima facie showing of a
 racially disproportionate pattern, a government must establish by clear
 and convincing evidence that identifiable and pertinent nondiscriminatory
 factors persuasively explain the observable racial disparities comprising
 the disproportion.
SEC. 4. DATA ON DEATH PENALTY CASES.
 (a) DESIGNATION OF CENTRAL AGENCY- Any State or Federal entity that provides
 by law for death to be imposed as a punishment for any crime shall designate
 a central agency to collect and maintain pertinent data on the charging,
 disposition, and sentencing patterns for all cases of death-eligible crimes.
 (b) FORM FOR DATA- The central agency so designated shall devise
 and distribute to every local official or agency responsible for the
 investigation or prosecution of deatheligible crimes a standard form to
 collect pertinent data.
 (c) PREPARATION OF DATA BY LOCAL OFFICIALS- Each local official responsible
 for the investigation or prosecution of death-eligible crimes shall complete
 a standard form on every case of death-eligible crime and shall transmit
 it to the central agency no later than three months after the disposition
 of each such case--whether that disposition is by dismissal of charges,
 reduction of charges, acceptance of a plea of guilty to the death-eligible
 crime or to another crime, acquittal, conviction, or any decision not to
 proceed with prosecution.
 (d) POLICE AND INVESTIGATIVE REPORT- In addition to the standard form,
 the local official or agency shall transmit to the central agency one copy
 of all police and investigative reports made in connection with each case
 of deatheligible crime.
 (e) OTHER DUTIES OF CENTRAL AGENCY- The central agency shall affirmatively
 monitor compliance with this section by local officials and agencies. It
 shall maintain all standard forms, compile and index all information
 contained in the forms, and make both the forms and the compiled
 information publicly available. The compiled information shall be made
 publicly available in machine readable form. The central agency shall
 also maintain a centralized, alphabetically indexed file of all police
 and investigative reports transmitted to it by local officials or agencies
 in every case of death-eligible crime. It shall allow access to its file
 of police and investigative reports to counsel of record for any person
 charged with any death-eligible crime or sentenced to death who has made,
 or intends to make, a claim under section 2; and it may also allow access
 to this file to other persons.
SEC. 5. LEGAL COUNSEL.
 (a) REQUIREMENT- In any action brought in a court of the United States within
 the jurisidiction conferred by sections 2241, 2254, or 2255 of title 28,
 United States Code, in which any person raises a claim under section 2--
 (1) the court shall appoint counsel for any such person who is financially
 unable to retain counsel; and
 (2) the court shall furnish investigative, expert or other services
 necessary for the adequate development of the claim to any such person
 who is financially unable to obtain such services.
 (b) NONAPPLICATION OF PRESUMPTION OF CORRECTNESS- Notwithstanding section
 2254 of title 28, United States Code, no determination on the merits of a
 factual issue made by a State court pertinent to any claim under section
 2 shall be presumed to be correct unless--
 (1) the State is in compliance with section 4;
 (2) the determination was made in a proceeding in a State court in which
 the person asserting the claim was afforded rights to the appointment of
 counsel and to the furnishing of investigative, expert, and other services
 necessary for the adequate development of the claim which were substantially
 equivalent to those provided by subsection (a); and
 (3) the determination is one which is otherwise entitled to be presumed
 to be correct under the criteria specified in section 2254.
SEC. 6. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act--
 (1) the term `pertinent data' means the data to be collected in the standard
 form as designated by the central agency. Such term includes, at a minimum--
 (A) pertinent demographic information on all persons charged with the
 crime and all victims (including race, sex, age, and national origin);
 (B) information on the principal features of the crime;
 (C) information on the aggravating and mitigating factors of the crime, and
 on the background and character of every person charged with the crime; and
 (D) a narrative summary of the crime; and
 (2) the term `case of death-eligible crime' means a case in which the
 complaint, indictment, information, or any other initial or later charging
 paper charges any person with a crime for which the punishment of death
 is authorized to be imposed under any circumstances upon conviction.
SEC. 7. CLAIMS BEFORE ENACTMENT NOT BARRED.
 A person is not barred from raising a claim under section 2 on the ground
 of having failed to raise or to prosecute the same or a similar claim before
 the date of enactment of this Act, not by reason of any adjudication before
 this date.