HR 650 SC4
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 650
To amend the Social Security Act and the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
to provide for a Mediplan that assures the provision of health insurance
coverage to all residents, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
January 24, 1991
Mr. STARK introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the
Committees on Ways and Means and Energy and Commerce
March 11, 1991
Additional sponsors: Ms. PELOSI, Mr. LEHMAN of Florida, and Mr. Annunzio
June 5, 1991
Additional sponsors: Mrs. BOXER and Mr. Weiss
September 16, 1991
Additional sponsor: Mr. Gibbons
October 15, 1991
Additional sponsor: Mr. Jontz
April 29, 1992
Additional sponsor: Mr. Gephardt
Delete sponsor: Mr. JONTZ (added September 26, 1991; deleted March 4, 1992)
A BILL
To amend the Social Security Act and the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
to provide for a Mediplan that assures the provision of health insurance
coverage to all residents, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as `Mediplan Health Care Act of 1991'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS-
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--HEALTH CARE ELIGIBILITY AND BENEFITS
Sec. 101. Health care eligibility and benefits.
`TITLE XXI--MEDIPLAN HEALTH BENEFITS
`Part A--Eligibility and Entitlement
`Sec. 2101. Eligibility.
`Sec. 2102. Enrollment and Mediplan cards.
`Part B--Benefits
`Sec. 2121. Scope of benefits.
`Sec. 2122. Exclusions.
`Part C--Payments for Benefits and Financing
`Sec. 2141. Payments for benefits.
`Sec. 2142. Mediplan Trust Fund.
`Part D--General Provisions
`Sec. 2161. Definitions relating to beneficiaries and income.
`Sec. 2162. Incorporation of certain medicare provisions and other provisions.
`Sec. 2163. State maintenance of effort payments.
`Sec. 2164. Modification of medicaid and other programs to avoid duplication
of benefits.
`Sec. 2165. Maintenance of additional benefits for current beneficiaries
under group health plans.'.
TITLE II--FINANCING PROVISIONS
Sec. 201. Income taxes for Mediplan health care.
Sec. 202. Tax on wages paid by employers.
TITLE I--HEALTH CARE ELIGIBILITY AND BENEFITS
SEC. 101. ELIGIBILITY AND BENEFITS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Social Security Act is amended by adding at the end
 the following new title:
`TITLE XXI--MEDIPLAN HEALTH BENEFITS
`Part A--Eligibility
`SEC. 2101. ELIGIBILITY.
 `(a) UNIVERSAL ELIGIBILITY FOR RESIDENTS- Except as provided in section
 2163(a), each individual who is a resident of the United States is entitled
 to health insurance benefits under this title.
 `(b) SPECIAL ELIGIBILITY GROUPS- For purposes of this title, an individual
 described in subsection (a) may obtain special benefits under this title
 on the basis of one or more of the following special eligibility groups:
 `(1) Children (as defined in section 2161(a)(1)).
 `(2) Low-income individuals (as defined in section 2161(a)(2)).
 `(3) Pregnant women (as defined in section 2161(a)(3)).
 `(c) RECIPROCAL COVERAGE OF NONRESIDENTS- An individual who--
 `(1) is not a resident of the United States,
 `(2) is in the United States, and
 `(3) is a national of a foreign state which provides health benefits to
 nationals of the United States who are nonresidents in that state,
is entitled to such health insurance benefits under this title, but only to
the extent the Secretary determines that such benefits would be available
to nationals of the United States similarly situated as a nonresident in
the foreign state.
`SEC. 2102. ENROLLMENT AND MEDIPLAN CARDS.
 `(a) ENROLLMENT- The Secretary shall provide a mechanism for the enrollment
 of individuals entitled to benefits under this title and, in conjunction
 with such enrollment, the issuance of a mediplan card which may be used
 for purposes of identification and processing of claims for benefits
 under this title. Mediplan cards shall identify (as appropriate) if the
 individual is a child, a pregnant woman, or a low-income individual.
 `(b) ENROLLMENT AT BIRTH- The mechanism under subsection (a) shall include
 a process for the automatic enrollment of individuals at the time of birth
 in the United States.
`Part B--Benefits
`SEC. 2121. SCOPE OF BENEFITS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in the succeeding provisions of this
 part, the benefits provided to an individual described in section 2101(a)
 by the program established by this title shall consist of entitlement to
 the same benefits as are provided under title XVIII to individuals entitled
 to benefits under part A, and enrolled under part B, of title XVIII.
 `(b) CHANGE IN THE DEDUCTIBLE AND LIMIT ON COST-SHARING-
 `(1) $500 DEDUCTIBLE PER INDIVIDUAL- Except as provided in the succeeding
 provisions of this part, the amount of expenses with respect to which an
 individual is entitled to have payment made under this title for any year
 shall first be reduced by a deductible of $500. Such deductible shall be
 instead of the deductible for inpatient hospital services under the first
 sentence of section 1813(a)(1) and the deductible under section 1833(b).
 `(2) LIMIT ON OUT-OF-POCKET EXPENSES- Whenever in a calendar year an
 individual's expenses for deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments with
 respect to services covered under this title and furnished during the year
 equals $2,500, payment of benefits under this title for the individual for
 services furnished during the remainder of the year shall be paid without
 the application of any coinsurance or copayments.
 `(c) CHILDREN-
 `(1) NO DEDUCTIBLES OR COINSURANCE- In the case of children (as defined
 in section 2161(a)(1)), there shall be no coinsurance, deductibles, or
 copayments applicable to covered benefits (including benefits described
 in paragraphs (2) and (3)).
 `(2) ADDITIONAL PREVENTIVE BENEFITS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to the periodicity schedule established with
 respect to the services under subparagraph (B), for children benefits
 shall be available under this title for the following items and services:
 `(i) Newborn and well-baby care, including normal newborn care and
 pediatrician services for high-risk deliveries.
 `(ii) Well-child care, including routine office visits, routine immunizations
 (including the vaccine itself), routine laboratory tests, and preventive
 dental care.
 `(B) PERIODICITY SCHEDULE- The Secretary, in consultation with the American
 Academy of Pediatrics, shall establish a schedule of periodicity which
 reflects the general, appropriate frequency with which services listed in
 subparagraph (A) should be provided to healthy children.
 `(3) OTHER ADDITIONAL SERVICES- For children benefits also shall be
 available under this title for the following:
 `(A) Inpatient hospital services (without regard to the restrictions
 described in subsections (a)(1) and (b)(1) of section 1812 and the
 coinsurance described in section 1813(a)(1)).
 `(B) Outpatient prescription drugs and biologicals (based on a formulary
 developed by the Secretary).
 `(C) Eyeglasses and hearing aids, and examinations therefor.
 `(d) PREGNANCY-RELATED SERVICES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In the case of a pregnant woman (as defined in section
 2161(a)(3)), benefits under this title shall include entitlement to have
 payment made for the following, without the application of deductibles,
 coinsurance, or copayments, subject to the periodicity schedule established
 with respect to the services under paragraph (2) and prior authorization
 of certain services under paragraph (3):
 `(A) Prenatal care, including care for all complications of pregnancy.
 `(B) Inpatient labor and delivery services.
 `(C) Postnatal care.
 `(D) Postnatal family planning services.
 `(2) PERIODICITY SCHEDULE- The Secretary, in consultation with the
 American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology, shall establish a schedule
 of periodicity which reflects the general, appropriate frequency with
 which services listed in paragraph (1) should be provided to pregnant
 women without complications of pregnancy.
 `(3) PRIOR AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN SERVICES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except in the case of items and services specified under
 subparagraph (B), benefits are not available with respect to an item or
 service under paragraph (1) unless the provision of the item or service has
 been approved by a utilization and quality control peer review organization
 before the provision of the item or service.
 `(B) EXCEPTION FOR ROUTINE OR COMMON ITEMS AND SERVICES- Subparagraph (A)
 shall not apply to items and services which the Secretary has specified
 on a list as being either--
 `(i) related to normal pregnancy, or
 `(ii) related to a highly prevalent complication of pregnancy,
or in the case of emergency services.
 `(4) MULTIPLE BASES FOR ELIGIBILITY- In the case of a pregnant woman who is
 also a child or a low-income individual, the benefits under this subsection
 shall be in addition or supplementation to the benefits otherwise available
 to the individual.
 `(e) LOWER-INCOME INDIVIDUALS-
 `(1) LIMITATIONS ON DEDUCTIBLES AND COINSURANCE-
 `(A) NONE FOR LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUALS- In the case of a low-income individual,
 there shall be no coinsurance, deductibles, or copayments under this title.
 `(B) PHASE-IN FOR OTHER LOWER-INCOME INDIVIDUALS- In the case of an
 individual whose applicable modified gross income (as defined in section
 2161(b)(1)) exceeds the poverty level (as defined in section 2161(b)(2))
 but does not exceed twice the poverty level, the coinsurance, deductibles,
 and copayments applicable under this title shall bear the same ratio to
 the coinsurance, deductibles, and copayments otherwise applicable as--
 `(i) the excess of the applicable modified gross income over the poverty
 level, bears to
 `(ii) the poverty level.
If the ratio determined under the preceding sentence is not a multiple of 25
percentage points, such ratio shall be rounded to the nearest 25 percentage
points.
 `(2) ADDITIONAL BENEFITS FOR LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUALS- In the case of
 low-income individuals (as defined in section 2161(a)(2)), benefits
 under this title shall also include entitlement to have payment made
 for the following, without the application of deductibles, coinsurance,
 or copayments:
 `(A) Inpatient hospital services (without regard to the restrictions
 described in subsections (a)(1) and (b)(1) of section 1812 and the
 coinsurance described in section 1813(a)(1)).
 `(B) Outpatient prescription drugs and biologicals (based on a formulary
 developed by the Secretary).
 `(C) Eyeglasses and hearing aids and examinations therefor.
`SEC. 2122. EXCLUSIONS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this section, section 1862 shall
 apply to expenses incurred for items and services provided under this title
 the same manner as such section applies to items and services provided
 under title XVIII.
 `(b) BENEFITS EXCEPTION-
 `(1) CHILDRENS' SERVICES- In applying section 1862(a) with respect to
 services described in section 2121(c)(2)(A) (relating to well-child
 services), payment shall not be denied under paragraph (1), (7), or (12)
 of such section 1862(a) if the services are provided in accordance with
 the periodicity schedule described in section 2121(c)(2)(B).
 `(2) SERVICES FOR PREGNANT WOMEN- In applying section 1862(a) with respect
 to services described in section 2121(d)(1) (other than subparagraph
 (A) thereof), payment shall not be denied under paragraph (1) or (7) of
 such section 1862(a) if the services are provided in accordance with the
 periodicity schedule described in section 2121(d)(2).
 `(3) TREATMENT OF EYEGLASSES AND HEARING AIDS FOR CHILDREN AND LOW-INCOME
 INDIVIDUALS- Payment shall not be denied under this title under section
 1862(a)(7) with respect to eyeglasses and hearing aids and examinations
 therefor in the case of children and low-income individuals.
 `(c) COORDINATION OF PAYMENTS-
 `(1) PRIMARY TO GROUP HEALTH PLANS- Section 1862(b)(1) (relating to
 requirements of group health plans) shall not apply under this title.
 `(2) SECONDARY TO MEDICARE- Payment shall not be made under this title
 with respect to benefits to the extent that payment for such benefits may
 be made under title XVIII.
`Part C--Payment for Benefits and Financing
`SEC. 2141. PAYMENTS FOR BENEFITS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this section and in
 section 2121--
 `(1) payment of benefits under this title with respect to benefits shall
 be made in the same amounts and on the same basis as payment may be made
 with respect to such benefits under title XVIII, and
 `(2) the provisions of sections 1814, 1833, 1842, 1848, and 1886 shall
 apply to payment of benefits under this title in the same manner as they
 apply to benefits under title XVIII.
 `(b) NO COST-SHARING FOR CERTAIN SERVICES- No deductibles, coinsurance,
 copayments, or other cost-sharing shall be imposed with respect to--
 `(1) well-child care services described in section 2121(c)(1),
 `(2) items and services for which an individual is entitled under this
 title as a pregnant woman, and
 `(3) items and services for qualified low-income individuals.
For provision limiting the deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments under
this title in any year, see section 2121(b).
 `(c) NO EXTRA BILLING PERMITTED- Payment under this title may only be made
 on an assignment-related basis (as defined in section 1842(i)(1)). If an
 entity knowingly and willfully presents or causes to be presented a claim
 or bills an individual enrolled under this title for charges for services
 other than on an assignment-related basis, the Secretary may apply sanctions
 against such entity in accordance with section 1842(j)(2).
 `(d) ADJUSTMENT OF PAYMENTS-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT OF NEW DRGS AND WEIGHTS- In making payment under this
 title with respect to inpatient hospital services, the Secretary shall
 make such adjustments in the diagnosis-related groups and weighting factors
 with respect to discharges within such groups, otherwise established under
 section 1886(d)(4) as may be necessary--
 `(A) to reflect the types of discharges occurring under this title which
 are not occurring under title XVIII, and
 `(B) to provide for a weighting factor, for cesarean section deliveries,
 which is 95 percent of the weighting factor that otherwise would be
 established.
 `(2) PAYMENT FOR OBSTETRICAL SERVICES-
 `(A) GLOBAL FEE- In making payment under this title with respect to the
 group of obstetrical services typical of treatment throughout a course of
 pregnancy, the Secretary shall establish, as a schedule under section 1848,
 a global fee with respect to such group of services.
 `(B) BONUS FOR EARLY PRESENTATION- The fee schedule amount with respect
 to obstetrical services under this title shall be increased by 5 percent
 in the case of services furnished to women who have presented for prenatal
 care during the first trimester.
 `(C) DISINCENTIVE FOR CESAREAN SECTIONS- The fee schedule amount otherwise
 established with respect to a cesarean section shall be 95 percent of
 the fee schedule amount otherwise established.
 `(e) CONDITIONS OF AND LIMITATIONS ON PAYMENTS- The provisions of sections
 1814 and 1835 shall apply to payment for services under this title in the
 same manner as they apply to payment for services under parts A and B,
 respectively, of title XVIII.
 `(f) USE OF TRUST FUND- In carrying out this section, any reference in
 title XVIII to a trust fund shall be treated as a reference to the Mediplan
 Trust Fund established under section 2142.
 `(g) PAYMENT FOR OUTPATIENT PRESCRIPTION DRUGS AND BIOLOGICALS- The
 Secretary, taking into account the payment methodology that was described
 in the amendments made by section 202 of the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage
 Act of 1988 (as in effect before its repeal), shall establish a prospective
 payment methodology for the payment for outpatient prescription drugs and
 biologicals under this title.
`SEC. 2142. MEDIPLAN TRUST FUND.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT- (1) There is hereby created on the books of the Treasury
 of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Mediplan Trust Fund'
 (in this section referred to as the `Trust Fund'). The Trust Fund shall
 consist of such gifts and bequests as may be made as provided in section
 201(i)(1) and amounts appropriated under paragraph (2).
 `(2) There are hereby appropriated to the Trust Fund amounts equivalent
 to 100 percent of--
 `(A) the taxes imposed by sections 59B and 59C of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986,
 `(B) the taxes imposed by section 3111(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of
 1986, and
 `(C) the taxes imposed by sections 3221(c) of such Code.
The amounts appropriated by the preceding sentence shall be transferred from
time to time from the general fund in the Treasury to the Trust Fund, such
amounts to be determined on the basis of estimates by the Secretary of the
Treasury of the taxes, paid to or deposited into the Treasury; and proper
adjustments shall be made in amounts subsequently transferred to the extent
prior estimates were in excess of or were less than the taxes specified in
such sentence.
 `(b) INCORPORATION OF PROVISIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (2), the provisions of subsections
 (b) through (j) of section 1817 shall apply to the Trust Fund in the same
 manner as they apply to the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund.
 `(2) EXCEPTIONS- In applying paragraph (1)--
 `(A) the Board of Trustees and Managing Trustee of the Trust Fund shall be
 composed of the members of the Board of Trustees and the Managing Trustee,
 respectively, of the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund; and
 `(B) any reference in section 1817 to the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust
 Fund, to title XVIII (or part A thereof), or to section 3102(b) of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is deemed a reference to the Trust Fund under
 this section, this title, and to section 3102(c) of such Code, respectively.
`Part D--General Provisions
`SEC. 2161. DEFINITIONS RELATING TO BENEFICIARIES AND INCOME.
 `(a) TERMS RELATING TO BENEFICIARIES- In this title:
 `(1) CHILD- The term `child' means an individual who throughout a month
 has not attained 23 years of age.
 `(2) LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUAL- The term `low-income individual' means an
 individual whose applicable modified gross income (as defined in subsection
 (b)(1)) is less than 100 percent of the poverty level (as defined in
 subsection (b)(2)).
 `(3) PREGNANT WOMAN- The term `pregnant woman' means a woman who has
 been certified by a physician (in a manner specified by the Secretary) as
 being pregnant, until the last day of the month in which the 60-day period
 (beginning on the date of termination of the pregnancy) ends.
 `(b) TERMS RELATING TO INCOME- In this title:
 `(1) APPLICABLE MODIFIED GROSS INCOME-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this paragraph, the term `applicable
 modified gross income' means, for a calendar year for an individual, the
 modified gross income (as defined in section 59B(c) of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986) of the taxpayer (or the taxpayer for whom the individual
 may be claimed as a dependent) for the taxable year ending in the second
 previous calendar year.
 `(B) APPLICATION OF CURRENT YEAR MODIFIED GROSS INCOME-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Subject to clause (ii), the Secretary shall establish a
 procedure under which an individual may file a declaration of estimated
 modified gross income for a taxable year ending in a calendar year, which
 modified gross income will apply under this subsection as the applicable
 modified gross income for the calendar year. Subject to clause (ii), such
 procedure shall be applicable regardless of whether or not the individual
 filed a tax return for the taxable year ending in the second previous
 calendar year.
 `(ii) LIMITATION ON APPLICATION- The Secretary may limit the application of
 clause (i), in the case of individuals who have filed tax returns for the
 taxable year ending in the second previous calendar year, to individuals
 with respect to whom the applicable modified gross income will be reduced
 by at least 20 percent as a result of the application of such clause.
 `(iii) REQUIREMENT FOR RETURN- Any individual who has filed a declaration
 under clause (i) for a calendar year is required to file an income tax return
 for the taxable year in the calendar year, regardless of whether any income
 tax is actually owed for the year. The failure of the individual to file
 such a return makes the individual liable for overpayments under this title
 under clause (iv) in the same manner as if this paragraph had not applied.
 `(iv) COLLECTION FOR OVERPAYMENTS- If a declaration of estimated modified
 gross income is made applicable to a calendar year under clause (i) and the
 actual modified gross income for that taxable year exceeds such estimated
 modified gross income, the individual shall be liable to the United States
 for 110 percent of the amount of additional payments made under this title
 as a result of the use of such estimated modified gross income instead of
 the actual modified gross income for that taxable year.
 `(C) TRANSMITTAL OF INFORMATION- By not later than October 1 of each
 year, the Secretary of the Treasury shall transmit to the Secretary such
 information relating to the applicable modified gross income of individuals
 for the taxable year ending in the previous year as may be necessary to
 apply this title in the succeeding calendar year.
 `(2) POVERTY LEVEL- The term `poverty level' means, for an individual in a
 family, the official poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management
 and Budget, and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the
 Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981) applicable to a family of the
 size involved.
`SEC. 2162. INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN MEDICARE PROVISIONS AND OTHER PROVISIONS.
 `(a) USE OF CARRIERS AND INTERMEDIARIES- The Secretary shall provide for
 the administration of this title through the use of fiscal intermediaries
 and carriers in the same manner as title XVIII is carried out through the
 use of such fiscal intermediaries and carriers, except that no payment
 shall be made under this title except on the basis of bills or charges
 that are submitted electronically in a manner specified by the Secretary.
 `(b) DEFINITIONS- Except as otherwise provided in this title, the definitions
 contained in section 1861 shall apply for purposes of this title in the
 same manner as they apply for purposes of title XVIII.
 `(c) CERTIFICATION, PROVIDER QUALIFICATION, ETC- The provisions of sections
 1863 through 1875, sections 1878 through 1880, section 1883, section 1885,
 and sections 1887 through 1892 shall apply to this title in the same manner
 as they apply to title XVIII.
 `(d) HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS AND COMPETITIVE MEDICAL PLANS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this subsection, section 1876 shall
 apply to individuals entitled to benefits under this title in the same
 manner as such section applies to individuals entitled to benefits under
 part A, and enrolled under part B, of title XVIII.
 `(2) APPLICATION- In applying section 1876 under this section--
 `(A) the provisions of such section relating only to individuals enrolled
 under part B of title XVIII shall not apply;
 `(B) any reference to a Trust Fund established under title XVIII and to
 benefits under such title is deemed a reference to the Mediplan Trust Fund
 and to benefits under this title;
 `(C) the adjusted average per capita cost and the adjusted community rate
 shall be determined on the basis of benefits under this title; and
 `(D) subsection (f) shall not apply.
 `(e) TITLE XI PROVISIONS- The following provisions shall apply to this
 title in the same manner as they apply to title XVIII:
 `(1) Sections 1124, 1126, and 1128 through 1128B (relating to fraud
 and abuse).
 `(2) Section 1134 (relating to nonprofit hospital philanthropy).
 `(3) Section 1138 (relating to hospital protocols for organ procurement
 and standards for organ procurement agencies).
 `(4) Section 1142 (relating to research on outcomes of health care services
 and procedures), except that any reference in such section to a Trust Fund
 is deemed a reference to the Mediplan Trust Fund.
 `(5) Part B of title XI (relating to peer review of the utilization and
 quality of health care services).
 `(f) OTHER PROVISIONS- The provisions of section 201(i) shall apply to
 this title and the Mediplan Trust Fund in the same manner as they apply
 to title XVIII and the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund.
`SEC. 2163. STATE MAINTENANCE OF EFFORT PAYMENTS.
 `(a) CONDITION OF COVERAGE- Notwithstanding any other provision of this
 title, no individual who is a resident of a State is eligible for benefits
 under this title for a month in a calendar year, unless the State provides
 (in a manner and at a time specified by the Secretary) for payment to the
 Mediplan Trust Fund of 1/12th of the amount specified in subsection (b)
 for the year.
 `(b) MAINTENANCE OF EFFORT AMOUNT- The amount of payment specified in this
 subsection for a State for a year is equal to the amount of payment (net
 of Federal payments) made by a State under its State plan under title XIX
 for 1991 for medical assistance with respect to which benefits would have
 been payable under this title for low-income individuals if this title were
 in effect in that year, increased to the year involved by the compounded
 sum of the increase in the consumer price index for all urban consumers
 (U.S. City average, as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the
 Department of Labor) for each year after 1991 and up to the year involved.
`SEC. 2164. MODIFICATION OF MEDICAID AND OTHER PROGRAMS TO AVOID DUPLICATION
OF BENEFITS.
 `Notwithstanding any other provision of law--
 `(1) a State plan under title XIX shall not provide any medical assistance
 for benefits with respect to which any payments may be made under this title;
 `(2) a health benefits plan under chapter 89 of title 5, United States
 Code, shall not provide benefits for which any payment may be made under
 this title; and
 `(3) health benefits shall not be available under the Civilian Health and
 Medical Program of the Uniformed Services (as defined in section 1072(4)
 of title 10, United States Code) for services for which payment may be
 made under this title.
`SEC. 2165. MAINTENANCE OF ADDITIONAL BENEFITS FOR CURRENT BENEFICIARIES
UNDER GROUP HEALTH PLANS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- In the case of a group health plan (as defined in section
 5000(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) that, as of the date of
 the enactment of this title, provides any health benefit to an employee
 or former employee or a family member of an employee or former employee
 that is additional to the benefits provided under this title, the group
 health plan must continue to make available such an additional benefit to
 such an individual notwithstanding the enactment of this title.
 `(b) LIMITATION TO CURRENT BENEFICIARIES- Subsection (a) shall not apply
 to an individual who is not entitled to benefits under the group health
 plan as of the date of the enactment of this title.
 `(c) ENFORCEMENT- There is established a private cause of action for damages
 (which shall be in an amount triple the amount otherwise provided) in the
 case of a group health plan that fails to continue to provide benefits in
 accordance with subsection (a).'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE FOR BENEFITS- Title XXI of the Social Security Act
 shall apply to items and services furnished on or after January 1, 1993.
TITLE II--FINANCING PROVISIONS
SEC. 201. INCOME TAXES FOR MEDIPLAN HEALTH CARE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of
 1986 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new part:
`PART VIII--INCOME TAXES FOR MEDIPLAN HEALTH CARE
`Sec. 59B. Tax on individuals.
`Sec. 59C. Tax on corporations, etc.
`SEC. 59B. TAX ON INDIVIDUALS.
 `(a) IMPOSITION OF TAX- In the case of an individual, there is hereby imposed
 (in addition to other taxes) for each taxable year on the modified gross
 income of the taxpayer a tax equal to the Mediplan health care premium
 determined under subsection (b) for such year.
 `(b) MEDIPLAN HEALTH CARE PREMIUM-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Mediplan health care premium for the taxable year
 shall be equal to the sum of the basic tax and the supplemental tax.
 `(2) BASIC TAX- For purposes of paragraph (1), the basic tax is the
 excess of--
 `(A) the lesser of--
 `(i) $1,000 ($2,000 in the case of a joint return), or
 `(ii) 12.5 percent of the excess (if any) of the modified gross income of
 the taxpayer over $8,000 ($16,000 in the case of a joint return), over
 `(B) the sum of the taxes imposed by sections 3111(c) and 3221(c) with
 respect to remuneration paid to such individual during the calendar year
 ending with or within the taxable year.
 `(3) SUPPLEMENTAL TAX- For purposes of paragraph (1), the supplemental
 tax is 2 percent of the excess (if any) of the modified gross income of
 the taxpayer over $16,000 ($32,000 in the case of a joint return).
 `(c) MODIFIED GROSS INCOME- For purposes of this section, the term
 `modified gross income' means the adjusted gross income of the taxpayer
 for the taxable year determined--
 `(1) without regard to paragraphs (6), (7), and (11) of section 62(a)
 and without regard to sections 911, 931, and 933, and
 `(2) increased by--
 `(A) the amount of interest received or accrued by the taxpayer during
 the taxable year which is exempt from tax,
 `(B) the amount of social security benefits (as defined in section 86(d))
 received during the taxable year which is not includible in gross income
 under section 86,
 `(C) the amount of qualified military benefits (as defined in section
 134(b)) received during the taxable year, and
 `(D) the amounts described in paragraphs (7) and (8) of section 6051(a)
 which are not includible in gross income.
 `(d) MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES EXEMPT FROM BASIC TAX-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The basic tax shall not apply to any individual who is
 a medicare-eligible individual for more than 6 full months beginning in
 the taxable year.
 `(2) MEDICARE-ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL- For purposes of this subsection, the
 term `medicare-eligible individual' means, with respect to any month,
 any individual who is entitled to (or, on application without the payment
 of an additional premium, would be entitled to) benefits under part A of
 title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
 `(3) SPECIAL RULES FOR JOINT RETURNS WHERE ONLY 1 SPOUSE IS
 MEDICARE-ELIGIBLE- In the case of a joint return where only 1 spouse is
 a medicare-eligible individual, this section shall be applied--
 `(A) as if such return were the return of an unmarried individual, and
 `(B) by taking into account one-half of the modified gross income determined
 under the joint return.
 `(e) COST-OF-LIVING ADJUSTMENT- In the case of any taxable year beginning
 in a calendar year after 1995, the $8,000, $16,000, and $32,000 amounts
 contained in this section shall be increased by an amount equal to--
 `(1) such dollar amount, multiplied by
 `(2) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3),
 for the calendar year in which the taxable year begins, by substituting
 `calendar year 1993' for `calendar year 1987' in subparagraph (B) thereof.
 `(f) COORDINATION WITH OTHER PROVISIONS-
 `(1) NOT TREATED AS MEDICAL EXPENSE- For purposes of section 213, the tax
 imposed by this section shall not be treated as an expense for medical care.
 `(2) NOT TREATED AS TAX FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES- The taxes imposed by this
 section and section 59C shall not be treated as taxes imposed by this
 chapter for purposes of determining--
 `(A) the amount of any credit allowable under this chapter, or
 `(B) the amount of the minimum tax imposed by section 55.
`SEC. 59C. TAX ON CORPORATIONS, ETC.
 `(a) IMPOSITION OF TAX- In addition to other taxes, there is hereby imposed
 a tax on every taxpayer other than an individual for the taxable year an
 amount equal to 2 percent of the modified gross income of the taxpayer
 for the taxable year.
 `(b) MODIFIED GROSS INCOME- For purposes of this section, the term `modified
 gross income' means the alternative minimum taxable income for the taxable
 year (as defined in section 55, determined by substituting `100 percent'
 for `75 percent' in paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 56(g)).
 `(c) APPLICATION OF TAX TO OTHERWISE EXEMPT ENTITIES- In the case of an
 organization which is exempt from tax under section 501(a) (without regard
 to this subsection)--
 `(1) the tax imposed by this section shall apply to such organization, and
 `(2) the modified gross income of such organization shall include--
 `(A) the unrelated business taxable income (as defined in section 512)
 of the organization for the taxable year, and
 `(B) the net investment income (within the meaning of section 4940(c))
 of the organization for such year.'
 (b) TAXES INCLUDED IN ESTIMATED TAX- Subparagraph (A) of section 6655(g)(1)
 of such Code is amended by striking `plus' at the end of clause (iii),
 by redesignating clause (iv) as clause (v), and by inserting after clause
 (iii) the following new clause:
 `(iv) the tax imposed by section 59B, plus'.
 (c) CERTAIN INFORMATION INCLUDED ON W-2- Subsection (a) of section 6051
 of such Code is amended by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (8),
 by striking the period at the end of paragraph (9) and inserting a comma,
 and by inserting after paragraph (9) the following new paragraphs:
 `(10) the total amount of qualified military benefits (as defined in
 section 134(b)), and
 `(11) the total amount of taxes paid under sections 3111(c) and 3221(c).'
 (d) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of parts for such subchapter A of chapter 1
 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`Part VIII. Income taxes for Mediplan health care.'
 (e) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after September 30, 1994.
SEC. 202. TAX ON WAGES PAID BY EMPLOYERS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 3111 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended
 by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d) and by inserting after
 subsection (b) the following new subsection:
 `(c) MEDIPLAN HEALTH CARE TAX-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In addition to other taxes, there is hereby imposed on
 every employer an excise tax, with respect to having individuals in his
 employ, equal to rate specified in paragraph (2) with respect to the wages
 (as defined in section 3121(a)) paid during the calendar year by him with
 respect to employment (as defined in section 3121(b) without regard to
 paragraphs (5) and (7) thereof).
 `(2) RATE OF TAX- The rate of the tax imposed by paragraph (1) shall be--
 `(A) 40 cents per hour in the case of employees whose wages are determined
 on an hourly basis, and
 `(B) 10 percent of wages (as so defined) in the case of other employees.
 `(3) MAXIMUM TAX- The amount of the tax imposed by this subsection with
 respect to wages paid by the employer during any calendar year to an
 individual shall not exceed $800.'
 (b) COMPARABLE EMPLOYER TAX FOR RAILROAD SERVICES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 3221 of such Code is amended by redesignating
 subsections (c), (d), and (e) as subsections (d), (e), and (f), respectively,
 and by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection:
 `(c) MEDIPLAN HEALTH CARE TAX-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In addition to other taxes, there is hereby imposed on
 every employer an excise tax, with respect to having individuals in his
 employ, equal to the rate specified in paragraph (2) with respect to the
 compensation paid during the calendar year by such employer for services
 rendered to such employer.
 `(2) RATE OF TAX- The rate of the tax imposed by paragraph (1) shall be--
 `(A) 40 cents per hour in the case of employees whose compensation is
 determined on an hourly basis, and
 `(B) 10 percent of compensation in the case of other employees.
 `(3) MAXIMUM TAX- The amount of the tax imposed by this subsection with
 respect to compensation paid by the employer during any calendar year to
 an individual shall not exceed $800.'
 (2) TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS-
 (A) Subsection (f) of section 3221 of such Code, as redesignated by
 subparagraph (A), is amended by striking `(a) and (b)' and inserting `(a),
 (b), and (c)'.
 (B) The heading of clause (i) of section 3231(e)(2)(B) of such Code is
 amended by inserting `AND MEDIPLAN HEALTH CARE' after `TIER 1'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 remuneration paid after September 30, 1994.