S 2853 IS
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2853
To prohibit oil and gas leasing, exploration, and development offshore
North Carolina until adequate physical oceanographic, ecological, and
socioeconomic information is available to enable informed decisionmaking,
and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
July 13 (legislative day, JULY 10), 1990
Mr. SANFORD introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
A BILL
To prohibit oil and gas leasing, exploration, and development offshore
North Carolina until adequate physical oceanographic, ecological, and
socioeconomic information is available to enable informed decisionmaking,
and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Outer Banks Protection Act'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) the Outer Banks of North Carolina is an area of exceptional environmental
 fragility and beauty;
 (2) the annual economic benefits of commercial and recreational fishing
 activities to North Carolina, which could be adversely affected by oil or
 gas development offshore the State's coast, exceeds $1,000,000,000;
 (3) the major industry in coastal North Carolina is tourism, which is
 subject to potential disruption by offshore oil or gas development;
 (4) the physical oceanographic characteristics of the area offshore North
 Carolina between Cape Hatteras and the mouth of the Chesapeake Bay are not
 well understood, being affected by Gulf Stream western boundary pertubations
 and accompanying warm filaments, warm rings which separate from the Gulf
 Stream, wind stress, outflow from the Chesapeake Bay, Gulf Stream meanders,
 and intrusions of Virginia coastal waters around and over the Diamond Shoals;
 (5) the environmental impact statements prepared for Outer Continental
 Shelf lease sales numbered 56 (1981) and 76 (1983) contain insufficient
 and outdated information from which to make a decision on approval of
 additional oil and gas leasing, exploration, and development activities;
 (6) the draft environmental report, dated November 1, 1989, prepared pursuant
 to the July 14, 1989 memorandum of understanding between the State of North
 Carolina, the Department of the Interior, and Mobil Oil Company, has not
 sufficiently allayed concerns about the adequacy of the environmental or
 socioeconomic information available to determine whether to proceed with
 additional leasing, exploration, or development offshore North Carolina;
 (7) the conclusions of the National Research Council report entitled `The
 Adequacy of Environmental Information for Outer Continental Shelf Oil and
 Gas Decisions: Florida and California', issued in 1989, reinforce concerns
 about the adequacy of the scientific and technical information which are the
 basis for the decision to lease additional tracts or approve an exploration
 plan offshore North Carolina, especially with respect to oceanographic,
 ecological, and socioeconomic information;
 (8) the President has recently announced support for moratoria on oil
 and gas activities affecting broad areas of the Outer Continental Shelf,
 including areas offshore the States of Florida, California, Oregon, and
 Washington, and the Georges Bank area of the North Atlantic, the result
 of which would be a prohibition on oil and gas leasing, exploration,
 and development in such areas at least until the year 2000;
 (9) the President's support of such moratoria was based on five principles,
 including for each affected area availability of adequate information and
 analysis; environmental sensitivity; resource potential and existence of
 proven recoverable reserves; effect on the Nation's energy requirements;
 and national security requirements; and
 (10) the application of such principles to areas offshore North Carolina
 qualifies all such areas for a moratorium on oil and gas activities similar
 to those proposed by the President for waters offshore various other States.
SEC. 3. PROHIBITION OF OIL AND GAS LEASING, EXPLORATION, AND DEVELOPMENT.
 (a) PROHIBITION- The Secretary of the Interior shall not--
 (1) issue any new leases;
 (2) approve any plan of exploration;
 (3) approve any permit to drill; or
 (4) permit any drilling, for oil or gas on any lands of the Outer Continental
 Shelf offshore North Carolina.
 (b) BOUNDARIES- For purposes of subsection (a), the lateral seaward boundary
 between areas offshore North Carolina and areas offshore--
 (1) Virginia shall be as provided in the joint resolution entitled `Joint
 Resolution granting the consent of Congress to an agreement between the
 States of North Carolina and Virginia establishing their lateral seaward
 boundary' approved October 27, 1972 (86 Stat. 1298); and
 (2) South Carolina shall be as provided in the Act entitled `An Act
 granting the consent of Congress to the agreement between the States
 of North Carolina and South Carolina establishing their lateral seaward
 boundary' approved October 9, 1981 (95 Stat. 988).
 (c) Duration of Prohibition-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The prohibition under subsection (a) shall remain in effect
 until forty-five days of continuous session of the Congress after submission
 of a certification to the Congress by the Secretary of the Interior, made
 on the basis of the findings and recommendations of the Environmental
 Sciences Review Panel under section 5, that the information available,
 including information acquired pursuant to section 4, is sufficient to
 enable the Secretary to carry out his responsibilities under the Outer
 Continental Shelf Lands Act with respect to authorizing the activities
 described in subsection (a).
 (2) CONTINUOUS SESSION OF CONGRESS- In computing any forty-five-day period
 of continuous session of Congress under paragraph (1)--
 (A) continuity of session is broken only by an adjournment of the Congress
 sine die; and
 (B) the days on which either House of Congress is not in session because
 of an adjournment of more than three days to a date certain are excluded.
 (3) NEW LEASES- The prohibition under subsection (a)(1) shall remain in
 effect until January 1, 2000.
 (4) LEASE SUSPENSION- The Secretary of the Interior shall issue a lease
 suspension for any active lease affected by the prohibition under subsection
 (a). The lease suspension shall remain in effect throughout the duration
 of such prohibition.
SEC. 4. ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL INFORMATION.
 The Secretary of the Interior, in consultation with the Environmental
 Sciences Review Panel established under section 5, shall undertake
 ecological and socioeconomic studies, additional physical oceanographic
 studies, including actual field work and the correlation of existing data,
 and other additional environmental studies, including data and information
 necessary to adequately assess cumulative impacts, to obtain sufficient
 information about all significant conditions, processes, and environments
 which influence, or may be influenced by, oil and gas leasing, exploration,
 and development activities offshore North Carolina to enable the Secretary
 to carry out his responsibilities under the Outer Continental Shelf Lands
 Act with respect to authorizing the activities described in section 3(a).
SEC. 5. ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCES REVIEW PANEL.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT AND MEMBERSHIP- There shall be established an Environmental
 Sciences Review Panel, to consist of--
 (1) 1 marine scientist selected by the Secretary of the Interior;
 (2) 1 marine scientist selected by the Governor of North Carolina;
 (3) 1 person each from the disciplines of physical oceanography, ecology,
 and sociology, to be selected jointly by the Secretary of the Interior
 and the Governor of North Carolina from a list of individuals nominated
 by the National Academy of Sciences.
 (b) FUNCTIONS- The Environmental Sciences Review Panel shall--
 (1) consult with the Secretary of the Interior as provided in section 4; and
 (2) prepare, and submit to the Secretary of the Interior, findings and
 recommendations as to the adequacy of physical oceanographic, ecological,
 and socioeconomic information available in enabling the Secretary to carry
 out his responsibilities under the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act with
 respect to authorizing the activities described in section 3(a). Such
 findings and recommendations should address, at a minimum, the following:
 (A) surface and subsurface ocean current data and models, including the
 utility of such data and models in predicting the worst-case consequences of
 a hydrocarbon spill associated with oil and gas exploration and development;
 (B) living marine resources inhabiting areas proposed for exploration
 activity, including areas which may qualify for special protective measures
 as `Areas of Biological Concern'; the potential effects of oil and gas
 activities on juvenile and larval forms of important species adjacent to a
 proposed drilling site; and the potential for significant adverse effects
 of such activities on specific year classes of important species adjacent
 to a proposed drilling site;
 (C) the extent to which fishing activities would be excluded near a proposed
 drilling site either directly by special exclusion or indirectly through
 water quality impacts or other impacts such as noise or harmonic vibrations
 which may occur in mooring cables;
 (D) stability of geologic features along the ocean floor adjacent to any
 proposed drilling site;
 (E) socioeconomic impacts of oil and gas activities, including potential
 for cultural disruption and the ability of local governments to control
 development associated with oil and gas activities which may be viewed as
 inappropriate; and
 (F) potential impacts of oil and gas activities on endangered species in
 general; marine mammals; and pelagic bird species.
 (c) EXPENSES- Each member of the Environmental Sciences Review Panel shall
 be reimbursed for actual travel expenses and shall receive per diem in
 lieu of subsistence for each day such member is engaged in the business
 of the Environmental Sciences Review Panel.
SEC. 6. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Interior
 to carry out this Act not to exceed $500,000 for fiscal year 1991.