[Congressional Bills 111th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 3126 Introduced in House (IH)]

111th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 3126

 To establish the Consumer Financial Protection Agency, and for other 
 purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 July 8, 2009

Mr. Frank of Massachusetts (for himself, Ms. Waters, Mrs. Maloney, Mr. 
Gutierrez, Mr. Watt, Mr. Ackerman, Mr. Sherman, Mr. Capuano, Mr. Miller 
of North Carolina, Mr. Al Green of Texas, Mr. Ellison, Ms. Speier, and 
 Mr. Grayson) introduced the following bill; which was referred to the 
 Committee on Financial Services, and in addition to the Committee on 
Energy and Commerce, for a period to be subsequently determined by the 
 Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall 
 within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To establish the Consumer Financial Protection Agency, and for other 
 purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Consumer Financial Protection Agency 
Act of 2009''.

SEC. 2. TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 The table of contents for this Act is as follows:

Sec. 1. Short title.
Sec. 2. Table of contents.
 TITLE I--CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION AGENCY

Sec. 101. Definitions.
 Subtitle A--Establishment of the Agency

Sec. 111. Establishment of the Consumer Financial Protection Agency.
Sec. 112. Board.
Sec. 113. Executive and administrative powers.
Sec. 114. Administration.
Sec. 115. Consumer Advisory Board.
Sec. 116. Coordination.
Sec. 117. Reports to the Congress.
Sec. 118. Funding; fees and assessments; penalties and fines.
Sec. 119. Effective date.
 Subtitle B--General Powers of the Agency

Sec. 121. Mandate and objectives.
Sec. 122. Authorities.
Sec. 123. Collection of information; confidentiality rules.
Sec. 124. Monitoring; assessments of significant rules; reports.
Sec. 125. Authority to restrict mandatory pre-dispute arbitration.
Sec. 126. Effective date.
 Subtitle C--Specific Authorities

Sec. 131. Prohibiting unfair, deceptive, or abusive acts or practices.
Sec. 132. Disclosures and communications.
Sec. 133. Sales practices.
Sec. 134. Pilot disclosures.
Sec. 135. Adopting operational standards to deter unfair, deceptive, or 
 abusive practices.
Sec. 136. Standard consumer financial products or services.
Sec. 137. Duties.
Sec. 138. Consumer rights to access information.
Sec. 139. Prohibited acts.
Sec. 140. Effective date.
 Subtitle D--Preservation of State Law

Sec. 141. Relation to State law.
Sec. 142. Preservation of enforcement powers of States.
Sec. 143. State law preemption standards for national banks and 
 subsidiaries clarified.
Sec. 144. Visitorial standards.
Sec. 145. Clarification of law applicable to nondepository institution 
 subsidiaries.
Sec. 146. State law preemption standards for Federal savings 
 associations and subsidiaries clarified.
Sec. 147. Visitorial standards.
Sec. 148. Clarification of law applicable to nondepository institution 
 subsidiaries.
Sec. 149. Effective date.
 Subtitle E--Enforcement Powers

Sec. 151. Definitions.
Sec. 152. Investigations and administrative discovery.
Sec. 153. Hearings and adjudication proceedings.
Sec. 154. Litigation authority.
Sec. 155. Relief available.
Sec. 156. Referrals for criminal proceedings.
Sec. 157. Employee protection.
Sec. 158. Effective date.
 Subtitle F--Transfer of Functions and Personnel; Transitional 
 Provisions

Sec. 161. Transfer of certain functions.
Sec. 162. Designated transfer date.
Sec. 163. Savings provisions.
Sec. 164. Transfer of certain personnel.
Sec. 165. Incidental transfers.
Sec. 166. Interim authority of the Secretary.
 Subtitle G--Regulatory Improvements

Sec. 171. Collection of deposit account data.
Sec. 172. Small business data collection.
 Subtitle H--Conforming Amendments

Sec. 181. Amendments to the Inspector General Act of 1978.
Sec. 182. Amendments to the Privacy Act of 1974.
Sec. 183. Amendments to the Alternative Mortgage Transaction Parity Act 
 of 1982.
Sec. 184. Amendments to the Consumer Credit Protection Act.
Sec. 185. Amendments to the Expedited Funds Availability Act.
Sec. 186. Amendments to the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
Sec. 187. Amendments to the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act.
Sec. 188. Amendments to the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act of 1975.
Sec. 189. Amendments to division D of the Omnibus Appropriations Act, 
 2009.
Sec. 190. Amendments to the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 
 1974.
Sec. 191. Amendments to the Right to Financial Privacy Act of 1978.
Sec. 192. Amendments to the Secure and Fair Enforcement for Mortgage 
 Licensing Act of 2008.
Sec. 193. Amendments to the Truth in Savings Act.
Sec. 194. Effective date.
 TITLE J--IMPROVEMENTS TO THE FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION ACT

Sec. 201. Amendments to the Federal Trade Commission Act.

 TITLE I--CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION AGENCY

SEC. 101. DEFINITIONS.

 For the purposes of subtitles A through F of this title, the 
following definitions shall apply:
 (1) Affiliate.--The term ``affiliate'' means any person 
 that controls, is controlled by, or is under common control 
 with another person.
 (2) Agency.--The term ``Agency'' means the Consumer 
 Financial Protection Agency.
 (3) Alternative consumer financial product or service.--The 
 term ``alternative consumer financial product or service'' 
 means a consumer financial product or service that is of the 
 same type or class as a standard consumer financial product or 
 service, but that contains different or additional terms, fees, 
 or features.
 (4) Appointed board member.--The term ``appointed Board 
 member'' or ``appointed Board members'' means a member or 
 members of the Board appointed by the President under section 
 112(a)(1).
 (5) Board.--The term ``Board'' means the Board of the 
 Consumer Financial Protection Agency.
 (6) Board of governors.--The term ``Board of Governors'' 
 means the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
 (7) Consumer.--The term ``consumer'' means an individual or 
 an agent, trustee, or representative acting on behalf of an 
 individual.
 (8) Consumer financial product or service.--The term 
 ``consumer financial product or service'' means any financial 
 product or service to be used by a consumer primarily for 
 personal, family, or household purposes.
 (9) Covered person.--The term ``covered person'' means--
 (A) any person who engages directly or indirectly 
 in a financial activity, in connection with the 
 provision of a consumer financial product or service; 
 or
 (B) any person who, in connection with the 
 provision of a consumer financial product or service, 
 provides a material service to, or processes a 
 transaction on behalf of, a person described in 
 subparagraph (A).
 (10) Credit.--The term ``credit'' means the right granted 
 by a person to a consumer to defer payment of a debt, incur 
 debt and defer its payment, or purchase property or services 
 and defer payment for such purchase.
 (11) Credit union.--The term ``credit union'' means a 
 Federal credit union, State credit union, or State-chartered 
 credit union as defined in section 101 of the Federal Credit 
 Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1752).
 (12) Deposit.--The term ``deposit''--
 (A) has the same meaning as in section 3(l) of the 
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act; and
 (B) includes a share in a member account (as 
 defined in section 101(5) of the Federal Credit Union 
 Act) at a credit union.
 (13) Deposit-taking activity.--The term ``deposit-taking 
 activity'' means--
 (A) the acceptance of deposits, the provision of 
 other services related to the acceptance of deposits, 
 or the maintenance of deposit accounts;
 (B) the acceptance of money, the provision of other 
 services related to the acceptance of money, or the 
 maintenance of members' share accounts by a credit 
 union; or
 (C) the receipt of money or its equivalent, as the 
 Agency may determine by regulation or order, received 
 or held by the covered person (or an agent for the 
 person) for the purpose of facilitating a payment or 
 transferring funds or value of funds by a consumer to a 
 third party.
 For the purposes of this title, the Agency may determine that 
 the term ``deposit-taking activity'' includes the receipt of 
 money or its equivalent in connection with the sale or issuance 
 of any payment instrument or stored value product or service.
 (14) Designated transfer date.--The term ``designated 
 transfer date'' has the meaning provided in section 162.
 (15) Director.--The term ``Director'' means the Director of 
 the Agency.
 (16) Enumerated consumer laws.--The term ``enumerated 
 consumer laws'' means each of the following:
 (A) The Alternative Mortgage Transaction Parity Act 
 (12 U.S.C. 3801 et seq.).
 (B) The Electronic Funds Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. 
 1693 et seq.)
 (C) The Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 
 1691 et seq.).
 (D) The Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681 
 et seq.), except with respect to sections 615(e), 624, 
 and 628.
 (E) The Fair Debt Collection Practices Act (15 
 U.S.C. 1692 et seq.).
 (F) Subsections (c), (d), (e), and (f) of section 
 43 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 
 1831t).
 (G) Sections 502, 503, 504, 505, 506, 507, 508, and 
 509 of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (15 U.S.C. 6802 et 
 seq.).
 (H) The Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (12 U.S.C. 
 2801 et seq.).
 (I) The Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (12 
 U.S.C. 2601 et seq.).
 (J) The Secure and Fair Enforcement for Mortgage 
 Licensing Act (12 U.S.C. 5101 et seq.).
 (K) The Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1601 et 
 seq.).
 (L) The Truth in Savings Act (12 U.S.C. 4301 et 
 seq.).
 (17) Federal banking agency.--The term ``Federal banking 
 agency'' means the Board of Governors, the Comptroller of the 
 Currency, the Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision, the 
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, or the National Credit 
 Union Administration and the term ``Federal banking agencies'' 
 means all of those agencies.
 (18) Financial activity.--The term ``financial activity'' 
 means any of the following activities:
 (A) Deposit-taking activities.
 (B) Extending credit and servicing loans, 
 including--
 (i) acquiring, brokering, or servicing 
 loans or other extensions of credit;
 (ii) engaging in any other activity usual 
 in connection with extending credit or 
 servicing loans, including performing 
 appraisals of real estate and personal property 
 and selling or servicing credit insurance or 
 mortgage insurance.
 (C) Check-guaranty services, including--
 (i) authorizing a subscribing merchant to 
 accept personal checks tendered by the 
 merchant's customers in payment for goods and 
 services; and
 (ii) purchasing from a subscribing merchant 
 validly authorized checks that are subsequently 
 dishonored.
 (D) Collecting, analyzing, maintaining, and 
 providing consumer report information or other account 
 information by covered persons, including information 
 relating to the credit history of consumers and 
 providing the information to a credit grantor who is 
 considering a consumer application for credit or who 
 has extended credit to the borrower.
 (E) Collection of debt related to any consumer 
 financial product or service.
 (F) Providing real estate settlement services, 
 including providing title insurance.
 (G) Leasing personal or real property or acting as 
 agent, broker, or adviser in leasing such property if--
 (i) the lease is on a non-operating basis;
 (ii) the initial term of the lease is at 
 least 90 days; and
 (iii) in the case of leases involving real 
 property, at the inception of the initial 
 lease, the transaction is intended to result in 
 ownership of the leased property to be 
 transferred to the lessee, subject to standards 
 prescribed by the Agency.
 (H) Acting as an investment adviser to any person 
 (not subject to regulation by or required to register 
 with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission or the 
 Securities and Exchange Commission).
 (I) Acting as financial adviser to any person, 
 including--
 (i) providing financial and other related 
 advisory services;
 (ii) providing educational courses, and 
 instructional materials to consumers on 
 individual financial management matters; or
 (iii) providing credit counseling, tax-
 planning or tax-preparation services to any 
 person.
 (J) Financial data processing, including providing 
 data processing and data transmission services, 
 facilities (including data processing and data 
 transmission hardware, software, documentation, or 
 operating personnel), databases, advice, and access to 
 such services, facilities, or databases by any 
 technological means, if--
 (i) the data to be processed or furnished 
 are financial, banking, or economic; and
 (ii) the hardware provided in connection 
 therewith is offered only in conjunction with 
 software designed and marketed for the 
 processing and transmission of financial, 
 banking, or economic data, and where the 
 general purpose hardware does not constitute 
 more than 30 percent of the cost of any 
 packaged offering.
 (K) Money transmitting.
 (L) Sale or issuance of stored value.
 (M) Acting as a money services business.
 (N) Acting as a custodian of money or any financial 
 instrument.
 (O) Any other activity that the Agency defines, by 
 regulation, as a financial activity for the purposes of 
 this title, except that the Agency shall not define 
 engaging in the business of insurance as a financial 
 activity (other than with respect to credit insurance, 
 mortgage insurance, or title insurance, as described in 
 this section).
 (19) Financial product or service.--The term ``financial 
 product or service'' means any product or service that, 
 directly or indirectly, results from or is related to engaging 
 in 1 or more financial activities.
 (20) Foreign exchange.--The term ``foreign exchange'' means 
 the exchange, for compensation, of currency of the United 
 States or of a foreign government for currency of another 
 government.
 (21) Insured depository institution.--The term ``insured 
 depository institution'' has the same meaning as in section 3 
 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
 (22) Money services business.--The term ``money services 
 business'' means a covered person that--
 (A) receives currency, monetary value, or payment 
 instruments for the purpose of exchanging or 
 transmitting the same by any means, including 
 transmission by wire, facsimile, electronic transfer, 
 courier, the Internet, or through bill payment 
 services, or other businesses that facilitate third-
 party transfers within the United States or to or from 
 the United States; or
 (B) issues payment instruments or stored value.
 (23) Money transmitting.--The term ``money transmitting'' 
 means the receipt by a covered person of currency, monetary 
 value, or payment instruments for the purpose of transmitting 
 the same to any third-party by any means, including 
 transmission by wire, facsimile, electronic transfer, courier, 
 the Internet, or through bill payment services.
 (24) Payment instrument.--The term ``payment instrument'' 
 means a check, draft, warrant, money order, traveler's check, 
 electronic instrument, or other instrument, payment of money, 
 or monetary value (other than currency).
 (25) Person.--The term ``person'' means an individual, 
 partnership, company, corporation, association (incorporated or 
 unincorporated), trust, estate, cooperative organization, or 
 other entity.
 (26) Person regulated by the commodity futures trading 
 commission.--The term ``person regulated by the Commodity 
 Futures Trading Commission'' means any futures commission 
 merchant, commodity trading adviser, commodity pool operator, 
 or introducing broker that is subject to the jurisdiction of 
 the Commodity Futures Trading Commission under the Commodity 
 Exchange Act, but only to the extent that the person acts in 
 such capacity.
 (27) Person regulated by the securities and exchange 
 commission.--The term ``person regulated by the Securities and 
 Exchange Commission'' means--
 (A) a broker or dealer that is required to be 
 registered under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934;
 (B) an investment adviser that is required to be 
 registered under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940; 
 or
 (C) an investment company that is required to be 
 registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940--
 but only to the extent that the person acts in a registered 
 capacity.
 (28) Provision of a consumer financial product or 
 service.--The term ``provision of (or providing) a consumer 
 financial product or service'' means the advertisement, 
 marketing, solicitation, sale, disclosure, delivery, or account 
 maintenance or servicing of a consumer financial product or 
 service.
 (29) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of the Treasury.
 (30) Standard consumer financial product or service.--The 
 term ``standard consumer financial product or service'' means a 
 consumer financial product or service containing terms, 
 conditions, and features defined by the Agency.
 (31) State.--The term ``State'' means any State, territory, 
 or possession of the United States, the District of Columbia, 
 Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Commonwealth of the Northern 
 Mariana Islands, Guam, American Samoa, or the United States 
 Virgin Islands.
 (32) Stored value.--The term ``stored value'' means funds 
 or monetary value represented in any electronic format, whether 
 or not specially encrypted, and stored or capable of storage on 
 electronic media in such a way as to be retrievable and 
 transferred electronically, and includes a prepaid debit card 
 or product, or any other similar product, regardless of whether 
 the amount of the funds or monetary value may be increased or 
 reloaded.

 Subtitle A--Establishment of the Agency

SEC. 111. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION AGENCY.

 (a) Agency Established.--There is established the Consumer 
Financial Protection Agency as an independent agency in the executive 
branch to regulate the provision of consumer financial products or 
services under this title, the enumerated consumer laws, and the 
authorities transferred under subtitles F and H.
 (b) Principal Office.--The principal office of the Agency shall be 
located in the city of Washington, District of Columbia, at 1 or more 
sites.

SEC. 112. BOARD.

 (a) Composition of the Board.--The Agency shall have a Board that 
is composed of 5 members as follows:
 (1) 4 members of the Board who shall be appointed by the 
 President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate--
 (A) from among individuals who are citizens of the 
 United States; and
 (B) who have a strong competencies and experiences 
 related to consumer financial products or services; and
 (2) the head of the agency responsible for chartering and 
 regulating national banks.
 (b) Director of the Agency.--From among the appointed Board 
members, the President shall designate 1 member of the Board to serve 
as the Director and the Director shall be the chief executive of the 
Agency.
 (c) Terms of Appointed Board Members.--
 (1) In general.--An appointed Board member, including the 
 Director of the Agency, shall serve for a term of 5 years.
 (2) Removal for cause.--The President may remove any 
 appointed Board member for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or 
 malfeasance in office.
 (3) Vacancies.--Any member of the Board appointed to fill a 
 vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term to which 
 that member's predecessor was appointed (including the Director 
 of the Agency) shall be appointed only for the remainder of the 
 term.
 (4) Continuation of service.--Each appointed Board member 
 may continue to serve after the expiration of the term of 
 office to which that member was appointed until a successor has 
 been appointed by the President and confirmed by the Senate.
 (5) Initial appointments staggered.--The appointed Board 
 members (including the Director of the Agency) shall serve 
 staggered terms, which initially shall be established by the 
 President for terms of 2, 3, 4, and 5 years, respectively.
 (d) Compensation.--
 (1) Director.--The Director shall receive compensation at 
 the rate prescribed for Level I of the Executive Schedule under 
 section 5313 of title 5, United States Code.
 (2) Other appointed board members.--The 3 other appointed 
 Board members shall each receive compensation at the rate 
 prescribed for Level II of the Executive Schedule under section 
 5314 of title 5, United States Code.

SEC. 113. EXECUTIVE AND ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS.

 (a) Powers.--The Board may exercise all executive and 
administrative functions of the Agency, including to--
 (1) establish rules for conducting the Agency's general 
 business in a manner not inconsistent with this title;
 (2) bind the Agency and enter into contracts;
 (3) direct the establishment of and maintain divisions or 
 other offices within the Agency in order to fulfill the 
 responsibilities of this title, the enumerated consumer laws, 
 and the authorities transferred under subtitles F and H, and to 
 satisfy the requirements of other applicable law;
 (4) coordinate and oversee the operation of all 
 administrative, enforcement, and research activities of the 
 Agency;
 (5) adopt and use a seal;
 (6) determine the character of and the necessity for the 
 Agency's obligations and expenditures, and the manner in which 
 they shall be incurred, allowed, and paid;
 (7) delegate authority, at the Agency's lawful discretion, 
 to the Director or to a member of the Board or to any officer 
 or employee of the Agency to take action under any provision of 
 this title or under other applicable law;
 (8) to implement this title and the Agency's authorities 
 under the enumerated consumer laws and under subtitles F and H 
 through rules, orders, guidance, interpretations, statements of 
 policy, examinations, and enforcement actions; and
 (9) perform such other functions as may be authorized or 
 required by law.
 (b) Transacting Business.--
 (1) Quorum.--3 members of the Board shall constitute a 
 quorum for the transaction of business, except that if only 3 
 members of the Board are serving because of vacancies, 2 
 members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the 
 transaction of business.
 (2) Voting.--Other than acts performed under delegated 
 authority, the Board shall act through a majority vote of its 
 members assembled.

SEC. 114. ADMINISTRATION.

 (a) Officers.--The Agency shall appoint the following officials:
 (1) A secretary, who shall be charged with maintaining the 
 records of the Agency and performing such other activities as 
 the Board directs.
 (2) A general counsel, who shall be charged with overseeing 
 the legal affairs of the Agency and performing such other 
 activities as the Board directs.
 (3) An inspector general, who shall have the authority and 
 functions of an inspector general of a designated Federal 
 entity under the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App. 
 3).
 (b) Personnel.--
 (1) Appointment.--
 (A) In general.--The Agency may fix the number of, 
 and appoint and direct, all employees of the Agency.
 (B) Expedited hiring.--During the 2-year period 
 beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
 Agency may appoint, without regard to the provisions of 
 sections 3309 through 3318, of title 5, United States 
 Code, candidates directly to positions for which public 
 notice has been given.
 (2) Compensation.--
 (A) Pay.--The Agency shall fix, adjust, and 
 administer the pay for all employees of the Agency 
 without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 or 
 subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States 
 Code.
 (B) Benefits.--The Agency may provide additional 
 benefits to Agency employees if the same type of 
 benefits are then being provided by the Board of 
 Governors or, if not then being provided, could be 
 provided by the Board of Governors under applicable 
 provisions of law, rule, or regulation.
 (C) Minimum standard.--The Agency shall at all 
 times provide compensation and benefits to classes of 
 employees that, at a minimum, are equivalent to the 
 compensation and benefits provided by the Board of 
 Governors for the corresponding class of employees in 
 any fiscal year.
 (c) Specific Functional Units.--
 (1) Research.--The Agency shall establish a unit whose 
 functions shall include researching, analyzing, and reporting 
 on--
 (A) current and prospective developments in markets 
 for consumer financial products or services, including 
 market areas of alternative consumer financial products 
 or services with high growth rates;
 (B) consumer awareness, understanding, and use of 
 disclosures and communications regarding consumer 
 financial products or services;
 (C) consumer awareness and understanding of costs, 
 risks, and benefits of consumer financial products or 
 services; and
 (D) consumer behavior with respect to consumer 
 financial products or services.
 (2) Community affairs.--The Agency shall establish a unit 
 whose functions shall include providing information, guidance, 
 and technical assistance regarding the provision of consumer 
 financial products or services to traditionally underserved 
 consumers and communities.
 (3) Consumer complaints.--The Agency shall establish a unit 
 whose functions shall include--
 (A) establishing a central database for collecting 
 and tracking information on consumer complaints about 
 consumer financial products or services and resolution 
 of complaints; and
 (B) sharing data and coordinating consumer 
 complaints with Federal banking agencies, other Federal 
 agencies, and State regulators.

SEC. 115. CONSUMER ADVISORY BOARD.

 (a) Establishment Required.--The Agency shall establish a Consumer 
Advisory Board to advise and consult with the Agency in the exercise of 
its functions under this title, the enumerated consumer laws, and to 
provide information on emerging practices in the consumer financial 
products or services industry.
 (b) Membership.--In appointing the members of the Consumer Advisory 
Board, the Agency shall seek to assemble experts in financial services, 
community development, and consumer financial products or services and 
seek representation of the interests of covered persons and consumers.
 (c) Meetings.--The Consumer Advisory Board shall meet from time to 
time at the call of the Agency, but, at a minimum, shall meet at least 
twice in each year.
 (d) Compensation and Travel Expenses.--Members of the Consumer 
Advisory Board who are not full-time employees of the United States 
shall--
 (1) be entitled to receive compensation at a rate fixed by 
 the Agency while attending meetings of the Consumer Advisory 
 Board, including travel time; and
 (2) be allowed travel expenses, including transportation 
 and subsistence, while away from their homes or regular places 
 of business.

SEC. 116. COORDINATION.

 (a) Coordination With Other Federal Agencies and State 
Regulators.--The Agency shall coordinate with the Securities and 
Exchange Commission, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, and 
other Federal agencies and State regulators, as appropriate, to promote 
consistent regulatory treatment of consumer and investment products and 
services.
 (b) Coordination of Consumer Education Initiatives.--
 (1) In general.--The Agency shall coordinate with each 
 agency that is a member of the Financial Literacy and Education 
 Commission established by the Financial Literacy and Education 
 Improvement Act (20 U.S.C. 9701 et seq.) to assist each agency 
 in enhancing its existing financial literacy and education 
 initiatives to better achieve the goals in paragraph (2) and to 
 ensure the consistency of such initiatives across Federal 
 agencies.
 (2) Goals of coordination.--In coordinating with the 
 agencies described in paragraph (1), the Agency shall seek to 
 improve efforts to educate consumers about financial matters 
 generally, the management of their own financial affairs, and 
 their judgments about the appropriateness of certain financial 
 products.

SEC. 117. REPORTS TO THE CONGRESS.

 (a) Reports Required.--The Agency shall prepare and submit to the 
President and the appropriate committees of the Congress a report at 
the beginning of each regular session of the Congress, beginning with 
the session following the designated transfer date.
 (b) Contents.--The reports required by subsection (a) shall 
include--
 (1) a list of the significant rules and orders adopted by 
 the Agency, as well as other significant initiatives conducted 
 by the Agency, during the preceding year and the Agency's plan 
 for rules, orders, or other initiatives to be undertaken during 
 the upcoming period;
 (2) an analysis of complaints about consumer financial 
 products or services that the Agency has received and collected 
 in its central database on complaints during the preceding 
 year;
 (3) a list, with a brief statement of the issues, of the 
 public supervisory and enforcement actions to which the Agency 
 is a party (including adjudication proceedings conducted under 
 subtitle E) during the preceding year; and
 (4) an appraisal of significant actions, including actions 
 under Federal or State law, by State attorneys general or State 
 regulators relating to this title, the authorities transferred 
 under subtitles F and H, and the enumerated consumer laws.

SEC. 118. FUNDING; FEES AND ASSESSMENTS; PENALTIES AND FINES.

 (a) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purposes of carrying 
out the authorities granted in this title and the enumerated consumer 
laws and transferred under subtitles F and H, there are appropriated to 
the Agency such sums as are necessary. Notwithstanding any other 
provision of law, such amounts shall be subject to apportionment under 
section 1517 of title 31, United States Code, and restrictions that 
generally apply to the use of appropriated funds in title 31, United 
States Code, and other laws.
 (b) Fees and Assessments on Covered Persons.--
 (1) Recovery of expended funds.--The Agency shall recover 
 the amount of funds expended by the Agency under this title, 
 through the collection of annual fees or assessments on covered 
 persons.
 (2) Rulemaking.--The Agency shall prescribe regulations to 
 govern the collection of fees and assessments. Such regulations 
 shall specify and define the basis of fees or assessments (such 
 as the outstanding volume of consumer credit accounts, total 
 assets under management, or consumer financial transactions), 
 the amount and frequency of fees or assessments, and such other 
 factors that the Agency deems appropriate.
 (3) Fees and assessments as miscellaneous receipts.--All 
 fees and assessments collected under this title, the 
 authorities transferred under subtitles F and H, or any 
 enumerated consumer law shall be deposited into the Treasury as 
 miscellaneous receipts.
 (c) Penalties and Fines.--
 (1) Establishment of victims relief fund.--There is 
 established in the Treasury of the United States a fund to be 
 known as the ``Consumer Financial Protection Agency Civil 
 Penalty Fund'' (referred to in this section as the ``Fund''). 
 If the Agency obtains a civil penalty against any person in any 
 judicial or administrative action under this title, the 
 authorities transferred under subtitles F and H, or any 
 enumerated consumer law, the Agency shall deposit into the Fund 
 the amount of the penalty collected.
 (2) Payment to victims.--Amounts in the Fund shall be 
 available to the Agency, without fiscal year limitation, for 
 payments to the victims of activities for which civil penalties 
 have been imposed under this title, the authorities transferred 
 under subtitles F and H, or any enumerated consumer law.

SEC. 119. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 This subtitle shall take effect on the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

 Subtitle B--General Powers of the Agency

SEC. 121. MANDATE AND OBJECTIVES.

 (a) Mandate.--The Agency shall seek to promote transparency, 
simplicity, fairness, accountability, and access in the market for 
consumer financial products or services.
 (b) Objectives.--The Agency is authorized to exercise its 
authorities granted in this title, in the enumerated consumer laws, and 
transferred under subtitles F and H for the purposes of ensuring that--
 (1) consumers have, understand, and can use the information 
 they need to make responsible decisions about consumer 
 financial products or services;
 (2) consumers are protected from abuse, unfairness, 
 deception, and discrimination;
 (3) markets for consumer financial products or services 
 operate fairly and efficiently with ample room for sustainable 
 growth and innovation; and
 (4) traditionally underserved consumers and communities 
 have access to financial services.

SEC. 122. AUTHORITIES.

 (a) In General.--The Agency is authorized to exercise its 
authorities granted in this title, in the enumerated consumer laws, and 
transferred under subtitles F and H, to administer, enforce, and 
otherwise implement the provisions of this title, the authorities 
transferred in subtitles F and H, and the enumerated consumer laws.
 (b) Rulemaking, Orders, and Guidance.--
 (1) In general.--The Agency may prescribe rules and issue 
 orders and guidance as may be necessary or appropriate to 
 enable it to administer and carry out the purposes and 
 objectives of this title, the authorities transferred under 
 subtitles F and H, and the enumerated consumer laws, and to 
 prevent evasions thereof.
 (2) Standards for rulemaking.--In prescribing a rule under 
 this title or pursuant to the authorities transferred under 
 subtitles F and H or the enumerated consumer laws, the Agency 
 shall--
 (A) consider the potential benefits and costs to 
 consumers and covered persons, including the potential 
 reduction of consumers' access to consumer financial 
 products or services, resulting from such rule; and
 (B) consult with the Federal banking agencies, or 
 other Federal agencies, as appropriate, regarding the 
 consistency of a proposed rule with prudential, market, 
 or systemic objectives administered by such agencies.
 (3) Exemptions.--
 (A) In general.--The Agency, by rule or order, may 
 conditionally or unconditionally exempt any covered 
 person or any consumer financial product or service or 
 any class of covered persons or consumer financial 
 products or services, from any provision of this title, 
 any enumerated consumer law, or from any rule 
 thereunder, as the Agency deems necessary or 
 appropriate to carry out the purposes and objectives of 
 this title taking into consideration the factors in 
 subparagraph (B).
 (B) Factors.--In issuing an exemption by rule or 
 order as permitted in subparagraph (A), the Agency 
 shall as appropriate take into consideration the 
 following--
 (i) total assets of the covered person;
 (ii) the volume of transactions involving 
 consumer financial products or services in 
 which the covered person engages;
 (iii) the extent to which the covered 
 person engages in 1 or more financial 
 activities; and
 (iv) existing laws or regulations which are 
 applicable to the consumer financial product or 
 service and the extent to which such laws or 
 regulations provide consumers with adequate 
 protections.
 (c) Examinations and Reports.--
 (1) In general.--The Agency may on a periodic basis 
 examine, or require reports from, a covered person for purposes 
 of ensuring compliance with the requirements of this title, the 
 enumerated consumer laws, and any regulations prescribed by the 
 Agency under this title or pursuant to the authorities 
 transferred under subtitles F and H, and enforcing compliance 
 with such requirements.
 (2) Content of reports.--The reports authorized in 
 paragraph (1) may include such information as necessary to keep 
 the Agency informed as to--
 (A) the compliance systems or procedures of the 
 covered person or any affiliate thereof, with 
 applicable provisions of this title or any other law 
 that the Agency has jurisdiction to enforce; and
 (B) matters related to the provision of consumer 
 financial products or services including the servicing 
 or maintenance of accounts or extensions of credit.
 (3) Use of existing reports.--In general, the Agency shall, 
 to the fullest extent possible, use--
 (A) reports that a covered person, or any affiliate 
 thereof, has provided or been required to provide to a 
 Federal or State agency; and
 (B) information that has been reported publicly.
 (4) Reports from nondepository covered persons.--The Agency 
 may require reports regarding financial condition from covered 
 persons which are not subject to the jurisdiction of a Federal 
 banking agency or a comparable State regulator for the purpose 
 of assessing the ability of such person to perform its 
 obligations to consumers.
 (5) Access by the agency to reports of other regulators.--
 (A) Examination and financial condition reports.--
 Upon providing reasonable assurances of 
 confidentiality, the Agency shall have access to any 
 report of examination or financial condition made by a 
 Federal banking agency or other Federal agency having 
 supervision of a covered person, and to all revisions 
 made to any such report.
 (B) Provision of other reports to agency.--In 
 addition to the reports described in paragraph (a), a 
 Federal banking agency may, in its discretion, furnish 
 to the Agency any other report or other confidential 
 supervisory information concerning any insured 
 depository institution, any credit union, or other 
 entity examined by such agency under authority of any 
 Federal law.
 (6) Access by other regulators to reports of the agency.--
 Upon providing reasonable assurances of confidentiality, a 
 Federal banking agency, a State regulator, or any other Federal 
 agency having supervision of a covered person shall have access 
 to any report of examination made by the Agency with respect to 
 the covered person, and to all revisions made to any such 
 report.
 (7) Preservation of authority.--No provision in paragraph 
 (3) shall be construed as preventing the Agency from conducting 
 an examination authorized by this title or under the 
 authorities transferred under subtitles F and H or pursuant to 
 any enumerated consumer law.
 (d) Exclusive Rulemaking and Examination Authority.--
Notwithstanding any other provision of Federal law other than 
subsection (f), to the extent that a Federal law authorizes the Agency 
and another Federal agency to prescribe regulations, issue guidance, 
conduct examinations, or require reports under that law for purposes of 
assuring compliance with this title, any enumerated consumer law, the 
laws for which authorities were transferred under subtitles F and H, 
and any regulations prescribed under this title or pursuant to any such 
authority, the Agency shall have the exclusive authority to prescribe 
regulations, issue guidance, conduct examinations, require reports, or 
issue exemptions with regard to any person subject to that law.
 (e) Primary Enforcement Authority.--
 (1) The agency to have primary enforcement authority.--To 
 the extent that a Federal law authorizes the Agency and another 
 Federal agency to enforce that law, the Agency shall have 
 primary authority to enforce that Federal law with respect to 
 any person in accordance with this subsection.
 (2) Referral.--Any Federal agency authorized to enforce a 
 Federal law described in paragraph (1) may recommend in writing 
 to the Agency that the Agency initiate an enforcement 
 proceeding as the Agency is authorized by that Federal law or 
 by this title. The recommendation shall be accompanied by a 
 written explanation of the concerns giving rise to the 
 recommendation.
 (3) Backstop enforcement authority of other federal 
 agency.--If the Agency does not, before the end of the 120-day 
 period beginning on the date on which the Agency receives a 
 recommendation under paragraph (2), initiate an enforcement 
 proceeding, the other agency may initiate an enforcement 
 proceeding as permitted by that Federal law.
 (f) Exceptions.--
 (1) Department of justice.--Nothing in this title shall 
 affect the authorities of the Department of Justice.
 (2) Persons regulated by the securities and exchange 
 commission.--
 (A) In general.--No provision of this title shall 
 be construed as altering, amending, or affecting the 
 authority of the Securities and Exchange Commission to 
 adopt rules, initiate enforcement proceedings, or take 
 any other action with respect to a person regulated by 
 the Securities and Exchange Commission. The Agency 
 shall have no authority to exercise any power to 
 enforce this title with respect to a person regulated 
 by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
 (B) Consultation and coordination.--Notwithstanding 
 subparagraph (A), the Securities and Exchange 
 Commission shall consult and coordinate with the Agency 
 with respect to any rule (including any advance notice 
 of proposed rulemaking) regarding an investment product 
 or service that is the same type of product as, or that 
 competes directly with, a consumer financial product or 
 service that is subject to the jurisdiction of the 
 Agency under this title or under any other law.
 (3) Persons regulated by the commodity futures trading 
 commission.--
 (A) In general.--No provision of this title shall 
 be construed as altering, amending, or affecting the 
 authority of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission 
 to adopt rules, initiate enforcement proceedings, or 
 take any other action with respect to a person 
 regulated by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. 
 The Agency shall have no authority to exercise any 
 power to enforce this title with respect to a person 
 regulated by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
 (B) Consultation and coordination.--Notwithstanding 
 subparagraph (A), the Commodity Futures Trading 
 Commission shall consult and coordinate with the Agency 
 with respect to any rule (including any advance notice 
 of proposed rulemaking) regarding a product or service 
 that is the same type of product as, or that competes 
 directly with, a consumer financial product or service 
 that is subject to the jurisdiction of the Agency under 
 this title or under any other law.
 (g) No Authority To Impose Usury Limit.--No provision of this title 
shall be construed as conferring authority on the Agency to establish a 
usury limit applicable to an extension of credit offered or made by a 
covered person to a consumer, unless explicitly authorized by law.

SEC. 123. COLLECTION OF INFORMATION; CONFIDENTIALITY RULES.

 (a) Collection of Information.--
 (1) In general.--In conducting research on the provision of 
 consumer financial products or services, the Agency shall have 
 the power to gather information from time to time regarding the 
 organization, business conduct, and practices of covered 
 persons.
 (2) Specific authority.--In order to gather such 
 information, the Agency shall have the power--
 (A) to gather and compile information;
 (B) to require persons to file with the Agency, in 
 such form and within such reasonable period of time as 
 the Agency may prescribe, by regulation or order, 
 annual or special reports, or answers in writing to 
 specific questions, furnishing information the Agency 
 may require; and
 (C) to make public such information obtained by it 
 under this section as is in the public interest in 
 reports or otherwise in the manner best suited for 
 public information and use.
 (b) Confidentiality Rules.--The Agency shall prescribe regulations 
regarding the confidential treatment of information obtained from 
persons in connection with the exercise of its authorities under this 
title and the enumerated consumer laws and the authorities transferred 
under subtitles F and H.

SEC. 124. MONITORING; ASSESSMENTS OF SIGNIFICANT RULES; REPORTS.

 (a) Monitoring.--
 (1) In general.--The Agency shall monitor for risks to 
 consumers in the provision of consumer financial products or 
 services, including developments in markets for such products 
 or services.
 (2) Means of monitoring.--Such monitoring may be conducted 
 by examinations of covered persons, analysis of reports 
 obtained from covered persons, assessment of consumer 
 complaints, surveys and interviews of covered persons and 
 consumers, and review of available databases.
 (3) Considerations.--In allocating its resources to perform 
 the monitoring required by this section, the Agency may 
 consider, among other factors--
 (A) likely risks and costs to consumers associated 
 with buying or using a type of consumer financial 
 product or service;
 (B) consumers' understanding of the risks of a type 
 of consumer financial product or service;
 (C) the state of the law that applies to the 
 provision of a consumer financial product or service, 
 including the extent to which the law is likely to 
 adequately protect consumers;
 (D) rates of growth in the provision of a consumer 
 financial product or service;
 (E) extent, if any, to which the risks of a 
 consumer financial product or service may 
 disproportionately affect traditionally underserved 
 consumers, if any; or
 (F) types, number, and other pertinent 
 characteristics of covered persons that provide the 
 product or service.
 (4) Reports.--The Agency shall publish at least 1 report of 
 significant findings of its monitoring required by paragraph 
 (1) in each calendar year, beginning in the calendar year that 
 is 1 year after the designated transfer date.
 (b) Assessment of Significant Rules.--
 (1) In general.--The Agency shall conduct an assessment of 
 each significant regulation prescribed or order issued by the 
 Agency under this title, under the authorities transferred 
 under subtitles F and H or pursuant to any enumerated consumer 
 law that addresses, among other relevant factors, the 
 effectiveness of the regulation in meeting the purposes and 
 objectives of this Act and the specific goals stated by the 
 Agency.
 (2) Basis for assessment.--The assessment shall reflect 
 available evidence and any data that the Agency reasonably may 
 collect.
 (3) Reports.--The Agency shall publish a report of its 
 assessment not later than 3 years after the effective date of 
 the regulation or order, unless the Agency determines that 3 
 years is not sufficient time to study or review the impact of 
 the regulation, but in no event shall the Agency publish a 
 report thereof more than 5 years after the effective date of 
 the regulation or order.
 (4) Public commented required.--Before publishing a report 
 of its assessment, the Agency shall invite public comment on 
 recommendations for modifying, expanding, or eliminating the 
 newly adopted significant regulation or order.
 (c) Information Gathering.--In conducting any monitoring or 
assessment required by this section, the Agency may gather information 
through a variety of methods, including by conducting surveys or 
interviews of consumers.

SEC. 125. AUTHORITY TO RESTRICT MANDATORY PRE-DISPUTE ARBITRATION.

 The Agency, by regulation, may prohibit or impose conditions or 
limitations on the use of agreements between a covered person and a 
consumer that require the consumer to arbitrate any future dispute 
between the parties arising under this title or any enumerated consumer 
law if the Agency finds that such prohibition, imposition of 
conditions, or limitations are in the public interest and for the 
protection of consumers.

SEC. 126. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 This subtitle shall take effect on the designated transfer date.

 Subtitle C--Specific Authorities

SEC. 131. PROHIBITING UNFAIR, DECEPTIVE, OR ABUSIVE ACTS OR PRACTICES.

 (a) In General.--The Agency may take any action authorized under 
subtitle E to prevent a person from committing or engaging in an 
unfair, deceptive, or abusive act or practice under Federal law in 
connection with any transaction with a consumer for a consumer 
financial product or service.
 (b) Rulemaking Required.--
 (1) In general.--The Agency may prescribe regulations 
 identifying as unlawful unfair, deceptive, or abusive acts or 
 practices in connection with any transaction with a consumer 
 for a consumer financial product or service.
 (2) Includes prevention measures.--Regulations prescribed 
 under this section may include requirements for the purpose of 
 preventing such acts or practices.
 (c) Unfairness.--
 (1) In general.--The Agency shall have no authority under 
 this section to declare an act or practice in connection with a 
 transaction with a consumer for a consumer financial product or 
 service to be unlawful on the grounds that such act or practice 
 is unfair unless the Agency has a reasonable basis to conclude 
 that the act or practice causes or is likely to cause 
 substantial injury to consumers which is not reasonably 
 avoidable by consumers and such substantial injury is not 
 outweighed by countervailing benefits to consumers or to 
 competition.
 (2) Established public policy as factor.--In determining 
 whether an act or practice is unfair, the Agency may consider 
 established public policies as evidence to be considered with 
 all other evidence.
 (d) Consultation.--In prescribing a regulation under this section, 
the Agency shall consult with the Federal banking agencies, or other 
Federal agencies, as appropriate, concerning the consistency of the 
proposed regulation with prudential, market, or systemic objectives 
administered by such agencies.

SEC. 132. DISCLOSURES AND COMMUNICATIONS.

 (a) In General.--The Agency may prescribe regulations to ensure the 
appropriate and effective disclosure or communication to consumers of 
the costs, benefits, and risks associated with any consumer financial 
product or service.
 (b) Reasonable Disclosures and Communications.--Subject to 
regulations prescribed by the Agency, a covered person shall, with 
respect to disclosures or communications regarding any consumer 
financial product or service, make or provide to a consumer disclosures 
and communications that--
 (1) balance communication of the benefits of the product or 
 service with communication of significant risks and costs;
 (2) prominently disclose the significant risks and costs, 
 in reasonable proportion to the disclosure of the benefits;
 (3) communicate significant risks and costs in a clear, 
 concise, and timely manner designed to promote a consumer's 
 awareness and understanding of the risks and costs, as well as 
 to use the information to make financial decisions; and
 (4) comply with standards prescribed by the Agency.
 (c) Basis for Rulemaking.--In prescribing regulations under this 
section, the Agency shall consider available evidence about consumer 
awareness, understanding of, and responses to disclosures or 
communications about the risks, costs, and benefits of consumer 
financial products or services.
 (d) Combined Mortgage Loan Disclosure.--Within 1 year after the 
designated transfer date, the Agency shall propose for public comment 
regulations and model disclosures that combine the disclosures required 
under the Truth in Lending Act and the Real Estate Settlement 
Procedures Act into a single, integrated disclosure for mortgage loan 
transactions covered by those laws, unless the Agency determines that 
any proposal issued by the Board of Governors and the Department of 
Housing and Urban Development carries out the same purpose.

SEC. 133. SALES PRACTICES.

 The Agency may prescribe regulations and issue orders and guidance 
regarding the manner, settings, and circumstances for the provision of 
any consumer financial products or services to ensure that the risks, 
costs, and benefits of the products or services, both initially and 
over the term of the products or services, are fully and accurately 
represented to consumers.

SEC. 134. PILOT DISCLOSURES.

 (a) Pilot Disclosures.--The Agency shall establish standards and 
procedures for approval of pilot disclosures to be provided or made 
available by a covered person to consumers in connection with the 
provision of a consumer financial product or service.
 (b) Standards.--The procedures shall provide that a pilot 
disclosure must be limited in time and scope and reasonably designed to 
contribute materially to the understanding of consumer awareness and 
understanding of, and responses to, disclosures or communications about 
the risks, costs, and benefits of consumer financial products or 
services.
 (c) Transparency.--The procedures shall provide for public 
disclosure of pilots, but the Agency may limit disclosure to the extent 
necessary to encourage covered persons to conduct effective pilots.

SEC. 135. ADOPTING OPERATIONAL STANDARDS TO DETER UNFAIR, DECEPTIVE, OR 
 ABUSIVE PRACTICES.

 (a) Authority To Prescribe Standards.--The States are encouraged to 
prescribe standards applicable to covered persons who are not insured 
depository institutions or credit unions to deter and detect unfair, 
deceptive, abusive, fraudulent, or illegal transactions in the 
provision of consumer financial products or services, including 
standards for--
 (1) background checks for principals, officers, directors, 
 or key personnel of the covered person;
 (2) registration, licensing, or certification;
 (3) bond or other appropriate financial requirements to 
 provide reasonable assurance of the ability of the covered 
 person to perform its obligations to consumers;
 (4) creating and maintaining records of transactions or 
 accounts; or
 (5) procedures and operations of the covered person 
 relating to the provision of, or maintenance of accounts for, 
 consumer financial products or services.
 (b) Agency Authority To Prescribe Standards.--The Agency may 
prescribe regulations establishing minimum standards under this section 
for any class of covered persons other than covered persons which are 
subject to the jurisdiction of a Federal banking agency or a comparable 
State regulator. The Agency may enforce under subtitle E compliance 
with standards adopted by the Agency or a State pursuant to this 
section for covered persons operating in that State.
 (c) Consultation.--In prescribing minimum standards under this 
section, the Agency shall consult with the State authorities, the 
Federal banking agencies, or other Federal agencies, as appropriate, 
concerning the consistency of the proposed regulation with prudential, 
market, or systemic objectives administered by such State authorities 
or such agencies.

SEC. 136. STANDARD CONSUMER FINANCIAL PRODUCTS OR SERVICES.

 (a) Characteristics of Standard Consumer Financial Products or 
Services.--Subject to regulations prescribed by the Agency under this 
section, a standard consumer financial product or service is a consumer 
financial product or service that--
 (1) is or can be readily offered by covered persons that 
 offer or seek to offer alternative consumer financial products 
 or services;
 (2) is transparent to consumers in its terms and features;
 (3) poses lower risks to consumers;
 (4) facilitates comparisons with and assessment of the 
 benefits and costs of alternative consumer financial products 
 or services; and
 (5) contains the features or terms defined by the Agency 
 for the product or service.
 (b) Offering Standard Consumer Financial Products or Services.--
 (1) In general.--The Agency may prescribe regulations or 
 issue guidance regarding the offer of a standard consumer 
 financial product or service at or before the time an 
 alternative consumer financial product or service is offered to 
 a consumer, including--
 (A) warnings to consumers about the heightened 
 risks of alternative consumer financial products or 
 services; or
 (B) providing the consumer with a meaningful 
 opportunity to decline to obtain the standard consumer 
 financial product or service.
 (2) Rulemaking regarding the offering of standard consumer 
 financial products or services.--The Agency may not require a 
 covered person to offer a standard consumer financial product 
 or service at or before the time an alternative consumer 
 financial product or service is offered to a consumer unless 
 the Agency prescribes regulations, after notice and comment, 
 regarding the features or terms of the product or service.
 (3) General applicability.--Regulations prescribed by the 
 Agency under this section shall apply only to any covered 
 person who--
 (A) voluntarily offers or provides a consumer 
 financial product or service that is of the same type, 
 or in the same class, as a standard consumer financial 
 product or service; or
 (B) maintains an account or has a relationship with 
 a consumer involving a product or service that is 
 substantively similar to the standard product or 
 service.

SEC. 137. DUTIES.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Regulations ensuring fair dealing with consumers.--The 
 Agency shall prescribe regulations imposing duties on a covered 
 person, or an employee of a covered person, or an agent or 
 independent contractor for a covered person, who deals or 
 communicates directly with consumers in the provision of a 
 consumer financial product or service, as the Agency deems 
 appropriate or necessary to ensure fair dealing with consumers.
 (2) Considerations for duties.--In prescribing such 
 regulations, the Agency shall consider whether--
 (A) the covered person, employee, agent, or 
 independent contractor represents implicitly or 
 explicitly that the person, employee, agent, or 
 contractor is acting in the interest of the consumer 
 with respect to any aspect of the transaction;
 (B) the covered person, employee, agent, or 
 independent contractor provides the consumer with 
 advice with respect to any aspect of the transaction;
 (C) the consumer's reliance on any advice from the 
 covered person, employee, agent, or independent 
 contractor would be reasonable and justifiable under 
 the circumstances;
 (D) the benefits to consumers of imposing a 
 particular duty would outweigh the costs; and
 (E) any other factors as the Agency considers 
 appropriate.
 (3) Duties relating to compensation practices.--The Agency 
 may prescribe regulations establishing duties regarding 
 compensation practices applicable to a covered person, 
 employee, agent, or independent contractor who deals or 
 communicates directly with a consumer in the provision of a 
 consumer financial product or service for the purpose of 
 promoting fair dealing with consumers. The Agency shall not 
 prescribe a limit on the total dollar amount of compensation 
 paid to any person.
 (b) Administrative Proceedings.--
 (1) In general.--Any regulation prescribed by the Agency 
 under this section shall be enforceable only by the Agency 
 through an adjudication proceeding under subtitle E or by a 
 State regulator through an appropriate administrative 
 proceeding as permitted under State law.
 (2) Exclusivity of remedy.--No action may be commenced in 
 any court to enforce any requirement of a regulation prescribed 
 under this section, and no court may exercise supplemental 
 jurisdiction over a claim asserted under a regulation 
 prescribed under this section based on allegations or evidence 
 of conduct that otherwise may be subject to such regulation.
 (3) Rule of construction.--The Agency, the Attorney 
 General, and any State attorney general or State regulator 
 shall not be precluded from enforcing any other Federal or 
 State law against a person with respect to conduct that may be 
 subject to a regulation prescribed by the Agency under this 
 section.
 (c) Exclusions.--This section shall not be construed as authorizing 
the Agency to prescribe regulations applicable to--
 (1) an attorney licensed to practice law and in compliance 
 with the applicable rules and standards of professional 
 conduct, but only to the extent that the consumer financial 
 product or service provided is within the attorney-client 
 relationship with the consumer; or
 (2) any trustee, custodian, or other person that holds a 
 fiduciary duty in connection with a trust, including a 
 fiduciary duty to a grantor or beneficiary of a trust, that is 
 subject to and in compliance with the applicable law relating 
 to such trust.

SEC. 138. CONSUMER RIGHTS TO ACCESS INFORMATION.

 (a) In General.--Subject to regulations prescribed by the Agency, a 
covered person shall make available to a consumer, in an electronic 
form usable by the consumer, information in the control or possession 
of the covered person concerning the consumer financial product or 
service that the consumer obtained from such covered person including 
information relating to any transaction, series of transactions, or to 
the account including costs, charges and usage data.
 (b) Exceptions.--A covered person shall not be required by this 
section to make available to the consumer--
 (1) any confidential commercial information, including an 
 algorithm used to derive credit scores or other risk scores or 
 predictors;
 (2) any information collected by the covered person for the 
 purpose of preventing fraud or money laundering, or detecting, 
 or making any report regarding other unlawful or potentially 
 unlawful conduct;
 (3) any information required to be kept confidential by any 
 other law; or
 (4) any information that the covered person cannot retrieve 
 in the ordinary course of its business with respect to that 
 information.
 (c) No Duty To Maintain Records.--No provision of this section 
shall be construed as imposing any duty on a covered person to maintain 
or keep any information about a consumer.
 (d) Standardized Formats for Data.--The Agency, by regulation, 
shall prescribe standards applicable to covered persons to promote the 
development and use of standardized formats for information, including 
through the use of machine readable files, to be made available to 
consumers under this section.
 (e) Consultation and Coordination.--The Agency shall, when 
prescribing any regulation under this section, consult and coordinate 
with the Federal banking agencies and the Federal Trade Commission to 
ensure that the regulations--
 (1) impose substantively similar requirements on covered 
 persons;
 (2) take into account conditions under which covered 
 persons do business both in the United States and in other 
 countries; and
 (3) do not require or promote the use of any particular 
 technology in order to develop systems for compliance.

SEC. 139. PROHIBITED ACTS.

 It shall be unlawful for any person to--
 (1) advertise, market, offer, sell, enforce, or attempt to 
 enforce, any term, agreement, change in terms, fee or charge in 
 connection with a consumer financial product or service that is 
 not in conformity with this title or applicable regulation 
 prescribed or order issued by the Agency;
 (2) fail or refuse to permit access to or copying of 
 records, or fail or refuse to establish or maintain records, or 
 fail or refuse to make reports or provide information to the 
 Agency, as required by this title, an enumerated consumer law, 
 or pursuant to the authorities transferred by subtitles F and 
 H, or any regulation prescribed or order issued by the Agency 
 this title or pursuant to any such authority; or
 (3) knowingly or recklessly provide substantial assistance 
 to another person in violation of the provisions of section 
 131, or any regulation prescribed or order issued under such 
 section, and any such person shall be deemed to be in violation 
 of that section to the same extent as the person to whom such 
 assistance is provided.

SEC. 140. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 This subtitle shall take effect on the designated transfer date.

 Subtitle D--Preservation of State Law

SEC. 141. RELATION TO STATE LAW.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Rule of construction.--This title shall not be 
 construed as annulling, altering, or affecting, or exempting 
 any person subject to the provisions of this title from 
 complying with, the laws, regulations, orders, or 
 interpretations, in effect in any State, except to the extent 
 that such statute, regulation, order, or interpretation is 
 inconsistent with the provisions of this title and then only to 
 the extent of the inconsistency.
 (2) Greater protection under state law.--For the purposes 
 of this subsection, a State statute, regulation, order, or 
 interpretation is not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
 title if the protection such statute, regulation, order, or 
 interpretation affords consumers is greater than the protection 
 provided under this title, as determined by the Agency. A 
 determination regarding whether a State statute, regulation, 
 order, or interpretation is inconsistent with the provisions of 
 this title may be made by regulation, order or guidance adopted 
 by the Agency on its own motion or in response to a 
 nonfrivolous petition initiated by any interested person.
 (b) Relation to Other Provisions of Enumerated Consumer Laws That 
Relate to State Law.--No provision of this title, except as provided in 
section 175, shall be construed as modifying, limiting, or superseding 
the operation of any provision of an enumerated consumer law that 
relates to the application of State law with respect to such Federal 
law.

SEC. 142. PRESERVATION OF ENFORCEMENT POWERS OF STATES.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Action by state.--Any State attorney general may bring 
 a civil action in the name of such State, as parens patriae on 
 behalf of natural persons residing in such State, in any 
 district court of the United States or State court having 
 jurisdiction of the defendant, to secure monetary or equitable 
 relief for violation of any provisions of this title or 
 regulations issued thereunder.
 (2) Rule of construction.--No provision of this title shall 
 be construed as modifying, limiting, or superseding the 
 operation of any provision of an enumerated consumer law that 
 relates to the authority of a State attorney general or State 
 regulator to enforce such Federal law.
 (b) Consultation Required.--
 (1) Notice.--
 (A) In general.--Before initiating any action in a 
 court or other administrative or regulatory proceeding 
 against any covered person to enforce any provision of 
 this title, including any regulation prescribed by the 
 Agency under this title, a State attorney general or 
 State regulator shall timely provide a copy of the 
 complete complaint to be filed and written notice 
 describing such action or proceeding to the Agency, or 
 the Agency's designee.
 (B) Emergency action.--If prior notice is not 
 practicable, the State attorney general or State 
 regulator shall provide a copy of the complete 
 complaint and the notice to the Agency immediately upon 
 instituting the action or proceeding.
 (C) Contents of notice.--The notification required 
 under this section shall, at a minimum, describe--
 (i) the identity of the parties;
 (ii) the alleged facts underlying the 
 proceeding; and
 (iii) whether there may be a need to 
 coordinate the prosecution of the proceeding so 
 as not to interfere with any action, including 
 any rulemaking, undertaken by the Agency or 
 another Federal agency.
 (2) Agency response.--In any action described in paragraph 
 (1), the Agency may--
 (A) intervene in the action as a party;
 (B) upon intervening--
 (i) remove the action to the appropriate 
 United States district court, if the action was 
 not originally brought there; and
 (ii) be heard on all matters arising in the 
 action; and
 (C) appeal any order or judgment to the same extent 
 as any other party in the proceeding may.
 (c) Regulations.--The Agency shall prescribe regulations to 
implement the requirements of this section and, from time to time, 
provide guidance in order to further coordinate actions with the State 
attorneys general and other regulators.
 (d) Preservation of State Claims.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed as limiting the authority of a State attorney general or 
State regulator to bring an action or other regulatory proceeding 
arising solely under the law of that State.

SEC. 143. STATE LAW PREEMPTION STANDARDS FOR NATIONAL BANKS AND 
 SUBSIDIARIES CLARIFIED.

 (a) In General.--Chapter one of title LXII of the Revised Statutes 
of the United States (12 U.S.C. 21 et seq.) is amended by inserting 
after section 5136B the following new section:

``SEC. 5136C. STATE LAW PREEMPTION STANDARDS FOR NATIONAL BANKS AND 
 SUBSIDIARIES CLARIFIED.

 ``(a) Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the following 
definitions shall apply:
 ``(1) National bank.--The term `national bank' includes--
 ``(A) any bank organized under the laws of the 
 United States;
 ``(B) any affiliate of a national bank;
 ``(C) any subsidiary of a national bank; and
 ``(D) any Federal branch established in accordance 
 with the International Banking Act of 1978.
 ``(2) Other definitions.--The terms `affiliate', 
 `subsidiary', `includes', and `including' have the same meaning 
 as in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
 ``(3) State consumer law.--The term `State consumer law' 
 means any law of a State that--
 ``(A) accords rights to or protects the rights of 
 its citizens in financial transactions concerning 
 negotiation, sales, solicitation, disclosure, terms and 
 conditions, advice, and remedies; or
 ``(B) prevents counterparties, successors, and 
 assigns of financial contracts from engaging in unfair 
 or deceptive acts and practices.
 ``(b) State Consumer Laws of General Application.--Notwithstanding 
any other provision of Federal law and except as provided in subsection 
(d), any consumer protection provision in State consumer laws of 
general application, including any law relating to unfair or deceptive 
acts or practices, any consumer fraud law and repossession, 
foreclosure, and collection law, shall apply to any national bank.
 ``(c) State Banking Laws Enacted Pursuant to Federal Law.--
Notwithstanding any other provision of Federal law and except as 
provided in subsection (d), any State consumer law that--
 ``(1) is applicable to State banks; and
 ``(2) was enacted pursuant to or in accordance with, and is 
 not inconsistent with, an Act of Congress, including the Gramm-
 Leach-Bliley Act, the Consumer Credit Protection Act, and the 
 Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act, that explicitly or by 
 implication, permits States to exceed or supplement the 
 requirements of any comparable Federal law,
shall apply to any national bank.
 ``(d) Exceptions.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subsections (b) and (c) shall not apply 
 with respect to any State consumer law if--
 ``(A) the State consumer law discriminates against 
 national banks; or
 ``(B) the State consumer law is inconsistent with 
 provisions of Federal law other than this title, but 
 only to the extent of the inconsistency (as determined 
 in accordance with the provision of the other Federal 
 law).
 ``(2) Rule for determining inconsistency.--For purposes of 
 paragraph (1)(B), a State consumer law is not inconsistent with 
 Federal law if the protection the State consumer law affords 
 consumers is greater than the protection provided under Federal 
 law as determined by the Agency.
 ``(e) No Negative Implications for Applicability of Other State 
Laws.--No provision of this section shall be construed as altering or 
affecting the applicability, to national banks, of any State law which 
is not described in this section.
 ``(f) Effect of Transfer of Transaction.--State consumer law 
applicable to a transaction at the inception of the transaction may not 
be preempted under Federal law solely because a national bank 
subsequently acquires the asset or instrument that is the subject of 
the transaction.
 ``(g) Denial of Preemption Not a Deprivation of a Civil Right.--The 
preemption of any provision of the law of any State with respect to any 
national bank shall not be treated as a right, privilege, or immunity 
for purposes of section 1979 of the Revised Statutes of the United 
States (42 U.S.C. 1983).''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter one of 
title LXII of the Revised Statutes of the United States is amended by 
inserting after the item relating to section 5136B the following new 
item:

``5136C. State law preemption standards for national banks and 
 subsidiaries clarified.''.

SEC. 144. VISITORIAL STANDARDS.

 Section 5136C of the Revised Statutes of the United States (as 
added by section 143) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsections:
 ``(h) Visitorial Powers.--
 ``(1) Rule of construction.--No provision of this title 
 which relates to visitorial powers or otherwise limits or 
 restricts the supervisory, examination, or regulatory authority 
 to which any national bank is subject shall be construed as 
 limiting or restricting the authority of any attorney general 
 (or other chief law enforcement officer) of any State to bring 
 any action in any court of appropriate jurisdiction--
 ``(A) to require a national bank to produce records 
 relative to the investigation of violations of State 
 consumer law, or Federal consumer laws;
 ``(B) to enforce any applicable Federal or State 
 law, as authorized by such law; or
 ``(C) on behalf of residents of such State, to 
 enforce any applicable provision of any Federal or 
 State law against a national bank, as authorized by 
 such law, or to seek relief and recover damages for 
 such residents from any violation of any such law by 
 any national bank.
 ``(2) Consultation.--The attorney general (or other chief 
 law enforcement officer) of any State shall consult with the 
 head of the agency responsible for chartering and regulating 
 national banks before acting under paragraph (1).
 ``(i) Enforcement Actions.--The ability of the head of the agency 
responsible for chartering and regulating national banks to bring an 
enforcement action under this title or section 5 of the Federal Trade 
Commission Act shall not be construed as precluding private parties 
from enforcing rights granted under Federal or State law in the 
courts.''.

SEC. 145. CLARIFICATION OF LAW APPLICABLE TO NONDEPOSITORY INSTITUTION 
 SUBSIDIARIES.

 Section 5136C of the Revised Statutes of the United States is 
amended by inserting after subsection (i) (as added by section 144) the 
following new subsection:
 ``(j) Clarification of Law Applicable to Nondepository Institution 
Subsidiaries and Affiliates of National Banks.--
 ``(1) Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the 
 following definitions shall apply:
 ``(A) Depository institution, subsidiary, 
 affiliate.--The terms `depository institution', 
 `subsidiary', and `affiliate' have the same meanings as 
 in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
 ``(B) Nondepository institution.--The term 
 `nondepository institution' means any entity that is 
 not a depository institution.
 ``(2) In general.--No provision of this title shall be 
 construed as annulling, altering, or affecting the 
 applicability of State law to any nondepository institution, 
 subsidiary, other affiliate, or agent of a national bank.''.

SEC. 146. STATE LAW PREEMPTION STANDARDS FOR FEDERAL SAVINGS 
 ASSOCIATIONS AND SUBSIDIARIES CLARIFIED.

 (a) In General.--The Home Owners' Loan Act (12 U.S.C. 1461 et seq.) 
is amended by inserting after section 5 the following new section:

``SEC. 6. STATE LAW PREEMPTION STANDARDS FOR FEDERAL SAVINGS 
 ASSOCIATIONS CLARIFIED.

 ``(a) Definition.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) the terms `includes' and `including' have the same 
 meaning as in section 3(t) of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Act.
 ``(2) the term `State consumer law' means any law of a 
 State that:
 ``(A) accords rights to or protects the rights of 
 its citizens in financial transactions concerning 
 negotiation, sales, solicitation, disclosure, terms and 
 conditions, advice, and remedies; or
 ``(B) prevents counterparties, successors, and 
 assigns of financial contracts from engaging in unfair 
 or deceptive acts and practices.
 ``(b) State Consumer Laws of General Application.--Notwithstanding 
any other provision of Federal law and except as provided in subsection 
(c), any consumer protection provision in State consumer laws of 
general application, including any law relating to unfair or deceptive 
acts or practices, any consumer fraud law and repossession, 
foreclosure, and collection law, shall apply to any Federal savings 
association.
 ``(c) Exceptions.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subsection (b) shall not apply with 
 respect to any State law if--
 ``(A) the State law discriminates against Federal 
 savings associations; or
 ``(B) the State consumer law is inconsistent with 
 provisions of Federal law other than this Act, but only 
 to the extent of the inconsistency (as determined in 
 accordance with the provision of the other Federal 
 law).
 ``(2) Rule for determining inconsistency.--For purposes of 
 paragraph (1)(B), a State consumer law is not inconsistent with 
 Federal law if the protection the State consumer law affords 
 consumers is greater than the protection provided under Federal 
 law, as determined by the Agency.
 ``(d) State Banking or Thrift Laws Enacted Pursuant to Federal 
Law.--
 ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 Federal law and except as provided in paragraph (2), any State 
 law that--
 ``(A) is applicable to State savings associations 
 (as defined in section 3 of the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Act); and
 ``(B) was enacted pursuant to or in accordance 
 with, and is not inconsistent with, an Act of Congress, 
 including the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, the Consumer 
 Credit Protection Act, and the Real Estate Settlement 
 Procedures Act, that explicitly or by implication, 
 permits States to exceed or supplement the requirements 
 of any comparable Federal law,
 shall apply to any Federal savings association.
 ``(2) Exceptions.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply with 
 respect to any State law if--
 ``(A) the State law discriminates against Federal 
 savings associations; or
 ``(B) the State consumer law is inconsistent with 
 provisions of Federal law other than this Act, but only 
 to the extent of the inconsistency (as determined in 
 accordance with the provision of the other Federal 
 law). For this purpose, a State consumer law is not 
 inconsistent with Federal law if the protection the 
 State consumer law affords consumers is greater than 
 the protection provided under Federal law, as 
 determined by the Agency.
 ``(e) No Negative Implications for Applicability of Other State 
Laws.--No provision of this section shall be construed as altering or 
affecting the applicability, to Federal savings associations, of any 
State law which is not described in this section.
 ``(f) Effect of Transfer of Transaction.--State consumer law 
applicable to a transaction at the inception of the transaction may not 
be preempted under Federal law solely because a Federal savings 
association subsequently acquires the asset or instrument that is the 
subject of the transaction.
 ``(g) Denial of Preemption Not a Deprivation of a Civil Right.--The 
preemption of any provision of the law of any State with respect to any 
Federal savings association shall not be treated as a right, privilege, 
or immunity for purposes of section 1979 of the Revised Statutes of the 
United States (42 U.S.C. 1983).''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for the Home Owners' 
Loan Act (12 U.S.C. 1461 et seq.) is amended by striking the item 
relating to section 6 and inserting the following new item:

``6. State law preemption standards for Federal savings associations 
 and subsidiaries clarified.''.

SEC. 147. VISITORIAL STANDARDS.

 Section 6 of the Home Owners' Loan Act (as added by section 146 of 
this title) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsections:
 ``(h) Visitorial Powers.--
 ``(1) In general.--No provision of this Act shall be 
 construed as limiting or restricting the authority of any 
 attorney general (or other chief law enforcement officer) of 
 any State to bring any action in any court of appropriate 
 jurisdiction--
 ``(A) to require a Federal savings association to 
 produce records relative to the investigation of 
 violations of State consumer law, or Federal consumer 
 laws;
 ``(B) to enforce any applicable Federal or State 
 law, as authorized by such law; or
 ``(C) on behalf of residents of such State, to 
 enforce any applicable provision of any Federal or 
 State law against a Federal savings association, as 
 authorized by such law, or to seek relief and recover 
 damages for such residents from any violation of any 
 such law by any Federal savings association.
 ``(2) Consultation.--The attorney general (or other chief 
 law enforcement officer) of any State shall consult with the 
 Director or any successor agency before acting under paragraph 
 (1).
 ``(i) Enforcement Actions.--The ability of the Director or any 
successor agency to bring an enforcement action under this Act or 
section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act shall not be construed as 
precluding private parties from enforcing rights granted under Federal 
or State law in the courts.''.

SEC. 148. CLARIFICATION OF LAW APPLICABLE TO NONDEPOSITORY INSTITUTION 
 SUBSIDIARIES.

 Section 6 of the Home Owners' Loan Act is amended by adding after 
subsection (i) (as added by section 147) the following new subsection:
 ``(j) Clarification of Law Applicable to Nondepository Institution 
Subsidiaries and Affiliates of Federal Savings Associations.--
 ``(1) Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the 
 following definitions shall apply:
 ``(A) Depository institution, subsidiary, 
 affiliate.--The terms `depository institution', 
 `subsidiary', and `affiliate' have the same meanings as 
 in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
 ``(B) Nondepository institution.--The term 
 `nondepository institution' means any entity that is 
 not a depository institution.
 ``(2) In general.--No provision of this title shall be 
 construed as preempting the applicability of State law to any 
 nondepository institution, subsidiary, other affiliate, or 
 agent of a Federal savings association.''.

SEC. 149. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 This subtitle shall take effect on the designated transfer date.

 Subtitle E--Enforcement Powers

SEC. 151. DEFINITIONS.

 For purposes of this subtitle, the following definitions shall 
apply:
 (1) Civil investigative demand and demand.--The terms 
 ``civil investigative demand'' and ``demand'' mean any demand 
 issued by the Agency.
 (2) Agency investigation.--The term ``Agency 
 investigation'' means any inquiry conducted by an Agency 
 investigator for the purpose of ascertaining whether any person 
 is or has been engaged in any conduct that violates this title, 
 any enumerated consumer law, or any regulation prescribed or 
 order issued by the Agency under this title or under the 
 authorities transferred under subtitles F and H.
 (3) Agency investigator.--The term ``Agency investigator'' 
 means any attorney or investigator employed by the Agency who 
 is charged with the duty of enforcing or carrying into effect 
 any provisions of this title, any enumerated consumer law, the 
 authorities transferred under subtitles F and H, or any 
 regulation prescribed or order issued under this title or 
 pursuant to any such authority by the Agency.
 (4) Custodian.--The term ``custodian'' means the custodian 
 or any deputy custodian designated by the Agency.
 (5) Documentary material.--The term ``documentary 
 material'' includes the original or any copy of any book, 
 record, report, memorandum, paper, communication, tabulation, 
 chart, or other document.
 (6) Violation.--The term ``violation'' means any act or 
 omission that, if proved, would constitute a violation of any 
 provision of this title, any enumerated consumer law, any law 
 for which authorities were transferred under subtitles F and H, 
 or of any regulation prescribed or order issued by the Agency 
 under this title or pursuant to any such authority.

SEC. 152. INVESTIGATIONS AND ADMINISTRATIVE DISCOVERY.

 (a) Subpoenas.--
 (1) In general.--The Agency or an Agency investigator may 
 issue subpoenas for the attendance and testimony of witnesses 
 and the production of relevant papers, books, documents, or 
 other material in connection with hearings under this title.
 (2) Failure to obey.--In case of contumacy or refusal to 
 obey a subpoena issued pursuant to this paragraph and served 
 upon any person, the district court of the United States for 
 any district in which such person is found, resides, or 
 transacts business, upon application by the Agency or an Agency 
 investigator and after notice to such person, shall have 
 jurisdiction to issue an order requiring such person to appear 
 and give testimony or to appear and produce documents or other 
 material, or both.
 (3) Contempt.--Any failure to obey an order of the court 
 under this subsection may be punished by the court as a 
 contempt thereof.
 (b) Demands.--
 (1) In general.--Whenever the Agency has reason to believe 
 that any person may be in possession, custody, or control of 
 any documentary material or tangible things, or may have any 
 information, relevant to a violation, the Agency may, before 
 the institution of any proceedings under this title or under 
 any enumerated consumer law or pursuant to the authorities 
 transferred under subtitles F and H, issue in writing, and 
 cause to be served upon such person, a civil investigative 
 demand requiring such person to--
 (A) produce such documentary material for 
 inspection and copying or reproduction;
 (B) submit such tangible things;
 (C) file written reports or answers to questions;
 (D) give oral testimony concerning documentary 
 material or other information; or
 (E) furnish any combination of such material, 
 answers, or testimony.
 (2) Requirements.--Each civil investigative demand shall 
 state the nature of the conduct constituting the alleged 
 violation which is under investigation and the provision of law 
 applicable to such violation.
 (3) Production of documents.--Each civil investigative 
 demand for the production of documentary material shall--
 (A) describe each class of documentary material to 
 be produced under the demand with such definiteness and 
 certainty as to permit such material to be fairly 
 identified;
 (B) prescribe a return date or dates which will 
 provide a reasonable period of time within which the 
 material so demanded may be assembled and made 
 available for inspection and copying or reproduction; 
 and
 (C) identify the custodian to whom such material 
 shall be made available.
 (4) Production of things.--Each civil investigative demand 
 for the submission of tangible things shall--
 (A) describe each class of tangible things to be 
 submitted under the demand with such definiteness and 
 certainty as to permit such things to be fairly 
 identified;
 (B) prescribe a return date or dates which will 
 provide a reasonable period of time within which the 
 things so demanded may be assembled and submitted; and
 (C) identify the custodian to whom such things 
 shall be submitted.
 (5) Demand for written reports or answers.--Each civil 
 investigative demand for written reports or answers to 
 questions shall--
 (A) propound with definiteness and certainty the 
 reports to be produced or the questions to be answered;
 (B) prescribe a date or dates at which time written 
 reports or answers to questions shall be submitted; and
 (C) identify the custodian to whom such reports or 
 answers shall be submitted.
 (6) Oral testimony.--Each civil investigative demand for 
 the giving of oral testimony shall--
 (A) prescribe a date, time, and place at which oral 
 testimony shall be commenced; and
 (B) identify a Agency investigator who shall 
 conduct the investigation and the custodian to whom the 
 transcript of such investigation shall be submitted.
 (7) Service.--
 (A) Any civil investigative demand may be served by 
 any Agency investigator at any place within the 
 territorial jurisdiction of any court of the United 
 States.
 (B) Any such demand or any enforcement petition 
 filed under this section may be served upon any person 
 who is not found within the territorial jurisdiction of 
 any court of the United States, in such manner as the 
 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure prescribe for service 
 in a foreign nation.
 (C) To the extent that the courts of the United 
 States have authority to assert jurisdiction over such 
 person consistent with due process, the United States 
 District Court for the District of Columbia shall have 
 the same jurisdiction to take any action respecting 
 compliance with this section by such person that such 
 district court would have if such person were 
 personally within the jurisdiction of such district 
 court.
 (8) Method of service.--Service of any civil investigative 
 demand or any enforcement petition filed under this section may 
 be made upon a person, including any legal entity, by--
 (A) delivering a duly executed copy of such demand 
 or petition to the individual or to any partner, 
 executive officer, managing agent, or general agent of 
 such person, or to any agent of such person authorized 
 by appointment or by law to receive service of process 
 on behalf of such person;
 (B) delivering a duly executed copy of such demand 
 or petition to the principal office or place of 
 business of the person to be served; or
 (C) depositing a duly executed copy in the United 
 States mails, by registered or certified mail, return 
 receipt requested, duly addressed to such person at its 
 principal office or place of business.
 (9) Proof of service.--
 (A) A verified return by the individual serving any 
 civil investigative demand or any enforcement petition 
 filed under this section setting forth the manner of 
 such service shall be proof of such service.
 (B) In the case of service by registered or 
 certified mail, such return shall be accompanied by the 
 return post office receipt of delivery of such demand 
 or enforcement petition.
 (10) Production of documentary material.--The production of 
 documentary material in response to a civil investigative 
 demand shall be made under a sworn certificate, in such form as 
 the demand designates, by the person, if a natural person, to 
 whom the demand is directed or, if not a natural person, by any 
 person having knowledge of the facts and circumstances relating 
 to such production, to the effect that all of the documentary 
 material required by the demand and in the possession, custody, 
 or control of the person to whom the demand is directed has 
 been produced and made available to the custodian.
 (11) Submission of tangible things.--The submission of 
 tangible things in response to a civil investigative demand 
 shall be made under a sworn certificate, in such form as the 
 demand designates, by the person to whom the demand is directed 
 or, if not a natural person, by any person having knowledge of 
 the facts and circumstances relating to such production, to the 
 effect that all of the tangible things required by the demand 
 and in the possession, custody, or control of the person to 
 whom the demand is directed have been submitted to the 
 custodian.
 (12) Separate answers.--Each reporting requirement or 
 question in a civil investigative demand shall be answered 
 separately and fully in writing under oath, unless it is 
 objected to, in which event the reasons for the objection shall 
 be stated in lieu of an answer, and it shall be submitted under 
 a sworn certificate, in such form as the demand designates, by 
 the person, if a natural person, to whom the demand is directed 
 or, if not a natural person, by any person responsible for 
 answering each reporting requirement or question, to the effect 
 that all information required by the demand and in the 
 possession, custody, control, or knowledge of the person to 
 whom the demand is directed has been submitted.
 (13) Testimony.--
 (A) Procedure.--
 (i) Oath and recordation.--Any Agency 
 investigator before whom oral testimony is to 
 be taken shall put the witness on oath or 
 affirmation and shall personally, or by any 
 individual acting under his direction and in 
 his presence, record the testimony of the 
 witness.
 (ii) Transcriptions.--The testimony shall 
 be taken stenographically and transcribed.
 (iii) Copy to custodian.--After the 
 testimony is fully transcribed, the Agency 
 investigator before whom the testimony is taken 
 shall promptly transmit a copy of the 
 transcript of the testimony to the custodian.
 (B) Parties present.--Any Agency investigator 
 before whom oral testimony is to be taken shall exclude 
 from the place where the testimony is to be taken all 
 other persons except the person giving the testimony, 
 his or her attorney, the officer before whom the 
 testimony is to be taken, and any stenographer taking 
 such testimony.
 (C) Location.--The oral testimony of any person 
 taken pursuant to a civil investigative demand shall be 
 taken in the judicial district of the United States in 
 which such person resides, is found, or transacts 
 business, or in such other place as may be agreed upon 
 by the Agency investigator before whom the oral 
 testimony of such person is to be taken and such 
 person.
 (D) Attorney representation.--
 (i) In general.--Any person compelled to 
 appear under a civil investigative demand for 
 oral testimony pursuant to this section may be 
 accompanied, represented, and advised by an 
 attorney.
 (ii) Confidential advice.--The attorney may 
 advise the person summoned, in confidence, 
 either upon the request of such person or upon 
 the initiative of the attorney, with respect to 
 any question asked of such person.
 (iii) Objections.--The person summoned or 
 the attorney may object on the record to any 
 question, in whole or in part, and shall 
 briefly state for the record the reason for the 
 objection.
 (iv) Refusal to answer.--An objection may 
 properly be made, received, and entered upon 
 the record when it is claimed that the person 
 summoned is entitled to refuse to answer the 
 question on grounds of any constitutional or 
 other legal right or privilege, including the 
 privilege against self-incrimination, but such 
 person shall not otherwise object to or refuse 
 to answer any question, and shall not otherwise 
 interrupt the oral examination, directly or 
 through such person's attorney.
 (v) Petition for order.--If such person 
 refuses to answer any question, the Agency may 
 petition the district court of the United 
 States pursuant to this section for an order 
 compelling such person to answer such question.
 (vi) Basis for compelling testimony.--If 
 such person refuses to answer any question on 
 grounds of the privilege against self-
 incrimination, the testimony of such person may 
 be compelled in accordance with the provisions 
 of section 6004 of title 18, United States 
 Code.
 (E) Transcripts.--
 (i) Right to examine.--After the testimony 
 of any witness is fully transcribed, the Agency 
 investigator shall afford the witness (who may 
 be accompanied by an attorney) a reasonable 
 opportunity to examine the transcript.
 (ii) Reading the transcript.--The 
 transcript shall be read to or by the witness, 
 unless such examination and reading are waived 
 by the witness.
 (iii) Request for changes.--Any changes in 
 form or substance which the witness desires to 
 make shall be entered and identified upon the 
 transcript by the Agency investigator with a 
 statement of the reasons given by the witness 
 for making such changes.
 (iv) Signature.--The transcript shall be 
 signed by the witness, unless the witness in 
 writing waives the signing, is ill, cannot be 
 found, or refuses to sign.
 (v) Agency action in lieu of signature.--If 
 the transcript is not signed by the witness 
 during the 30-day period following the date 
 upon which the witness is first afforded a 
 reasonable opportunity to examine it, the 
 Agency investigator shall sign the transcript 
 and state on the record the fact of the waiver, 
 illness, absence of the witness, or the refusal 
 to sign, together with any reasons given for 
 the failure to sign.
 (F) Certification by investigator.--The Agency 
 investigator shall certify on the transcript that the 
 witness was duly sworn by the investigator and that the 
 transcript is a true record of the testimony given by 
 the witness, and the Agency investigator shall promptly 
 deliver the transcript or send it by registered or 
 certified mail to the custodian.
 (G) Copy of transcript.--The Agency investigator 
 shall furnish a copy of the transcript (upon payment of 
 reasonable charges for the transcript) to the witness 
 only, except that the Agency may for good cause limit 
 such witness to inspection of the official transcript 
 of his testimony.
 (H) Witness fees.--Any witness appearing for the 
 taking of oral testimony pursuant to a civil 
 investigative demand shall be entitled to the same fees 
 and mileage which are paid to witnesses in the district 
 courts of the United States.
 (c) Confidential Treatment of Demand Material.--
 (1) In general.--Materials received as a result of a civil 
 investigative demand shall be subject to requirements and 
 procedures regarding confidentiality, in accordance with 
 regulations established by the Agency.
 (2) Disclosure to congress.--No regulation established by 
 the Agency regarding the confidentiality of materials submitted 
 to, or otherwise obtained by, the Agency shall be intended to 
 prevent disclosure to either House of Congress or to an 
 appropriate committee of the Congress, except that the Agency 
 may prescribe regulations allowing prior notice to any party 
 that owns or otherwise provided the material to the Agency and 
 has designated such material as confidential.
 (d) Petition for Enforcement.--
 (1) In general.--Whenever any person fails to comply with 
 any civil investigative demand duly served upon such person 
 under this section, or whenever satisfactory copying or 
 reproduction of material requested pursuant to the demand 
 cannot be accomplished and such person refuses to surrender 
 such material, the Agency, through such officers or attorneys 
 as it may designate, may file, in the district court of the 
 United States for any judicial district in which such person 
 resides, is found, or transacts business, and serve upon such 
 person, a petition for an order of such court for the 
 enforcement of this section.
 (2) Service of process.--All process of any court to which 
 application may be made as provided in this subsection may be 
 served in any judicial district.
 (e) Petition for Order Modifying or Setting Aside Demand.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 20 days after the service 
 of any civil investigative demand upon any person under 
 subsection (b), or at any time before the return date specified 
 in the demand, whichever period is shorter, or within such 
 period exceeding 20 days after service or in excess of such 
 return date as may be prescribed in writing, subsequent to 
 service, by any Agency investigator named in the demand, such 
 person may file with the Agency a petition for an order by the 
 Agency modifying or setting aside the demand.
 (2) Compliance during pendency.--The time permitted for 
 compliance with the demand in whole or in part, as deemed 
 proper and ordered by the Agency, shall not run during the 
 pendency of such petition at the Agency, except that such 
 person shall comply with any portions of the demand not sought 
 to be modified or set aside.
 (3) Specific grounds.--Such petition shall specify each 
 ground upon which the petitioner relies in seeking such relief, 
 and may be based upon any failure of the demand to comply with 
 the provisions of this section, or upon any constitutional or 
 other legal right or privilege of such person.
 (f) Custodial Control.--At any time during which any custodian is 
in custody or control of any documentary material, tangible things, 
reports, answers to questions, or transcripts of oral testimony given 
by any person in compliance with any civil investigative demand, such 
person may file, in the district court of the United States for the 
judicial district within which the office of such custodian is 
situated, and serve upon such custodian, a petition for an order of 
such court requiring the performance by such custodian of any duty 
imposed upon such custodian by this section or regulation prescribed by 
the Agency.
 (g) Jurisdiction of Court.--
 (1) In general.--Whenever any petition is filed in any 
 district court of the United States under this section, such 
 court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine the matter 
 so presented, and to enter such order or orders as may be 
 required to carry into effect the provisions of this section.
 (2) Appeal.--Any final order so entered shall be subject to 
 appeal pursuant to section 1291 of title 28, United States 
 Code.

SEC. 153. HEARINGS AND ADJUDICATION PROCEEDINGS.

 (a) In General.--The Agency may conduct hearings and adjudication 
proceedings with respect to any person in the manner prescribed by 
chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code in order to ensure or enforce 
compliance with--
 (1) the provisions of this title, including any regulations 
 prescribed by the Agency under this title; and
 (2) any other Federal law that the Agency is authorized to 
 enforce, including an enumerated consumer law, and any 
 regulations or order prescribed thereunder, unless such Federal 
 law specifically limits the Agency from conducting a hearing or 
 adjudication proceeding and only to the extent of such 
 limitation.
 (b) Special Rules for Cease-and-desist Proceedings.--
 (1) Issuance.--
 (A) Notice of charges.--If, in the opinion of the 
 Agency, any covered person is engaging or has engaged 
 in an activity that violates a law, regulation, or any 
 condition imposed in writing on the person by the 
 Agency, the Agency may issue and serve upon the person 
 a notice of charges with respect to such violation.
 (B) Contents of notice.--The notice shall contain a 
 statement of the facts constituting any alleged 
 violation and shall fix a time and place at which a 
 hearing will be held to determine whether an order to 
 cease-and-desist there from should issue against the 
 person.
 (C) Time of hearing.--A hearing under this 
 subsection shall be fixed for a date not earlier than 
 30 days nor later than 60 days after service of such 
 notice unless an earlier or a later date is set by the 
 Agency at the request of any party so served.
 (D) Nonappearance deemed to be consent to order.--
 Unless the party or parties so served shall appear at 
 the hearing personally or by a duly authorized 
 representative, they shall be deemed to have consented 
 to the issuance of the cease-and-desist order.
 (E) Issuance of order.--In the event of such 
 consent, or if upon the record made at any such 
 hearing, the Agency shall find that any violation 
 specified in the notice of charges has been 
 established, the Agency may issue and serve upon the 
 person an order to cease-and-desist from any such 
 violation or practice.
 (F) Includes requirement for corrective action.--
 Such order may, by provisions which may be mandatory or 
 otherwise, require the person to cease-and-desist from 
 the same, and, further, to take affirmative action to 
 correct the conditions resulting from any such 
 violation.
 (2) Effectiveness of order.--A cease-and-desist order shall 
 take effect at the end of the 30-day period beginning on the 
 date of the service of such order upon the covered person 
 concerned (except in the case of a cease-and-desist order 
 issued upon consent, which shall take effect at the time 
 specified therein), and shall remain effective and enforceable 
 as provided therein, except to such extent as it is stayed, 
 modified, terminated, or set aside by action of the Agency or a 
 reviewing court.
 (3) Decision and appeal.--
 (A) Place of and procedures for hearing.--Any 
 hearing provided for in this subsection shall be held 
 in the Federal judicial district or in the territory in 
 which the residence or home office of the person is 
 located unless the person consents to another place, 
 and shall be conducted in accordance with the 
 provisions of chapter 5 of title 5 of the United States 
 Code.
 (B) Time limit for decision.--After such hearing, 
 and within 90 days after the Agency has notified the 
 parties that the case has been submitted to it for 
 final decision, the Agency shall--
 (i) render its decision (which shall 
 include findings of fact upon which its 
 decision is predicated) and shall issue; and
 (ii) serve upon each party to the 
 proceeding an order or orders consistent with 
 the provisions of this section. Judicial review 
 of any such order shall be exclusively as 
 provided in this subsection.
 (C) Modification of order generally.--Unless a 
 petition for review is timely filed in a court of 
 appeals of the United States, as hereinafter provided 
 in paragraph (4), and thereafter until the record in 
 the proceeding has been filed as so provided, the 
 Agency may at any time, upon such notice and in such 
 manner as it shall deem proper, modify, terminate, or 
 set aside any such order.
 (D) Modification of order after filing record on 
 appeal.--Upon such filing of the record, the Agency may 
 modify, terminate, or set aside any such order with 
 permission of the court.
 (4) Appeal to court of appeals.--
 (A) In general.--Any party to any proceeding under 
 this subsection may obtain a review of any order served 
 pursuant to this subsection (other than an order issued 
 with the consent of the person concerned) by the filing 
 in the court of appeals of the United States for the 
 circuit in which the principal office of the covered 
 person is located, or in the United States Court of 
 Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, within 30 
 days after the date of service of such order, a written 
 petition praying that the order of the Agency be 
 modified, terminated, or set aside.
 (B) Transmittal of copy to the agency.--A copy of 
 such petition shall be forthwith transmitted by the 
 clerk of the court to the Agency, and thereupon the 
 Agency shall file in the court the record in the 
 proceeding, as provided in section 2112 of title 28 of 
 the United States Code.
 (C) Jurisdiction of court.--Upon the filing of such 
 petition, such court shall have jurisdiction, which 
 upon the filing of the record shall except as provided 
 in the last sentence of paragraph (3) be exclusive, to 
 affirm, modify, terminate, or set aside, in whole or in 
 part, the order of the agency.
 (D) Scope of review.--Review of such proceedings 
 shall be had as provided in chapter 7 of title 5 of the 
 United States Code.
 (E) Finality.--The judgment and decree of the court 
 shall be final, except that the same shall be subject 
 to review by the Supreme Court upon certiorari, as 
 provided in section 1254 of title 28 of the United 
 States Code.
 (5) No stay.--The commencement of proceedings for judicial 
 review under paragraph (4) shall not, unless specifically 
 ordered by the court, operate as a stay of any order issued by 
 the agency.
 (c) Special Rules for Temporary Cease-and-desist Proceedings.--
 (1) Issuance.--
 (A) In general.--Whenever the Agency determines 
 that the violation specified in the notice of charges 
 served upon a person pursuant to subsection (b), or the 
 continuation thereof, is likely to cause the person to 
 be insolvent or otherwise prejudice the interests of 
 consumers before the completion of the proceedings 
 conducted pursuant to subsection (b), the Agency may 
 issue a temporary order requiring the covered person to 
 cease-and-desist from any such violation or practice 
 and to take affirmative action to prevent or remedy 
 such insolvency or other condition pending completion 
 of such proceedings.
 (B) Other requirements.--Any temporary order issued 
 under this paragraph may include any requirement 
 authorized under this subtitle.
 (C) Effect date of order.--Any temporary order 
 issued under this paragraph shall take effect upon 
 service upon the person and, unless set aside, limited, 
 or suspended by a court in proceedings authorized by 
 paragraph (2) of this subsection, shall remain 
 effective and enforceable pending the completion of the 
 administrative proceedings pursuant to such notice and 
 until such time as the Agency shall dismiss the charges 
 specified in such notice, or if a cease-and-desist 
 order is issued against the person, until the effective 
 date of such order.
 (2) Appeal.--Within 10 days after the person concerned has 
 been served with a temporary cease-and-desist order, the person 
 may apply to the United States district court for the judicial 
 district in which the home office of the covered person is 
 located, or the United States District Court for the District 
 of Columbia, for an injunction setting aside, limiting, or 
 suspending the enforcement, operation, or effectiveness of such 
 order pending the completion of the administrative proceedings 
 pursuant to the notice of charges served upon the person under 
 subsection (b), and such court shall have jurisdiction to issue 
 such injunction.
 (3) Incomplete or inaccurate records.--
 (A) Temporary order.--If a notice of charges served 
 under subsection (b) specifies, on the basis of 
 particular facts and circumstances, that a person's 
 books and records are so incomplete or inaccurate that 
 the Agency is unable to determine the financial 
 condition of that person or the details or purpose of 
 any transaction or transactions that may have a 
 material effect on the financial condition of that 
 person, the Agency may issue a temporary order 
 requiring--
 (i) the cessation of any activity or 
 practice which gave rise, whether in whole or 
 in part, to the incomplete or inaccurate state 
 of the books or records; or
 (ii) affirmative action to restore such 
 books or records to a complete and accurate 
 state, until the completion of the proceedings 
 under subsection (b)(1).
 (B) Effective period.--Any temporary order issued 
 under subparagraph (A)--
 (i) shall take effect upon service; and
 (ii) unless set aside, limited, or 
 suspended by a court in proceedings under 
 paragraph (2), shall remain in effect and 
 enforceable until the earlier of--
 (I) the completion of the 
 proceeding initiated under subsection 
 (b) in connection with the notice of 
 charges; or
 (II) the date the Agency 
 determines, by examination or 
 otherwise, that the person's books and 
 records are accurate and reflect the 
 financial condition of the person.
 (d) Special Rules for Enforcement of Orders.--
 (1) In general.--The Agency may in its discretion apply to 
 the United States district court within the jurisdiction of 
 which the principal office of the covered person is located, 
 for the enforcement of any effective and outstanding notice or 
 order issued under this section, and such court shall have 
 jurisdiction and power to order and require compliance 
 herewith.
 (2) Exception.--Except as otherwise provided in this 
 subsection, no court shall have jurisdiction to affect by 
 injunction or otherwise the issuance or enforcement of any 
 notice or order or to review, modify, suspend, terminate, or 
 set aside any such notice or order.
 (e) Regulations.--The Agency shall prescribe regulations 
establishing such procedures as may be necessary to carry out this 
section.

SEC. 154. LITIGATION AUTHORITY.

 (a) In General.--If any person violates a provision of this title, 
any enumerated consumer law, any law for which authorities were 
transferred under subtitles F and H, or any regulation prescribed or 
order issued by the Agency under this title or pursuant to any such 
authority, the Agency may commence a civil action against such person 
to impose a civil penalty or to seek all appropriate legal or equitable 
relief including a permanent or temporary injunction as permitted by 
law.
 (b) Representation.--The Agency may act in its own name and through 
its own attorneys in enforcing any provision of this title, regulations 
under this title, or any other law or regulation, or in any action, 
suit, or proceeding to which the Agency is a party.
 (c) Compromise of Actions.--The Agency may compromise or settle any 
action if such compromise is approved by the court.
 (d) Notice to the Attorney General.--When commencing a civil action 
under this title, any enumerated consumer law, any law for which 
authorities were transferred under subtitles F and H, or any regulation 
thereunder, the Agency shall notify the Attorney General.
 (e) Appearance Before the Supreme Court.--The Agency may represent 
itself in its own name before the Supreme Court of the United States, 
if--
 (1) the Agency makes a written request to the Attorney 
 General within the 10-day period which begins on the date of 
 entry of the judgment which would permit any party to file a 
 petition for writ of certiorari; and
 (2) the Attorney General concurs with such request or fails 
 to take action within 60 days of the Agency's request.
 (f) Forum.--Any civil action brought under this title may be 
brought in a United States district court or in any court of competent 
jurisdiction of a state in a district in which the defendant is located 
or resides or is doing business, and such court shall have jurisdiction 
to enjoin such person and to require compliance with this title, any 
enumerated consumer law, any law for which authorities were transferred 
under subtitles F and H, or any regulation prescribed or order issued 
by the Agency under this title or pursuant to any such authority.
 (g) Time for Bringing Action.--
 (1) In general.--Except as otherwise permitted by law, no 
 action may be brought under this title more than 3 years after 
 the violation to which an action relates.
 (2) Limitations under other federal laws.--
 (A) For purposes of this section, an action arising 
 under this title shall not include claims arising 
 solely under enumerated consumer laws.
 (B) In any action arising solely under an 
 enumerated consumer law, the Agency may commence, 
 defend, or intervene in the action in accordance with 
 the requirements of that law, as applicable.
 (C) In any action arising solely under the laws for 
 which authorities were transferred by subtitles F and 
 H, the Agency may commence, defend, or intervene in the 
 action in accordance with the requirements of that law, 
 as applicable.

SEC. 155. RELIEF AVAILABLE.

 (a) Administrative Proceedings or Court Actions.--
 (1) Jurisdiction.--The court (or Agency, as the case may 
 be) in an action or adjudication proceeding brought under this 
 title, any enumerated consumer law, or any law for which 
 authorities were transferred by subtitles F and H, shall have 
 jurisdiction to grant any appropriate legal or equitable relief 
 with respect to a violation of this title, any enumerated 
 consumer law, and any law for which authorities were 
 transferred by subtitles F and H, including a violation of a 
 regulation prescribed or order issued under this title, any 
 enumerated consumer law and any law for which authorities were 
 transferred by subtitles F and H.
 (2) Relief.--Such relief may include--
 (A) rescission or reformation of contracts;
 (B) refund of moneys or return of real property;
 (C) restitution;
 (D) compensation for unjust enrichment;
 (E) payment of damages;
 (F) public notification regarding the violation, 
 including the costs of notification;
 (G) limits on the activities or functions of the 
 person; and
 (H) civil money penalties, as set forth more fully 
 in subsection (d).
 (3) No exemplary or punitive damages.--Nothing in this 
 subsection shall be construed as authorizing the imposition of 
 exemplary or punitive damages.
 (b) Recovery of Costs.--In any action brought by the Agency to 
enforce any provision of this title, any enumerated consumer law, any 
law for which authorities were transferred by subtitles F and H, or any 
regulation prescribed or order issued by the Agency under this title or 
pursuant to any such authority, the Agency may recover its costs in 
connection with prosecuting such action if the Agency is the prevailing 
party in the action.
 (c) Civil Money Penalty in Court and Administrative Actions.--
 (1) Any person that violates any provision of this title, 
 any enumerated consumer law, or any regulation prescribed or 
 order issued by the Agency under this title shall forfeit and 
 pay a civil penalty pursuant to this subsection determined as 
 follows:
 (A) First tier.--For any violation of a final order 
 or condition imposed in writing by the Agency, a civil 
 penalty shall not exceed $5,000 for each day during 
 which such violation continues.
 (B) Second tier.--Notwithstanding paragraph (A), 
 for any violation of a regulation prescribed under 
 section 136 or for any person that recklessly engages 
 in a violation of this title, any enumerated consumer 
 law, or any regulation prescribed or order issued by 
 the Agency under this title, relating to the provision 
 of an alternative consumer financial product or 
 service, a civil penalty shall not exceed $25,000 for 
 each day during which such violation continues.
 (C) Third tier.--Notwithstanding subparagraphs (A) 
 and (B), for any person that knowingly violates this 
 title, any enumerated consumer law, or any regulation 
 prescribed or order issued by the Agency under this 
 title, a civil penalty shall not exceed $1,000,000 for 
 each day during which such violation continues.
 (2) Mitigating factors.--In determining the amount of any 
 penalty assessed under paragraph (1), the Agency or the court 
 shall take into account the appropriateness of the penalty with 
 respect to--
 (A) the size of financial resources and good faith 
 of the person charged;
 (B) the gravity of the violation;
 (C) the severity of the risks to or losses of the 
 consumer, which may take into account the number of 
 products or services sold or provided;
 (D) the history of previous violations; and
 (E) such other matters as justice may require.
 (3) Authority to modify or remit penalty.--The Agency may 
 compromise, modify, or remit any penalty which may be assessed 
 or had already been assessed under paragraph (1). The amount of 
 such penalty, when finally determined, shall be exclusive of 
 any sums owed by the person to the United States in connection 
 with the costs of the proceeding, and may be deducted from any 
 sums owing by the United States to the person charged.
 (4) Notice and hearing.--No civil penalty may be assessed 
 with respect to a violation of this title, any enumerated 
 consumer law, or any regulation prescribed or order issued by 
 the Agency, unless--
 (A) the Agency gives notice and an opportunity for 
 a hearing to the person accused of the violation; or
 (B) the appropriate court has ordered such 
 assessment and entered judgment in favor of the Agency.

SEC. 156. REFERRALS FOR CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS.

 Whenever the Agency obtains evidence that any person, either 
domestic or foreign, has engaged in conduct that may constitute a 
violation of Federal criminal law, the Agency shall have the power to 
transmit such evidence to the Attorney General, who may institute 
criminal proceedings under appropriate law. Nothing in this section 
affects any other authority of the Agency to disclose information.

SEC. 157. EMPLOYEE PROTECTION.

 (a) In General.--No person shall terminate or in any other way 
discriminate against, or cause to be terminated or discriminated 
against, any employee or any authorized representative of employees by 
reason of the fact that such employee or representative has provided 
information to the Agency, filed, instituted or caused to be filed or 
instituted any proceeding under this title, any enumerated consumer 
law, or any law for which authorities were transferred by subtitles F 
and H, or has testified or is about to testify in any proceeding 
resulting from the administration or enforcement of the provisions of 
this title.
 (b) Agency Review of Termination.--
 (1) Application for review.--Any employee or representative 
 of employees who believes that he has been terminated or 
 otherwise discriminated against by any person in violation of 
 subsection (a) may, within 45 days after such alleged violated 
 occurs, apply to the Agency for review of such termination or 
 alleged discrimination.
 (2) Copy to respondent.--A copy of the application shall be 
 sent to the person who is alleged to have terminated or 
 otherwise discriminated against an employee, and such person 
 shall be the respondent.
 (3) Investigation.--Upon receipt of such application, the 
 Agency shall cause such investigation to be made as the Agency 
 deems appropriate.
 (4) Hearing.--Any investigation under this subsection shall 
 provide an opportunity for a public hearing at the request of 
 any party to such review to enable the parties to present 
 information relating to such alleged violation.
 (5) Notice of time and place for hearing.--The parties 
 shall be given written notice of the time and place of the 
 hearing at least 5 days prior to the hearing.
 (6) Procedure.--Any hearing under this subsection shall be 
 of record and shall be subject to section 554 of title 5, 
 United States Code.
 (7) Determination.--
 (A) In general.--Upon receiving the report of such 
 investigation, the Agency shall make findings of fact.
 (B) Issuance of decision.--If the Agency finds that 
 there is sufficient evidence in the record to conclude 
 that such a violation did occur, the Agency shall issue 
 a decision, incorporating an order therein and the 
 Agency's findings, requiring the party committing such 
 violation to take such affirmative action to abate the 
 violation as the Agency deems appropriate, including 
 reinstating or rehiring the employee or representative 
 of employees to the former position with compensation.
 (C) Denial of application.--If the Agency finds 
 insufficient evidence to support the allegations made 
 in the application, the Agency shall deny the 
 application.
 (8) Judicial review.--An order issued by the Agency under 
 this subsection (b) shall be subject to judicial review in the 
 same manner as orders and decisions are subject to judicial 
 review under this title or any enumerated consumer law.
 (c) Costs and Expenses.--Whenever an order is issued under this 
section to abate such violation, at the request of the applicant a sum 
equal to the aggregate amount of all costs and expenses (including 
attorney's fees) determined by the Agency to have been reasonably 
incurred by the applicant for, or in connection with, the application 
and prosecution of such proceedings shall be assessed against the 
person committing such violation.
 (d) Exception.--This section shall not apply to any employee who 
acting without discretion from the employer of such employee (or the 
employer's agent) deliberately violates any requirement of this title 
or any enumerated consumer law.

SEC. 158. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 This subtitle shall take effect on the designated transfer date.

 Subtitle F--Transfer of Functions and Personnel; Transitional 
 Provisions

SEC. 161. TRANSFER OF CERTAIN FUNCTIONS.

 (a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), consumer 
financial protection functions are transferred as follows:
 (1) Board of governors.--
 (A) Transfer of functions.--All consumer financial 
 protection functions of the Board of Governors are 
 transferred to the Agency.
 (B) Board of governors' authority.--The Agency 
 shall have all powers and duties that were vested in 
 the Board of Governors, relating to consumer financial 
 protection functions, on the day before the designated 
 transfer date.
 (2) Comptroller of the currency.--
 (A) Transfer of functions.--All consumer financial 
 protection functions of the Comptroller of the Currency 
 are transferred to the Agency.
 (B) Comptroller's authority.--The Agency shall have 
 all powers and duties that were vested in the 
 Comptroller of the Currency, relating to consumer 
 financial protection functions, on the day before the 
 designated transfer date.
 (3) Director of the office of thrift supervision.--
 (A) Transfer of functions.--All consumer financial 
 protection functions of the Director of the Office of 
 Thrift Supervision are transferred to the Agency.
 (B) Director's authority.--The Agency shall have 
 all powers and duties that were vested in the Director 
 of the Office of Thrift Supervision, relating to 
 consumer financial protection functions, on the day 
 before the designated transfer date.
 (4) Federal deposit insurance corporation.--
 (A) Transfer of functions.--All consumer financial 
 protection functions of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Corporation are transferred to the Agency.
 (B) Corporation's authority.--The Agency shall have 
 all powers and duties that were vested in the Federal 
 Deposit Insurance Corporation, relating to consumer 
 financial protection functions, on the day before the 
 designated transfer date.
 (5) Federal trade commission.--
 (A) Transfer of functions.--All consumer financial 
 protection functions of the Federal Trade Commission 
 are transferred to the Agency.
 (B) Commission's authority.--The Agency shall have 
 all powers and duties that were vested in the Federal 
 Trade Commission, relating to consumer financial 
 protection functions, on the day before the designated 
 transfer date.
 (6) National credit union administration.--
 (A) Transfer of functions.--All consumer financial 
 protection functions of the National Credit Union 
 Administration are transferred to the Agency.
 (B) National credit union administration's 
 authority.--The Agency shall have all powers and duties 
 that were vested in the National Credit Union 
 Administration, relating to consumer financial 
 protection functions, on the day before the designated 
 transfer date.
 (b) Transfers of Functions Subject to Backstop Enforcement 
Authority Remaining With Transferor Agencies.--The transfers of 
functions in subsection (a) shall not affect the authority of the 
agencies identified in subsection (a) from initiating enforcement 
proceedings under the circumstances described in section 122(e)(3).
 (c) Termination of Authority of Transferor Agencies To Collect Fees 
for Consumer Financial Protection Purposes.--Authorities of the 
agencies identified in subsection (a) to assess and collect fees to 
cover the cost of conducting consumer financial protection functions 
shall terminate on the day before the designated transfer date.
 (d) Consumer Financial Protection Functions Defined.--For purposes 
of this subtitle, the term ``consumer financial protection functions'' 
means research, rulemaking, issuance of orders or guidance, 
supervision, examination, and enforcement activities, powers, and 
duties relating to the provision of consumer financial products or 
services, including the authority to assess and collect fees for those 
purposes, except that such term shall not include any such function 
relating to an agency's responsibilities under the Community 
Reinvestment Act of 1977.
 (e) Effective Date.--Subsections (a) and (b) shall take effect on 
the designated transfer date.

SEC. 162. DESIGNATED TRANSFER DATE.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 60 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary--
 (1) shall, in consultation with the Chairman of the Board 
 of Governors, the Chairperson of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Corporation, the Chairman of the Federal Trade Commission, the 
 Chairman of the National Credit Union Administration Board, the 
 Comptroller of the Currency, the Director of the Office of 
 Thrift Supervision, and the Director of the Office of 
 Management and Budget, designate a single calendar date for the 
 transfer of functions to the Agency under section 161; and
 (2) shall publish notice of that designation in the Federal 
 Register.
 (b) Changing Designation.--The Secretary--
 (1) may, in consultation with the Chairman of the Board of 
 Governors, the Chairperson of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Corporation, the Chairman of the Federal Trade Commission, the 
 Chairman of the National Credit Union Administration Board, the 
 Comptroller of the Currency, the Director of the Office of 
 Thrift Supervision, and the Director of the Office of 
 Management and Budget, change the date designated under 
 subsection (a); and
 (2) shall publish notice of any changed designation in the 
 Federal Register.
 (c) Permissible Dates.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), any 
 date designated under this section shall be not earlier than 
 180 days nor later than 18 months after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.
 (2) Extension of time.--The Secretary may designate a date 
 that is later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of 
 this Act if the Secretary transmits to appropriate committees 
 of Congress--
 (A) a written determination that orderly 
 implementation of this title is not feasible on the 
 date that is 18 months after the date of the enactment 
 of this Act;
 (B) an explanation of why an extension is necessary 
 for the orderly implementation of this title; and
 (C) a description of the steps that will be taken 
 to effect an orderly and timely implementation of this 
 title within the extended time period.
 (3) Extension limited.--In no case shall any date 
 designated under this section be later than 24 months after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 163. SAVINGS PROVISIONS.

 (a) Board of Governors.--
 (1) Existing rights, duties, and obligations not 
 affected.--Section 161(a)(1) shall not affect the validity of 
 any right, duty, or obligation of the United States, the Board 
 of Governors (or any Federal reserve bank), or any other person 
 that--
 (A) arises under any provision of law relating to 
 any consumer financial protection function of the Board 
 of Governors transferred to the Agency by this title; 
 and
 (B) existed on the day before the designated 
 transfer date.
 (2) Continuation of suits.--This Act shall not abate any 
 proceeding commenced by or against the Board of Governors (or 
 any Federal reserve bank) before the designated transfer date 
 with respect to any consumer financial protection function of 
 the Board of Governors (or any Federal reserve bank) 
 transferred to the Agency by this title, except that the Agency 
 shall be substituted for the Board of Governors (or Federal 
 reserve bank) as a party to any such proceeding as of the 
 designated transfer date.
 (b) Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.--
 (1) Existing rights, duties, and obligations not 
 affected.--Section 161(a)(4) shall not affect the validity of 
 any right, duty, or obligation of the United States, the 
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Board of Directors 
 of that Corporation, or any other person, that--
 (A) arises under any provision of law relating to 
 any consumer financial protection function of the 
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation transferred to 
 the Agency by this title; and
 (B) existed on the day before the designated 
 transfer date.
 (2) Continuation of suits.--This Act shall not abate any 
 proceeding commenced by or against the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Corporation (or the Board of Directors of that 
 Corporation) before the designated transfer date with respect 
 to any consumer financial protection function of the Federal 
 Deposit Insurance Corporation transferred to the Agency by this 
 title, except that the Agency shall be substituted for the 
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (or Board of Directors) 
 as a party to any such proceeding as of the designated transfer 
 date.
 (c) Federal Trade Commission.--
 (1) Existing rights, duties, and obligations not 
 affected.--Section 161(a)(5) shall not affect the validity of 
 any right, duty, or obligation of the United States, the 
 Federal Trade Commission, or any other person, that--
 (A) arises under any provision of law relating to 
 any consumer financial protection function of the 
 Federal Trade Commission transferred to the Agency by 
 this title; and
 (B) existed on the day before the designated 
 transfer date.
 (2) Continuation of suits.--This Act shall not abate any 
 proceeding commenced by or against the Federal Trade Commission 
 before the designated transfer date with respect to any 
 consumer financial protection function of the Federal Trade 
 Commission transferred to the Agency by this title, except that 
 the Agency shall be substituted for the Federal Trade 
 Commission as a party to any such proceeding as of the 
 designated transfer date.
 (d) National Credit Union Administration.--
 (1) Existing rights, duties, and obligations not 
 affected.--Section 161(a)(6) shall not affect the validity of 
 any right, duty, or obligation of the United States, the 
 National Credit Union Administration, the National Credit Union 
 Administration Board, or any other person, that--
 (A) arises under any provision of law relating to 
 any consumer financial protection function of the 
 National Credit Union Administration transferred to the 
 Agency by this title; and
 (B) existed on the day before the designated 
 transfer date.
 (2) Continuation of suits.--This Act shall not abate any 
 proceeding commenced by or against the National Credit Union 
 Administration (or the National Credit Union Administration 
 Board) before the designated transfer date with respect to any 
 consumer financial protection function of the National Credit 
 Union Administration transferred to the Agency by this title, 
 except that the Agency shall be substituted for the National 
 Credit Union Administration (or National Credit Union 
 Administration Board) as a party to any such proceeding as of 
 the designated transfer date.
 (e) Comptroller of the Currency.--
 (1) Existing rights, duties, and obligations not 
 affected.--Section 161(a)(2) shall not affect the validity of 
 any right, duty, or obligation of the United States, the 
 Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of the Comptroller of 
 the Currency, or any other person, that--
 (A) arises under any provision of law relating to 
 any consumer financial protection function of the 
 Comptroller of the Currency transferred to the Agency 
 by this title; and
 (B) existed on the day before the designated 
 transfer date.
 (2) Continuation of suits.--This Act shall not abate any 
 proceeding commenced by or against the Comptroller of the 
 Currency (or the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency) 
 with respect to any consumer financial protection function of 
 the Comptroller of the Currency transferred to the Agency by 
 this title before the designated transfer date, except that the 
 Agency shall be substituted for the Comptroller of the Currency 
 (or the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency) as a party 
 to any such proceeding as of the designated transfer date.
 (f) Office of Thrift Supervision.--
 (1) Existing rights, duties, and obligations not 
 affected.--Section 161(a)(3) shall not affect the validity of 
 any right, duty, or obligation of the United States, the 
 Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision, the Office of 
 Thrift Supervision, or any other person, that--
 (A) arises under any provision of law relating to 
 any consumer financial protection function of the 
 Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision 
 transferred to the Agency by this title; and
 (B) that existed on the day before the designated 
 transfer date.
 (2) Continuation of suits.--This Act shall not abate any 
 proceeding commenced by or against the Director of the Office 
 of Thrift Supervision (or the Office of Thrift Supervision) 
 with respect to any consumer financial protection function of 
 the Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision transferred to 
 the Agency by this title before the designated transfer date, 
 except that the Agency shall be substituted for the Director 
 (or the Office of Thrift Supervision) as a party to any such 
 proceeding as of the designated transfer date.
 (g) Continuation of Existing Orders, Regulations, Determinations, 
Agreements, and Resolutions.--All orders, resolutions, determinations, 
agreements, and regulations that have been issued, made, prescribed, or 
allowed to become effective by the Board of Governors (or any Federal 
reserve bank), the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal 
Trade Commission, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office 
of the Comptroller of the Currency, or the Office of Thrift 
Supervision, or by a court of competent jurisdiction, in the 
performance of consumer financial protection functions that are 
transferred by this title and that are in effect on the day before the 
designated transfer date, shall continue in effect according to the 
terms of those orders, resolutions, determinations, agreements, and 
regulations, and shall be enforceable by or against the Agency until 
modified, terminated, set aside, or superseded in accordance with 
applicable law by the Agency, by any court of competent jurisdiction, 
or by operation of law.
 (h) Identification of Regulations Continued.--Not later than the 
designated transfer date, the Agency--
 (1) shall, after consultation with the Chairman of the 
 Board of Governors, the Chairperson of the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Corporation, the Chairman of the Federal Trade 
 Commission, the Chairman of the National Credit Union 
 Administration Board, the Comptroller of the Currency, and the 
 Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision, identify the 
 regulations continued under subsection (g) that will be 
 enforced by the Agency; and
 (2) shall publish a list of such regulations in the Federal 
 Register.
 (i) Status of Regulations Proposed or Not Yet Effective.--
 (1) Proposed regulations.--Any proposed regulation of the 
 Board of Governors, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 
 the Federal Trade Commission, the National Credit Union 
 Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, 
 or the Office of Thrift Supervision, which that agency, in 
 performing consumer financial protection functions transferred 
 by this title, has proposed before the designated transfer date 
 but has not published as a final rule before that date, shall 
 be deemed to be a proposed regulation of the Agency.
 (2) Regulations not yet effective.--Any interim or final 
 regulation of Board of Governors, the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Corporation, the Federal Trade Commission, the National Credit 
 Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the 
 Currency, or the Office of Thrift Supervision, which that 
 agency, in performing consumer financial protection functions 
 transferred by this title, has published before the designated 
 transfer date but which has not become effective before that 
 date, shall take effect as a regulation of the Agency according 
 to its terms.

SEC. 164. TRANSFER OF CERTAIN PERSONNEL.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Certain federal reserve system employees transferred.--
 (A) Identifying employees for transfer.--The Agency 
 and the Board of Governors shall--
 (i) jointly determine the number of 
 employees of the Board necessary to perform or 
 support the consumer financial protection 
 functions of the Board of Governors that are 
 transferred to the Agency by this title; and
 (ii) consistent with the number determined 
 under clause (i), jointly identify employees of 
 the Board of Governors for transfer to the 
 Agency in a manner that the Agency and the 
 Board of Governors, in their sole discretion, 
 deem equitable.
 (B) Identified employees transferred.--All 
 employees of the Board of Governors identified under 
 subparagraph (A)(ii) shall be transferred to the Agency 
 for employment.
 (C) Federal reserve bank employees.--Employees of 
 any Federal reserve bank who, on the day before the 
 designated transfer date, are performing consumer 
 financial protection functions on behalf of the Board 
 of Governors shall be treated as employees of the Board 
 of Governors for purposes of subparagraphs (A) and (B).
 (2) Certain fdic employees transferred.--
 (A) Identifying employees for transfer.--The Agency 
 and the Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Corporation shall--
 (i) jointly determine the number of 
 employees of that Corporation necessary to 
 perform or support the consumer financial 
 protection functions of the Corporation that 
 are transferred to the Agency by this title; 
 and
 (ii) consistent with the number determined 
 under clause (i), jointly identify employees of 
 the Corporation for transfer to the Agency in a 
 manner that the Agency and the Board of 
 Directors of the Corporation, in their sole 
 discretion, deem equitable.
 (B) Identified employees transferred.--All 
 employees of the Corporation identified under 
 subparagraph (A)(ii) shall be transferred to the Agency 
 for employment.
 (3) Certain ncua employees transferred.--
 (A) Identifying employees for transfer.--The Agency 
 and the National Credit Union Administration Board 
 shall--
 (i) jointly determine the number of 
 employees of the National Credit Union 
 Administration necessary to perform or support 
 the consumer financial protection functions of 
 the National Credit Union Administration that 
 are transferred to the Agency by this title; 
 and
 (ii) consistent with the number determined 
 under clause (i), jointly identify employees of 
 the National Credit Union Administration for 
 transfer to the Agency in a manner that the 
 Agency and the National Credit Union 
 Administration Board, in their sole discretion, 
 deem equitable.
 (B) Identified employees transferred.--All 
 employees of the National Credit Union Administration 
 identified under subparagraph (A)(ii) shall be 
 transferred to the Agency for employment.
 (4) Appointment authority for excepted service and senior 
 executive service transferred.--
 (A) In general.--In the case of employees occupying 
 positions in the excepted service or the Senior 
 Executive Service, any appointment authority 
 established pursuant to law or regulations of the 
 Office of Personnel Management for filling such 
 positions shall be transferred, subject to subparagraph 
 (B).
 (B) Declining transfers allowed.--An agency or 
 entity may decline to make a transfer of authority 
 under subparagraph (A) (and the employees appointed 
 pursuant thereto) to the extent that such authority 
 relates to positions excepted from the competitive 
 service because of their confidential, policy-making, 
 policy-determining, or policy-advocating character, and 
 non-career positions in the Senior Executive Service 
 (within the meaning of section 3132(a)(7) of title 5, 
 United States Code).
 (b) Timing of Transfers and Position Assignments.--Each employee to 
be transferred under this section shall--
 (1) be transferred not later than 90 days after the 
 designated transfer date; and
 (2) receive notice of his or her position assignment not 
 later than 120 days after the effective date of his or her 
 transfer.
 (c) Transfer of Function.--
 (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 law, the transfer of employees shall be deemed a transfer of 
 functions for the purpose of section 3503 of title 5, United 
 States Code.
 (2) Priority of this title.--If any provisions of this 
 title conflict with any protection provided to transferred 
 employees under section 3503 of title 5, United States Code, 
 the provisions of this title shall control.
 (d) Equal Status and Tenure Positions.--
 (1) Employees transferred from fdic, ftc, ncua, occ, and 
 ots.--Each employee transferred from the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Corporation, the Federal Trade Commission, the 
 National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the 
 Comptroller of the Currency, or the Office of Thrift 
 Supervision shall be placed in a position at the Agency with 
 the same status and tenure as he or she held on the day before 
 the designated transfer date.
 (2) Employees transferred from the federal reserve 
 system.--
 (A) Comparability.--Each employee transferred from 
 the Board of Governors or from a Federal reserve bank 
 shall be placed in a position with the same status and 
 tenure as that of employees transferring to the Agency 
 from the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency who 
 perform similar functions and have similar periods of 
 service.
 (B) Service periods credited.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, periods of service with the Board of 
 Governors or a Federal reserve bank shall be credited 
 as periods of service with a Federal agency.
 (e) Additional Certification Requirements Limited.--Examiners 
transferred to the Agency shall not be subject to any additional 
certification requirements before being placed in a comparable 
examiner's position at the Agency examining the same types of 
institutions as they examined before they were transferred.
 (f) Personnel Actions Limited.--
 (1) 1-year protection.--Except as provided in paragraph 
 (2), each transferred employee holding a permanent position on 
 the day before the designated transfer date shall not, during 
 the 1-year period beginning on the designated transfer date, be 
 involuntarily separated, or involuntarily reassigned outside 
 his or her local locality pay area as defined by the Office of 
 Personnel Management.
 (2) Exceptions.--Paragraph (1) shall not be construed as 
 limiting the right of the Agency to--
 (A) separate an employee for cause or for 
 unacceptable performance;
 (B) terminate an appointment to a position excepted 
 from the competitive service because of its 
 confidential policy-making, policy-determining, or 
 policy-advocating character; or
 (C) reassign a supervisory employee outside his or 
 her locality pay area as defined by the Office of 
 Personnel Management when the Agency determines that 
 the reassignment is necessary for the efficient 
 operation of the Agency.
 (g) Pay.--
 (1) 1-year protection.--Except as provided in paragraph 
 (2), each transferred employee shall, during the 1-year period 
 beginning on the designated transfer date, receive pay at a 
 rate not less than the basic rate of pay (including any 
 geographic differential) that the employee received during the 
 1-year period immediately before the transfer.
 (2) Exceptions.--Paragraph (1) shall not be construed as 
 limiting the right of the Agency to reduce the rate of basic 
 pay of a transferred employee--
 (A) for cause;
 (B) for unacceptable performance; or
 (C) with the employee's consent.
 (3) Protection only while employed.--Paragraph (1) applies 
 to a transferred employee only while that employee remains 
 employed by the Agency.
 (4) Pay increases permitted.--Paragraph (1) shall not be 
 construed as limiting the authority of the Agency to increase a 
 transferred employee's pay.
 (h) Reorganization.--
 (1) Between 1st and 3rd year.--
 (A) In general.--If the Agency determines, during 
 the period beginning 1 year after the designated 
 transfer date and ending 3 years after the designated 
 transfer date, that a reorganization of the staff of 
 the Agency is required--
 (i) that reorganization shall be deemed a 
 ``major reorganization'' for purposes of 
 affording affected employees retirement under 
 section 8336(d)(2) or 8414(b)(1)(B) of title 5, 
 United States Code;
 (ii) before the reorganization occurs, all 
 employees in the same locality pay area as 
 defined by the Office of Personnel Management 
 shall be placed in a uniform position 
 classification system; and
 (iii) any resulting reduction in force 
 shall be governed by the provisions of chapter 
 35 of title 5, United States Code, except that 
 the Agency shall--
 (I) establish competitive areas (as 
 that term is defined in regulations 
 issued by the Office of Personnel 
 Management) to include at a minimum all 
 employees in the same locality pay area 
 as defined by the Office of Personnel 
 Management;
 (II) establish competitive levels 
 (as that term is defined in regulations 
 issued by the Office of Personnel 
 Management) without regard to whether 
 the particular employees have been 
 appointed to positions in the 
 competitive service or the excepted 
 service; and
 (III) afford employees appointed to 
 positions in the excepted service 
 (other than to a position excepted from 
 the competitive service because of its 
 confidential policy-making, policy-
 determining, or policy-advocating 
 character) the same assignment rights 
 to positions within the Agency as 
 employees appointed to positions in the 
 competitive service.
 (B) Service credit for reductions in force.--For 
 purposes of this paragraph, periods of service with a 
 Federal home loan bank, a joint office of the Federal 
 home loan banks, the Board of Governors, a Federal 
 reserve bank, the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Corporation, or the National Credit Union 
 Administration shall be credited as periods of service 
 with a Federal agency.
 (2) After 3rd year.--
 (A) In general.--If the Agency determines, at any 
 time after the 3-year period beginning on the 
 designated transfer date, that a reorganization of the 
 staff of the Agency is required, any resulting 
 reduction in force shall be governed by the provisions 
 of chapter 35 of title 5, United States Code, except 
 that the Agency shall establish competitive levels (as 
 that term is defined in regulations issued by the 
 Office of Personnel Management) without regard to types 
 of appointment held by particular employees transferred 
 under this section.
 (B) Service credit for reductions in force.--For 
 purposes of this paragraph, periods of service with a 
 Federal home loan bank, a joint office of the Federal 
 home loan banks, the Board of Governors, a Federal 
 reserve bank, the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Corporation, or the National Credit Union 
 Administration shall be credited as periods of service 
 with a Federal agency.
 (i) Benefits.--
 (1) Retirement benefits for transferred employees.--
 (A) In general.--
 (i) Continuation of existing retirement 
 plan.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), 
 each transferred employee shall remain enrolled 
 in his or her existing retirement plan as long 
 as he or she remains employed by the Agency.
 (ii) Employer's contribution.--The Agency 
 shall pay any employer contributions to the 
 existing retirement plan of each transferred 
 employee as required under that plan.
 (B) Option for employees transferred from federal 
 reserve system to be subject to federal employee 
 retirement program.--
 (i) Election.--Any transferred employee who 
 was enrolled in a Federal Reserve System 
 retirement plan on the day before his or her 
 transfer to the Agency may, during the period 
 beginning 6 months after the designated 
 transfer date and ending 1 year after the 
 designated transfer date, elect to be subject 
 to the Federal employee retirement program.
 (ii) Effective date of coverage.--For any 
 employee making an election under clause (i), 
 coverage by the Federal employee retirement 
 program shall begin 1 year after the designated 
 transfer date.
 (C) Agency participation in federal reserve system 
 retirement plan.--
 (i) Separate account in federal reserve 
 system retirement plan established.--A separate 
 account in the Federal Reserve System 
 retirement plan shall be established for Agency 
 employees who do not make the election under 
 subparagraph (B).
 (ii) Funds attributable to transferred 
 employees remaining in federal reserve system 
 retirement plan transferred.--The proportionate 
 share of funds in the Federal Reserve System 
 retirement plan, including the proportionate 
 share of any funding surplus in that plan, 
 attributable to a transferred employee who does 
 not make the election under subparagraph (B), 
 shall be transferred to the account established 
 under clause (i).
 (iii) Employer contributions deposited.--
 The Agency shall deposit into the account 
 established under clause (i) the employer 
 contributions that the Agency makes on behalf 
 of employees who do not make the election under 
 subparagraph (B).
 (iv) Account administration.--The Agency 
 shall administer the account established under 
 clause (i) as a participating employer in the 
 Federal Reserve System retirement plan.
 (D) Definitions.--For purposes of this paragraph, 
 the following definitions shall apply:
 (i) Existing retirement plan.--The term 
 ``existing retirement plan'' means, with 
 respect to any employee transferred under this 
 section, the particular retirement plan 
 (including the Financial Institutions 
 Retirement Fund) and any associated thrift 
 savings plan of the agency or Federal reserve 
 bank from which the employee was transferred, 
 which the employee was enrolled in on the day 
 before the designated transfer date.
 (ii) Federal employee retirement plan.--The 
 term ``Federal employee retirement program'' 
 means the retirement program for Federal 
 employees established by chapters 83 and 84 of 
 title 5, United States Code.
 (2) Benefits other than retirement benefits for transferred 
 employees.--
 (A) During 1st year.--
 (i) Existing plans continue.--Each 
 transferred employee may, for 1 year after the 
 designated transfer date, retain membership in 
 any other employee benefit program of the 
 agency or bank from which the employee 
 transferred, including a dental, vision, long-
 term care, or life insurance program, to which 
 the employee belonged on the day before the 
 designated transfer date.
 (ii) Employer's contribution.--The Agency 
 shall reimburse the agency or bank from which 
 an employee was transferred for any cost 
 incurred by that agency or bank in continuing 
 to extend coverage in the benefit program to 
 the employee as required under that program or 
 negotiated agreements.
 (B) Dental, vision, or life insurance after 1st 
 year.--If, after the 1-year period beginning on the 
 designated transfer date, the Agency decides not to 
 continue participation in any dental, vision, or life 
 insurance program of an agency or bank from which 
 employees transferred, a transferred employee who is a 
 member of such a program may, before the Agency's 
 decision takes effect, elect to enroll, without regard 
 to any regularly scheduled open season, in--
 (i) the enhanced dental benefits 
 established by chapter 89A of title 5, United 
 States Code;
 (ii) the enhanced vision benefits 
 established by chapter 89B of title 5, United 
 States Code; and
 (iii) the Federal Employees Group Life 
 Insurance Program established by chapter 87 of 
 title 5, United States Code, without regard to 
 any requirement of insurability.
 (C) Long-term care insurance after 1st year.--If, 
 after the 1-year period beginning on the designated 
 transfer date, the Agency decides not to continue 
 participation in any long-term care insurance program 
 of an agency or bank from which employees transferred, 
 a transferred employee who is a member of such a 
 program may, before the Agency's decision takes effect, 
 elect to apply for coverage under the Federal Long Term 
 Care Insurance Program established by chapter 90 of 
 title 5, United States Code, under the underwriting 
 requirements applicable to a new active workforce 
 member (as defined in Part 875, title 5, Code of 
 Federal Regulations).
 (D) Employee's contribution.--An individual 
 enrolled in the Federal Employees Health Benefits 
 program shall pay any employee contribution required by 
 the plan.
 (E) Additional funding.--The Agency shall transfer 
 to the Federal Employees Health Benefits Fund 
 established under section 8909 of title 5, United 
 States Code, an amount determined by the Director of 
 the Office of Personnel Management, after consultation 
 with the Agency and the Office of Management and 
 Budget, to be necessary to reimburse the Fund for the 
 cost to the Fund of providing benefits under this 
 subparagraph.
 (F) Credit for time enrolled in other plans.--For 
 employees transferred under this section, enrollment in 
 a health benefits plan administered by the Office of 
 the Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of Thrift 
 Supervision, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 
 the National Credit Union Administration, the Board of 
 Governors, or a Federal reserve bank, immediately 
 before enrollment in a health benefits plan under 
 chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, shall be 
 considered as enrollment in a health benefits plan 
 under that chapter for purposes of section 
 8905(b)(1)(A) of title 5, United States Code.
 (E) Special provisions to ensure continuation of 
 life insurance benefits.--
 (i) In general.--An annuitant (as defined 
 in section 8901(3) of title 5, United States 
 Code) who is enrolled in a life insurance plan 
 administered by the Board of Governors of the 
 Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Corporation, the Federal Trade 
 Commission, the National Credit Union 
 Administration, the Office of the Comptroller 
 of the Currency, or the Office of Thrift 
 Supervision on the day before the designated 
 transfer date shall be eligible for coverage by 
 a life insurance plan under sections 8706(b), 
 8714a, 8714b, and 8714c of title 5, United 
 States Code, or in a life insurance plan 
 established by the Agency, without regard to 
 any regularly scheduled open season and 
 requirement of insurability.
 (ii) Employee's contribution.--An 
 individual enrolled in a life insurance plan 
 under this clause shall pay any employee 
 contribution required by the plan.
 (iii) Additional funding.--The Agency shall 
 transfer to the Employees' Life Insurance Fund 
 established under section 8714 of title 5, 
 United States Code, an amount determined by the 
 Director of the Office of Personnel Management, 
 after consultation with the Agency and the 
 Office of Management and Budget, to be 
 necessary to reimburse the Fund for the cost to 
 the Fund of providing benefits under this 
 subparagraph not otherwise paid for by the 
 employee under clause (ii).
 (iv) Credit for time enrolled in other 
 plans.--For employees transferred under this 
 section, enrollment in a life insurance plan 
 administered by the Board of Governors, the 
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the 
 Federal Trade Commission, the National Credit 
 Union Administration, the Office of the 
 Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of 
 Thrift Supervision, or a Federal reserve bank 
 immediately before enrollment in a life 
 insurance plan under chapter 87 of title 5, 
 United States Code, shall be considered as 
 enrollment in a life insurance plan under that 
 chapter for purposes of section 8706(b)(1)(A) 
 of title 5, United States Code.
 (j) Implementation of Uniform Pay and Classification System.--Not 
later than 2 years after the designated transfer date, the Agency shall 
implement a uniform pay and classification system for all transferred 
employees.
 (k) Equitable Treatment.--In administering the provisions of this 
section, the Agency--
 (1) shall take no action that would unfairly disadvantage 
 transferred employees relative to each other based on their 
 prior employment by the Board of Governors, the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Corporation, the Federal Trade Commission, the 
 National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the 
 Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of Thrift Supervision, 
 a Federal reserve bank, a Federal home loan bank, or a joint 
 office of the Federal home loan banks; and
 (2) may take such action as is appropriate in individual 
 cases so that employees transferred under this section receive 
 equitable treatment, with respect to those employees' status, 
 tenure, pay, benefits (other than benefits under programs 
 administered by the Office of Personnel Management), and 
 accrued leave or vacation time, for prior periods of service 
 with any Federal agency, including the Board of Governors of 
 the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Corporation, the Federal Trade Commission, the National Credit 
 Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the 
 Currency, the Office of Thrift Supervision, a Federal reserve 
 bank, a Federal home loan bank, or a joint office of the 
 Federal home loan banks.
 (l) No Private Right of Action.--This section shall not be 
construed as providing any transferred employee with any right of 
action to require the Agency or any officer or employee of the Agency 
to take any action under this section.
 (m) Implementation.--In implementing the provisions of this 
section, the Agency shall work with the Office of Personnel Management 
and other entities with expertise in matters related to employment to 
ensure a fair and orderly transition for affected employees.

SEC. 165. INCIDENTAL TRANSFERS.

 (a) Incidental Transfers Authorized.--The Director of the Office of 
Management and Budget, in consultation with the Secretary, shall make 
such additional incidental transfers and dispositions of assets and 
liabilities held, used, arising from, available, or to be made 
available, in connection with the functions transferred by this title, 
as the Director may determine necessary to accomplish the purposes of 
this title.
 (b) Sunset.--The authority provided in this section shall terminate 
5 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 166. INTERIM AUTHORITY OF THE SECRETARY.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary is authorized to perform the 
functions of the Agency under this subtitle until 3 of the appointed 
Board members are confirmed by the Senate in accordance with section 
112.
 (b) Interim Administrative Services by the Department of the 
Treasury.--The Department of the Treasury may provide administrative 
services necessary to support the Agency before the designated transfer 
date.
 (c) Interim Funding for the Department of the Treasury.--For the 
purposes of carrying out the authorities granted in this section, there 
are appropriated to the Department of the Treasury such sums as are 
necessary. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, such amounts 
shall be subject to apportionment under section 1517 of title 31, 
United States Code, and restrictions that generally apply to the use of 
appropriated funds in title 31, United States Code, and other laws.

 Subtitle G--Regulatory Improvements

SEC. 171. COLLECTION OF DEPOSIT ACCOUNT DATA.

 (a) Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to promote awareness 
and understanding of the access of individuals and communities to 
financial services, and to identify business and community development 
needs and opportunities.
 (b) In General.--
 (1) Records required.--For each branch, automated teller 
 machine at which deposits are accepted, and other deposit 
 taking service facility with respect to any financial 
 institution, the financial institution shall maintain records 
 of the number and dollar amounts of deposit accounts of 
 customers.
 (2) Geo-coded addresses of depositors.--The customers' 
 addresses maintained pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be geo-
 coded so that data shall be collected regarding the census 
 tracts of the residence or business location of the customers.
 (3) Identification of depositor type.--In maintaining 
 records on any deposit account under this section, the 
 financial institution shall also record whether the deposit 
 account is for a residential or commercial customer.
 (4) Public availability.--
 (A) In general.--The following information shall be 
 publicly available on an annual basis--
 (i) the address and census tracts of each 
 branch, automated teller machine at which 
 deposits are accepted, and other deposit taking 
 service facility with respect to any financial 
 institution;
 (ii) the type of deposit account including 
 whether the account was a checking or savings 
 account; and
 (iii) data on the number and dollar amounts 
 of the accounts, presented by census tract 
 location of the residential and commercial 
 customers.
 (B) Protection of identity.--In the publicly 
 available data, any personally identifiable data 
 element shall be removed so as to protect the 
 identities of the commercial and residential customers.
 (c) Availability of Information.--
 (1) Submission to agencies.--The data required to be 
 compiled and maintained under this section by any financial 
 institution shall be submitted annually to the Agency, or to a 
 Federal banking agency, in accordance with rules prescribed by 
 the Agency.
 (2) Availability of information.--Information compiled and 
 maintained under this section shall be retained for not less 
 than 3 years after the date of preparation and shall be made 
 available to the public, upon request, in the form required 
 under rules prescribed by the Agency.
 (d) Agency Use.--The Agency--
 (1) shall assess the distribution of residential and 
 commercial accounts at such financial institution across income 
 and minority level of census tracts; and
 (2) may use the data for any other purpose as permitted by 
 law.
 (e) Regulations and Guidance.--
 (1) In general.--The Agency shall prescribe such 
 regulations and issue guidance as may be necessary to carry 
 out, enforce, and compile data pursuant to this section.
 (2) Data compilation regulations.--The Agency shall 
 prescribe regulations regarding the provision of data compiled 
 under this section to the Federal banking agencies to carry out 
 the purposes of this section and shall issue guidance to 
 financial institutions regarding measures to facilitate 
 compliance with the this section and the requirements of 
 regulations prescribed under this section.
 (f) Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the following 
definitions shall apply:
 (1) Agency.--The term ``Agency'' means the Consumer 
 Financial Protection Agency.
 (2) Credit union.--The term ``credit union'' means a 
 Federal credit union or a State-chartered credit union (as such 
 terms are defined in section 101 of the Federal Credit Union 
 Act).
 (3) Deposit account.--The term ``deposit account'' includes 
 any checking account, savings account, credit union share 
 account, and other type of account as defined by the Agency.
 (4) Federal banking agency.--The term ``Federal banking 
 agency'' means the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
 System, the head of the agency responsible for chartering and 
 regulating national banks, the Director of the Office of Thrift 
 Supervision, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the 
 National Credit Union Administration; and the term ``Federal 
 banking agencies'' means all of those agencies.
 (5) Financial institution.--The term ``financial 
 institution''--
 (A) has the meaning given to the term ``insured 
 depository institution'' in section 3(c)(2) of the 
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act; and
 (B) includes any credit union.
 (g) Effective Date.--This section shall take effect on the 
designated transfer date.

SEC. 172. SMALL BUSINESS DATA COLLECTION.

 (a) In General.--The Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691 
et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 704A the following new 
section:
``Sec. 704B. Small business loan data collection
 ``(a) Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to facilitate 
enforcement of fair lending laws and enable communities, governmental 
entities, and creditors to identify business and community development 
needs and opportunities of women- and minority-owned small businesses.
 ``(b) In General.--Subject to the requirements of this section, in 
the case of any application to a financial institution for credit for a 
small business, the financial institution shall--
 ``(1) inquire whether the business is a women- or minority-
 owned business, without regard to whether such application is 
 received in person, by mail, by telephone, by electronic mail 
 or other form of electronic transmission, or by any other means 
 and whether or not such application is in response to a 
 solicitation by the financial institution; and
 ``(2) maintain a record of the responses to such inquiry 
 separate from the application and accompanying information.
 ``(c) Right to Refuse.--Any applicant for credit may refuse to 
provide any information requested pursuant to subsection (b) in 
connection with any application for credit.
 ``(d) No Access by Underwriters.--
 ``(1) In general.--Where feasible, no loan underwriter or 
 other officer or employee of a financial institution, or any 
 affiliate of a financial institution, involved in making any 
 determination concerning an application for credit shall have 
 access to any information provided by the applicant pursuant to 
 a request under subsection (b) in connection with such 
 application.
 ``(2) Exception.--If a financial institution determines 
 that loan underwriter or other officer or employee of a 
 financial institution, or any affiliate of a financial 
 institution, involved in making any determination concerning an 
 application for credit should have access to any information 
 provided by the applicant pursuant to a request under 
 subsection (b), the financial institution will provide notice 
 to the applicant of the access of the underwriter to this 
 information, along with notice that the financial institution 
 may not discriminate on this basis of this information.
 ``(e) Form and Manner of Information.--
 ``(1) In general.--Each financial institution shall compile 
 and maintain, in accordance with regulations of the Agency, a 
 record of the information provided by any loan applicant 
 pursuant to a request under subsection (b).
 ``(2) Itemization.--Information compiled and maintained 
 under paragraph (1) shall also be itemized in order to clearly 
 and conspicuously disclose the following:
 ``(A) The number of the application and the date 
 the application was received.
 ``(B) The type and purpose of the loan or other 
 credit being applied for.
 ``(C) The amount of the credit or credit limit 
 applied for and the amount of the credit transaction or 
 the credit limit approved for such applicant.
 ``(D) The type of action taken with respect to such 
 application and the date of such action.
 ``(E) The census tract in which is located the 
 principal place of business of the small business loan 
 applicant.
 ``(F) The gross annual revenue of the business in 
 the last fiscal year of the small business loan 
 applicant preceding the date of the application.
 ``(G) The race and ethnicity of the principal 
 owners of the business.
 ``(H) Any additional data the Agency determines 
 would aid in fulfilling the purposes of this section.
 ``(3) Inclusion of personally identifiable information 
 prohibited.--In compiling and maintaining any record of 
 information under this section, a financial institution may not 
 include in such record the name, specific address (other than 
 the census tract required under paragraph (1)(E)), telephone 
 number, electronic mail address, and any other personally 
 identifiable information concerning any individual who is, or 
 is connected with, the small business loan applicant.
 ``(4) Discretion to delete or modify publicly available 
 data.--The Agency may, in the discretion of the Agency, delete 
 or modify data collected under this section which is or will be 
 available to the public if the Agency determines that the 
 deletion or modification of the data would advance a compelling 
 privacy interest.
 ``(f) Availability of Information.--
 ``(1) Submission to agency.--The data required to be 
 compiled and maintained under this section by any financial 
 institution shall be submitted annually to the Agency.
 ``(2) Availability of information.--
 ``(A) In general.--Information compiled and 
 maintained under this section shall be retained for not 
 less than 3 years after the date of preparation and 
 shall be made available to the public, upon request, in 
 the form required under regulations prescribed by the 
 Agency.
 ``(B) Annual disclosure to the public.--In addition 
 to the availability by request under subparagraph (A) 
 of data compiled and maintained under this section, the 
 Agency shall annually provide such data to the public.
 ``(C) Procedures.--The procedures for disclosing 
 data compiled and maintained under this section to the 
 public shall be determined by the Agency by regulation.
 ``(3) Compilation of aggregate data.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Agency may, in the 
 discretion of the Agency, compile for the Agency's own 
 use compilations of aggregate data.
 ``(B) Public availability of aggregate data.--The 
 Agency may, in the discretion of the Agency, make 
 public compilations of aggregate data in such manner as 
 the Agency may determine to be appropriate.
 ``(g) Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the following 
definitions shall apply:
 ``(1) Financial institution.--The term `financial 
 institution' means any partnership, company, corporation, 
 association (incorporated or unincorporated), trust, estate, 
 cooperative organization, or other entity that engages in any 
 financial activity.
 ``(2) Minority-owned business.--The term `minority-owned 
 business' means a business--
 ``(A) more than 50 percent of the ownership or 
 control of which is held by 1 or more minority 
 individuals; and
 ``(B) more than 50 percent of the net profit or 
 loss of which accrues to 1 or more minority 
 individuals.
 ``(3) Women-owned business.--The term `women-owned 
 business' means a business--
 ``(A) more than 50 percent of the ownership or 
 control of which is held by 1 or more women; and
 ``(B) more than 50 percent of the net profit or 
 loss of which accrues to 1 or more women.
 ``(4) Minority.--The term `minority' has the meaning given 
 to such term by section 1204(c)(3) of the Financial 
 Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989.
 ``(5) Small business loan.--The term `small business loan' 
 shall be defined by the Agency, which may take into account--
 ``(A) the gross revenues of the borrower;
 ``(B) the total number of employees of the 
 borrower;
 ``(C) the industry in which the borrower has its 
 primary operations; and
 ``(D) the size of the loan.
 ``(h) Agency Action.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Agency shall prescribe such 
 regulations and issue such guidance as may be necessary to 
 carry out, enforce, and compile data pursuant to this section.
 ``(2) Exceptions.--The Agency, by regulation or order, may 
 adopt exceptions to any requirement of this section and may, 
 conditionally or unconditionally, exempt any financial 
 institution or class of institutions from the requirements of 
 this section as the Agency determines to be necessary or 
 appropriate to carry out the purposes and objectives of this 
 section.
 ``(3) Guidance.--The Agency shall issue guidance designed 
 to facilitate compliance with the requirements of this section, 
 including assisting financial institutions in working with 
 applicants to determine whether the applicants are women- or 
 minority-owned for the purposes of this section.''''.
 (b) Technical and Conforming Amendment.--Section 701(b) of the 
Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691(b)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``or'' after the semicolon at the end of 
 paragraph (3);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (4) and 
 inserting ``; or''; and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (4), the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(5) to make an inquiry under section 704B in accordance 
 with the requirements of such section.''.
 (c) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for title VII of the 
Consumer Credit Protection Act is amended by inserting after the item 
relating to section 704A the following new item:

``704B. Small business loan data collection.''.
 (d) Effective Date.--This section shall take effect on the 
designated transfer date.

 Subtitle H--Conforming Amendments

SEC. 181. AMENDMENTS TO THE INSPECTOR GENERAL ACT OF 1978.

 (a) Establishment.--Section 8G(a)(2) of the Inspector General Act 
of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App. 3, 8G(a)(2)) is amended by inserting ``the 
Consumer Financial Protection Agency,'' before ``the Consumer Product 
Safety Commission,''.
 (b) Effective Date.--This section shall take effect on the date of 
the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 182. AMENDMENTS TO THE PRIVACY ACT OF 1974.

 (a) Applicability.--Section 552a of title 5, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(w) Applicability to Consumer Financial Protection Agency.--
Except as provided in the Consumer Financial Protection Agency Act of 
2009, this section shall apply with respect to the Consumer Financial 
Protection Agency.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--This section shall take effect on the date of 
the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 183. AMENDMENTS TO THE ALTERNATIVE MORTGAGE TRANSACTION PARITY ACT 
 OF 1982.

 (a) Section 803(1).--Section 803(1) of the Alternative Mortgage 
Transaction Parity Act of 1982 (12 U.S.C. 3802(1)) is amended by 
striking paragraphs (B) and (C).
 (b) Section 804(a).--Section 804(a) of the Alternative Mortgage 
Transaction Parity Act of l982 (12 U.S.C. 3803(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3), by inserting ``on or 
 before the designated transfer date, as determined in section 
 1062 of the Consumer Financial Protection Agency Act of 2009'' 
 after ``transactions made'' each place such term appears;
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (3) in paragraph (3), by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) with respect to transactions made after the 
 designated transfer date, as determined in section 1062 of the 
 Consumer Financial Protection Agency Act of 2009, only in 
 accordance with regulations governing alternative mortgage 
 transactions as issued by the Consumer Financial Protection 
 Agency for federally chartered housing creditors, in accordance 
 with the rulemaking authority granted to the Consumer Financial 
 Protection Agency with regard to federally chartered housing 
 creditors under laws other than this section.''.
 (c) Section 804.--Section 804 of the Alternative Mortgage 
Transaction Parity Act of l982 (12 U.S.C. 3803) is amended--
 (1) by striking subsection (c) and inserting the following 
 new subsection:
 ``(c) Effect of State Law.--
 ``(1) In general.--An alternative mortgage transaction may 
 be made by a housing creditor in accordance with this section, 
 notwithstanding any State Constitution, law, or regulation that 
 prohibits an alternative mortgage transaction.
 ``(2) Rule of construction.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, a State Constitution, law, or regulation that 
 prohibits an alternative mortgage transaction does not include 
 any State Constitution, law, or regulation that regulates 
 mortgage transactions generally, including any restriction on 
 prepayment penalties or late charges.''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(d) Duties of Consumer Financial Protection Agency.--The Consumer 
Financial Protection Agency shall--
 ``(1) review the regulations identified by the Comptroller 
 of the Currency, the National Credit Union Administration, and 
 the Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision (as those 
 regulations exist on the designated transfer date, as 
 determined in section 1062 of the Consumer Financial Protection 
 Agency Act of 2009) as applicable under paragraphs (1), (2), 
 and (3) of subsection (a);
 ``(2) determine whether such regulations are fair and not 
 deceptive and otherwise meet the objectives of title I of the 
 Consumer Financial Protection Agency Act of 2009; and
 ``(3) prescribe regulations under subsection (a)(4) after 
 the designated transfer date, as determined under such Act.''.
 (d) Effective Date and Scope of Application.--
 (1) Effective date.--This section shall take effect on the 
 designated transfer date.
 (2) Scope of application.--The amendments made by 
 subsection (a) shall not affect any transaction covered by the 
 Alternative Mortgage Transaction Parity Act of l982 which is 
 entered into on or before the designated transfer date.

SEC. 184. AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSUMER CREDIT PROTECTION ACT.

 (a) Truth in Lending Act.--
 (1) Section 103.--Section 103 of the Truth in Lending Act 
 (15 U.S.C. 1602) is amended by striking subsection (b) and 
 inserting the following new subsection:
 ``(b) Agency Definitions.--
 ``(1) Board.--The term `Board' means the `Board of 
 Governors of the Federal Reserve System'.
 ``(2) Agency.--The term `Agency' means the Consumer 
 Financial Protection Agency.''.
 (2) Universal amendment relating to board of governors of 
 the federal reserve system.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B), the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) 
 is amended by striking ``Board'' each place such term 
 appears, including in chapters 4 and 5 relating to 
 credit billing and consumer leases, and inserting 
 ``Agency''.
 (B) Exceptions.--The amendment described in 
 subparagraph (A) shall not apply to sections 108(a) (as 
 amended by paragraph (4)) and 140(d)) or any reference 
 in either such section to the term ``Board''.
 (3) Section 105.--Section 105(b) of the Truth in Lending 
 Act (15 U.S.C. 1604(b)) is amended by striking the first 
 sentence and inserting the following: ``The Agency shall 
 publish a single, integrated disclosure for mortgage loan 
 transactions, including real estate settlement cost statements, 
 which include the disclosure requirements of this title, in 
 conjunction with the disclosure requirements of the Real Estate 
 Settlement Procedures Act that, taken together, may apply to 
 transactions subject to both or either law. The purpose of such 
 model disclosure shall be to facilitate compliance with the 
 disclosure requirements of those titles, and to aid the 
 borrower or lessee in understanding the transaction by 
 utilizing readily understandable language to simplify the 
 technical nature of the disclosures.''.
 (4) Section 108.--Section 108 of the Truth in Lending Act 
 (15 U.S.C. 1607) is amended--
 (A) by striking subsection (a) and inserting the 
 following new subsection:
 ``(a) Enforcing Agencies.--Subject to section 1022 of the Consumer 
Financial Protection Agency Act of 2009, compliance with the 
requirements imposed under this title shall be enforced as follows:
 ``(1) Under section 8 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, 
 in the case of--
 ``(A) national banks, and Federal branches and 
 Federal agencies of foreign banks, by the head of the 
 agency responsible for chartering and regulating 
 national banks;
 ``(B) member banks of the Federal Reserve System 
 (other than national banks), branches and agencies of 
 foreign banks (other than Federal branches, Federal 
 agencies, and insured State branches of foreign banks), 
 commercial lending companies owned or controlled by 
 foreign banks, and organizations operating under 
 section 25 or 25(a) of the Federal Reserve Act, by the 
 Board;
 ``(C) depository institution insured by the Federal 
 Deposit Insurance Corporation (other than members of 
 the Federal Reserve System, Federal savings 
 associations, and savings and loan holding companies) 
 and insured State branches of foreign banks, by the 
 Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Corporation; and
 ``(D) Federal savings associations and savings and 
 loan holding companies, by the Director of the Office 
 of Thrift Supervision.
 ``(2) Under subtitle E of the Consumer Financial Protection 
 Agency Act of 2009, by the Agency in the case of a covered 
 person under that Act.
 ``(3) Under the Federal Credit Union Act, by the head of 
 the agency responsible for chartering and regulating Federal 
 credit unions.
 ``(4) Under the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, by the 
 Secretary of Transportation with respect to any air carrier or 
 foreign air carrier subject to that Act.
 ``(5) Under the Packers and Stockyards Act, 1921 (except as 
 provided in section 406 of that Act), by the Secretary of 
 Agriculture with respect to any activities subject to that Act.
 ``(6) Under the Farm Credit Act of 1971, by the Farm Credit 
 Administration with respect to any Federal land bank, Federal 
 land bank association, Federal intermediate credit bank, or 
 production credit association.''; and
 (B) by striking subsection (c) and inserting the 
 following new subsection:
 ``(c) Overall Enforcement Authority of the Federal Trade 
Commission.--Except to the extent that enforcement of the requirements 
imposed under this title is specifically committed to some other 
Government agency under subsection (a) and subject to section 1022 of 
the Consumer Financial Protection Agency Act of 2009, the Federal Trade 
Commission shall enforce such requirements. For the purpose of the 
exercise by the Federal Trade Commission of its functions and powers 
under the Federal Trade Commission Act, a violation of any requirement 
imposed under this title shall be deemed a violation of a requirement 
imposed under that Act. All of the functions and powers of the Federal 
Trade Commission under the Federal Trade Commission Act are available 
to the Commission to enforce compliance by any person with the 
requirements under this title, irrespective of whether that person is 
engaged in commerce or meets any other jurisdictional tests in the 
Federal Trade Commission Act.''.
 (5) Universal amendment relating to the federal trade 
 commission.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B), the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) 
 is amended by striking ``Federal Trade Commission'' 
 each place such term appears and inserting ``Agency''.
 (B) Exceptions.--The amendment described in 
 subparagraph (A) shall not apply to sections 108(c) (as 
 amended by paragraph (4)) and 129(m) (as amended by 
 paragraph (7)) or any reference in either such section 
 to the term ``Federal Trade Commission''.
 (6) Section 127.--Subparagraph (C) of section 127(b)(11) of 
 the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1637(b)(11)) is amended to 
 read as follows:
 ``(C) Notwithstanding subparagraphs (A) and (B), in 
 the case of a creditor with respect to which compliance 
 with this title is enforced by the Agency, the 
 following statement, in a prominent location on the 
 front of the billing statement, disclosed clearly and 
 conspicuously: `Minimum Payment Warning: Making only 
 the required minimum payment will increase the interest 
 you pay and the time it takes to repay your balance. 
 For example, making only the typical 5 percent minimum 
 monthly payment on a balance of $300 at an interest 
 rate of 17 percent would take 24 months to repay the 
 balance in full. For an estimate of the time it would 
 take to repay your balance, making only minimum monthly 
 payments, call the Consumer Financial Protection Agency 
 at this toll-free number: _________ [the blank space to 
 be filled in by the creditor].' A creditor who is 
 subject to this subparagraph shall not be subject to 
 subparagraph (A) or (B).''.
 (7) Section 129.--Section 129(m) of the Truth in Lending 
 Act (15 U.S.C. 1639(m)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(m) Civil Penalties in Federal Trade Commission Enforcement 
Actions.--For purposes of enforcement by the Federal Trade Commission, 
any violation of a regulation issued by the Agency pursuant to 
subsection (l)(2) of this section shall be treated as a violation of a 
rule promulgated under section 18 of the Federal Trade Commission Act 
(15 U.S.C. 57a) regarding unfair or deceptive acts or practices.''.
 (b) Fair Credit Reporting Act.--
 (1) Section 603.--Section 603 of the Fair Credit Reporting 
 Act (15 U.S.C. 1681a) is amended--
 (A) by redesignating subsections (w) and (x) as 
 subsections (x) and (y), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting after subsection (v) the following 
 new subsection:
 ``(w) Agency.--The term `Agency' means the Consumer Financial 
Protection Agency.''.
 (2) Universal amendments relating to the federal trade 
 commission.--Other than in connection with the amendment made 
 by paragraph (7)(A), the Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 
 1681a) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``Federal Trade Commission'' each 
 place such term appears and inserting ``Agency'';
 (B) by striking ``Commission'' each place such term 
 appears (other than in connection with the term amended 
 in subparagraph (A)) and inserting ``Agency''; and
 (C) by striking ``Federal banking agencies, the 
 National Credit Union Administration, and the 
 Commission shall jointly'' each place such term appears 
 in sections 605(h)(2), 615(e)(1), 623(a)(8)(A), 
 623(e)(1), 628(a)(1), and 628(a)(3) and inserting 
 ``Agency shall''.
 (3) Section 603.--Section 603(k)(2) of the Fair Credit 
 Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681a(k)(2)) is amended by striking 
 ``Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System'' and 
 inserting ``Agency''.
 (4) Section 604.--Subsection 604(g) of the Fair Credit 
 Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681b(g)) is amended--
 (A) by striking subparagraph (C) of paragraph (3) 
 and inserting the following new subsections:
 ``(C) as otherwise determined to be necessary and 
 appropriate, by regulation or order and subject to 
 paragraph (6), by the Agency (with respect to any 
 covered person subject to the jurisdiction of such 
 agency under paragraph (2) of section 621(b)), or the 
 applicable State insurance authority (with respect to 
 any person engaged in providing insurance or 
 annuities).'';
 (B) by striking paragraph (5) and inserting the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(5) Regulations and effective date for paragraph (2).--
 ``(A) Regulations required.--The Agency may, after 
 notice and opportunity for comment, prescribe 
 regulations that permit transactions under paragraph 
 (2) that are determined to be necessary and appropriate 
 to protect legitimate operational, transactional, risk, 
 consumer, and other needs (and which shall include 
 permitting actions necessary for administrative 
 verification purposes), consistent with the intent of 
 paragraph (2) to restrict the use of medical 
 information for inappropriate purposes.''; and
 (C) by striking paragraph (6).
 (5) Section 611.--Subsection 611(e)(2) of the Fair Credit 
 Reporting Act (15 U.S.C.1681i(e)(2)) is amended to read as 
 follows:
 ``(2) Exclusion.--Complaints received or obtained by the 
 Agency pursuant to its investigative authority under the 
 Consumer Financial Protection Agency Act of 2009 shall not be 
 subject to paragraph (1).''.
 (6) Section 615.--Subparagraph 615(h)(6)(A) of the Fair 
 Credit Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681m(h)(6)(A)) is amended to 
 read as follows:
 ``(A) Rules required.--The Agency shall prescribe 
 rules.''.
 (7) Section 621.--Section 621 of the Fair Credit Reporting 
 Act (15 U.S.C. 1681s) is amended--
 (A) by striking subsection (a) and inserting the 
 following new subsection:
 ``(a) Enforcement by Federal Trade Commission.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to section 1022 of the Consumer 
 Financial Protection Agency Act of 2009, compliance with the 
 requirements imposed under this title shall be enforced under 
 the Federal Trade Commission Act by the Federal Trade 
 Commission with respect to consumer reporting agencies and all 
 other persons subject thereto, except to the extent that 
 enforcement of the requirements imposed under this title is 
 specifically committed to some other government agency under 
 subsection (b) hereof. For the purpose of the exercise by the 
 Federal Trade Commission of its functions and powers under the 
 Federal Trade Commission Act, a violation of any requirement or 
 prohibition imposed under this title shall constitute an unfair 
 or deceptive act or practice in commerce in violation of 
 section 5(a) of the Federal Trade Commission Act and shall be 
 subject to enforcement by the Federal Trade Commission under 
 section 5(b) of such Act with respect to any consumer reporting 
 agency or person subject to enforcement by the Federal Trade 
 Commission pursuant to this subsection, irrespective of whether 
 that person is engaged in commerce or meets any other 
 jurisdictional tests in the Federal Trade Commission Act. The 
 Federal Trade Commission shall have such procedural, 
 investigative, and enforcement powers (subject to section 1022 
 of the Consumer Financial Protection Agency Act of 2009), 
 including the power to issue procedural rules in enforcing 
 compliance with the requirements imposed under this title and 
 to require the filing of reports, the production of documents, 
 and the appearance of witnesses as though the applicable terms 
 and conditions of the Federal Trade Commission Act were part of 
 this title. Any person violating any of the provisions of this 
 title shall be subject to the penalties and entitled to the 
 privileges and immunities provided in the Federal Trade 
 Commission Act as though the applicable terms and provisions 
 thereof were part of this title.
 ``(2) Civil money penalties.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to section 1022 of the 
 Consumer Financial Protection Agency Act of 2009, in 
 the event of a knowing violation, which constitutes a 
 pattern or practice of violations of this title, the 
 Commission may commence a civil action to recover a 
 civil penalty in a district court of the United States 
 against any person that violates this title. In such 
 action, such person shall be liable for a civil penalty 
 of not more than $2,500 per violation.
 ``(B) Factors in determining amount.--In 
 determining the amount of a civil penalty under 
 subparagraph (A), the court shall take into account the 
 degree of culpability, any history of prior such 
 conduct, ability to pay, effect on ability to continue 
 to do business, and such other matters as justice may 
 require.
 ``(3) Exception.--Notwithstanding paragraph (2), a court 
 may not impose any civil penalty on a person for a violation of 
 section 623(a)(1) unless the person has been enjoined from 
 committing the violation, or ordered not to commit the 
 violation, in an action or proceeding brought by or on behalf 
 of the Federal Trade Commission, and has violated the 
 injunction or order, and the court may not impose any civil 
 penalty for any violation occurring before the date of the 
 violation of the injunction or order.'';
 (B) by striking subsection (b) and inserting the 
 following new subsection:
 ``(b) Enforcement by Other Agencies.--Subject to section 1022 of 
the Consumer Financial Protection Agency Act of 2009, compliance with 
the requirements imposed under this title with respect to consumer 
reporting agencies, persons who use consumer reports from such 
agencies, persons who furnish information to such agencies, and users 
of information that are subject to subsection (d) of section 615 shall 
be enforced as follows:
 ``(1) Under section 8 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, 
 in the case of--
 ``(A) national banks, and Federal branches and 
 Federal agencies of foreign banks, by the head of the 
 agency responsible for chartering and regulating 
 national banks;
 ``(B) member banks of the Federal Reserve System 
 (other than national banks), branches and agencies of 
 foreign banks (other than Federal branches, Federal 
 agencies, and insured State branches of foreign banks), 
 commercial lending companies owned or controlled by 
 foreign banks, and organizations operating under 
 section 25 or 25A of the Federal Reserve Act, by the 
 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System;
 ``(C) banks insured by the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Corporation (other than members of the 
 Federal Reserve System, Federal savings associations, 
 and savings and loan holding companies) and insured 
 State branches of foreign banks, by the Board of 
 Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation; 
 and
 ``(D) Federal savings associations and savings and 
 loan holding companies, by the Director of the Office 
 of Thrift Supervision.
 ``(2) Under subtitle E of the Consumer Financial Protection 
 Agency Act of 2009, by the Agency in the case of a covered 
 person under that Act.
 ``(3) Under the Federal Credit Union Act, by the National 
 Credit Union Administration Board with respect to any Federal 
 credit union.
 ``(4) Under subtitle IV of title 49, United States Code, by 
 the Secretary of Transportation, with respect to all carriers 
 subject to the jurisdiction of the Surface Transportation 
 Board.
 ``(5) Under the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, by the 
 Secretary of Transportation with respect to any air carrier or 
 foreign air carrier subject to that Act.
 ``(6) Under the Packers and Stockyards Act, 1921 (except as 
 provided in section 406 of that Act), by the Secretary of 
 Agriculture with respect to any activities subject to that Act.
Any term used in paragraph (1) that is not defined in this title or 
otherwise defined in section 3(s) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act 
shall have the meaning given to such term in section 1(b) of the 
International Banking Act of 1978.'';
 (C) by striking subsection (e) and inserting the 
 following new subsection:
 ``(e) Regulatory Authority.--The Agency shall prescribe such 
regulations as necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act with 
respect to a covered person described in subsection (b)''; and
 (D) in the heading of subsection (g) by striking 
 ``FTC''.
 (8) Section 623.--Section 623 of the Fair Credit Reporting 
 Act (15 U.S.C. 1681s-2) is amended--
 (A) by amending subparagraph (a)(7)(D) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(D) Model disclosure.--
 ``(i) Duty of agency to prepare.--The 
 Agency shall prescribe a brief model disclosure 
 a financial institution may use to comply with 
 subparagraph (A), which shall not exceed 30 
 words.
 ``(ii) Use of model not required.--No 
 provision of this paragraph shall be construed 
 as requiring a financial institution to use any 
 such model form prescribed by the Agency.
 ``(iii) Compliance using model.--A 
 financial institution shall be deemed to be in 
 compliance with subparagraph (A) if the 
 financial institution uses any such model form 
 prescribed by the Agency, or the financial 
 institution uses any such model form and 
 rearranges its format.''.
 (B) by amending subsection (e) to read as follows:
 ``(e) Accuracy Guidelines and Regulations Required.--
 ``(1) Guidelines.--The Agency shall, with respect to the 
 entities that are subject to its enforcement authority under 
 section 621--
 ``(A) establish and maintain guidelines for use by 
 each person that furnishes information to a consumer 
 reporting agency regarding the accuracy and integrity 
 of the information relating to consumers that such 
 entities furnish to consumer reporting agencies, and 
 update such guidelines as often as necessary; and
 ``(B) prescribe regulations requiring each person 
 that furnishes information to a consumer reporting 
 agency to establish reasonable policies and procedures 
 or implementing the guidelines established pursuant to 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(2) Criteria.--In developing the guidelines required by 
 paragraph (1)(A), the Agency shall--
 ``(A) identify patterns, practices, and specific 
 forms of activity that can compromise the accuracy and 
 integrity of information furnished to consumer 
 reporting agencies;
 ``(B) review the methods (including technological 
 means) used to furnish information relating to 
 consumers to consumer reporting agencies;
 ``(C) determine whether persons that furnish 
 information to consumer reporting agencies maintain and 
 enforce policies to ensure the accuracy and integrity 
 of information furnished to consumer reporting 
 agencies; and
 ``(D) examine the policies and processes that 
 persons that furnish information to consumer reporting 
 agencies employ to conduct reinvestigations and correct 
 inaccurate information relating to consumers that has 
 been furnished to consumer reporting agencies.''
 (c) Equal Credit Opportunity Act.--
 (1) Section 701.--Section 701 of the Equal Credit 
 Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691) is amended by striking 
 ``Board'' each place such term appears and inserting 
 ``Agency''.
 (2) Section 702.--Section 702(c) of the Equal Credit 
 Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691a) is amended to read as 
 follows:
 ``(c) The term `Agency' means the Consumer Financial Protection 
Agency.''.
 (3) Section 703.--Section 703 of the Equal Credit 
 Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691b) is amended--
 (A) by striking subsection (b);
 (B) by redesignating paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), 
 and (5) of subsection (a) as subsections (a), (b), (c), 
 (d), and (e), respectively;
 (C) in subsection (c) (as so redesignated)--
 (i) by striking ``paragraph (2)'' and 
 inserting ``subsection (b)''; and
 (ii) by striking ``such paragraph'' and 
 inserting ``such subsection;''
 (D) in subsection (d) (as so redesignated)--
 (i) by striking ``subsection'' and 
 inserting ``section'''
 (ii) by striking ``Act'' and inserting 
 ``title''; and
 (iii) by striking ``this paragraph'' and 
 inserting ``this subsection''; and
 (E) by striking ``Board'' each place such term 
 appears in such section and inserting ``Agency''.
 (4) Section 704.--Section 704 of the Equal Credit 
 Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691c) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)--
 (i) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), 
 by striking ``Compliance'' and inserting 
 ``Subject to section 1022 of the Consumer 
 Financial Protection Agency Act of 2009, 
 compliance'';
 (ii) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking 
 ``Office of the Comptroller of the Currency'' 
 and inserting ``head of the agency responsible 
 for chartering and regulating national banks'';
 (iii) in paragraph (1)(B), by striking 
 ``and'' after the semicolon;
 (iv) in paragraph (1)(C), by inserting 
 ``and'' after the semicolon;
 (v) by inserting after subparagraph (C) of 
 paragraph (1) the following new subparagraph:
 ``(D) savings associations and savings and loan 
 holding companies by the Director of the Office of 
 Thrift Supervision;''; and
 (vi) by amending paragraph (2) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(2) Subtitle E of the Consumer Financial Protection 
 Agency Act of 2009, by the Agency in case of a covered person 
 under that Act.'';
 (B) by striking subsection (c) and inserting the 
 following new subsection:
 ``(c) Overall Enforcement Authority of Federal Trade Commission.--
Except to the extent that enforcement of the requirements imposed under 
this title is specifically committed to some other Government agency 
under subsection (a) and subject to section 1022 of the Consumer 
Financial Protection Agency Act of 2009, the Federal Trade Commission 
shall enforce such requirements. For the purpose of the exercise by the 
Federal Trade Commission of its functions and powers under the Federal 
Trade Commission Act, a violation of any requirement imposed under this 
title shall be deemed a violation of a requirement imposed under that 
Act. All of the functions and powers of the Federal Trade Commission 
under the Federal Trade Commission Act are available to the Commission 
to enforce compliance by any person with the requirements imposed under 
this title, irrespective of whether that person is engaged in commerce 
or meets any other jurisdictional tests in the Federal Trade Commission 
Act, including the power to enforce any rule prescribed by the Agency 
under this title in the same manner as if the violation had been a 
violation of a Federal Trade Commission trade regulation rule.''; and
 (C) in subsection (d), by striking ``Board'' and 
 inserting ``Agency''.
 (5) Section 704a.--Section 704A(a)(1) of the Equal Credit 
 Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691c-1(a)(1)) is amended in by 
 striking ``Board'' and inserting ``Agency''.
 (6) Section 705.--Section 705 of the Equal Credit 
 Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691d) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (f), by striking ``Board'' each 
 place such term appears and inserting ``Agency''; and
 (B) in subsection (g), by striking ``Board'' and 
 inserting ``Agency''.
 (7) Section 706.--Section 706(e) of the Equal Credit 
 Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691e(e)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``Board'' each place such term 
 appears and inserting ``Agency''; and
 (B) by striking ``Federal Reserve System'' and 
 inserting ``Consumer Financial Protection Agency''.
 (8) Section 707.--Section 707 of the Equal Credit 
 Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691f) is amended by striking 
 ``Board'' each place such term appears and inserting 
 ``Agency''.
 (d) Fair Debt Collection Practices Act.--
 (1) Section 803.--Section 803 of the Fair Debt Collection 
 Practices Act (15 U.S.C. 1692a) is amended--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), 
 (5), (6), (7), and (8) as paragraphs (2), (3), (4), 
 (5), (6), (7), (8), and (9), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting before paragraph (2) (as so 
 redesignated) the following new paragraph:
 ``(1) The term `Agency' means the Consumer Financial 
 Protection Agency.''.
 (2) Section 813.--Section 813(e) of the Fair Debt 
 Collection Practices Act (15 U.S.C. 1692k(e)) is amended by 
 striking ``Commission'' and inserting ``Agency''.
 (3) Section 814.--Section 814 of the Fair Debt Collection 
 Practices Act (15 U.S.C. 1692l) is amended--
 (A) by striking subsection (a) and inserting the 
 following new subsection:
 ``(a) Federal Trade Commission.--Subject to section 1022 of the 
Consumer Financial Protection Agency Act of 2009, compliance with this 
title shall be enforced by the Commission, except to the extent that 
enforcement of the requirements imposed under this title is 
specifically committed to another agency under subsection (b). For 
purpose of the exercise by the Commission of its functions and powers 
under the Federal Trade Commission Act, a violation of this title shall 
be deemed an unfair or deceptive act or practice in violation of that 
Act. All of the functions and powers of the Commission under the 
Federal Trade Commission Act are available to the Commission to enforce 
compliance by any person with this title, irrespective of whether that 
person is engaged in commerce or meets any other jurisdictional tests 
in the Federal Trade Commission Act, including the power to enforce the 
provisions of this title in the same manner as if the violation had 
been a violation of a Federal Trade Commission trade regulation 
rule.'';
 (B) in subsection (b)--
 (i) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), 
 by striking ``Compliance'' and inserting 
 ``Subject to section 1022 of the Consumer 
 Financial Protection Agency Act of 2009, 
 compliance''.
 (ii) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking 
 ``Office of the Comptroller of the Currency;'' 
 and inserting ``head of the agency responsible 
 for chartering and regulating national banks'';
 (iii) in paragraph (1)(B), by striking 
 ``and'' after the semicolon;
 (iv) in paragraph (1)(C), by inserting 
 ``and'' after the semicolon;
 (v) by inserting after subparagraph (C) of 
 paragraph (1) the following new subparagraph:
 ``(D) savings associations and savings and loan 
 holding companies by the Director of the Office of 
 Thrift Supervision;''; and
 (vi) by striking paragraph (2) and 
 inserting the following new paragraph:
 ``(2) subtitle E of the Consumer Financial Protection 
 Agency Act of 2009 by the Agency in the case of a covered 
 person under the Act''; and
 (C) in subsection (d), by striking ``Commission'' 
 and inserting ``Agency''.
 (4) Section 815.--Section 815 (15 U.S.C. 1692m) is amended 
 by striking ``Commission'' each place such term appears and 
 inserting ``Agency''.
 (5) Section 817.--Section 817 (15 U.S.C. 1692o) is amended 
 by striking ``Commission'' each place such term appears and 
 inserting ``Agency''.
 (e) Electronic Fund Transfer Act.--
 (1) Section 903.--Section 903 of the Electronic Fund 
 Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. 1693a) is amended--
 (A) by striking paragraph (3) and inserting the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(3) the term `Agency' means the Consumer Financial 
 Protection Agency;''; and
 (B) in paragraph (6), by striking ``Board'' and 
 inserting ``Agency''.
 (2) Section 904.--Section 904 of the Electronic Fund 
 Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. 1693b) is amended by striking ``Board'' 
 each place such term appears and inserting ``Agency''.
 (3) Section 905.--Section 905 of the Electronic Fund 
 Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. 1693c) is amended by striking ``Board'' 
 each place such term appears and inserting ``Agency''.
 (4) Section 906.--Section 906(b) of the Electronic Fund 
 Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. 1693d(b)) is amended by striking 
 ``Board'' and inserting ``Agency''.
 (5) Section 907.--Section 907(b) of the Electronic Fund 
 Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. 1693e(b)) is amended by striking 
 ``Board'' and inserting ``Agency''.
 (6) Section 908.--Section 908(f)(7) of the Electronic Fund 
 Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. 1693f(f)(7)) is amended by striking 
 ``Board'' and inserting ``Agency''.
 (7) Section 910.--Section 910(a)(1)(E) of the Electronic 
 Fund Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. 1693h(a)(1)(E)) is amended by 
 striking ``Board'' and inserting ``Agency''.
 (8) Section 911.--Section 911(b)(3) of the Electronic Fund 
 Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. 1693i(b)(3) is amended by striking 
 ``Board'' and inserting ``Agency''.
 (9) Section 915.--Section 915(d) of the Electronic Fund 
 Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. 1693m(d)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``Board'' each place such term 
 appears and inserting ``Agency''; and
 (B) by striking ``Federal Reserve System'' and 
 inserting ``Consumer Financial Protection Agency''.
 (10) Section 917.--Section 917 of the Electronic Fund 
 Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. 1693o) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)--
 (i) by striking ``Compliance'' and 
 inserting ``Subject to section 1022 of the 
 Consumer Financial Protection Agency Act of 
 2009, compliance'';
 (ii) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking 
 ``Office of the Comptroller of the Currency'' 
 and inserting ``head of the agency responsible 
 for chartering and regulating national banks''; 
 and
 (iii) by striking paragraph (2) and 
 inserting:
 ``(2) subtitle E of the Consumer Financial Protection 
 Agency Act of 2009, by the Agency in the case of a covered 
 person under that Act.''; and
 (B) by striking subsection (c) and inserting the 
 following new subsection:
 ``(c) Overall Enforcement Authority of the Federal Trade 
Commission.--Except to the extent that enforcement of the requirements 
imposed under this title is specifically committed to some other 
Government agency under subsection (a) and subject to section 1022 of 
the Consumer Financial Protection Agency Act of 2009, the Federal Trade 
Commission shall enforce such requirements. For the purpose of the 
exercise by the Federal Trade Commission of its functions and powers 
under the Federal Trade Commission Act, a violation of any requirement 
imposed under this title shall be deemed a violation of a requirement 
imposed under that Act. All of the functions and powers of the Federal 
Trade Commission under the Federal Trade Commission Act are available 
to the Commission to enforce compliance by any person subject to the 
jurisdiction of the Commission with the requirements imposed under this 
title, irrespective of whether that person is engaged in commerce or 
meets any other jurisdictional tests in the Federal Trade Commission 
Act.''.
 (11) Section 918.--Section 918 of the Electronic Fund 
 Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. 1693p) is amended by striking ``Board'' 
 each place such term appears and inserting ``Agency''.
 (12) Section 919.--Section 919 of the Electronic Fund 
 Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. 1693q) is amended by striking ``Board'' 
 each place such term appears and inserting ``Agency''.
 (13) Section 920.--Section 920 of the Electronic Fund 
 Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. 1693r) is amended by striking ``Board'' 
 each place such term appears and inserting ``Agency''.
 (f) Amendments to HOEPA Relating to the Truth in Lending Act.--
Section 158 of the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act of 1994 (15 
U.S.C. 1601 nt.) (relating to hearings on home equity lending) is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``Board of Governors of 
 the Federal Reserve System, in consultation with the Consumer 
 Advisory Council of the Board,'' and inserting ``Consumer 
 Financial Protection Agency, in consultation with the Advisory 
 Board to the Agency''; and
 (2) in subsection (b), by striking ``Board of Governors of 
 the Federal Reserve System'' and inserting ``Consumer Financial 
 Protection Agency''.
 (g) Amendment to the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 
2003 Relating to the Fair Credit Reporting Act.--Section 214(b)(1) of 
the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003 (15 U.S.C. 1681s-
3 nt.) is amended by striking ``The Federal banking agencies, the 
National Credit Union Administration, and the Commission, with respect 
to the entities that are subject to their respective enforcement 
authority under section 621 of the Fair Credit Reporting Act and'' and 
inserting ``The Consumer Financial Protection Agency, with respect to a 
person subject to the enforcement authority of the Agency, and''.

SEC. 185. AMENDMENTS TO THE EXPEDITED FUNDS AVAILABILITY ACT.

 (a) Section 605.--Section 605(f)(1) of the Expedited Funds 
Availability Act (12 U.S.C. 4004(f)(1)) is amended by inserting ``, in 
consultation with the Director of the Consumer Financial Protection 
Agency,''after ``Board''.
 (b) Section 609.--Section 609(a) of the Expedited Funds 
Availability Act (12 U.S.C. 4008(a)) is amended by inserting ``, in 
consultation with the Director of the Consumer Financial Protection 
Agency,''after ``Board''.

SEC. 186. AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE ACT.

 (a) Section 8.--Section 8(t) the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 
U.S.C. 1818(t)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(6) Referral to consumer financial protection 
 commission.--Each appropriate Federal banking agency shall make 
 a referral to the Consumer Financial Protection Agency when the 
 Federal banking agency has a reasonable belief that a violation 
 of an enumerated consumer law, as defined in section 1022(e)(2) 
 of the Consumer Financial Protection Agency Act of 2009, by any 
 insured depository institution or institution-affiliated party 
 within the jurisdiction of that appropriate Federal banking 
 agency.''.
 (b) Section 43.--Section 43 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act 
(12 U.S.C. 1831t) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (c), by striking ``Federal Trade 
 Commission'' and inserting ``Agency'';
 (2) in subsection (d), by striking ``Federal Trade 
 Commission'' and inserting ``Agency'';
 (3) in subsection (e)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``Federal Trade 
 Commission'' and inserting ``Agency''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(5) Agency.--The term `Agency' means the Consumer 
 Financial Protection Agency.''.
 (e) Section 43(f).--Section 43(f) of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Act (12 U.S.C. 1831t(f)) is amended--
 (1) by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(1) Limited enforcement authority.--Compliance with the 
 requirements of subsections (b), (c) and (e), and any 
 regulation prescribed or order issued under such subsection, 
 shall be enforced under the Consumer Financial Protection 
 Agency Act of 2009 by the Agency.''; and
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking subparagraph (C) and 
 inserting the following new subparagraph:
 ``(C) Limitation on state action while federal 
 action pending.--If the Agency has instituted an 
 enforcement action for a violation of this section, no 
 appropriate State supervisory may, during the pendency 
 of such action, bring an action under this section 
 against any defendant named in the complaint of the 
 Agency for any violation of this section that is 
 alleged in that complaint.''.

SEC. 187. AMENDMENTS TO THE GRAMM-LEACH-BLILEY ACT.

 (a) Section 504.--Section 504(a)(1) of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act 
(15 U.S.C. 6804(a)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``The Federal banking agencies, the 
 National Credit Union Administration, the Secretary of the 
 Treasury,'' and inserting ``The Consumer Financial Protection 
 Agency and''; and
 (2) by striking ``, and the Federal Trade Commission''.
 (b) Section 505.--
 (1) Section 505(a) of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (15 U.S.C. 
 6805(a)) is amended--
 (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by 
 striking ``This subtitle and the regulations prescribed 
 thereunder shall be enforced by'' and inserting 
 ``Subject to section 1022 of the Consumer Financial 
 Protection Agency Act of 2009, this subtitle and the 
 regulations prescribed under this title shall be 
 enforced by the Consumer Financial Protection 
 Agency,''; and
 (B) by inserting after paragraph (7) the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(8) Under the Consumer Financial Protection Agency Act of 
 2009, by the Consumer Financial Protection Agency in the case 
 of financial institutions and other covered persons subject to 
 the jurisdiction of the Agency under that Act, but not with 
 respect to the standards under section 501.''.
 (2) Section 505(b)(1) of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (15 
 U.S.C. 6805(b)(1)) is amended by inserting ``, other than the 
 Consumer Financial Protection Agency,'' after ``described in 
 subsection (a)''.

SEC. 188. AMENDMENTS TO THE HOME MORTGAGE DISCLOSURE ACT OF 1975.

 (a) Section 303.--Section 303 of the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act 
of 1975 (12 U.S.C. 2802) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), 
 and (6) as paragraphs (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), and (7), 
 respectively; and
 (2) by inserting before paragraph (2) (as so redesignated) 
 the following new paragraph:
 ``(1) The term `Agency' means the Consumer Financial 
 Protection Agency.''.
 (b) Universal Amendment Relating to Agency.--Except as provided in 
subsections (c), (d), (e), and (f), the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act of 
1975 (12 U.S.C. 2801-11) is amended by striking ``Board'' each place 
such term appears and inserting ``Agency''.
 (c) Section 304.--Section 304 of the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act 
of 1975 (12 U.S.C. 2803(h)) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)--
 (A) by striking ``and'' after the semicolon at the 
 end of paragraph (3);
 (B) by striking ``and gender'' in paragraph (4), 
 and inserting ``age, and gender'';
 (C) by striking the period at the end of paragraph 
 (4) and inserting a semicolon; and
 (D) by inserting after paragraph (4) the following 
 new paragraphs:
 ``(5) the number and dollar amount of mortgage loans 
 grouped according to the following measurements:
 ``(A) the total points and fees payable at 
 origination in connection with the mortgage as 
 determined by the Agency, taking into account 15 U.S.C. 
 1602(aa)(4);
 ``(B) the difference between the annual percentage 
 rate associated with the loan and a benchmark rate or 
 rates for all loans;
 ``(C) the term in months of any prepayment penalty 
 or other fee or charge payable on repayment of some 
 portion of principal or the entire principal in advance 
 of scheduled payments; and
 ``(D) such other information as the Agency may 
 require; and
 ``(6) the number and dollar amount of mortgage loans and 
 completed applications grouped according to the following 
 measurements:
 ``(A) the value of the real property pledged or 
 proposed to be pledged as collateral;
 ``(B) the actual or proposed term in months of any 
 introductory period after which the rate of interest 
 may change;
 ``(C) the presence of contractual terms or proposed 
 contractual terms that would allow the mortgagor or 
 applicant to make payments other than fully-amortizing 
 payments during any portion of the loan term;
 ``(D) the actual or proposed term in months of the 
 mortgage loan;
 ``(E) the channel through which application was 
 made, including retail, broker, and other relevant 
 categories;
 ``(F) as the Agency may determine to be 
 appropriate, a unique identifier that identifies the 
 loan originator as set forth in Section 1503 of the 
 Secure and Fair Enforcement for Mortgage Licensing Act 
 of 2008;
 ``(G) as the Agency may determine to be 
 appropriate, a universal loan identifier that 
 corresponds to the real property pledged or proposed to 
 be pledged as collateral;
 ``(H) as the Agency may determine to be 
 appropriate, the parcel number that corresponds to the 
 real property pledged or proposed to be pledged as 
 collateral;
 ``(I) the credit score of mortgage applicants and 
 mortgagors in such form as the Agency may proscribe; 
 and
 ``(J) such other information as the Agency may 
 require.'';
 (2) by striking subsection (h) and inserting the following 
 new subsection:
 ``(h) Submission to Agencies.--The data required to be disclosed 
under subsection (b) shall be submitted to the Agency and to the 
appropriate agency for each institution reporting under this title. 
Notwithstanding the requirement of section 304(a)(2)(A) for disclosure 
by census tract, the Agency, in cooperation with other appropriate 
regulators, including--
 ``(1) the head of the agency responsible for chartering and 
 regulating national banks for national banks and Federal 
 branches, Federal agencies of foreign banks, and savings 
 associations;
 ``(2) the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation for 
 depository institutions insured by the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Corporation (other than members of the Federal 
 Reserve System, Federal savings associations, and savings and 
 loan holding companies) and insured State branches of foreign 
 banks;
 ``(3) the Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision for 
 Federal savings associations and savings and loan holding 
 companies;
 ``(4) the National Credit Union Administration Board for 
 credit unions; and
 ``(5) the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development for 
 other lending institutions not regulated by the agencies 
 referred to in paragraphs (1) through (4), shall develop 
 regulations prescribing the format for such disclosures, the 
 method for submission of the data to the appropriate regulatory 
 agency, and the procedures for disclosing the information to 
 the public. These regulations shall also require the collection 
 of data required to be disclosed under subsection (b) with 
 respect to loans sold by each institution reporting under this 
 title, and, in addition, shall require disclosure of the class 
 of the purchaser of such loans. Any reporting institution may 
 submit in writing to the Agency or to the appropriate agency 
 such additional data or explanations as it deems relevant to 
 the decision to originate or purchase mortgage loans.'';
 (3) in subsection (i), by striking ``subsection (b)(4)'' 
 and inserting ``paragraphs (4), (5), and (6) of subsections 
 (b)'';
 (4) in subsection (j)--
 (A) by striking ``(as'' where such term appears in 
 paragraph (1) and inserting ``(containing loan-level 
 and application-level information relating to 
 disclosures required under subsections (a) and (b) and 
 as otherwise'';
 (B) by striking ``in the format in which such 
 information is maintained by the institution'' where 
 such term appears in paragraph (2)(A), and inserting 
 ``in such formats as the Agency may require'';
 (C) by inserting ``credit score or similar 
 measurement,'' after ``number,'' where such term 
 appears in paragraph (2)(B)(i); and
 (D) by striking paragraph (3) and inserting the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(3) Change of form not required.--A depository 
 institution meets the disclosure requirement of paragraph (1) 
 if the institution provides the information required under such 
 paragraph in such formats as the Agency may require.''; and
 (5) by striking paragraph (2) of subsection (m) and 
 inserting the following new paragraph:
 ``(2) Form of information.--In complying with paragraph 
 (1), a depository institution shall provide the person 
 requesting the information with a copy of the information 
 requested in such formats as the Agency may require.''.
 (d) Section 305.--Section 305 of the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act 
of 1975 (12 U.S.C. 2804) is amended--
 (1) by striking subsection (b) and inserting the following 
 new subsection:
 ``(b) Powers of Certain Other Agencies.--Compliance with the 
requirements imposed under this title shall be enforced under--
 ``(1) section 8 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, in 
 the case of--
 ``(A) national banks, and Federal branches and 
 Federal agencies of foreign banks, by the head of the 
 agency responsible for chartering and regulating 
 national banks;
 ``(B) member banks of the Federal Reserve System 
 (other than national banks), branches and agencies of 
 foreign banks (other than Federal branches, Federal 
 agencies, and insured State branches of foreign banks), 
 commercial lending companies owned or controlled by 
 foreign banks, and organizations operating under 
 section 25 or 25(a) of the Federal Reserve Act, by the 
 Board;
 ``(C) depository institutions insured by the 
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (other than 
 members of the Federal Reserve System, Federal savings 
 associations, and savings and loan holding companies) 
 and insured State branches of foreign banks, by the 
 Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Corporation; and
 ``(D) Federal savings associations, and savings and 
 loan holding companies, by the Director of the Office 
 of Thrift Supervision;
 ``(2) subtitle E of the Consumer Financial Protection 
 Agency Act of 2009, by the Agency in the case of a covered 
 person under that Act;
 ``(3) the Federal Credit Union Act, by the Administrator of 
 the National Credit Union Administration with respect to any 
 credit union; and
 ``(4) other lending institutions, by the Secretary of 
 Housing and Urban Development. The terms used in paragraph (1) 
 that are not defined in this title or otherwise defined in 
 section 3(s) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 
 1813(s)) shall have the meaning given to them in section 1(b) 
 of the International Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3101).
The terms used in paragraph (1) that are not defined in this title or 
otherwise defined in section 3(s) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act 
(12 U.S.C. 1813(s)) shall have the meaning given to them in section 
1(b) of the International Banking Act of 1978''; and
 (2) by inserting at the end of section 305 the following 
 new subsection:
 ``(d) Overall Enforcement Authority of the Consumer Financial 
Protection Agency.--Subject to section 1022 of the Consumer Financial 
Protection Agency Act of 2009, enforcement of the requirements imposed 
under this title is committed to each of the agencies under subsection 
(b). The Agency may exercise its authorities under the Consumer 
Financial Protection Agency Act of 2009 to exercise principal authority 
to examine and enforce compliance by any person with the requirements 
under this title.''.
 (e) Section 306.--Subsection 306(b) of the Home Mortgage Disclosure 
Act of 1975 (12 U.S.C. 2805(b)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(b) The Agency may, by regulation, exempt from the requirements 
of this title any State chartered depository institution within any 
State or subdivision of any state if the Agency determines that, under 
the law of such State or subdivision, that institution is subject to 
requirements substantially similar to those imposed under this title, 
and that such law contains adequate provisions for enforcement. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, compliance with 
the requirements imposed under this subsection shall be enforced by the 
head of the agency responsible for chartering and regulating national 
banks under section 8 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act in the case 
of national banks and savings association the deposits of which are 
insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.''.
 (f) Section 307.--Section 307 of the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act 
of 1975 (12 U.S.C. 2806) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 307. RESEARCH AND IMPROVED METHODS.

 ``(a) Enhanced Compliance in Economical Manner.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Director of the Consumer Financial 
 Protection Agency, with the assistance of the Secretary, the 
 Director of the Bureau of the Census, the Board of Governors of 
 the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Corporation, and such other persons as the Consumer Financial 
 Protection Agency deems appropriate, shall develop or assist in 
 the improvement of, methods of matching addresses and census 
 tracts to facilitate compliance by depository institutions in 
 as economical a manner as possible with the requirements of 
 this title.
 ``(2) Authorization of appropriation.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out 
 this subsection.
 ``(3) Authority of agency.--The Director of the Consumer 
 Financial Protection Agency is authorized to utilize, contract 
 with, act through, or compensate any person or agency in order 
 to carry out this subsection.
 ``(b) Recommendations to the Congress.--The Director of the 
Consumer Financial Protection Agency shall recommend to the Committee 
on Financial Services of the House of Representatives and the Committee 
on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate such additional 
legislation as the Director of the Consumer Financial Protection Agency 
deems appropriate to carry out the purpose of this title.''.

SEC. 189. AMENDMENTS TO DIVISION D OF THE OMNIBUS APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 
 2009.

 (a) Section 626(a) of title VI of division D of the Omnibus 
Appropriations Act, 2009 (15 U.S.C. 1638 nt.) (as amended by the Credit 
Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure Act of 2009) is 
amended--
 (1) by striking by paragraph (1) and inserting the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(1) The Consumer Financial Protection Agency shall have 
 authority to prescribe rules with respect to mortgage loans in 
 accordance with section 553 of title 5, United States Code. 
 Such rulemaking shall relate to unfair or deceptive acts or 
 practices regarding mortgage loans, which may include unfair or 
 deceptive acts or practices involving loan modification and 
 foreclosure rescue services. Any violation of a rule prescribed 
 under this subsection shall be treated as a violation of a rule 
 prohibiting unfair, deceptive, or abusive acts or practices 
 under the Consumer Financial Protection Agency Act of 2009.'';
 (2) by striking paragraph (2);
 (3) by striking paragraph (3); and
 (4) by striking paragraph (4) and inserting the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(2) The Consumer Financial Protection Agency shall 
 enforce the rules issued under paragraph (1) in the same 
 manner, by the same means, and with the same jurisdiction, 
 powers, and duties as though all applicable terms and 
 provisions of the Consumer Financial Protection Agency Act of 
 2009 were incorporated into and made part of this section.''.
 (b) Section 626(b) of title VI of division D of the Omnibus 
Appropriations Act, 2009 (15 U.S.C. 1638 nt.) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``Federal Trade Commission'' and inserting 
 ``Consumer Financial Protection Agency'';
 (2) by striking ``the Commission'' and inserting ``the 
 Consumer Financial Protection Agency''; and
 (3) by striking ``primary Federal regulatory'' and 
 inserting ``Consumer Financial Protection Agency''.

SEC. 190. AMENDMENTS TO THE REAL ESTATE SETTLEMENT PROCEDURES ACT OF 
 1974.

 (a) Section 3.--Section 3 of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures 
Act of 1974 (12 U.S.C. 2602) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new paragraph--
 ``(9) the term `Agency' means the Consumer Financial 
 Protection Agency.''.
 (b) Section 4.--Section 4 of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures 
Act of 1974 (12 U.S.C. 2603) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by striking the first sentence and 
 inserting the following: ``The Agency shall publish a single, 
 integrated disclosure for mortgage loan transactions, including 
 real estate settlement cost statements, which include the 
 disclosure requirements of this title, in conjunction with the 
 disclosure requirements of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 
 1601 note et seq.) that, taken together, may apply to 
 transactions subject to both or either law. The purpose of such 
 model disclosure shall be to facilitate compliance with the 
 disclosure requirements of those titles, and to aid the 
 borrower or lessee in understanding the transaction by 
 utilizing readily understandable language to simplify the 
 technical nature of the disclosures.'';
 (2) by striking ``Secretary'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``Agency''; and
 (3) by striking ``form'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``forms''.
 (c) Section 5.--Section 5 of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures 
Act of 1974 (12 U.S.C. 2604) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``Secretary'' each place such term appears, 
 and inserting ``Agency''; and
 (2) by striking the first sentence of subsection (a), and 
 inserting ``The Agency shall prepare and distribute booklets 
 jointly complying with the requirements of the Truth in Lending 
 Act (15 U.S.C. 1601 note et seq.) and the provisions of this 
 title, in order to help persons borrowing money to finance the 
 purchase of residential real estate better to understand the 
 nature and costs of real estate settlement services.''.
 (d) Section 6.--Section 6 of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures 
Act of 1974 (12 U.S.C. 2605) is amended by striking ``Secretary'' and 
inserting ``Agency''; and by striking ``by regulations that shall take 
effect not later than April 20, 1991,''.
 (e) Section 7.--Section 7 of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures 
Act of 1974 (12 U.S.C. 2606) is amended by striking ``Secretary'' and 
inserting ``Agency''.
 (f) Section 8.--Section 8(d)(4) of the Real Estate Settlement 
Procedures Act of 1974 (12 U.S.C. 2607(d)(4)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``The Secretary,'' and inserting ``The 
 Agency, the Secretary,''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new sentence: 
 ``However, to the extent that a Federal law authorizes the 
 Agency and other Federal and State agencies to enforce or 
 administer the law, the Agency shall have primary authority to 
 enforce or administer that Federal law in accordance with 
 section 1022 of the Consumer Financial Protection Agency Act of 
 2009.''.
 (g) Section 10.--Section 10(d) of the Real Estate Settlement 
Procedures Act of 1974 (12 U.S.C. 2609(d)) is amended by striking 
``Secretary'' and inserting ``Agency''.
 (h) Section 16.--Section 16 of the Real Estate Settlement 
Procedures Act of 1974 (12 U.S.C. 2614) is amended by inserting ``the 
Agency,'' before ``the Secretary''.
 (i) Section 18.--Section 18 of the Real Estate Settlement 
Procedures Act of 1974 (12 U.S.C. 2616) is amended by striking 
``Secretary'' and inserting ``Agency''.
 (j) Section 19.--Section 19 of the Real Estate Settlement 
Procedures Act of 1974 (12 U.S.C. 2617) is amended by striking 
``Secretary'' each place where it appears and inserting ``Agency''.

SEC. 191. AMENDMENTS TO THE RIGHT TO FINANCIAL PRIVACY ACT OF 1978.

 (a) Amendments to Section 1101.--Section 1101 of the Right to 
Financial Privacy Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3401) is amended--
 (1) by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(1) `financial institution' means any bank, savings 
 association, card issuer as defined in section 103(n) of the 
 Truth in Lending Act, credit union, or consumer finance 
 institution located in any State or territory of the United 
 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, Guam, American 
 Samoa, or the Virgin Islands;''; and
 (2) in paragraph (7)--
 (A) by redesignating subparagraphs (F), (G), (H), 
 and (I) as subparagraphs (G), (H), (I), and (J), 
 respectively; and
 (B) by inserting after subparagraph (E) the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(F) the Consumer Financial Protection Agency;''.
 (b) Amendments to Section 1112.--Section 1112(e) of the Right to 
Financial Privacy Act (12 U.S.C. 3412) is amended by striking ``and the 
Commodity Futures Trading Commission is permitted'' and inserting ``the 
Commodity Futures Trading Commission, and the Consumer Financial 
Protection Agency is permitted''.
 (c) Amendments to Section 1113.--Section 1113 of the Right to 
Financial Privacy Act (12 U.S.C. 3413) is amended by adding at the end 
the following new subsection--
 ``(r) Disclosure to the Consumer Financial Protection Agency.--
Nothing in this chapter shall apply to the examination by or disclosure 
to the Consumer Financial Protection Agency of financial records or 
information in the exercise of its authority with respect to a 
financial institution.''.

SEC. 192. AMENDMENTS TO THE SECURE AND FAIR ENFORCEMENT FOR MORTGAGE 
 LICENSING ACT OF 2008.

 (a) Section 1503.--Section 1503 of the Secure and Fair Enforcement 
for Mortgage Licensing Act of 2008 (12 U.S.C. 5102) is amended--
 (1) by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(1) Agency.--The term `Agency' means the Consumer 
 Financial Protection Agency.''; and
 (2) by striking paragraph (9) and inserting the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(9) Director.--The term `Director' means the Director of 
 the Consumer Financial Protection Agency.''.
 (b) Universal Amendments Relating to Agency.--The Secure and Fair 
Enforcement for Mortgage Licensing Act of 2008 (12 U.S.C. 5101 et seq.) 
is amended--
 (1) by striking ``a Federal banking agency'' each place 
 such term appears and inserting ``the Agency'';
 (2) by striking ``Federal banking agencies'' each place 
 such term appears and inserting ``Agency''; and
 (3) by striking ``Secretary'' each place such term appears 
 and inserting ``Director''.
 (c) Section 1507.--Section 1507 of the Secure and Fair Enforcement 
for Mortgage Licensing Act of 2008 (12 U.S.C. 5106) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(1) In general.--The Agency shall develop and maintain a 
 system for registering employees of a subsidiary that is owned 
 and controlled by a depository institution, and regulated by 
 the Agency as a registered loan originator with the Nationwide 
 Mortgage Licensing System and Registry. The system shall be 
 implemented before the end of a the 1-year period beginning 
 July 30, 2009.''; and
 (B) by striking ``appropriate Federal banking 
 agency and the Farm Credit Administration'' where such 
 term appears in paragraph (2) and inserting ``Agency'';
 (2) in subsection (b), by striking ``Federal banking 
 agencies, through the Financial Institutions Examination 
 Council and the Farm Credit Administration'', and inserting 
 ``Agency''; and
 (3) in subsection (c), by striking ``Federal banking 
 agencies'', and inserting ``Agency''.
 (d) Section 1508.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1508 of the Secure and Fair 
 Enforcement for Mortgage Licensing Act of 2008 (12 U.S.C. 5107) 
 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection--
 ``(f) Regulations.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Agency may prescribe regulations 
 setting minimum net worth or surety bond requirements for 
 residential mortgage loan originators and minimum requirements 
 for recovery funds paid into by loan originators.
 ``(2) Factors taken into account.--Such regulations shall 
 take into account the need to provide originators adequate 
 incentives to originate affordable and sustainable mortgage 
 loans as well as the need to ensure a competitive origination 
 market that maximizes consumers' access to affordable and 
 sustainable mortgage loans.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The heading for section 1508 of 
 the Secure and Fair Enforcement for Mortgage Licensing Act of 
 2008 is amended by striking ``secretary of housing and urban 
 development'' and inserting ``consumer financial protection 
 agency''.
 (e) Section 1510.--Section 1510 of the Secure and Fair Enforcement 
for Mortgage Licensing Act of 2008 (12 U.S.C. 5109) is amended to read 
as follows:

``SEC. 1510. FEES.

 ``The Agency, the Farm Credit Administration, and the Nationwide 
Mortgage Licensing System and Registry may charge reasonable fees to 
cover the costs of maintaining and providing access to information from 
the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry, to the extent 
that such fees are not charged to consumers for access to such system 
and registry.''.
 (f) Section 1513.--Section 1513 of the Secure and Fair Enforcement 
for Mortgage Licensing Act of 2008 (12 U.S.C. 5112) is amended to read 
as follows:

``SEC. 1513. LIABILITY PROVISIONS.

 ``The Agency, any State official or agency, or any organization 
serving as the administrator of the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing 
System and Registry or a system established by the Director under 
section 5108 of this title, or any officer or employee of any such 
entity, shall not by subject to any civil action or proceeding for 
monetary damages by reason of the good faith action or omission of any 
officer or employee of any such entity, while acting within the scope 
of office or employment, relating to the collection, furnishing, or 
dissemination of information concerning persons who are loan 
originators or are applying for licensing or registration as loan 
originators.''.
 (g) Section 1514.--The heading for section 1514 of the Secure and 
Fair Enforcement for Mortgage Licensing Act of 2008 (12 U.S.C. 5113) is 
amended by striking ``under hud backup licensing system'' and inserting 
``by the agency''.

SEC. 193. AMENDMENTS TO THE TRUTH IN SAVINGS ACT.

 (a) Section 263.--Section 263 of the Truth in Savings Act (12 
U.S.C. 4302) is amended in subsection (b) by striking ``Board'' each 
place such term appears and inserting ``Agency''.
 (b) Section 265.--Section 265 of the Truth in Savings Act (12 
U.S.C. 4304) is amended by striking ``Board'' each place such term 
appears and inserting ``Agency''.
 (c) Section 266.--Section 266(e) of the Truth in Savings Act is 
amended (12 U.S.C. 4305) by striking ``Board'' and inserting 
``Agency''.
 (d) Section 269.--Section 269 of the Truth in Savings Act (12 
U.S.C. 4308) is amended by striking ``Board'' each place such term 
appears and inserting ``Agency''.
 (e) Section 270.--Section 270 of the Truth in Savings Act (12 
U.S.C. 4309) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by striking ``Compliance'' and inserting 
 ``Subject to section 1022 of the Consumer Financial 
 Protection Agency Act of 2009, compliance'';
 (B) by striking subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) 
 and inserting the following new subparagraph:
 ``(A) by the head of the agency responsible for 
 chartering and regulating national banks for national 
 banks, and Federal branches and Federal agencies of 
 foreign banks;''; and
 (C) by adding at the end, the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(3) subtitle E of the Consumer Financial Protection 
 Agency Act of 2009, by the Agency in the case of a covered 
 person under that Act.''; and
 (2) in subsection (c), by striking ``Board'' and inserting 
 ``Agency''.
 (f) Section 272.--Section 272 of the Truth in Savings Act (12 
U.S.C. 4311) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``Board'' and inserting 
 ``Agency''; and
 (2) in subsection (b), by striking ``regulation prescribed 
 by the Board'' each place it appears and inserting ``regulation 
 prescribed by the Agency''.
 (g) Section 273.--Section 273 of the Truth in Savings Act (12 
U.S.C. 4312) is amended in the last sentence by striking ``Board'' and 
inserting ``Agency''.
 (h) Section 274.--Section 274 of the Truth in Savings Act (12 
U.S.C. 4313) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2) by striking ``Board'' and inserting 
 ``Agency''; and
 (2) by striking paragraph (4) and inserting the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(4) Agency.--The term `Agency' means the Consumer 
 Financial Protection Agency.''.

SEC. 194. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 The amendments made by sections 183 through 193 shall take effect 
on the designated transfer date.

 TITLE J--IMPROVEMENTS TO THE FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION ACT

SEC. 201. AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION ACT.

 (a) Section 5(a) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 
45(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(5) In any investigation or proceeding in which it 
 appears to the Commission that an unfair or deceptive act or 
 practice is being committed in connection with the marketing, 
 sale, provision or delivery of a consumer financial product or 
 service, the Commission shall consult and coordinate with the 
 Consumer Financial Protection Agency, as the agencies deem to 
 be appropriate.''.
 (b) Section 5(m)(1)(A) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 
U.S.C. 45(m)(1)(A)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``this Act or'' after ``violates'' the 
 first place it appears;
 (2) by inserting a comma after ``chapter'' and after 
 ``section)''; and
 (3) by inserting ``a violation of this Act or is'' before 
 ``prohibited''.
 (c) Section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45) is 
amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 ``(o) Unlawful Assistance.--It is unlawful for any person, 
knowingly or recklessly, to provide substantial assistance to another 
in violating any provision of this Act or of any other Act enforceable 
by the Commission that relates to unfair or deceptive acts or 
practices. Any such violation shall constitute an unfair or deceptive 
act or practice described in section 5(a)(1) of this Act.''.
 (d) Section 18 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 57a) 
is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1)(B), by adding after ``pursuant to 
 this section'' the following: ``or with regard to the 
 marketing, sale, provision or delivery to an individual, for 
 personal, family or household purposes, of a consumer financial 
 product or service that is subject to the jurisdiction of the 
 Consumer Financial Protection Agency under the Consumer 
 Financial Protection Agency Act of 2009'';
 (2) by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
 ``(b) Procedure Applicable.--When prescribing a rule under 
subsection (a)(1)(B) of this section, the Commission shall proceed in 
accordance with section 553 of Title 5 (without regard to any reference 
in such section to sections 556 and 557 of such title).'';
 (3) by striking subsections (c), (d)(1), (d)(2), (f), (i), 
 and (j), and redesignating subsections (e), (g) and (h) as (d), 
 (e) and (f);
 (4) by redesignating paragraph (d)(3) as subsection (c); 
 and
 (5) in subsection (e)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)(B), by striking ``the 
 transcript required by subsection (c)(5) of this 
 section,'';
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking everything 
 following ``error)''; and
 (C) in paragraph (5), by striking subparagraph (C).
 <all>