HR 2060 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2060
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to deny the deduction for any
removal or liability cost attributable to an oil spill from a vessel in
navigable waters.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
April 18, 1989
Ms. SLAUGHTER of New York (for herself, Mr. DEFAZIO, and Mr. JONTZ) introduced
the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Ways and Means
A BILL
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to deny the deduction for any
removal or liability cost attributable to an oil spill from a vessel in
navigable waters.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That (a) section 162 of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to trade or business expenses) is
 amended by redesignating subsection (m) as subsection (n) and by inserting
 after subsection (l) the following new subsection:
 `(m) DENIAL OF DEDUCTION FOR COSTS RESULTING FROM CERTAIN OIL SPILLS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- If--
 `(A) any oil is being transported by or for the taxpayer in a vessel, and
 `(B) there is a spill (or other discharge) of such oil from such vessel
 onto waters subject to the Clean Water Act,
no deduction shall be allowed for any removal or liability cost resulting
from such spill (or other discharge).
 `(2) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this subsection--
 `(A) REMOVAL OR LIABILITY COST- The term `removal or liability cost' means--
 `(i) any cost incurred in removing or attempting to remove the oil or
 in taking other measures to reduce or mitigate damages from the spill
 (or other discharge), and
 `(ii) any cost attributable to liabilities for damages resulting from
 the spill (or other discharge) or incurred in determining the amount of
 such liabilities.
 `(B) OIL- The term `oil' means crude oil and any other petroleum product.
 `(3) EXCLUSIONS- This subsection shall not apply where any owner or operator
 can prove that a discharge was caused solely by (A) an act of God, (B)
 an act of war, (C) negligence on the part of the United States Government,
 or (D) an act or omission of a third party without regard to whether any
 such act or omission was or was not negligent, or any combination of the
 foregoing clauses.'
 (b) The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to amounts paid or
 incurred in taxable years beginning after December 31, 1988.