HR 3560 SC
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 3560
To protect the cable consumer.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
OCTOBER 15, 1991
Mr. ECKART (for himself, Mr. COOPER, and Mr. SHAYS) introduced the following
bill; which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
March 2, 1992
Additional sponsors: Mr. WEISS, Mr. MAZZOLI, Mr. MURPHY, Mr. GORDON, and
Mr. Ramstad
A BILL
To protect the cable consumer.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Cable Consumer Protection Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds and declares the following:
 (1) Although the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 was intended to
 `promote competition in cable communications', competition has failed
 to develop. For a variety of reasons, most cable television subscribers
 have no opportunity to select between competing cable systems. Without the
 presence of another mutltichannel video programming distributor, a cable
 system faces no local competition. The result is undue market power for
 the cable operator as compared to that of consumers and video programmers.
 (2) The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as implemented by the
 Federal Communications Commission, prohibits any direct scrutiny of rates
 by States and franchising authorities in an overwhelming number of cable
 franchise areas. Rates for cable television services have been deregulated
 in approximately 97 percent of all franchises since December 29, 1986. Even
 under the Federal Communications Commission's newly modified rules governing
 local rate regulation, scheduled to go into effect on October 25, 1991,
 more than two-thirds of the Nation's cable subscribers will still have
 no protection from unreasonable rates. Cable consumers therefore are not
 protected by either competition or regulation.
 (3) Since 1986, when the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 became
 fully effective, thereby restricting States' and franchising authorities'
 ability to regulate directly the rates charged by the cable television
 industry, cable customers have been adversely affected by increased
 prices. According to the General Accounting Office, between December 1986
 and April 1991, the monthly price for the lowest priced basic cable service
 increased 56 percent and the most popular basic cable service increased 61
 percent. During the same period, the Consumer Price Index only increased
 17.9 percent. Moreover, according to an August 1991 study by an economist
 in the Antitrust Division, United States Department of Justice, on average,
 at least 45 to 50 percent of the price increases since deregulation are
 due to the exercise of market power by cable operators.
 (4) There has been a substantial increase in the penetration of cable
 television systems over the past decade, with cable television services now
 available to 71,300,000 of 92,100,000 households with televisions. Nearly
 54,000,000 households, over 58 percent of the households with televisions,
 subscribe to cable television, and this percentage is almost certain to
 increase. As a result of this growth, the cable television industry has
 become a dominant nationwide video medium.
 (5) The cable industry has become highly concentrated. The potential
 effects of such concentration are barriers to entry for new programmers
 and a reduction in the number of media voices available to consumers.
 (6) The cable television industry has become vertically integrated;
 cable operators and cable programmers often have common ownership. As
 a result, cable operators have the incentive and ability to favor their
 affiliated programmers. This could make it more difficult for noncable
 affiliated programmers to secure carriage on cable systems. Vertically
 integrated program suppliers also have the incentive and ability to favor
 their affiliated cable operators over nonaffiliated cable operators and
 programming distributors using other technologies. Vertical integration
 also has the potential of hurting small locally owned cable systems.
 (7) Customers also have complained continually about the quality of service
 they receive from cable operators in the absence of competition from another
 multichannel video provider. The Federal Communications Commission has
 concluded that `there currently is insufficient competition to provide a
 check on the quality of service offered by cable operators and responsive
 measures thus are necessary to ensure that consumers receive adequate
 service quality.'.
 (8) There is a substantial governmental and First Amendment interest in
 promoting a diversity of views provided through multiple technology media.
 (9) The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, in its amendments to the
 Communications Act of 1934, limited the regulatory authority of franchising
 authorities over cable operators. Franchising authorities are finding it
 difficult under the current regulatory scheme to deny renewals to cable
 systems that are not adequately serving cable subscribers.
 (10) Local governments are unreasonably exposed to liability for monetary
 damages for exercising their right to regulate cable television systems.
 (11) The public interest would be served by the development of competition in
 the marketplace for video programming and by encouraging new multichannel
 video programming distribution technology. The development of such
 competition will be fostered by ensuring access to video programming to
 multichannel video programming distributors other than cable operators.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 (a) BASIC CABLE SERVICE- Section 602(2) of the Communications Act of 1934
 (47 U.S.C. 522(2)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(2) the term `basic cable service' means any service tier or tiers which
 include--
 `(A) the retransmission of local television broadcast signals;
 `(B) public, educational, and governmental channels; or
 `(C) any other video programming services (except those programming services
 offered on a per channel or per program basis that are not significantly
 supported by revenues from advertisements);'.
 (b) ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS- Section 602 of the Communications Act of 1934
 (47 U.S.C. 522) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (15);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (16) and inserting in
 lieu thereof a semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraphs:
 `(17) the term `effective competition' means that--
 `(A) fewer than 30 percent of the households in the cable community
 subscribe to the cable service of a cable system; or
 `(B) the cable community is--
 `(i) served by at least two unaffiliated multichannel video programming
 distributors each of which make available comparable video programming to
 at least 80 percent of the households in the cable community; and
 `(ii) the number of households subscribing to programming services offered
 by multichannel video programming distributors other than the largest
 multichannel video programming distributor exceeds 30 percent of the
 households in the cable community;
 `(18) the term `available to a household' when used in reference to
 a multichannel video programming distributor means (A) a particular
 household which is a subscriber or customer of the distributor or (B)
 a particular household which is actively and currently sought as a
 subscriber or customer by a multichannel video programming distributor
 and which is capable of receiving the service offered by the multichannel
 video programming distributor;
 `(19) the term `cable community' means all of the households in the
 geographic area in which a cable system has been granted a franchise to
 provide cable service;
 `(20) the term `multichannel video programming distributor' means a person
 such as, but not limited to, a cable operator, a multichannel multipoint
 distributor of video programming, or a distributor or packager of video
 programming directly to the home via fixed service satellite or direct
 broadcast satellite, who makes available for purchase, by subscribers or
 customers, multiple channels of video programming; and
 `(21) the term `video programmer' means a person engaged in the production,
 creation, or wholesale distribution of a video programming service for
 sale.'.
SEC. 4. PROTECTION AGAINST MONOPOLY RATES.
 Section 623 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 543) is amended
 to read as follows:
`SEC. 623. REGULATION OF RATES.
 `(a) LIMITATION-
 `(1) GENERAL LIMITATION- Any Federal agency or franchising authority may
 not regulate the rates (including, but not limited to, all fees, charges,
 and deposits) for the provision of cable service, except to the extent
 provided under this section and section 612.
 `(2) EXCEPTIONS- Notwithstanding paragraph (1) of this subsection, the
 Commission or a franchising authority certified under subsection (b)(1)
 may regulate the rates for the provision of basic cable service, including
 rates for--
 `(A) the installation, rental or sale of equipment (including, but not
 limited to, converters and remote control devices) used for the receipt
 or use of basic cable service; and
 `(B) other basic cable-related services (including, but not limited to,
 changes in service packages or tiers, disconnection and reconnection,
 additional outlets, and service and repair calls).
 `(b) REGULATION OF BASIC CABLE SERVICE RATES-
 `(1) FRANCHISING AUTHORITY REGULATION IN ABSENCE OF EFFECTIVE COMPETITION-
 A franchising authority, upon written certification to the Commission,
 may regulate rates (including, but not limited to, all fees, charges,
 and deposits) for basic cable service in any cable system which is not
 subject to effective competition to ensure that they are reasonable.
 `(2) COMMISSION RESPONSIBILITY- The Commission shall ensure that the rates
 (including, but not limited to, all fees, charges, and deposits) for basic
 cable service in any cable system not subject to effective competition and
 not subject to regulation by a franchising authority pursuant to subsection
 (b)(1), are reasonable.
 `(3) FRANCHISING AUTHORITY CERTIFICATION REQUIRED- A franchising authority
 shall be deemed to be authorized to regulate rates for cable service
 pursuant to subsection (b)(1) upon the filing of written certification that--
 `(A) the franchising authority has administrative structures or procedures
 in place that ensure that uniform standards will be applied in a consistent
 manner in determining whether rates for cable service are reasonable; and
 `(B) procedural laws and regulations applicable to determinations of
 whether rates for cable service are reasonable, provide a reasonable
 opportunity for comment by interested parties and provide at least the
 level of protection to consumers as provided by the Commission.
If the Commission disapproves a franchising authority's certification,
the Commission shall notify the franchising authority of any revisions or
modifications necessary to obtain approval.
 `(4) FACTORS FOR CONSIDERATION- In determining whether the rate for a basic
 cable service offered by a cable operator is reasonable, the Commission or
 a franchising authority shall consider, among other factors, the following:
 `(A) The number of signals included in the service for which a rate is
 being established.
 `(B) The direct cost, if any, paid by the cable operator to obtain, transmit,
 or otherwise provide the signals included in each service for which a rate
 is being established, and changes in such costs.
 `(C) The revenues, if any, received by a cable operator from a supplier
 of programming or advertising carried as part of the service for which a
 rate is being established, and changes in such revenues.
 `(D) Such portion of the joint and common costs of the cable operator
 (including the costs of constructing, maintaining, and improving cable system
 facilities, meeting customer service and signal quality requirements, and
 fulfilling the cable operator's obligations pursuant to section 611 of the
 Communications Act of 1934 and other provisions of the franchise agreement
 not attributable to a particular service) as is properly allocable to
 providing the signals included in the cable service for which a rate is
 being established, and changes in such costs.
 `(E) Whether the cable operator has substantially complied with the terms
 and conditions of the franchise agreement.
 `(F) The rates charged by the cable operator for other cable services in
 the franchise area.
 `(G) Local conditions that may affect the reasonableness of a rate.
 `(H) Rates for comparable cable systems subject to effective competition,
 if any, that offer comparable services, taking into account, among other
 factors, similarities in facilities, the number of cable channels, the
 number of cable subscribers, and local conditions.
 `(5) CHALLENGES TO FRANCHISING AUTHORITY REGULATION- A cable operator or
 other interested party, after two years following written certification
 by a franchising authority pursuant to paragraph (3) of this subsection,
 may file a petition challenging regulation of rates for basic cable service
 by a franchising authority. If the petition establishes a prima facie case
 that the franchising authority has repeatedly acted in a manner materially
 inconsistent with the requirements of paragraph (3), after having received
 written notice from the cable operator specifying both such materially
 inconsistent conduct by the franchising authority, and the manner in which
 such actions by the franchising authority have actually prejudiced the
 cable operator, the Commission shall review such regulation of rates for
 basic cable service by the franchising authority. If the Commission finds,
 after notice to the franchising authority and a reasonable opportunity for
 the franchising authority to comment, that the franchising authority has
 repeatedly acted in a manner materially inconsistent with the requirements
 in paragraph (3), the Commission shall so inform the franchising authority
 and shall inform the franchising authority that its right to regulate
 rates may be revoked if such inconsistency is not cured. After such
 notice and a reasonable period and opportunity to cure any inconsistency,
 the Commission may order such relief, including decertification of the
 franchising authority, as it shall deem proper. A franchising authority
 whose right to regulate rates is revoked under this paragraph may apply
 for recertification pursuant to paragraph (3) six months from the effective
 date of the Commission's determination.
 `(c) RATE DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED- It shall be unlawful for any cable
 operator, directly or indirectly, to unreasonably discriminate among
 subscribers or potential subscribers of cable service in connection with
 the services offered or the rates charged for those services; provided that
 nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit a franchising
 authority from enforcing ordinance or franchise provisions established
 pursuant to this title, including, but not limited to sections 611, 624,
 and 632 of this title.
 `(d) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this title shall be construed as
 forbidding any Federal agency or franchising authority from--
 `(1) prohibiting discrimination among customers of cable service; or
 `(2) requiring and regulating the installation, sale or rental of
 equipment which facilitates the reception of cable service by persons
 with disabilities.
 `(e) ANNUAL FINANCIAL REPORTS- Within 180 days of the date of enactment
 of the Cable Consumer Protection Act of 1991, the Commission shall, by
 regulation, require cable operators to file, on at least an annual basis,
 such financial information as may be needed for purposes of administering
 and enforcing this section. A cable operator shall provide all such financial
 information to a franchising authority certified to regulate rates pursuant
 to subsections (b)(1) and (b)(3). Nothing in this title shall prohibit
 a franchising authority from requiring a cable operator to furnish such
 additional information as may be necessary to ensure that cable rates are
 reasonable. Nothing in this title shall prohibit a franchising authority
 from requiring a cable operator to provide financial information for any
 other lawful purpose.
 `(f) CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS- Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
 limit the power of a franchising authority to impose and enforce customer
 service standards which may cover items described in section 623(a).'.
SEC. 5. SIGNAL QUALITY.
 Section 624(e) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 544(e)) is
 amended to read as follows:
 `(e) Within one year after the date of enactment of the Cable Consumer
 Protection Act of 1991, the Commission shall, after notice and opportunity
 for comment, issue rules that establish minimum technical standards relating
 to cable systems' technical operation and signal quality, including testing
 procedures used to measure compliance with such standards. The Commission
 periodically shall update such standards and procedures to reflect
 improvements in technology. A franchising authority may require by law,
 regulation, or as part of a franchise (including the modification, renewal,
 or transfer thereof), provisions for the enforcement of the standards and
 procedures prescribed by the Commission under this subsection. Nothing in
 this section shall prohibit a franchising authority, as a matter of law or
 regulation, or as part of a franchise (including the modification, renewal,
 or transfer thereof) from establishing and enforcing technical standards
 and procedures that exceed the standards prescribed by the Commission
 under this section or are not addressed by the standards or procedures
 set by the Commission under this section.'.
SEC. 6. CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS.
 (a) AUTHORITY TO EXCEED COMMISSION STANDARDS- Section 632(a) of the
 Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 552(a)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `may establish and' after `authority'; and
 (2) by inserting immediately after `operator' the first place it appears
 the following: `that (A) either exceed the standards set by the Commission
 under this section or address matters not addressed by the standards set
 by the Commission under this section, or (B) exist prior to the adoption
 by the Commission of rules pursuant to subsection (d)(1) of this section'.
 (b) COMMISSION STANDARDS REQUIRED- Section 632 of the Communications Act
 of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 552) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new subsection:
 `(d)(1) The Commission, within 180 days after the date of enactment
 of this subsection, shall, after notice and an opportunity for comment,
 issue rules that establish customer service standards that ensure that all
 subscribers are fairly served. Such standards shall include, at a minimum,
 requirements governing--
 `(A) cable system office hours and customer service representative
 availability (whether in person or by telephone);
 `(B) installations, outages, service calls, and response time to service
 complaints and requests (whether in person or by telephone);
 `(C) billing and collection practices between the cable operator and
 the customer (including, but not limited to, standards governing bills,
 refunds, credits and service terminations);
 `(D) disclosure of all available services, tiers, prices, rates, and
 rights available to customers, and changes in such services, tiers, prices,
 rates and rights; and
 `(E) subscriber complaint resolution procedures, including notifying
 cable subscribers of grievance procedures and of regulatory bodies with
 the right to review customer complaints.
Thereafter the Commission shall regularly review the standards and make such
modifications as may be necessary to ensure that subscribers are fairly
served. A franchising authority may enforce the standards adopted by the
Commission.
 `(2) In addition to the provisions of subsection (a) and this subsection,
 nothing in this title shall be construed to prevent the enforcement of any
 municipal law or regulation, or any State law, concerning customer service
 that imposes customer service requirements that exceed the standards set
 by the Commission under this section, or address matters not addressed by
 the standards set by the Commission under this section.'.
SEC. 7. NONDISCRIMINATION WITH RESPECT TO VIDEO PROGRAMMING.
 Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 is amended by adding at the
 end of part II the following new sections:
`NONDISCRIMINATION WITH RESPECT TO VIDEO PROGRAMMING
 `SEC. 614. (a) A video programmer who licenses video programming for
 national or regional distribution--
 `(1) shall not unreasonably refuse to deal with any multichannel video
 programming distributor; and
 `(2) shall not discriminate in the price, terms, and conditions in the sale
 of the video programmer's programming among cable systems, cable operators,
 or other multichannel video programming distributors.
 `(b) A video programmer who licenses video programming for national or
 regional distribution shall make programming available on similar price,
 terms, and conditions to all cable systems, cable operators, or their
 agents or buying groups; except that such video programmer may--
 `(1) impose reasonable requirements for creditworthiness, offering of
 service, and financial stability;
 `(2) establish different price, terms, and conditions to take into account
 differences in cost in the creation, sale, delivery, or transmission of
 video programming;
 `(3) establish price, terms and conditions which take into account economies
 of scale or other cost savings reasonably attributable to the number of
 subscribers served by the distributor; and
 `(4) permit price differentials which are made in good faith to meet the
 equally low price of a competitor.
 `(c) The Commission shall prescribe rules and regulations to implement
 this section. The Commission's rules shall--
 `(1) provide for an expedited review of any complaints made pursuant to
 this section; and
 `(2) provide for penalties to be assessed against any person filing a
 frivolous complaint pursuant to this section.
 `(d) Any person who encrypts any C-band satellite cable programming for
 private viewing shall make such programming available for private viewing
 by C-band receive-only home satellite antenna users.
 `(e) This section shall not apply to the signal of an affiliate of a national
 television broadcast network or other television broadcast signal that is
 retransmitted by satellite and shall not apply to any internal satellite
 communication of any broadcaster, broadcast network, or cable network.
 `(f) For purposes of this section, any video programmer who licenses video
 programming for distribution to more than one cable community shall be
 considered a regional distributor of video programming. Nothing contained
 in this section shall require any person who licenses video programming
 for national or regional distribution to make such programming available
 in any geographic area beyond which such programming has been authorized
 or licensed for distribution.
`NONDISCRIMINATION WITH RESPECT TO SATELLITE CARRIERS
 `SEC. 615. A fixed service satellite carrier that provides service pursuant
 to section 119 of title 17, United States Code--
 `(1) shall not unreasonably refuse to deal with any distributor of video
 programming in the provision of such service to C-band home satellite earth
 stations qualified to receive such service under section 119 of title 17,
 United States Code; and
 `(2) shall not discriminate in the price, terms, and conditions of the
 sale of such service among distributors to C-band home satellite earth
 stations qualified to receive such signals under section 119 of title 17,
 United States Code, or between such distributors and other multichannel
 video programming distributors.
`AGREEMENTS BETWEEN CABLE OPERATORS AND VIDEO PROGRAMMERS
 `SEC. 616. Within one year after the date of enactment of this section, the
 Commission shall establish regulations governing program carriage agreements
 and related practices between cable operators and video programmers. Such
 regulations shall--
 `(1) include provisions designed to prevent a cable operator or other
 multichannel video programming distributor from requiring a financial
 interest in a program service as a condition for carriage on one or more
 of such operator's systems;
 `(2) contain provisions designed to prevent a multichannel video
 programming distributor from engaging in conduct the effect of which is
 to unreasonably restrain the ability of an unaffiliated video programmer
 to compete fairly by discriminating in video programming distribution
 on the basis of affiliation or nonaffiliation in the selection, terms,
 or conditions for carriage of video programmers;
 `(3) provide for expedited review of any complaints made by a video
 programmer pursuant to this section;
 `(4) provide for appropriate penalties and remedies for violations of this
 subsection, including carriage;
 `(5) provide penalties to be assessed against any person filing a frivolous
 complaint pursuant to this section;
 `(6) include provisions designed to prohibit any person seeking to obtain
 satellite-distributed programming for distribution or resale from entering
 into, extending, renewing, or continuing a contract or agreement for the
 distribution or sale of any satellite-distributed programming service which
 has the purpose or effect of establishing an exclusive distributorship
 for such programming service to consumers within an area for which a cable
 franchise has been awarded, unless--
 `(a) the particular programming service is not necessary to compete
 effectively within the franchise area; or
 `(b) such programming service was offered at nondiscriminatory prices,
 terms and conditions to all of the competitors who request such programming
 in writing without regard to the type of technology the competitor would
 use to deliver the programming to home viewers; and
 `(7) include provisions designed to prohibit a cable programmer from
 entering into, extending, renewing or continuing a contract or agreement
 for the distribution or sale of its programming which has the purpose or
 effect of prohibiting a cable operator or a multichannel video programming
 distributor from distributing or buying other programming, unless if there
 is a comparable programmer seeking access, such programmer was offered
 access at nondiscriminatory prices, terms and conditions and the programmer
 sought such access in writing.'.
SEC. 8. LIMITATION OF FRANCHISING AUTHORITY LIABILITY.
 Part III of title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 621 et
 seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new section:
SEC. 628. LIMITATION OF LIABILITY.
 `(a) LIMITATION TO INJUNCTIVE AND DECLARATORY RELIEF- In any court
 proceeding pending on the date of enactment of this section, or initiated
 after such date, involving any claim against a franchising authority or
 other governmental entity, or any official, member, employee, or agent of
 such authority or entity, arising from the regulation of cable services
 or a decision of approval or disapproval with respect to a grant, renewal,
 transfer or amendment of a franchise, so long as any such action or actions
 were contemplated by, or reasonably foreseeable under, applicable Federal,
 State, or local law, or the franchise, any relief, to the extent such
 relief is provided by this title or any other provision of Federal, State,
 or local law, shall be limited to injunctive and declaratory relief.
 `(b) EXCEPTION- Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the
 relief authorized with respect to any claim against a franchising authority
 or other governmental entity, or any official, member, employee or agent of
 such authority or entity, to the extent such claim involves discrimination
 on the basis of race, color, sex, age, religion, national origin or handicap.
 `(c) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this section shall be construed as
 creating or authorizing liability of any kind, under the Constitution of
 the United States or any law, for any action or failure to act relating to
 cable services, or for a decision of approval or disapproval with respect to
 a grant, renewal, transfer or amendment of a franchise, by any franchising
 authority or other governmental entity, or any official, member, employee,
 or agent of such authority or entity.'.
SEC. 9. FRANCHISE RENEWAL.
 (a) INITIATION OF RENEWAL PROCEDURES- Section 626(a) of the Communications
 Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 546(a)) is amended by adding at the end of the
 subsection the following: `If a franchising authority does not initiate
 proceedings under this subsection on its own initiative, submission of a
 timely written renewal notice by the cable operator specifically requesting
 a franchising authority to initiate the formal renewal process under
 this section is required for the cable operator to invoke the renewal
 procedures set forth in subsections (a) through (g) of this section;
 except that nothing in this section requires a franchising authority to
 commence the renewal proceedings during the 6-month period which begins
 with the 36th month before the franchise expiration.'.
 (b) REQUESTS FOR RENEWAL PROPOSALS- Section 626(b)(1) of the Communications
 Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 546(b)(1)) is amended by striking all after the
 first comma and inserting the following: `as determined by the franchising
 authority, the franchising authority shall issue a written request for a
 renewal proposal.'.
 (c) RENEWAL PROCEDURES- (1) Section 626(c)(1) of the Communications Act
 of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 546(c)(1)) is amended--
 (A) by adding after `franchise' the first time it appears the following:
 `submitted in response to a written request for a renewal proposal issued
 pursuant to subsection (b)';
 (B) by striking `completion of any proceedings under subsection (a)'
 and inserting `date of the submission of the cable operator's proposal in
 response to a written request for a renewal proposal issued pursuant to
 subsection (b)'; and
 (C) by striking `and' at the end of subparagraph (C), by striking the
 period at the end of subparagraph (D) and inserting `; and', and by adding
 at the end thereof the following new subparagraph:
 `(E) any other factors reasonably determined by the franchising authority
 to be relevant to the public interest in cable service.'.
 (2) Section 626(c)(1)(A) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 546(c)(1)(A)) is amended--
 (A) by striking `has' and inserting `and its predecessors have'; and
 (B) by inserting before the semicolon `throughout the franchise term'.
 (3) Section 626(c)(1)(B) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 546(c)(1)(B)) is amended--
 (A) by inserting `and its predecessor's' after `operator's';
 (B) by striking `, quality, or level' and inserting `or quality'; and
 (C) by inserting before the semicolon `throughout the franchise term'.
 (d) GROUNDS FOR DENIAL- Section 626(d) of the Communications Act of 1934
 (47 U.S.C. 546(d)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting after the word `renewal' the first time it appears the
 following: `which has been submitted in response to a request for a renewal
 proposal issued pursuant to subsection (b)'; and
 (2) by amending the second sentence thereof to read as follows: `A
 franchising authority may not base denial of renewal on a failure to
 substantially comply with the material terms of the franchise under
 subsection (c)(1)(A) of this section if--
 `(1) the franchising authority specifically, expressly and in writing waives
 its right to object to the conduct constituting a failure to substantially
 comply with the material terms of the franchise which is the grounds for
 denying renewal of the franchise, or
 `(2) if the cable operator demonstrates by a preponderance of the evidence
 that it had no actual knowledge, and no reason to know, that its conduct
 failed substantially to comply with the material terms of the franchise,
 and that its lack of knowledge or reason to know that its conduct failed
 substantially to comply with the material terms of the franchise actually
 prejudiced its ability to comply with those material terms.'.
 (e) APPEAL OF DENIALS- Section 626(e)(2) of the Communications Act of 1934
 (47 U.S.C. 546(e)(2)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting immediately before the semicolon in subparagraph (A)
 the following `and such failure to comply actually prejudiced the cable
 operator'; and
 (2) by striking `not supported by a preponderance of the evidence' in
 subparagraph (B) and inserting `arbitrary and capricious'.
 (f) ALTERNATIVE RENEWALS- Section 626(h) of the Communications Act of 1934
 (47 U.S.C. 546(h)) is amended by inserting immediately after the second
 sentence the following new sentence: `In addition, the provisions of
 subsections (a) through (g) of this section do not apply to any renewal
 proceeding which has not been commenced pursuant to subsection (a).'.
 (g) COMPETITIVE PROPOSALS- Section 626 of the Communications Act of 1934
 (47 U.S.C. 546) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new subsections:
 `(i) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) through (h) of this
 section, a franchising authority may, at any time after it determines the
 proceedings under subsection (a)(1) are completed, solicit and receive
 competitive proposals for a franchise and may grant any such competitive
 proposal and, subject to the provisions of subsection (c), deny renewal
 to the incumbent cable operator if the franchising authority reasonably
 determines that the person or persons submitting the competitive proposal
 or proposals has the financial, legal and technical ability to provide the
 proposed cable service and (1) the incumbent cable operator has failed to
 satisfy the standards in subsection (c)(1)(A) or subsection (c)(1)(B); or
 (2) the selection of the competing proposal or proposals will better serve
 the public interest with respect to the factors set forth in subsections
 (c)(1)(C), (c)(1)(D), or (c)(1)(E). Nothing in this subsection shall
 preclude a franchising authority from awarding one or more cable franchises
 at any time pursuant to section 621(a)(1) or require a franchising authority
 to grant any competitive proposal pursuant to this subsection (i) or any
 other proposal for a franchise.
 `(j) REVOCATIONS- Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) through
 (h), any lawful action to revoke a cable operator's franchise for cause
 shall not be negated by the initiation of renewal proceedings by the cable
 operator under this section.'.
SEC. 10. MULTIPLE FRANCHISES.
 Section 621(a) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 541(a)) is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(4) A franchising authority shall not, in awarding of franchises within its
 jurisdiction, unreasonably refuse to award additional franchises because of
 the previous award of a franchise to another cable operator. For purposes
 of this paragraph, refusal to award a franchise shall not be unreasonable
 if, for example, such refusal is on the ground--
 `(A) of technical infeasibility;
 `(B) of inadequate assurance that the cable operator will provide adequate
 public, educational and governmental access channel capacity, facilities,
 or financial support;
 `(C) of inadequate assurance that the cable operator will provide universal
 service throughout the entire franchise area under the jurisdiction of
 the franchising authority;
 `(D) that such award would interfere with the right of the franchising
 authority to deny renewal; or
 `(E) of inadequate assurance that the cable operator has the financial,
 technical, or legal qualifications to provide cable service.
 `(5) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as limiting the authority
 of local governments to assess fees or taxes for access to public rights
 of way.'.
SEC. 11. EQUIPMENT COMPATIBILITY.
 Section 632 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 552) is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(d)(1) The Commission shall within 60 days after the date of enactment
 of this Act, initiate a proceeding to establish standards that--
 `(A) ensure that the signals a cable system transmits to subscribers
 are compatible with all operational functions of cable-ready television
 receivers and video cassette recorders, taking into account the need for
 cable operators to protect their signals against unauthorized reception;
 `(B) promote the commercial availability, from cable operators and retail
 vendors that are not affiliated with cable systems, of converters and of
 remote control devices compatible with converters; and
 `(C) require manufacturers to include cable-ready and addressability
 technology for cable systems and other multichannel video systems in
 television receivers and video cassette recorders shipped in interstate
 commerce or imported from any foreign country into the United States
 for sale or resale to the public, taking into account: (i) the impact on
 domestic manufacturers of including such technology in such equipment, and
 (ii) the need for cable operators and other multichannel video systems to
 protect their signals against unauthorized reception.
 `(2) The Commission shall adopt standards that are technologically and
 economically feasible. In determining the feasibility of such standards,
 the Commission shall take into account the cost and benefit to cable
 subscribers of such standards.
 `(3) The Commission periodically shall update its standards or adopt
 additional standards to reflect improvements and changes in cable systems,
 television receivers, video cassette recorders, and similar technology.'.
SEC. 12. HOME WIRING.
 Section 624 of the Communications Act of 1934 (17 U.S.C. 544) is amended
 by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(g) Within 120 days after the date of enactment of this subsection, the
 Commission shall prescribe rules and regulations concerning the disposition,
 after a subscriber to a cable system terminates services, of any cable
 installed by the cable operator within the premises of such subscriber.'.
SEC. 13. PREEMPTION.
 Section 636 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 556) is amended
 to read as follows:
`SEC. 636. COORDINATION OF FEDERAL, STATE, AND LOCAL AUTHORITY.
 `(a) PRESERVATION OF STATE AND LOCAL AUTHORITY- Notwithstanding any other
 provision of this title, any State or franchising authority shall have the
 authority to establish and enforce requirements or to exercise jurisdiction
 by law, regulation, franchise, or any other lawful means, with respect to
 matters regarding cable service, cable systems, cable television, or other
 communications services or systems that (1) are not expressly addressed
 in or covered by this title; and (2) are addressed in or covered by this
 title to the extent consistent with the express provisions of this title.
 `(b) DEFINITION- For purposes of this title, the clause `consistent with
 the express provisions of this title' shall be construed to permit any
 State or franchising authority to establish and enforce requirements
 or to exercise jurisdiction by law, regulation, franchise, or any other
 lawful means that differ from or exceed those established by this title
 or by the Commission pursuant to this title, unless such requirements or
 the exercise of such jurisdiction by a State or franchising authority is
 expressly preempted by this title.'.
LEASED COMMERCIAL ACCESS
 SEC. 14. (a) Section 612(a) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 532(a)) is amended by inserting `to promote competition in the
 delivery of diverse sources of video programming and' immediately after
 `purpose of this section is'.
 (b) Section 612(c) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 532(c))
 is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1) by inserting `and with rules prescribed by the
 Commission under paragraph (4)' immediately after `purpose of this
 section'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(4)(A) The Commission shall have the authority to--
 `(i) determine the maximum reasonable rates that a cable operator may
 establish pursuant to paragraph (1) for commercial use of designated
 channel capacity, including the rate charged for the billing of rates
 to subscribers and for the collection of revenue from subscribers by the
 cable operator for such use;
 `(ii) establish reasonable terms and conditions for such use, including
 those for billing and collection; and
 `(iii) establish procedures by which cable operators shall inform the
 public of the availability of leased access channels.
 `(B) Within 180 days after the date of enactment of this paragraph, the
 Commission shall establish rules for determining the maximum reasonable
 rate under subparagraph (A)(i), for establishing terms and conditions under
 subparagraph (A)(ii), and for establishing procedures under subparagraph
 (A)(iii).'.
 (c) Paragraph (5) of section 612(b) of the Communications Act of 1934
 (47 U.S.C. 532(b)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(5) For the purposes of this section, the term `commercial use' means
 the provision of video programming, whether or not for profit.'.
 (d) Section 612(h) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 532(h))
 is deleted.
LIMITATIONS ON CONTROL AND UTILIZATION
 SEC. 15. Subsection (f) of section 613 of the Communications Act of 1934
 (47 U.S.C. 533) is amended to read as follows:
 `(f)(1) In order to enhance effective competition, the Commission shall,
 within one year after the date of enactment of the Cable Television Consumer
 Protection Act of 1991, conduct a rulemaking proceeding to prescribe rules
 and regulations establishing--
 `(A) reasonable limits on the number of cable subscribers a person is
 authorized to reach through cable systems owned by such person, or in
 which such person has an attributable interest; and
 `(B) reasonable limits on the number of channels on a cable system that
 can be occupied by a video programmer in which a cable operator has an
 attributable interest.
 `(2) In prescribing rules and regulations under paragraph (1), the Commission
 shall, among other public interest objectives--
 `(A) ensure that no cable operator or group of cable operators can unfairly
 impede, either because of the size of any individual operator or because
 of joint actions by a group of operators of sufficient size, the flow of
 video programming from the video programmer to the consumer;
 `(B) ensure that cable operators affiliated with video programmers do not
 favor such programmers in determining carriage on their cable systems or
 do not unreasonably restrict the flow of such programming to other video
 distributors;
 `(C) take particular account of the market structure, ownership patterns,
 and other relationships of the cable television industry, including the
 nature and market power of the local franchise, the joint ownership of
 cable systems and video programmers, and the various types of non-equity
 controlling interests;
 `(D) account for any efficiencies and other benefits that might be gained
 through increased ownership or control;
 `(E) make such rules and regulations reflect the dynamic nature of the
 communications marketplace;
 `(F) not impose limitations which would bar cable operators from serving
 previously unserved rural areas; and
 `(G) not impose limitations which would impair the development of diverse
 and high quality video programming.'.
CROSS-OWNERSHIP
 SEC. 16. (a) Section 613(a) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C.
 533(a)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(1)' immediately after `(a)'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(2) It shall be unlawful for a cable operator to hold a license for
 multichannel multipoint distribution service, or to offer satellite
 master antenna television service separate and apart from any franchised
 cable service, in any portion of the cable community served by that cable
 operator's cable system. The Commission--
 `(A) shall waive the requirements of this paragraph for all existing
 multichannel multipoint distribution services and satellite master antenna
 television services which are owned by a cable operator on the date of
 enactment of this paragraph; and
 `(B) may waive the requirements of this paragraph to the extent the
 Commission determines is necessary to ensure that all significant portions
 of the affected cable community are able to obtain video programming.'.
 (b) Section 613(c) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 533(c))
 is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(1)' immediately after `(c)'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(2) If ten percent of the households in the United States with television
 sets subscribe to service provided by multichanel video programming
 distributors directly via satellite to home satellite antennae, the
 Commission shall promulgate appropriate regulations (A) limiting ownership
 of any such distributor by cable operators or any person having other
 media interests and (B) requiring access to such satellite service by
 unaffiliated vido programmers.'.