HR 3200 SC
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3200
To amend the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 to clarify the
protections given to older individuals in regard to employee benefit plans,
and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
August 4, 1989
Mr. ROYBAL (for himself, Mr. HAWKINS, Mr. CLAY, Mr. MARTINEZ, and Mr. BILBRAY)
introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on
Education and Labor
January 17, 1990
Additional sponsors: Mr. BATES, Mr. FAUNTROY, Mr. AUCOIN, Mr. SOLARZ,
Mr. AKAKA, Mr. PENNY, Mr. JOHNSON of South Dakota, Mr. BRENNAN, Mr. NELSON
of Florida, Mr. YATES, Mr. KOSTMAYER, Mrs. LLOYD, Mr. MRAZEK, Mr. WOLPE,
Mr. KLECZKA, Mr. CONTE, Mr. LEWIS of Georgia, Mr. OLIN, Mr. WALGREN,
Mr. BUSTAMANTE, Mr. CARDIN, Mr. MARKEY, Mr. DURBIN, Mr. JACOBS, Mr. CROCKETT,
Mr. MCNULTY, Mr. FRANK, Mr. CHAPMAN, Mr. BRYANT, Mr. APPLEGATE, Mr. TORRES,
Mr. PALLONE, and Mr. McCloskey
A BILL
To amend the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 to clarify the
protections given to older individuals in regard to employee benefit plans,
and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Older Workers Benefit Protection Act'.
SEC. 2. FINDING.
 The Congress finds that, as a result of the decision of the Supreme Court in
 Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio v. Betts, U.S. , 109
 S.Ct. 256 (1989), legislative action is necessary to restore the original
 congressional intent in passing and amending the Age Discrimination in
 Employment Act of 1967 (29 U.S.C. 621 et seq.), which is to prohibit
 discrimination against older workers in all employee benefits except when
 age-based reductions in employee benefit plans are justified by significant
 cost considerations.
SEC. 3. DEFINITION.
 Section 11 of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (29
 U.S.C. 630) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new
 subsection:
 `(l) The term `compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment'
 encompasses all employee benefits, including such benefits provided pursuant
 to a bona fide employee benefit plan.'.
SEC. 4. LAWFUL EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES.
 Section 4 of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (29 U.S.C. 623)
 is amended--
 (1) by striking subsection (f) and inserting the following new subsection:
 `(f) It shall not be unlawful for an employer, employment agency, or labor
 organization to take any action otherwise prohibited under subsection (a),
 (b), (c), or (e)--
 `(1) where age is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably
 necessary to the normal operation of the particular business, or where
 the differentiation is based on reasonable factors other than age, or
 where such practices involve an employee in a workplace in a foreign
 country, and compliance with such subsections would cause such employer,
 or a corporation controlled by such employer, to violate the laws of the
 country in which such workplace is located;
 `(2)(A) to observe the terms of a bona fide seniority system that is
 not intended to evade the purposes of this Act, except that no such
 seniority system shall require or permit the involuntary retirement of
 any individual specified by section 12(a) of this Act because of the age
 of such individual; or
 `(B) to observe the terms of a bona fide employee benefit plan where, for
 each benefit or benefit package (as permissible under section 1625.10,
 title 29, Code of Federal Regulations, as in effect on June 22, 1989),
 the actual amount of payment made or cost incurred on behalf of an older
 worker is no less than that made or incurred on behalf of a younger worker,
 except that no such employee benefit plan shall excuse the failure to hire
 any individual, and no such employee benefit plan shall require or permit
 the involuntary retirement of any individual specified by section 12(a)
 of this Act because of the age of such individual; and
 `(3) to discharge or otherwise discipline an individual for good cause.
An employer, employment agency, or labor organization acting under paragraphs
(1) or (2) shall have the burden of proving that such actions are lawful in
any civil enforcement proceeding brought about under this Act.';
 (2) by redesignating the second subsection `(i)' as subsection `(j)'; and
 (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(k) A seniority system or employee benefit plan shall comply with this
 Act regardless of the date of adoption of such system or plan.'.
SEC. 5. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- This Act shall become effective on the date of enactment.
 (b) APPLICABILITY- This Act shall apply to all actions or proceedings brought
 under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (29 U.S.C. 621 et
 seq.) after June 23, 1989, and actions or proceedings brought under such
 Act prior to June 23, 1989 which were pending on June 23, 1989.