[Congressional Bills 105th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 3262 Introduced in House (IH)]

105th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 H. R. 3262

To reauthorize the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, 
 and Liability Act of 1980.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 February 25, 1998

Mr. Pallone (for himself, Mr. Lewis of Georgia, Mr. Waxman, Mr. Markey, 
Ms. Furse, Mr. Payne, Mr. Rush, Ms. DeGette, Mr. Hinchey, Ms. McKinney, 
Mrs. Clayton, Mrs. Lowey, Mr. Serrano, Mr. Vento, Ms. Christian-Green, 
Mr. Wexler, Mr. Berman, Mr. Dixon, Ms. Jackson-Lee of Texas, Mr. Evans, 
 Ms. Pelosi, Ms. DeLauro, Mr. Gejdenson, Mr. Jackson of Illinois, Mr. 
 Frost, Mr. Yates, Mr. Kennedy of Massachusetts, Mr. Olver, Mr. 
 Kucinich, Mr. Neal of Massachusetts, Ms. Millender-McDonald, Mr. 
 Gutierrez, Mr. Owens, Mr. Sanders, Mr. Brown of California, Mr. Davis 
 of Illinois, Mr. McGovern, Mr. Lantos, Mr. Stark, Mr. Barrett of 
Wisconsin, Mr. Delahunt, Mr. Conyers, Mr. Miller of California, and Mr. 
 Farr of California) introduced the following bill; which was referred 
 to the Committee on Commerce, and in addition to the Committees on 
Transportation and Infrastructure, and Ways and Means, for a period to 
 be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for 
consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the 
 committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

To reauthorize the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, 
 and Liability Act of 1980.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Children's Protection and Community 
Cleanup Act of 1998''.

SEC. 2. TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 The table of contents is as follows:

 TITLE I--REMEDY

Sec. 101. Amendments relating to selection of remedial action.
Sec. 102. Authorities for institutional controls.
Sec. 103. Amendments relating to response authorities.
 TITLE II--COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION AND HUMAN HEALTH

 Subtitle A--Community Participation

Sec. 201. Definitions.
Sec. 202. Public participation.
Sec. 203. Community Information and Access Offices.
Sec. 204. Community Advisory Groups.
Sec. 205. Technical outreach services for communities.
Sec. 206. Recruitment and training program.
 Subtitle B--Human Health

Sec. 211. Disease registry and health care providers.
Sec. 212. Substance profiles.
Sec. 213. Exposure levels.
Sec. 214. Health studies.
Sec. 215. Relocation of individuals.
Sec. 216. Grant awards, contracts, and community assistance activities.
Sec. 217. Indian health provisions.
Sec. 218. Public health recommendations in remedial actions.
 Subtitle C--General Provisions

Sec. 221. Transition.
 TITLE III--RIGHT TO KNOW

Sec. 301. Right to know.
Sec. 302. Unstudied chemical release forms.
 TITLE IV--ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE

Sec. 401. Environmental justice.
 TITLE V--CHILDREN'S ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH

Sec. 501. Children's environmental health.
 TITLE VI--BROWNFIELD REMEDIATION AND ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP

 Subtitle A--Brownfields

Sec. 601. Brownfields title.
Sec. 602. Research, development, and demonstration.
Sec. 603. Assistance for workforce training.
 Subtitle B--Innocent Landowners and Prospective Purchaser Liability

Sec. 621. Innocent landowners.
Sec. 622. Limitations on liability for response costs for prospective 
 purchasers.
Sec. 623. Contiguous or nearby properties.
 Subtitle C--Department of Housing and Urban Development Brownfield 
 Grants

Sec. 631. Economic development grants in connection with community 
 development loan guarantees.
 TITLE VII--NATURAL RESOURCE DAMAGES

Sec. 701. Liability for natural resources damages.
Sec. 702. Limitations on liability.
Sec. 703. Damage assessment.
Sec. 704. Standard of review.
Sec. 705. Contaminated sediments.
Sec. 706. Recruitment and training program.
Sec. 707. Statute of limitations.
Sec. 708. Archaeological resources.
Sec. 709. Citizen suits.
Sec. 710. Transition rules.
 TITLE VIII--FEDERAL FACILITIES

Sec. 801. Federal entities and facilities.
Sec. 802. Adjoining states.
Sec. 803. Enforceability of Federal compliance agreements.
 TITLE IX--LIABILITY

Sec. 901. Liability exemptions.
 TITLE X--FUNDING

Sec. 1001. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 1002. Agency for toxic substances and disease registry.
Sec. 1003. Limitations on research, development, and demonstration 
 programs.
Sec. 1004. Authorization of appropriations from general revenues.
Sec. 1005. Additional limitations.
Sec. 1006. Worker training and education grants.
Sec. 1007. Extension of Hazardous Substance Superfund.
 TITLE XI--MISCELLANEOUS

Sec. 1101. Penalties.
Sec. 1102. Employee protection.
Sec. 1103. Radioactively contaminated sites.

 TITLE I--REMEDY

SEC. 101. AMENDMENTS RELATING TO SELECTION OF REMEDIAL ACTION.

 (a) Amendments to General Rules.--(1) Section 121(b) of the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 
of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9621(b)) is amended in paragraph (1)--
 (A) by striking ``In making such assessment'' and all that 
 follows through ``or containment.'' at the end of subparagraph 
 (G); and
 (B) by inserting after ``to the maximum extent 
 practicable.'' the following: ``Remedial actions shall make 
 contaminated property available for beneficial use to the 
 maximum extent practicable. Wherever technically feasible, 
 remedial actions shall protect uncontaminated ground water and 
 surface water, and restore contaminated ground water and 
 surface water to beneficial uses in a time period that is 
 reasonable given the particular circumstances of the 
 release.''.
 (2) Section 121(b) of such Act is further amended--
 (A) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3); and
 (B) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following:
 ``(2) In assessing alternative remedial actions and in selecting a 
remedial action, the President shall comply with paragraph (1) and, at 
a minimum, take into account each of the following:
 ``(A) The effectiveness of the remedy in protecting human 
 health and the environment, including consideration of fetuses, 
 children, and other highly exposed, highly susceptible, or 
 differentially susceptible subpopulations.
 ``(B) The ability of the remedy to maintain a consistent 
 level of protection of human health and the environment over 
 the long term, considering the preference for treatment set 
 forth in the first sentence of paragraph (1) of this 
 subsection, the long-term uncertainty associated with 
 containment and institutional controls, and the consequences of 
 remedy failure.
 ``(C) Any short-term risk posed by the implementation of 
 the remedy to the affected community, to those engaged in the 
 cleanup effort, and to the environment.
 ``(D) The implementability of the remedy.
 ``(E) The acceptability of the remedy to the affected 
 community.
 ``(F) Any consensus recommendation of the Community 
 Advisory Group with respect to land use.
 ``(G) The potential for future remedial action costs if the 
 alternative remedial action in question were to fail.
 ``(H) The acceptability of the remedy to the State in which 
 the facility is located or to the Indian Tribe if the facility 
 is located in Indian country (as defined in section 1151 of 
 title 18 United States Code).
 ``(I) Other environmental exposures to hazardous 
 substances, pollutants, or contaminants in the affected 
 community, including those identified under section 117(k).''.
 (b) Amendment of Site Review Requirement.--Section 121(c) of such 
Act is amended by striking in the first sentence ``the initiation of'' 
and inserting ``construction and installation of equipment and 
structures to be used for'' and by adding the following after the first 
sentence: ``The President shall review the effectiveness of, legal 
efficacy of, and compliance with any institutional controls related to 
the remedial action during the review.''.
 (c) Amendments Relating to Degree of Cleanup.--
 (1) Section 121(d) of such Act is amended--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) 
 as paragraphs (3), (4), and (5), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following:
 ``(2) Unless the President determines that a risk-based 
 standard for a contaminant is based on data and assumptions 
 that are clearly adequate to assure that the standard will be 
 protective of children's health, the remedial action selected 
 by the President shall, to the maximum extent technically 
 feasible, reduce contamination to background levels (where more 
 stringent) with respect to that contaminant. The President may 
 not select a remedial action that allows hazardous substances, 
 pollutants, or contaminants to remain on site at a facility 
 above levels that would be protective for unrestricted use 
 unless institutional controls are incorporated into the 
 remedial action to achieve protection of human health and the 
 environment during and after completion of the remedial action 
 in accordance with subsection (g).''.
 (2) Subparagraph (A) of section 121(d)(3) of such Act, as 
 so redesignated, is amended as follows:
 (A) By inserting after ``is legally applicable'' 
 the following: ``to the conduct or operation of the 
 remedial action or''.
 (B) By inserting ``or Tribal'' after ``a State'' 
 and after ``such State'' and by inserting ``or Tribe'' 
 after ``the State''.
 (3) Subsection (d)(3) of such Act, as so redesignated, is 
 amended--
 (A) by redesignating subparagraphs (B) and (C) as 
 subparagraphs (C) and (D), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(B)(i) In the case of a remedial action for which the President 
makes a determination described in clause (ii), the President shall 
ensure that the remedial action attains levels or standards of control 
that are protective of human health and the environment.
 ``(ii) The determination referred to in clause (i) is a 
determination by the President with respect to a remedial action that--
 ``(I) no applicable Federal, State, or Tribal standard, 
 requirement, criteria, or limitation has been established for a 
 specific hazardous substance, pollutant, or contaminant present 
 at the facility at which the remedial action is being 
 undertaken; or
 ``(II) in the case of a remedial action at a facility where 
 there are multiple hazardous substances, pollutants, or 
 contaminants, the remedial action is not protective of human 
 health and the environment even though applicable standards, 
 requirements, criteria, or limitations would be attained.
 ``(iii) In the case of a remedial action for a release or 
threatened release of a hazardous substance, pollutant, or contaminant 
into a source of drinking water, if the President makes a determination 
described in clause (ii)(I), the President shall consider proposed 
maximum contaminant level goals under the Safe Drinking Water Act, 
health advisories, and other relevant information in ensuring that the 
remedial action attains levels or standards of control that are 
protective of human health and the environment.''.
 (4) Subparagraph (D) of section 121(d)(3) of such Act, as 
 so redesignated, is amended by striking clause (iv).
 (5) Section 121(d)(5) of such Act, as so redesignated, is 
 amended--
 (A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A)--
 (i) by striking ``paragraph (1)'' and 
 inserting ``paragraphs (1) and (2)'';
 (ii) by striking ``paragraph (2)'' and 
 inserting ``paragraph (3)'';
 (B) by striking subparagraph (C);
 (C) by redesignating subparagraphs (A), (B), (D), 
 (E), and (F) as clauses (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), and 
 (v), respectively;
 (D) by capitalizing the first word in each of those 
 clauses (as so redesignated);
 (E) by striking the semicolon and inserting a 
 period at the end of each of clauses (i), (ii), and 
 (iii) (as so redesignated);
 (F) by striking ``; or'' at the end of clause (iv) 
 (as so redesignated) and inserting a period;
 (G) by striking ``President finds that--'' and 
 inserting ``President finds any of the following:'';
 (H) by inserting ``(A)'' before ``The President may 
 select'';
 (I) by designating the text following clause (v) 
 (as so redesignated) as subparagraph (B); and
 (J) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(C) In any case where the President, in making a finding pursuant 
to this paragraph, waives any requirement, standard, criteria, or 
limitation specified under paragraph (3)(A) relating to contaminated 
ground water or surface water, the President shall select an 
appropriate remedy for contaminated ground water or surface water which 
meets, at a minimum, the following requirements:
 ``(i) Prevention or elimination of any human ingestion of 
 or exposure to water containing any hazardous substance, 
 pollutant, or contaminant at levels in excess of the levels 
 specified under paragraph (3)(A) including, as appropriate, the 
 provision of an alternate water supply.
 ``(ii) To the extent technically feasible, containment and 
 treatment of source areas that may continue to release 
 hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants to ground or 
 surface waters.
 ``(iii) Unless technically infeasible, prevention of 
 further contamination or impairment of any surface water 
 designated use established under section 303 of the Federal 
 Water Pollution Control Act caused by such hazardous substance, 
 pollutant, or contaminant in any surface water body into which 
 such contaminated ground water is known or expected to enter.
 ``(iv) Unless technically infeasible, containment of ground 
 water contamination, except where limited migration of 
 contamination is necessary to facilitate restoration of ground 
 water to beneficial use.
 ``(v) Provision for long-term monitoring of such ground 
 water until contaminants are no longer present (including any 
information needed for the purposes of review under subsection (c)).
 ``(vi) Assurance that, if the President has selected 
 alternative sources of water supply or methods of treating 
 contaminated water, including point-of-entry treatment, the 
 party or parties otherwise responsible for remediation shall 
 assume responsibility and liability for providing water for 
 domestic use meeting the requirements of levels specified in 
 paragraph (3)(A), including all associated incremental costs 
 for operation, maintenance, and delivery of water for present 
 and anticipated future domestic uses until such time as the 
 level of contamination is consistently below the levels 
 specified by paragraph (3)(A).''.
 (d) Institutional Controls.--Section 121 of such Act is further 
amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(g) Institutional Controls.--
 ``(1) Requirement for use of institutional controls in 
 certain circumstances.--The President may not select a remedial 
 action that allows hazardous substances, pollutants, or 
 contaminants to remain at a facility above levels that would be 
 protective for unrestricted use unless institutional controls 
 meeting the requirements of section 104 are incorporated into 
 the remedial action. Whenever such controls are selected, the 
 President shall ensure that the terms of the controls are 
 specified in all appropriate decision documents, enforcement 
 orders, and public information regarding the site. The 
 President may use institutional controls as a supplement to, 
 but not as a substitute for, other response measures under this 
 Act.
 ``(2) Assurances.--In any case in which the President 
 selects a response action that relies on institutional controls 
 to provide protection, the President shall--
 ``(A) ensure that such controls are adequate to 
 protect, over the long term, human health and the 
 environment, including fetuses, children, and other 
 highly exposed, highly susceptible, or differentially 
 susceptible subpopulations;
 ``(B) require measures to ensure that such controls 
 will be appropriately implemented, monitored, and 
 enforced;
 ``(C) ensure that such controls are developed in 
 consultation with and are acceptable to the affected 
 community;
 ``(D) upon adoption of such controls, ensure that 
 public notice is given and that the controls are 
 identified in the register established under section 
 104(k)(2)(H) and incorporated in the recordation 
 systems of the appropriate jurisdiction in which the 
 property is located; and
 ``(E) ensure that such controls shall remain in 
 effect until terminated in accordance with section 
 104(k)(2)(F).
 ``(3) Use of institutional controls.--
 ``(A) Terms of controls to be specified in decision 
 documents.--Whenever institutional controls are 
 selected as a component of a response action, the 
 President shall ensure that the terms of the controls 
 are specified in all appropriate decision documents, 
 enforcement orders, and public information regarding 
 the site. At a minimum, the President shall specify the 
 government official who is primarily responsible for 
 monitoring and enforcing the institutional controls. 
 Each record of decision with respect to a facility 
 shall clearly identify any institutional controls that 
 restrict uses of land or other resources or other 
 activities at the facility.
 ``(B) Changes in controls.--Any such change shall 
 be undertaken consistent with section 117 and notice 
 shall be given pursuant to the requirements of section 
 104.
 ``(4) Facility fund.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of a facility for 
 which the selected remedial action is containment or 
 which otherwise results in hazardous substances, 
 pollutants, or contaminants remaining on site above 
 levels that would allow for unrestricted use of the 
 facility, a fund shall be established specifically for 
 that facility in an amount sufficient to guarantee 
 successful performance of a remedy at the facility and, 
 to the extent technically feasible, future beneficial 
 reuse. The fund shall consist of amounts deposited into 
 it by potentially responsible parties.
 ``(B) Use of facility fund.--The amounts in the 
 fund shall be used at the facility for (i) costs of any 
 response necessary in the event that the remedial 
 action is not protective of human health and the 
 environment; and (ii) costs of any further reductions 
 in the volume, toxicity, or mobility of any hazardous 
 substance, pollutant, or contaminant remaining on site 
that are facilitated by the development of new technologies. Such costs 
shall be response costs under section 107(a). The President may, in his 
discretion, require a fund to be established as a condition of 
settlement under section 122.
 ``(5) Report to congress.--The Administrator shall, on 
 March 1, 1999, and annually thereafter, report to Congress for 
 each record of decision signed during the previous fiscal year, 
 the type of institutional controls and media affected, and the 
 institution designated to monitor, enforce, and ensure 
 compliance with the institutional controls.''.
 (e) Procedural Requirements; Enforcement.--Section 121(e)(1) is 
amended by adding the following at the end thereof: ``Except for 
recordkeeping and reporting, procedural requirements of State laws 
shall not apply to the portion of any removal or remedial action 
conducted entirely onsite.''.
 (f) Definition of Technically Infeasible.--Section 121 of such Act 
is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(h) Definitions.--
 ``(1) The term `technically infeasible' means that a 
 technology or combination of technologies that would be able to 
 achieve a required outcome does not exist.
 ``(2) The term `maximum extent technically feasible' means 
 that to the extent that a technology or combination of 
 technologies that is able to achieve a required outcome exists, 
 it should be used to its fullest ability to achieve that 
 required outcome.''.
 (g) Transition.--
 (1) Effective date.--This section, and the amendments made 
 by this section, shall become effective 180 days after the date 
 of enactment of this Act. Remedies selected under the 
 Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and 
 Liability Act of 1980 following that effective date shall be 
 selected as provided in section 121(b) of that Act (as amended 
 by this Act) and subject to the Federal and State requirements 
 specified in paragraphs (2) and (3) of section 121(d) of that 
 Act (as amended by this Act).
 (2) Prior rods.--(A) Nothing in this Act shall place upon 
 the Administrator an obligation to reopen a record of decision 
 signed prior to the effective date of this section.
 (B) If, pursuant to section 117 of the Comprehensive 
 Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 
 1980, the Administrator determines that a change to a record of 
 decision signed prior to the effective date of this section is 
 necessary, the Administrator may apply the rules in effect at 
 the time the original record of decision was signed.

SEC. 102. AUTHORITIES FOR INSTITUTIONAL CONTROLS.

 Section 104 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9604) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(k) Institutional Control Instruments.--
 ``(1) In general.--In any response action that includes 
 institutional controls, the President shall use one or more of 
 the types of institutional control instruments under paragraph 
 (3). Any institutional control instrument that is used in a 
 response action shall meet the criteria of paragraph (2). Any 
 institutional control instrument may include terms regarding 
 site access by persons involved in carrying out the response 
 action.
 ``(2) Criteria.--
 ``(A) Content of instruments.--An institutional 
 control instrument shall contain, at a minimum--
 ``(i) a legal description of the property 
 affected;
 ``(ii) the name or names of any current 
 owner or owners of the property as reflected in 
 public land records;
 ``(iii) a description of the release or 
 threatened release; and
 ``(iv) a statement as to the nature of the 
 restriction, limitation, or control created by 
 the institutional control instrument.
 ``(B) Use restriction notice.--If the President 
 adopts an institutional control instrument (or, in the 
 case of an assignable instrument, assigns it to another 
 party), the President shall record a notice of property 
 use restriction in the public land records for the 
 jurisdiction in which the affected property is located. 
 Such a notice shall specify restrictions, limitations, 
 or controls on the use of the land or other natural 
 resources provided for in the institutional control 
 instrument. If a particular institutional control 
 instrument applies to a large number of properties such 
 that compliance with this notice requirement is 
 impractical, the President may substitute another 
mechanism for providing continuing notice of property use restriction.
 ``(C) Filing of notice.--If recording in the public 
 land records is required under this subsection, the 
 President shall file the notice or other document in 
 the appropriate office within the State (or 
 governmental subdivision) in which the affected 
 property is located, as designated by State law. If the 
 State has not by law designated one office for the 
 recording of interests in real property or claims or 
 rights burdening real property, the notice or other 
 document shall be filed in the office of the clerk of 
 the United States district court for the district in 
 which the affected property is located and the registry 
 established under subparagraph (H).
 ``(D) Persons subject to instruments.--An 
 institutional control instrument shall be enforceable 
 in perpetuity (unless terminated and released as 
 provided for in this section) against any holder of an 
 interest in the affected property at the time the 
 instrument is adopted and all persons who subsequently 
 acquire an interest in the property or rights to use 
 the property, including lessees, licensees, and any 
 other person with an interest in the property. In the 
 case of easements, such easements shall apply without 
 respect to privity or lack of privity of estate or 
 contract, lack of benefit running to any other 
 property, assignment of the easement to another party 
 or sale or other transfer of the burdened property, or 
 any other circumstance which might otherwise affect the 
 enforceability of easements or similar deed 
 restrictions under the laws of the State. The 
 instrument shall be binding upon holders of any other 
 interests in the property regardless of whether such 
 interests are recorded or whether they were recorded 
 prior or subsequent to adoption of the instrument, and 
 shall remain in effect notwithstanding any foreclosure 
 or other assertion of such interests.
 ``(E) Enforcement.--
 ``(i) Effect of violations.--Violation of 
 any restriction, limitation, or control imposed 
 under an institutional control instrument shall 
 have the same effect as failure to comply with 
 an order issued under section 106 and relief 
 may be sought either in enforcement actions 
 under section 106(b)(1), by States under 
 section 121(e)(2), or in citizen suits under 
 section 310. No citizen suit under section 310 
 to enforce such an instrument may be commenced 
 if the holder of the easement has commenced and 
 is diligently prosecuting an action in court to 
 enforce the easement.
 ``(ii) Enforcement actions.--The President 
 may take appropriate enforcement actions to 
 ensure compliance with the terms of the 
 instrument whenever the Administrator of the 
 Environmental Protection Agency determines that 
 the terms set forth in the instrument are being 
 violated.
 ``(iii) Savings clause.--Nothing in this 
 section shall limit rights or remedies 
 available under other laws.
 ``(F) Termination or modification of institutional 
 control instruments.--An institutional control 
 instrument adopted under this subsection shall remain 
 in force until the instrument is modified or terminated 
 by or with the approval of the Administrator upon a 
 determination that the instrument is no longer needed 
 to protect human health and the environment, including 
 fetuses, children, and other highly exposed, highly 
 susceptible, or differentially susceptible 
 subpopulations. Such modification or termination shall 
 be recorded in the same manner as the original 
 instrument.
 ``(G) Public notice.--Not later than 180 days after 
 the date of the enactment of this subsection, the 
 President shall issue regulations regarding the 
 procedures to be used for public notice of proposed 
 property use restrictions and institutional control 
 instruments and any termination or modification 
 thereof. Such regulations shall ensure that before 
 acquiring an institutional control instrument, and 
 before recording any notice of such instrument, the 
 President will give notice and an opportunity to 
 comment to the owner of the affected property, all 
 other persons with recorded interests in the property, 
 any lessees or other authorized occupants of the 
 property known to the President, the State and any 
 municipalities in which the property is located, any 
 relevant community advisory group established under 
section 117, the affected community and the general public.
 ``(H) Registry of institutional controls.--The 
 President shall maintain a registry of all property at 
 which institutional controls have been established in 
 connection with any response action under this Act. The 
 registry shall identify the property and the nature or 
 form of the institutional controls, including any 
 subsequent changes in the nature or form of such 
 controls. Where this section refers to the filing of 
 any document in the local land records, if the State 
 has not by law designated one office for the recording 
 of interests in real property or claims or rights 
 burdening real property, or if the procedures 
 maintained by the designated office do not allow for 
 the filing of such a document, the document shall be 
 filed in this registry.
 ``(3) Types of instruments.--
 ``(A) Easements.--
 ``(i) Authority to acquire easements.--In 
 connection with any response action under this 
 Act, in order to prevent exposure to, reduce 
 the likelihood of, or otherwise respond to a 
 release or threatened release of a hazardous 
 substance, pollutant, or contaminant, the 
 President may acquire, at fair market value, or 
 for other consideration as agreed to by the 
 parties, a hazardous substance easement which 
 restricts, limits, or controls the use of land 
 or other natural resources, including 
 specifying permissible or impermissible uses of 
 land, prohibiting specified activities upon 
 property, prohibiting the drilling of wells or 
 use of ground water, or restricting the use of 
 surface water.
 ``(ii) Use of easements.--A hazardous 
 substance easement under this subsection may be 
 used wherever institutional controls have been 
 selected as a component of a response action.
 ``(iii) Methods of acquiring easements.--
 The President may acquire a hazardous substance 
 easement by purchase or other agreement, by 
 condemnation, or by any other means permitted 
 by law. Compensation for such easement shall be 
 at fair market value, or for other 
 consideration as agreed to by the parties, for 
 the interest acquired. For an easement acquired 
 from entities that are not responsible parties, 
 valuation of such easement shall be based on 
 the value of the property in an uncontaminated 
 condition. The costs of obtaining, ensuring 
 adequate public notice of, and otherwise 
 tracking and maintaining the protections 
 afforded by the easements shall be considered 
 response costs which are recoverable under this 
 Act.
 ``(iv) Assignment of easements to parties 
 other than the president.--
 ``(I) Authority to assign.--The 
 President may, where appropriate and 
 with the consent of the State, assign 
 an easement acquired under this 
 subsection to a State that has the 
 capacity to effectively enforce the 
 easement over the period of time during 
 which the easement is in effect. In the 
 case of any assignment, the easement 
 shall also be fully enforceable by the 
 assignee. Any assignment of such an 
 easement by the President may be made 
 by following the same procedures as are 
 used for the transfer of an interest in 
 real property to a State under section 
 104(j).
 ``(II) Easements held by other 
 persons.--Any interest in property 
 granted to a State, an Indian Tribe, or 
 another governmental entity or other 
 person which restricts, limits, or 
 controls the use of land or other 
 natural resources in order to prevent 
 exposure to, reduce the likelihood of, 
 or otherwise respond to, a release or 
 threatened release of a hazardous 
 substance, pollutant, or contaminant, 
 and which is expressly designated in 
 writing as a hazardous substance 
 easement within the meaning of this 
 paragraph, shall create the same 
 rights, have the same legal effect, and 
 be enforceable in the same manner as a 
 hazardous substance easement acquired 
 by the President regardless of whether 
 the interest in property is otherwise 
 denominated as an easement, covenant, 
 or any other form of property right.
 ``(v) Applicability of other provisions.--
 Holding a hazardous substance easement shall 
 not in itself subject either the holder thereof 
 or the owner of the affected property to 
 liability under section 107. Any such easement 
 acquired by the President shall not be subject 
 to the requirements of subsection (j)(2) or 
 section 120(h). Nothing in this subsection 
 limits or modifies the authority of the 
 President pursuant to subsection (j)(1).
 ``(B) Order imposing restrictions.--In connection 
 with any response action under this Act, in order to 
 prevent exposure to, reduce the likelihood of, or 
 otherwise respond to a release or threatened release of 
 a hazardous substance, pollutant, or contaminant, the 
 President may by order establish appropriate 
 restrictions, limitations, or controls on the use of 
 land or other natural resources, including specifying 
 permissible or impermissible uses of land, prohibiting 
 specified activities upon property, prohibiting the 
 drilling of wells or use of ground water, 
or restricting the use of surface water. Any such order shall be 
binding on each person who receives actual notice of the order, and 
after filing in the appropriate land records shall be binding on the 
owner's successors, assigns, and lessees, and on any person who 
subsequently acquires an interest in the property. A finding of 
imminent and substantial endangerment shall not be required to issue an 
order under this subparagraph.
 ``(C) State institutional control instruments.--In 
 connection with any response action under this Act, in 
 order to prevent exposure to, reduce the likelihood of, 
 or otherwise respond to a release or threatened release 
 of a hazardous substance, pollutant, or contaminant, 
 the President may include in a response action 
 institutional controls adopted pursuant to State law, 
 if such controls meet all requirements of paragraph (2) 
 of this subsection.''.

SEC. 103. AMENDMENTS RELATING TO RESPONSE AUTHORITIES.

 (a) Removal Actions.--Section 104(a)(2) of the Comprehensive 
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 
U.S.C. 9604(a)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``The 
President shall ensure that a removal action is not undertaken in lieu 
of a long-term remedial action.''.
 (b) Further Response Action.--Section 104(a) of such Act is amended 
by adding at the end the following:
 ``(5) Nothing in this Act shall be interpreted to limit the 
authority of the President, subsequent to selection of a remedial 
action, to take any further response action necessary to remove or 
remediate residual hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants 
where such removal or remediation is appropriate for the restoration of 
natural resources.''.

 TITLE II--COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION AND HUMAN HEALTH

 Subtitle A--Community Participation

SEC. 201. DEFINITIONS.

 Section 117 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9617) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(j) Definitions.--
 ``(1) Covered facility.--The term `covered facility' means 
 a facility--
 ``(A) that has been listed or proposed for listing 
 on the National Priorities List;
 ``(B) at which the Administrator is undertaking an 
 action anticipated to exceed 1 year in duration, or 
 with respect to which the funding limit under section 
 104 of this Act is anticipated to be reached; or
 ``(C) with respect to which the Administrator of 
 ATSDR has accepted a petition requesting a health 
 assessment or related health activity under section 
 104(i)(6)(B).
 ``(2) Affected community.--The term `affected community' 
 means any group of 2 or more individuals (including 
 representatives of Indian tribes) which may be affected by the 
 release or threatened release of hazardous substances, 
 pollutants, or contaminants at a covered facility.
 ``(3) Notice.--The term `notice' means an announcement, 
 including the date, time, location, and agenda of any meeting 
 to be held, that is issued using communications media targeted 
 to residents of affected communities and posters displayed in 
 public places within the affected community.''.

SEC. 202. PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.

 (a) TAG Grants.--Section 117(e) of the Comprehensive Environmental 
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9617(e)) 
is amended to read as follows:
 ``(e) Grants for Technical Assistance.--
 ``(1) Authority.--In accordance with the rules promulgated 
 by the Administrator, the Administrator may make grants 
 available to any Community Advisory Group or affected 
 community. Such grants shall be known as Technical Assistance 
 Grants (`TAGs').
 ``(2) Special rules.--No matching contribution shall be 
 required for a Technical Assistance Grant. The Administrator 
 may make the lesser of $10,000 or 10 percent of the total grant 
 amount available to the grant recipient, in advance of the 
 expenditures to be covered by the grant.
 ``(3) Grant availability.--The Administrator shall promptly 
 notify residents and Indian tribes living near a covered 
 facility that a technical assistance grant is available under 
 this section.
 ``(4) Number of tags per facility.--Except as provided in 
 this paragraph, not more than one grant may be made at a time 
 under this subsection with respect to a single covered 
 facility, but the grant may be renewed to facilitate public 
participation at all stages of response action, including operation and 
maintenance. Limits shall be established with respect to the number of 
years for which grants may be available based on the duration, type, 
and extent of response activity at a covered facility. The 
Administrator may provide more than one grant under this subsection 
with respect to a single covered facility, considering such factors as 
the area affected by the covered facility and the distances between 
affected communities.
 ``(5) Funding amount.--The initial amount of any grant 
 under this subsection may not exceed $100,000 (based on fiscal 
 year 1998 constant dollars) for a single grant recipient, 
 except that the Administrator may increase the amount of the 
 grant if the grant recipient demonstrates that the covered 
 facility's characteristics indicate additional funds are 
 necessary due to the complexity of the response action, 
 including the size and complexity of the covered facility or 
 the nature or volume of site-related information, or if the 
 grant recipient requests such additional funds to perform 
 biological sampling under paragraph (7)(C). In addition, the 
 Administrator must find that the grant recipient's management 
 of a previous grant award, if any, was satisfactory, and that 
 the costs incurred under the award are allowable and 
 reasonable.
 ``(6) Simplification.--To ensure that the application 
 process is accessible to all affected persons, including those 
 that reside in a special priority area listed under section 
 116(f)(2), the Administrator shall review the existing 
 guidelines and application procedures for the TAGs and, within 
 180 days after the date of enactment of this section, revise, 
 as appropriate, such guidelines and procedures to simplify the 
 process of obtaining such grants.
 ``(7) Authorized grant activities.--
 ``(A) Interpretation of information.--Grants 
 awarded under this subsection may be used to obtain 
 technical assistance in interpreting information and 
 providing input with regard to (i) the nature of the 
 hazard at a covered facility; (ii) sampling and 
 monitoring plans, (iii) the remedial investigation and 
 feasibility study; (iv) the record of decision; (v) the 
 selection, design, and construction of the remedial 
 action; (vi) operation and maintenance; (vii) removal 
 activities at such covered facility; or (viii) health 
 assessment or related health activity.
 ``(B) Environmental sampling.--
 ``(i) In general.--Grants awarded under 
 this subsection may be used to obtain technical 
 assistance in developing environmental sampling 
 plans, collecting samples, analyzing samples, 
 and interpreting sample data.
 ``(ii) Approval of sampling plans.--Before 
 any samples are collected by a TAG recipient, a 
 sampling plan shall be submitted to the 
 Administrator for approval. The Administrator 
 shall promulgate regulations regarding the 
 submittal of such plans.
 A sampling plan shall be deemed to be approved unless 
 such approval is denied by the Administrator within 60 
 days after the date on which the plan is submitted. If 
 the Administrator denies approval of the plan, the 
 Administrator shall provide an explanation of such 
 denial to the entity that submitted the plan. The 
 entity may revise and resubmit the plan accordingly.''.
 ``(C) Biological sampling.--Grants awarded under 
 this section also may be used to collect and analyze 
 biological samples. Such sample collection and analysis 
 shall be performed by an accredited health care 
 professional.
 ``(D) Additional activities.--(i) Subject to clause 
 (ii), grants awarded under this section also may be 
 used--
 ``(I) to obtain technical assistance in 
 interpreting information used to rank 
 facilities according to the Hazard Ranking 
 System;
 ``(II) to hire a community coordinator;
 ``(III) to hire health experts to advise 
 affected residents on health assessment and 
 data gathering efforts and response activities, 
 and on the design of any health studies that a 
 government agency performs;
 ``(IV) to hire technical or legal experts 
 to file comments with governmental agencies and 
 generate other documents as necessary to ensure 
 full participation by the grant recipient;
 ``(V) to publish newsletters or otherwise 
 finance the dissemination of information; and
 ``(VI) to evaluate the reliability of long-
 term operation and maintenance and 
 institutional controls.
 ``(ii) Not more than 10 percent of the amount of a 
 technical assistance grant may be used for hiring legal 
 experts or for travel expenses.
 ``(E) Availability of information.--Information 
 generated by the recipients of grants under this 
 section shall be made available, as appropriate, to the 
 appropriate Community Information and Access Office.
 ``(8) Non-site-specific grants.--In accordance with the 
 rules promulgated by the Administrator, the Administrator may 
 make Technical Assistance Grant funds available to Indian 
 tribes, nonprofit organizations, and citizens groups to enhance 
 their participation in rulemaking processes carried out in 
 accordance with this Act. Total funding for all such grants 
 shall not exceed $100,000.
 ``(9) National conference.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Administrator shall convene 
 a national conference once every two years for TAG 
 advisors and recipients for purposes of exchanging 
 information and making recommendations to the 
 Administrator.
 ``(B) Report to the administrator.--The 
 participants in a national conference shall, not later 
 than 180 days after the conference ends, submit to the 
 Administrator a report. The report shall contain such 
 findings and recommendations as the participants in the 
 conference consider appropriate.''.
 (b) Improving Citizen and Community Participation.--(1) Section 117 
of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and 
Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9617) is amended by--
 (A) redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a) 
 as subparagraphs (A) and (B);
 (B) striking ``under paragraph (1)'' in such subsection (a) 
 and inserting ``under subparagraph (A)'';
 (C) redesignating such subsection (a) as paragraph (4);
 (D) by redesignating subsections (b) and (c) as paragraphs 
 (6) and (7) of subsection (a); and
 (E) inserting the following immediately after the section 
 heading:
 ``(a) Improving Citizen and Community Participation in 
Decisionmaking.--
 ``(1) In general.--In order to provide an opportunity for 
 meaningful public participation in every significant phase of 
 response activities under this Act, the President shall take 
 the actions specified in this subsection.
 ``(2) Health assessment and preliminary assessment and site 
 inspection.--The President shall provide the opportunity for 
 public meetings and provide a notice of such meetings before or 
 during performance of the health assessment or related health 
 activity and the preliminary assessment and site inspection, as 
 appropriate. Before or during the health assessment or related 
 health activity and site inspection, the President shall 
 solicit and evaluate concerns, interests, and information from 
 the Community Advisory Group, if any, affected Indian tribes, 
 the affected community, local government officials and local 
 health officials. The evaluation shall include, as appropriate, 
 face-to-face community surveys to identify the location of 
 private drinking water wells, potential exposure pathways, 
 including historic, current, and potential use of water, and 
other environmental resources in the community; a public meeting; 
written responses to significant concerns; and other appropriate 
participatory activities.
 ``(3) Remedial investigation and feasibility study.--The 
 President shall provide the opportunity for public meetings and 
 publish a notice of such meetings before or during the Remedial 
 Investigation and Feasibility Study (RI/FS). During the 
 remedial investigation and feasibility study, the President 
 shall solicit the views and preferences of the Community 
 Advisory Group, if any, affected Indian tribes, the affected 
 community, local government officials and local health 
 officials on the remediation and disposition of hazardous 
 substances, pollutants, or contaminants at the covered 
 facility. Such views and preferences shall be described in the 
 remedial investigation and feasibility study and considered in 
 the screening of remedial alternatives for the covered 
 facility.''.
 (2) Such section 117, as amended by this subsection, is amended by 
adding the following new paragraph after paragraph (4) of subsection 
(a):
 ``(5) Completion of work plan.--The President shall provide 
 the opportunity for public meetings and publish a notice of 
 such meetings before or during the completion of the work plan 
 for the Remedial Design and Remedial Action.''.
 (3) Such section 117, as amended by this subsection, is amended by 
adding the following new paragraphs after paragraphs (6) and (7):
 ``(8) Alternatives.--Pursuant to paragraph (4), members of 
 the Community Advisory Group, if any, affected Indian tribes, 
 the affected community, local government officials and local 
 health officials may propose remedial alternatives to the 
 President, and the President shall consider such alternatives 
 in the same manner as the President considers alternatives 
 proposed by other parties.
 ``(9) Selecting appropriate procedures.--In determining 
 which of the procedures set forth in paragraph (2) may be 
 appropriate, the Administrator may consult with the Community 
 Advisory Group, if any, affected Indian tribe, the affected 
 community, local government officials and local health 
 officials.
 ``(10) Providing information.--The President, with the 
 assistance of the Community Information and Access Offices (as 
 provided for in subsection (c)), shall provide information to 
 the Community Advisory Group, if any, affected Indian tribes, 
 the affected community, local government officials and local 
 health officials throughout all significant phases of the 
 response action at the covered facility. The President, on a 
 regular basis, shall inform such entities of the progress and 
 substance of technical meetings between the lead agency and 
 potentially responsible parties regarding a covered facility. 
 The President shall notify the Community Advisory Group, if 
 any, affected Indian tribes, the affected community, local 
 government officials and local health officials concerning--
 ``(A) the schedule for commencement of construction 
 activities at the covered facility and the location and 
 availability of construction plans;
 ``(B) the results of any review under section 
 121(c) and any modifications to the covered facility 
 made as a result of the review; and
 ``(C) the execution of and any revisions to 
 institutional controls being used as part of a remedial 
 action.
 ``(11) Public meetings.--Public meetings required under 
 this subsection shall be designed to obtain information from 
 the affected community and disseminate information to the 
 affected community concerning the President's covered facility 
 activities and pending decisions. Public meetings shall be held 
 at a convenient and easily accessible location within the 
 affected community and at a time when the majority of residents 
 of the affected community is able to attend the meeting. A 
 notice of any such meeting shall be issued at least 10 days 
 before the date of the meeting.
 ``(12) Special priority areas.--In taking the actions 
 specified in this subsection, the President shall consider the 
 unique needs of residents of special priority areas listed 
 under section 116(f)(2).''.
 (4) Such section 117 is amended by striking ``major'' in subsection 
(d).
 (5) Such section 117 is amended by adding the following new 
subsection after subsection (a), as amended by this section:
 ``(b) Additional Public Involvement Requirements.--(1) The 
President shall make records relating to the covered facility available 
to the public throughout all phases of response action at the covered 
facility. Such information shall be made available to the public for 
inspection and copying without the need to file a formal request, 
subject to reasonable service charges as appropriate, in accordance 
with the schedule of fees promulgated in regulations under section 
552(a)(4)(A) of title 5, United States Code. This paragraph shall not 
apply to a record that is exempt from disclosure under section 552 of 
title 5, United States Code, or to any record that is exchanged between 
parties to a dispute under this Act for the purposes of settling the 
dispute.
 ``(2) The President, in carrying out responsibilities under this 
Act, shall ensure that the presentation of information on risk is 
unbiased and informative and clearly discloses any uncertainties and 
data gaps.
 ``(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, in 
the case of a removal action taken in accordance with section 104 which 
is expected to extend beyond 180 days, the President shall comply with 
the requirements of this section unless the President determines that 
such compliance presents an imminent and substantial endangerment to 
human health or the environment. Whenever the planning period for a 
removal action is expected to be greater than 180 days, the 
Administrator shall provide the Community Advisory Group, if any, 
affected Indian tribes, the affected community, local government 
officials and local health officials with notice of the anticipated 
removal action and a public comment period of no less than 30 days.
 ``(4) Any resident of an affected community shall have the ability 
to fully initiate or participate in any remedy review processes or 
mechanisms established by the Administrator.''.
 (6) Such section 117 is further amended by adding the following new 
subsection after subsection (e):
 ``(f) Understandable Presentation of Materials.--The President 
shall ensure that information prepared for distribution to the public 
under this section shall be provided or summarized in a manner that may 
be easily understood, considering any unique cultural needs of the 
affected community, including presentation of information orally and 
distribution of information in languages other than English, as 
appropriate.''.

SEC. 203. COMMUNITY INFORMATION AND ACCESS OFFICES.

 Section 117 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9617) is amended by 
adding the following after subsection (b), as added by section 202:
 ``(c) Community Information and Access Offices.--
 ``(1) Establishment.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), not 
 later than 18 months after the date of enactment of 
 this subsection, a State with a covered facility, or an 
 Indian tribe in the case of such a facility in Indian 
 country (as defined in section 1151 of title 18, United 
 States Code), shall establish a Community Information 
 and Access Office to perform the functions set forth in 
 paragraph (3).
 ``(B) Existing offices.--The Administrator may 
 determine that a State or tribal office in existence 
 before the date of enactment of this subsection can or 
 does already perform the functions of a Community 
 Information and Access Office and is eligible for 
 funding under paragraph (2).
 ``(C) Process.--Each State or tribe shall decide 
 the process for establishing a Community Information 
 and Access Office.
 ``(D) EPA role.--The Administrator shall approve 
 the Office if it meets the requirements of this 
 subsection. If the Administrator determines that the 
 State or tribe has not established an office or offices 
 that can perform the functions of a Community 
 Information and Access Office, the Administrator shall 
 establish an office or offices in the State.
 ``(E) Number of offices.--The Administrator may 
 require the establishment of more than one Community 
 Information and Access Office in a State, considering 
 factors such as the number of covered facilities in the 
 State, the geographic distance between such facilities, 
 and the number of people affected by such facilities in 
 the State.
 ``(2) Funding.--
 ``(A) In general.--Funding for the operation of 
 Community Information and Access Offices, or State, 
 tribal, or Environmental Protection Agency offices that 
 perform similar functions, collectively, shall not 
 exceed $50,000,000 for a fiscal year.
 ``(B) State or tribal grants.--Each State or Indian 
 tribe that has a Community Information and Access 
 Office, or each State, Indian tribe, or Environmental 
 Protection Agency office performing the functions of a 
 Community Information and Access Office, shall receive 
 not less than $500,000, and not more than $1,000,000, 
 for a fiscal year.
 ``(C) Formula.--
 ``(i) In general.--The Administrator shall 
 publish guidelines establishing a formula for 
 determining the actual amount of funding for 
 each Community Information and Access Office.
 ``(ii) Factors.--The formula shall include 
 factors such as the number of facilities listed 
 or proposed for listing on the National 
 Priorities List that would be covered by the 
 Community Information and Access Office.
 ``(3) Functions.--
 ``(A) In general.--A Community Information and 
 Access Office shall--
 ``(i) assist the Administrator (I) in 
 disseminating information regarding facilities, 
 information regarding the existence of the 
 Office and its services, and information 
 regarding opportunities for public 
 participation under this Act, (II) in notifying 
 citizens of public meetings, notifying the 
 community living or working near a facility of 
 the opportunity to establish a community 
 advisory group, and notifying the public of the 
 availability of TAGs, (III) in informing 
 citizens of their rights under this Act, 
 including the availability of health services 
 and the right of petition for assessment of 
 release, for performance of a health 
 assessment, and for establishment of a 
 Community Advisory Group, and (IV) in providing 
 citizens with information relating to the 
 operation of Federal, State, and tribal 
 hazardous substance and waste laws with respect 
 to facilities within the State or in Indian 
 country (as defined in section 1151 of title 
 18, United States Code);
 ``(ii) serve as a clearinghouse, maintain 
 records, and provide electronic access as 
 appropriate, for facility information, 
 including a description of the Administrator's 
 process for identifying facilities and 
 undertaking response actions under this Act, a 
 list of facilities located in the State or in 
 Indian country (as defined in section 1151 of 
 title 18 United States Code), and with respect 
 to each such facility and to the extent 
 information becomes available--
 ``(I) the location, name of owner 
 or operator, and characteristics of the 
 facility;
 ``(II) the hazardous substances, 
 pollutants, and contaminants present, 
 including the quantities and relative 
 toxicities of the substances, 
 pollutants, and contaminants;
 ``(III) the response actions being 
 taken, including records of any 
 institutional controls that are 
 included in the response actions;
 ``(IV) any health data generated in 
 connection with the facility;
 ``(V) the status of the response 
 actions at the facility;
 ``(VI) any report generated as a 
 result of a review under section 
 121(c);
 ``(VII) the location of the 
 Administrative Record created for the 
 facility, if any, under section 113(k); 
 and
 ``(VIII) any ongoing operation and 
 maintenance requirements or 
 institutional controls in place;
 ``(iii) assist members of an affected 
 community or Community Advisory Group in 
 applying for technical assistance grants under 
 subsection (e); and
 ``(iv) assist individuals in petitioning 
 for assessment of release under section 105(d), 
 in petitioning for a health assessment under 
 section 104(i)(6)(B), or in petitioning for 
 establishment of a Community Advisory Group 
 under section 117(g)(1)(B).
 ``(B) Report.--
 ``(i) In general.--Each Community 
 Information and Access Office shall annually 
 submit a report to the Administrator 
 summarizing the performance of its duties and 
 shall certify in the report that any funds used 
 under paragraph (2) by the Community 
 Information and Access Office have been used in 
 compliance with the requirements of this 
 subsection. The Administrator shall make such 
 report available to the public.
 ``(ii) Verification by inspector general.--
 The Inspector General of the Environmental 
 Protection Agency shall periodically review the 
 programs carried out under this subsection and 
 reports made under this subparagraph and shall 
 verify the accuracy of the certifications 
 contained in the reports.
 ``(iii) Termination of grant.--If the 
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection 
 Agency is unable to verify the information 
 provided in the report, or if the Administrator 
 determines that the grant is not being used in 
 a manner consistent with the functions under 
 subparagraph (A), the Administrator may 
 terminate the grant.''.

SEC. 204. COMMUNITY ADVISORY GROUPS.

 Section 117 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9617) is further 
amended by adding after subsection (f) the following:
 ``(g) Community Advisory Groups.--
 ``(1) Creation and responsibilities.--The President shall 
 provide the opportunity for the establishment of a 
 representative public forum, known as a Community Advisory 
 Group (CAG), to achieve direct, regular, and meaningful 
 consultation with all interested parties throughout all stages 
 of a response action whenever--
 ``(A) the President determines such a group will be 
 helpful; or
 ``(B) 10 individuals residing in or at the area in 
 which the covered facility is located, or 10 percent of 
 the population of a locality in which the covered 
 facility is located, whichever is less, petition for a 
 Community Advisory Group to be established.
 ``(2) Duties.--Each Community Advisory Group shall provide 
 information and views to the President, and, as appropriate, 
 any or all of the following: the Agency for Toxic Substances 
 and Disease Registry, State agencies, Federal agencies, 
 Federal, State, and tribal natural resource trustees, and 
 potentially responsible parties conducting response actions. 
 The information and views reported shall include the various 
 subjects related to facility remediation, including facility 
 health assessments and health related activities, potential 
 remedial alternatives, and selection and implementation of 
 remedial and removal actions. The Community Advisory Group 
 shall attempt to achieve consensus among its members before 
 reporting positions to agencies, trustees, or potentially 
 responsible parties. In cases in which consensus cannot be 
 reached, the Community Advisory Group shall allow the 
 presentation of divergent views.
 ``(3) Land use.--The President shall adopt, as part of the 
 remedy selected at the facility, any consensus recommendation 
 of the Community Advisory Group on land use to be used as part 
 of the remedy. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, the 
 President shall decline to adopt such a consensus 
 recommendation upon determining that the recommendation is not 
 adequate to protect human health and the environment. In cases 
 in which there is substantive disagreement within the Community 
 Advisory Group over a recommendation regarding land use, the 
 Administrator shall make reasonable efforts to reconcile the 
 differences.
 ``(4) Community advisory group input.--With the exception 
 of land use recommendations, input received from the Community 
 Advisory Groups shall be considered by the President to be of 
 equal weight with the advice received from the Technical 
 Assistance Grant recipients and other affected community 
 members.
 ``(5) Community advisory group members.--Members shall 
 serve on the Community Advisory Group without pay. The 
 President shall provide notice and opportunity to participate 
 on a Community Advisory Group to the affected community, 
 including to persons who are or historically have been 
 disproportionately affected by facility contamination in their 
 community. The President shall ensure that each Community 
 Advisory Group, to the extent practicable, reflects the 
 composition and diversity of interests of the community near 
 the facility. Residents of the area most affected by releases 
 from the facility shall comprise a majority of the total 
 membership of the CAG. At least one person in the CAG shall 
 represent the Technical Assistance Grant recipient if such a 
 grant has been awarded under subsection (e). To the extent 
 practicable, the President shall ensure that members of the 
 following groups are represented on a CAG:
 ``(A) Persons residing or owning residential 
 property in the area in which the covered facility is 
 located or persons who may be affected by releases from 
 the facility.
 ``(B) Medical professionals practicing in the 
 affected community.
 ``(C) Members of local Indian tribes or Indian 
 communities.
 ``(D) Local citizen, civic, environmental, or 
 public interest groups with members residing in the 
 affected community.
 ``(E) Current and former employees of the facility 
 during facility operation.
 ``(F) Local business community members.
 ``(6) FACA.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act shall not 
 apply to a CAG established under this Act or ATSDR Community 
 Advisory Panels.
 ``(7) Technical and administrative support for community 
 advisory groups.--The President may provide administrative 
 support for Community Advisory Groups.
 ``(8) Additional participants.--The Administrator of the 
 Environmental Protection Agency, the Administrator of the 
 Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, the State, 
 representatives chosen by the governing body of local Indian 
 tribes or Indian community local governments (which may include 
 pertinent city or county governments, or both), and any other 
 governmental unit which regulates land use in the vicinity of 
 the facility, as appropriate nonresidential owners or 
 operators, and local representatives of the Potentially 
 Responsible Parties (PRPs) who represent, wherever practicable, 
 a balance of PRP interests, may participate in Community 
 Advisory Group meetings to provide information and technical 
 expertise, but shall not be members of the Community Advisory 
 Group.
 ``(9) Other public involvement.--The existence of a 
 Community Advisory Group shall not diminish any other 
 obligation of the President to consider the views of any person 
 in selecting response actions under this Act. Nothing in this 
 section shall affect the status of any Citizen Advisory Group 
 formed before the enactment of this subsection. Nothing in this 
 section shall affect the status, decisions, or future formation 
 of any Department of Defense Restoration Advisory Board, or 
 Department of Energy Site Specific Advisory Board, and no 
 Citizen Advisory Group must be established for a facility if 
 any such Board has been established for the facility.
 ``(h) Community Study.--
 ``(1) Report by the administrator.--The Administrator shall 
 prepare and submit to Congress a Community Study two years 
 after the date of enactment of this Act, shall periodically 
 update the study, and shall also provide such study to the 
 Community Information and Access Office. The Administrator and 
 Community Information and Access Offices shall ensure that 
 copies of such studies are made available to the public.
 ``(2) Content of the report.--The Administrator's report 
 shall include an analysis of the speed of listing; the speed 
 and nature of response action; the degree to which public views 
 are reflected in response actions; use of institutional 
 controls; and the population, race, ethnicity, and income 
 characteristics of each community affected by each facility 
 listed or proposed for listing on the National Priorities List.
 ``(3) Evaluation.--The Administrator shall evaluate the 
 information in the study to determine whether priority setting, 
 response actions, and public participation requirements were 
 conducted in a fair and equitable manner and identify program 
 areas that require improvements or modification.
 ``(4) Actions based on evaluation.--The Administrator shall 
 institute the necessary improvements or modifications to 
 address any deficiencies identified by the study prepared under 
 this section.''.

SEC. 205. TECHNICAL OUTREACH SERVICES FOR COMMUNITIES.

 Section 311(d)(2) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9660(d)(2)) is 
amended to read as follows:
 ``(2) Responsibilities of centers.--The responsibilities of 
 a hazardous substance research center under this subsection 
 shall include--
 ``(A) the conduct of research and training relating 
 to the manufacture, use, transportation, disposal, and 
 management of hazardous substances and publication and 
 dissemination of the results of the research; and
 ``(B) the conduct of a program to provide 
 educational and technical assistance to communities 
 affected by contamination.''.

SEC. 206. RECRUITMENT AND TRAINING PROGRAM.

 Section 117 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9617) is amended by 
adding after subsection (h) the following:
 ``(i) Recruitment and Training Program.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Administrator, in consultation with 
 the National Institute of Environmental Health Studies, shall 
 conduct a program to assist in the recruitment and training of 
 individuals in an affected community for employment in response 
 activities conducted at the facility concerned.
 ``(2) Recruitment, training, and employment.--The 
 Administrator shall encourage a person conducting a response 
 action under this Act to train and employ persons from the 
 affected community in remediation skills.''.

 Subtitle B--Human Health

SEC. 211. DISEASE REGISTRY AND HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.

 Section 104 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9604) is amended as 
follows:
 (1) In subsection (b), by adding the following new 
 paragraph at the end thereof:
 ``(3) Notice to Health Authorities.--The President shall notify 
State and local public health authorities and Tribal health officials 
whenever the President has reason to believe that a release of a 
hazardous substance, pollutant, or contaminant has occurred, is 
occurring, or is about to occur or that there is a threat of such a 
release.''.
 (2) By amending subparagraph (A) of subsection (i)(1) to 
 read as follows:
 ``(A) in cooperation with the States, establish and 
 maintain a national registry of serious diseases and illnesses, 
 a national registry of persons exposed to toxic substances, 
 including a subregistry of those persons exposed within special 
 priority areas listed under section 116(f)(2), and a national 
 registry of health clinics and services available within 
 affected communities as authorized under section 104(i)(15)(C), 
 including a subregistry of clinics and services available 
 within such special priority areas;''.
 (3) In subparagraph (E) of subsection (i)(1), by striking 
 ``admission to hospitals and other facilities and services 
 operated or provided by the Public Health Service'' and 
 inserting ``referral to health care providers''.
 (4) Paragraph (6)(A) of subsection (i) is amended to read 
 as follows:
 ``(A)(i) The Administrator of ATSDR shall perform a health 
assessment for each facility listed or proposed for listing on the 
National Priorities List established under section 105, including a 
facility owned or operated by a department, agency, or instrumentality 
of the United States. In the case of a facility that is listed or 
proposed for listing on the National Priorities List for ecological 
reasons only, a related health activity (including biomedical testing, 
clinical evaluations, medical monitoring, and referral to accredited 
health care providers) may be performed in lieu of a health assessment. 
Such health assessment or related health activity shall be completed 
for each facility listed or proposed for listing on the National 
Priorities List not later than 1 year after the date of proposal for 
inclusion on such list for each facility.
 ``(ii) The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency and 
the Administrator of ATSDR shall develop strategies, in consultation 
with State, Tribal, and local health officials, to obtain relevant on-
site and off-site characterization data, taking into account the needs 
and conditions of the affected community.
 ``(iii) The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency 
shall, to the maximum extent practicable, provide the Administrator of 
ATSDR with the data and information necessary to make a public health 
determination in a timely manner in order to allow the Administrator of 
ATSDR to complete the assessment.
 ``(iv) If appropriate, the Administrator of ATSDR shall provide 
recommendations for sampling environmental media to the Administrator 
of the Environmental Protection Agency as soon as practicable after 
discovering a release or threat of release of a hazardous substance, 
pollutant, or contaminant at a facility. To the maximum extent 
practicable, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency 
shall incorporate such recommendations into the facility investigation 
activities.
 ``(v) In order to improve community involvement in health 
assessments, the Administrator of ATSDR shall carry out each of the 
following duties:
 ``(I) The Administrator of ATSDR shall actively collect 
 data from residents of affected communities and from other 
 sources in communities affected or potentially affected by 
 releases of hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants 
 regarding exposure, relevant human activities, and other 
 factors.
 ``(II) The Administrator of ATSDR shall design health 
 assessments that take into account the needs and conditions of 
 the affected community. In preparing such designs, the 
 Administrator of ATSDR shall permit each affected community to 
 play an active and early role in reviewing the designs, shall 
 place emphasis on collection of actual exposure data, and shall 
 consider sources of multiple exposure to environmental 
 pollutants.''.
 (5) Subparagraph (F) of subsection (i)(6) is amended to 
 read as follows:
 ``(F) For the purposes of this subsection and section 111(c)(4), 
the term `health assessments' shall include preliminary assessments of 
the potential risk to human health, including fetuses, children, and 
other highly exposed, highly susceptible, or differentially susceptible 
subpopulations, posed by individual sites and facilities, based on such 
factors as the nature and extent of contamination, the past, present, 
or future existence of potential pathways of human exposure and the 
community's historic exposure to site-related and non-site-related 
sources of contamination (including ground or surface water 
contamination, air emissions, and food chain contamination, including 
contamination of human breast milk), the size and potential 
susceptibility of the community within the likely pathways of exposure, 
the comparison of expected human exposure levels to the short-term and 
long-term health effects associated with identified hazardous 
substances and any available recommended exposure or tolerance limits 
for such hazardous substances, and the comparison of existing morbidity 
and mortality data on diseases that may be associated with the observed 
levels of exposure.''.
 (6) In paragraph (14) of subsection (i) by--
 (A) striking ``distribute to the States, and upon 
 request to medical colleges, physicians, and'' and 
 inserting the following: ``distribute to the States, 
 including State health departments, Tribal health 
 officials, and upon request to medical colleges, local 
 health departments, medical centers, physicians, 
 nursing institutions, nurses, and'';
 (B) inserting ``(A)'' after ``(14)''; and
 (C) adding the following at the end thereof:
 ``(B) The Administrator of ATSDR shall also assemble, develop, as 
necessary, and distribute to the general public and to at-risk 
populations appropriate educational materials and other information on 
the human health effects of hazardous substances.''.

SEC. 212. SUBSTANCE PROFILES.

 Section 104(i)(3) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9604(i)(3)) is 
amended as follows:
 (1) By inserting ``(A)'' after ``(3)''.
 (2) By redesignating subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) as 
 clauses (i), (ii), and (iii), respectively.
 (3) By striking out the matter beginning with ``Any 
 toxicological profile or revision thereof'' and all that 
 follows through the end of such paragraph and inserting in lieu 
 thereof the following:
 ``(B) Any toxicological profile or revision thereof shall reflect 
the Administrator of ATSDR's assessment of all relevant toxicological 
testing which has been peer reviewed. The profiles prepared under this 
paragraph shall be for those substances highest on the list of 
priorities under paragraph (2) for which profiles have not previously 
been prepared or for substances not on the listing but which have been 
found at National Priorities List facilities and non-National 
Priorities List facilities and which have been determined by ATSDR to 
be of health concern. Profiles required under this paragraph shall be 
revised and republished as appropriate, based on scientific 
development. Such profiles shall be provided to the States, including 
State health departments, Tribal health officials, and local health 
departments, and made available to other interested parties.''.

SEC. 213. EXPOSURE LEVELS.

 (a) Exposure and Tolerance Limits.--Section 104(i)(5)(A) of the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 
of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9604(i)(5)) is amended by striking the first three 
sentences and inserting the following:
 ``(5)(A) For each hazardous substance listed pursuant to paragraph 
(2), the Administrator of ATSDR (in consultation with the Administrator 
of the Environmental Protection Agency and other agencies and programs 
of the Public Health Service) shall assess whether adequate information 
on the health effects of such substance is available, including the 
availability of recommended exposure or tolerance limits. For any such 
substance for which adequate information is not available (or under 
development), the Administrator of ATSDR, in cooperation with the 
Director of the National Toxicology Program or the Administrator of the 
Environmental Protection Agency, shall assure the initiation of a 
program of research designed to determine the health effects of and 
exposure or tolerance limits for (and techniques for development of 
methods to determine such effects and limits) such substance, including 
the determination of such effects and limits for fetuses, children, and 
other highly exposed, highly susceptible, or differentially susceptible 
subpopulations. Where feasible, such program shall seek to develop 
methods to determine the health effects of and exposure or tolerance 
limits for such substance in combination with other substances with 
which it is commonly found.''.
 (b) Additional Duty of Administrator of ATSDR.--Section 104(i)(1) 
of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and 
Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9604(i)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (B), (C), and (D) as 
 subparagraphs (C), (D), and (E), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the following:
 ``(B) establish and maintain an inventory of available 
 exposure or tolerance limits for hazardous substances 
 identified in paragraph (2);''.
 (c) Research To Establish Exposure and Tolerance Limits.--Section 
311(a)(1)(A)(i) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9660(a)(1)(A)(i)) is 
amended by inserting ``and for the establishment of exposure or 
tolerance limits for hazardous substances'' before the period.

SEC. 214. HEALTH STUDIES.

 (a) Human Health Study.--Subparagraph (A) of section 104(i)(7) of 
the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability 
Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9604(i)(7)) is amended to read as follows: ``(A) 
Whenever in the judgment of the Administrator of ATSDR it is 
appropriate on the basis of the results of a health assessment or 
related health activity or on the basis of other appropriate 
information, the Administrator of ATSDR shall conduct a human health 
study of exposure or other health effects for selected groups or 
individuals in order to determine the desirability of conducting full 
scale epidemiologic or other health studies of the entire exposed 
population.''.
 (b) Research Program.--Section 104(i)(5)(A) of the Comprehensive 
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 
U.S.C. 9604(i)(5)(A)), as amended by section 213, is amended as 
follows:
 (1) By inserting after ``program of research'' the 
 following: ``conducted directly or by such means as cooperative 
 agreements and grants with appropriate public and nonprofit 
 institutions. The program shall be''.
 (2) In the last sentence--
 (A) in clause (iii), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) by redesignating clause (iv) as clause (v); and
 (C) by inserting after clause (iii) the following:
 ``(iv) laboratory and other studies that 
 can lead to the development of innovative 
 techniques for predicting organ-specific, 
 tissue-specific, and system-specific acute and 
 chronic toxicity; and''.

SEC. 215. RELOCATION OF INDIVIDUALS.

 Section 104(i)(11) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9604(i)(11)) is 
amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) and (B) as clauses 
 (i) and (ii), respectively;
 (2) by inserting ``(A)'' after ``(11)'';
 (3) by striking ``In any case'' and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(B) In any case'';
 (4) in subparagraph (A) (as so redesignated), by striking 
 ``or substantially mitigate the significant risk'' and 
 inserting ``the risk''; and
 (5) by adding at the end of subparagraph (A) (as so 
 redesignated) the following:
``In any case in which the President permanently relocates an 
individual, the President shall provide to the individual the 
replacement value of the individual's residence.''.

SEC. 216. GRANT AWARDS, CONTRACTS, AND COMMUNITY ASSISTANCE ACTIVITIES.

 (a) Carrying Out Activities of ATSDR.--Section 104(i)(15) of the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 
of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 6904(i)(15)) is amended as follows:
 (1) By inserting ``(A)'' before ``The activities''.
 (2) In the first sentence, by striking ``cooperative 
 agreements with States (or political subdivisions thereof)'' 
 and inserting ``grants, cooperative agreements, or contracts 
 with States (or political subdivisions thereof), Indian tribes, 
 other appropriate public authorities, public or private 
 institutions or organizations, colleges, universities 
 (including historically black colleges and universities) and 
 other educational institutions that primarily serve minorities 
 or represent the interests of affected communities''.
 (3) By adding at the end the following new subparagraphs:
 ``(B) When a health assessment is conducted at a facility on the 
National Priorities List, or a release is being evaluated for inclusion 
on the National Priorities List, the Administrator of ATSDR may provide 
the assistance specified in subparagraph (C) to public or private 
nonprofit entities, individuals, and community-based groups that may be 
affected by the release or threatened release of hazardous substances 
in the environment.
 ``(C) The Administrator of ATSDR, pursuant to the grants, 
cooperative agreements, and contracts referred to in this paragraph, is 
authorized and directed to provide, where appropriate, health services 
to communities affected by the release of hazardous substances. Such 
health services may include diagnostic services, testing, counseling, 
specialized treatment, health data registries, and preventive public 
health education. Such services may be provided at existing health 
clinics within the affected community. If such a clinic does not 
already exist within the affected community, the Administrator shall 
establish such a clinic within 1 year after the date of enactment of 
this paragraph.''.
 (b) Funding.--Section 111 of the Comprehensive Environmental 
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9611) is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (c)(4), by inserting ``operating support 
 for and establishment of environmental health clinics and 
 health services,'' after ``assessments,''; and
 (2) in subsection (m), by adding at the end the following: 
 ``There shall be directly available to the Agency for Toxic 
 Substances and Disease Registry to be used for the 
 establishment of environmental health clinics and health 
 services under section 104(i)(15)(C) not less than $50,000,000 
 for each of fiscal years 2000 through 2004.''.

SEC. 217. INDIAN HEALTH PROVISIONS.

 Section 104(i) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9406(i)) is amended 
as follows:
 (1) In paragraph (1)--
 (A) by inserting ``the Indian Health Service'' 
 after ``the Secretary of Transportation'';
 (B) by inserting ``and tribal'' after ``and 
 local'';
 (C) in subparagraph (A) by inserting ``and Indian 
 tribes'' after ``the States''; and
 (D) in subparagraph (C) by inserting ``Indian 
 tribes'' after ``States,''.
 (2) In paragraph (4) by--
 (A) striking ``State officials and local 
 officials'' and inserting ``State, tribal, and local 
 officials''; and
 (B) inserting in the second sentence ``or Indian 
 tribes'' after ``States''.
 (3) In paragraph (5)(A) by inserting ``and the Indian 
 Health Service'' after ``Public Health Service''.
 (4) In paragraph (6)(C) by inserting ``where low population 
 density is not used as an excluding risk factor'' after 
 ``health appears highest''.
 (5) In paragraph (6)(E)--
 (A) by inserting ``Indian tribe'' after ``Any''; 
 and
 (B) by inserting at the end of the subparagraph the 
 following: ``If the ATSDR or the Administrator of the 
 Environmental Protection Agency does not act on the 
 recommendations of the State or Indian tribe, then the 
 Administrators must respond in writing to the State or 
 tribe why they have not acted on the 
 recommendations.''.
 (6) In paragraph (6)(F) by striking ``and'' after 
 ``emissions,'' and inserting ``and any other pathways resulting 
 from subsistence activities'' after ``contamination''.
 (7) In paragraph (6)(G) by striking the period at the end 
 of the last sentence and inserting the following: ``and give 
 special consideration, where appropriate, to any practices of 
 the affected community that may result in increased exposure to 
 hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants, such as 
 subsistence hunting, fishing, and gathering.''.
 (8) In paragraph (10)--
 (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph 
 (D);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of 
 subparagraph (E) and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by inserting after revised subparagraph (E) the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(F) and the health impacts from pollutants, 
 contaminants, and hazardous substances on Indian tribes 
 from covered facilities.''.

SEC. 218. PUBLIC HEALTH RECOMMENDATIONS IN REMEDIAL ACTIONS.

 Section 121(c) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9621(c)) is amended 
in the first sentence by inserting after ``remedial action'' the second 
time it appears the following: ``, including public health 
recommendations and decisions resulting from activities under section 
104(i),''.

 Subtitle C--General Provisions

SEC. 221. TRANSITION.

 (a) Effective Date in General.--Except as provided in subsection 
(b), this title and the amendments made by this title shall become 
effective upon the date of enactment of this Act.
 (b) Special Rule.--The requirements of paragraphs (2), (3), (5), 
(8), (9), and (10) of section 117(a) and of the Comprehensive 
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, as 
added by section 302(b) shall become effective 180 days after the date 
of enactment of this Act.

 TITLE III--RIGHT TO KNOW

SEC. 301. RIGHT TO KNOW.

 (a) Amendment of Superfund.--Section 117 of title I of the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 
of 1980, as amended by title II, is further amended by adding at the 
end the following:
 ``(k) Disclosure of Hazardous Substances at Facilities.--
 ``(1) Purpose and means of disclosure.--The information 
 required under this subsection is intended for use by Federal, 
 State, and local governments and the public, including but not 
 limited to residents of affected communities and researchers. 
 The information on facilities not on the National Priorities 
 List, in particular, is intended to identify the multiple 
 sources of toxic chemicals to which communities may be 
 potentially exposed. The Administrator shall publish such 
 information using language and methods of communication, 
 including computer telecommunication, that the Administrator 
 believes to be clear and understandable to persons not expert 
 in environmental or legal matters. Such methods shall allow 
 persons to retrieve all the publicly available information 
 gathered by the Administrator for one or more facilities 
 through one point of access.
 ``(2) Dates of disclosure.--The potentially responsible 
 parties named by the Environmental Protection Agency in regard 
 to each facility listed on the National Priorities List, and 
 the owner or operator of each facility subject to section 313 
 of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, 
 shall submit to the Administrator and to an official or 
 officials of the State designated by the Governor the 
 information listed under (3) on or before July 1, 2000, for the 
 calendar year 1999, and annually thereafter on or before July 1 
 for the preceding calendar year. If the Administrator is 
 carrying out a response action at such a facility, the 
 Administrator shall compile such information in lieu of 
 potentially responsible parties.
 ``(3) Information disclosed.--The items of information to 
 be submitted under paragraph (2) for each facility are as 
 follows:
 ``(A) The name, location, regulatory status, common 
 identifiers, and principal activities at the facility.
 ``(B) In the case of a facility listed on the 
 National Priorities List, the identity of all 
 potentially responsible parties associated with the 
 facility.
 ``(C) An appropriate certification, signed by a 
 senior official with management responsibility for the 
 person or persons completing the report, regarding the 
 accuracy and completeness of the report.
 ``(D) Subject to section 322 of the Superfund 
 Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, each of the 
 items of information listed in subparagraph (E) for the 
 following substances:
 ``(i) Each hazardous substance, pollutant, 
 or contaminant identified in the preliminary 
 site assessment as being present in higher than 
 naturally occurring background concentrations, 
 if the facility is on the National Priorities 
 List.
 ``(ii) Each of the following substances 
 being released from the facility above 
 naturally occurring background levels: lead, 
 mercury, dioxin, cadmium, chromium, and 
 substances listed as bioaccumulative chemicals 
 of concern at 60 Federal Register 15393, and 
 each substance, pollutant, or contaminant which 
 the Administrator determines may present a 
 significant hazard to health or the environment 
 due to its persistence or potential to 
 bioaccumulate or disrupt endocrine systems, or 
 to other characteristics. The Administrator may 
 exempt from the requirements of this clause any 
 of the bioaccumulative chemicals of concern at 
 60 Federal Register 15393 that the 
 Administrator determines do not present a 
 significant hazard to health or the 
 environment.
 ``(iii) Each substance for which the 
 facility is required to submit a toxic chemical 
 release form under section 313 of the Superfund 
 Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986.
 ``(E) The items referred to in subparagraph (D) are 
 as follows:
 ``(i) If the substance was present or 
 released as a waste or contaminant, a 
 description of the form in which the substance 
 was present or released, or otherwise a 
 description of the uses of the substance at the 
 facility.
 ``(ii) The quantity of the substance 
 present at the facility at the beginning of the 
 reporting year.
 ``(iii) The quantity of the substance 
 present at the facility at the end of the 
 reporting year.
 ``(iv) The quantity of the substance 
 destroyed or consumed at the facility, and, if 
 destroyed or consumed as a waste, the 
 treatment, energy recovery, or recycling 
 methods employed.
 ``(v) The quantity of the substance 
 generated or produced at the facility, and if 
 generated or produced as a residual of the 
 process of waste treatment, whether it remained 
 on site or was released during the reporting 
 year.
 ``(vi) The quantity of the substance 
 removed as waste from the facility for 
 treatment, disposal, energy recovery, or 
 recycling and the destination and mode of 
 transportation.
 ``(vii) The quantity of the substance 
 recycled at the facility that is subsequently 
 used at the facility, except for substances 
 referred to in subparagraph (D)(i).
 ``(viii) The quantity of the substance 
 brought into the facility and the mode of 
 transportation, except for substances referred 
 to in subparagraph (D)(i).
 ``(ix) The quantity of the substance 
 removed from the facility as or in products and 
 the mode of transportation, except for 
 substances referred to in subparagraph (D)(i).
 ``(x) The quantity of the substance 
 released into each environmental medium from 
 the facility.
 ``(xi) The `hazardous substance 
 throughput', which shall be calculated by 
 adding the quantities reported under clauses 
 (ii), (v), (vii), and (viii) and subtracting 
 the quantity reported under clause (iii). If 
 the sum of the quantities reported under 
 clauses (ii), (v), and (viii) does not equal 
 the sum of the quantities reported under 
 clauses (iii), (iv), (vi), (ix), and (x), an 
explanation of the difference shall be provided.
 ``(xii) The number of employees, including 
 contractors, at the facility; the number of 
 employees, including contractors, at the 
 facility exposed to the substance; and an 
 estimate of occupational exposures to the 
 substance.
 ``(F) For substances referred to in subparagraph 
 (D)(i), within 3 years after the date of enactment of 
 this subparagraph, a statement of whether the set of 
 information defined under section 302(d) of the 
 Children's Protection and Community Cleanup Act of 1998 
 is publicly available. Such a statement shall not be 
 required for chemicals listed under section 302(e) of 
 such Act. In lieu of such a statement, a certification 
 under section 302(g) of such Act may be submitted where 
 appropriate.
 ``(4) Methods of calculation and reporting.--
 ``(A) Readily available data (including monitoring 
 data) collected pursuant to other provisions of law, 
 or, where such data are not readily available, 
 reasonable estimates of the amounts involved may be 
 used to provide the information required under this 
 subsection. Nothing in this section requires the 
 monitoring or measurement of the quantities, 
 concentration, or frequency of any substance beyond 
 that monitoring and measurement required under other 
 provisions of law or regulation.
 ``(B) The Administrator shall, within 5 years after 
 the enactment of this paragraph, consolidate all annual 
 reporting pursuant to this title and other Federal 
 environmental laws for each entity subject to such 
 reporting, to the extent not explicitly prohibited by 
 such laws. Such consolidated reporting requirements 
 shall allow reporting to one point of contact using one 
 form or electronic reporting system. In order to assure 
 consistency, the Administrator shall require that data 
 be expressed in common units and shall integrate the 
 reporting requirements and public dissemination of 
 information under this Act with that of section 313 of 
 the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 
 1986. Reports shall be submitted in an electronic 
 format to be determined by the Administrator, except 
 for those facilities which the Administrator believes 
 would be unduly burdened by using such an electronic 
 format.
 ``(5) Information provided to technical assistance 
 recipients and applicants.--The Administrator shall provide to 
 recipients of, and applicants for, technical assistance grants 
 awarded under subsection (e), community advisory groups 
 established under subsection (g), and other interested persons, 
 each of the following items of information:
 ``(A) The information reported to or compiled by 
 the Administrator under paragraph (3) regarding the 
 facility or facilities on the National Priorities List 
 of concern to such persons.
 ``(B) All publicly available information reported 
 to the Administrator under Federal environmental laws 
 regarding regulated facilities and the use and release 
 of hazardous substances in the geographic area of the 
 facility or facilities on the National Priorities List 
 of concern to such persons. Such information shall be 
 organized by facility and by other identifiers to 
 facilitate use by such persons.
 ``(C) Information that the Administrator believes 
 to be useful in understanding the potential hazards 
 that may be posed to human health and the environment 
 by the uses and releases of hazardous substances 
 disclosed under subparagraphs (A) and (B).
 ``(6) Information provided to persons studying national and 
 regional trends.--The Administrator shall provide or make 
 available to any person all publicly available information 
 reported to the Administrator under Federal environmental laws 
 regarding facilities and the use and release of hazardous 
 substances in order to study national and regional trends and 
 for other purposes. Such information shall be provided through 
 a system that allows for the retrieval and analysis of 
 information regarding one or more parent companies, facilities, 
 industries, chemicals, geographic locations, ecological 
 indicators, and categories of regulatory status.''.
 (b) Amendment of Superfund.--Section 117(a) of title I of the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 
of 1980 is amended as follows:
 (1) By striking ``both of the following actions'' and 
 inserting ``the following actions''.
 (2) By striking ``(2)'' and inserting ``(3)'',
 (3) By inserting after paragraph (1) the following:
 ``(2) Publish a notice of availability of the information 
 listed under subsection (k)(5).''.
 (c) No Preemption of State Programs.--Subsection (a) of section 114 
of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and 
Liability Act of 1980 is amended by inserting ``or reporting'' after 
``release''.
 (d) Penalties for Noncompliance.--Subsection (a)(1) of section 109 
of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and 
Liability Act of 1980 is amended by adding the following after 
subparagraph (E):
 ``(F) A violation of the requirements of section 
 117(k).''.
 (e) Additional Categories of Facilities.--Section 313(b)(1)(B) of 
the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 is amended as 
follows:
 (1) By striking ``(B) The Administrator'' and inserting 
 ``(B)(i) The Administrator''.
 (2) By adding at the end the following:
 ``(ii) Within 24 months after the date of 
 enactment of this clause, the Administrator 
 shall promulgate a final regulation that adds 
 all additional categories of facilities that 
 manufactured, processed, used, or released 
 toxic chemicals in volumes similar to those of 
 facilities that are covered by this section as 
 of such date of enactment. This clause shall 
 not apply to any farm.''.
 (f) Trade Secret Protection.--Section 322 of the Superfund 
Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 is amended as follows:
 (1) In subsection (a)(1) by adding the following at the end 
 thereof:
 ``(C) Any person required to submit information 
 under section 117(k)(3)(D) of the Comprehensive 
 Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 
 of 1980 may withhold an element or portion of such 
 information, as defined in regulations prescribed by 
 the Administrator under subsection (c) of this section, 
 if the person complies with paragraph (2) with respect 
 to the information to be withheld. This subparagraph 
 shall not provide authority to withhold any information 
 referred to in the Pollution Prevention Act of 1990 (42 
 U.S.C. 13101 and following). Any person withholding 
 information under this paragraph shall, in the place on 
 the submittal where the information would normally be 
 included, indicate that the information has been 
 withheld as a trade secret. Any person withholding 
 information under this subparagraph shall provide to 
 the Administrator the information required under in 
 writing and in such manner as the Administrator may 
 prescribe by regulation.''.
 (2) Subsection (b)(4) is amended by inserting ``or other 
 information withheld'' after ``The chemical identity''.
 (3) Subsection (d)(1) is amended by inserting ``or other 
 information'' after ``toxic chemical''.
 (4) Subsection (d)(2) is amended by inserting ``or other 
 information withheld'' after ``specific chemical identity''.
 (5) Subsection (d)(3)(A) is amended by inserting ``or other 
 information withheld'' after ``specific chemical identity''.
 (6) Subsection (d)(3)(B) is amended by inserting ``or other 
 information withheld'' after ``chemical identity''.
 (7) Subsection (d)(3)(C) is amended by inserting ``or other 
 information withheld'' after ``chemical identity'' in each 
 place it appears.
 (8) Subsection (d)(4)(A) is amended by inserting ``or other 
 information withheld'' after ``chemical identity''.
 (9) Subsection (f) is amended by inserting ``or other 
 information withheld under subsection (a)(1)'' after ``specific 
 chemical identity''.
 (10) Subsection (h)(1) is amended by inserting ``or other 
 information withheld'' before ``is claimed as a''.
 (11) Subsection (h)(2) is amended by inserting ``or other 
 information withheld'' after ``identity of a toxic chemical''.

SEC. 302. UNSTUDIED CHEMICAL RELEASE FORMS.

 (a) Basic Requirement.--The owner or operator of a facility subject 
to the requirements of this section shall complete an unstudied 
chemical release form as published under subsection (h) for each 
unstudied chemical subject to the requirements of this section that was 
manufactured, processed, or otherwise used in quantities exceeding the 
threshold quantity established by subsection (f) during the preceding 
calendar year at such facility. Such form shall be submitted to the 
Administrator and to an official or officials of the State designated 
by the Governor on or before July 1 of the year commencing 24 months 
after the date of enactment of this section and annually thereafter on 
July 1, and shall contain data reflecting releases during the preceding 
calendar year.
 (b) Covered Owners and Operators of Facilities.--
 (1) In general.--The requirements of this section shall 
 apply to owners and operators of facilities that are required 
 to report pursuant to section 313(b) of the Emergency Planning 
 and Community Right-To-Know Act (42 U.S.C. 11023(b)).
 (2) Addition of facilities.--The Administrator may by rule 
 apply the requirements of this section to the owners and 
 operators of any particular facility or class of facilities 
 that manufactures, processes, or otherwise uses an unstudied 
 chemical subject to the requirements of this section if the 
 Administrator determines that such action is warranted on the 
 basis of--
 (A) the potential volume of the unstudied chemical 
 manufactured, processed, or otherwise used at the 
 facility;
 (B) the proximity of the facility to other 
 facilities that manufacture, process, or otherwise use 
 the unstudied chemical or other chemicals of known or 
 potential toxicity;
 (C) the proximity of the facility to population 
 centers; or
 (D) such other factors as the Administrator deems 
 appropriate.
 (3) Exclusion of facilities.--The Administrator may by rule 
 exclude from reporting under this section a class of facilities 
 in a Standard Industrial Classification Code that is required 
 to report under section 313(b) of the Emergency Planning and 
 Community Right-To-Know Act (42 U.S.C. 11023(b)), upon 
 determining that there is sufficient information to conclude 
 that all unstudied chemicals subject to the requirements of 
 this section released by such facilities will not cause one or 
 more of the effects listed in clause (i), (ii), or (iii) of 
 subsection (d)(2)(A).
 (c) Unstudied Chemicals Covered.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 unstudied chemicals subject to the requirements of this section 
 are the following:
 (A) Any chemical--
 (i) for which the information needed to 
 complete a preliminary assessment of potential 
 toxicity defined in subsection (d) is not 
 available, in whole or in part; and
 (ii) that is a compound that is a member of 
 one or more of the following categories:
 (I) Compounds containing at least 
 the elements of carbon, hydrogen, and 
 one or more of the following elements: 
 chlorine, fluorine, or bromine.
 (II) Compounds included on the 1990 
 High Production Volume List compiled by 
 the Administrator based on the 
 Inventory Update Rule issued pursuant 
 to section 8 of the Toxic Substances 
 Control Act, or any subsequent version 
 of that list.
 (B) Such additional chemicals or categories of 
 chemicals as the Administrator may by rule add, based 
 on the potential ability of the chemical or categories 
 of chemicals to cause one or more of the effects listed 
 in clause (i), (ii), or (iii) of subsection (d)(2)(A) 
 or based on the presence of the chemical or category of 
 chemicals in human tissues, in food stuffs, or in 
 drinking water.
 (2) Exceptions.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the 
 following chemicals shall not be subject to the requirements of 
 this section:
 (A) Chemicals listed under section 313(b) of the 
 Emergency Planning and Community Right-To-Know Act (42 
 U.S.C. 11023(b)).
 (B) Chemicals that are high molecular weight 
 polymers.
 (C) Chemicals listed by the Administrator under 
 subsection (e).
 (3) Aggregated reporting.--Information required to be 
 reported under this section may be reported on an aggregated 
 basis for chemicals containing 20 or more carbon atoms. The 
 Administrator may by rule increase or decrease the number in 
 the preceding sentence, but shall not decrease it below 14 
 carbon atoms.
 (d) Information Needed for Preliminary Assessment of Potential 
Toxicity.--
 (1) In general.--The Administrator may by rule define the 
 set of information needed to conduct a preliminary assessment 
 of potential toxicity of a chemical. If the Administrator does 
 not promulgate such a rule prior to the date 9 months after the 
 date of enactment of this section, the set of 
information needed to conduct a preliminary assessment of potential 
toxicity shall be deemed to be the Screening Information Data Set 
established by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development and published in the SIDS Manual, Second Edition, May 1996, 
Chapter 2.2.
 (2) Alterations to set of information.--
 (A) Additions.--The Administrator shall add a new 
 element to the set of information needed for a 
 preliminary assessment of potential toxicity if the 
 Administrator determines that adding such element of 
 information is likely to facilitate the completion, or 
 enhance the reliability, of a preliminary assessment of 
 potential toxicity because the information relates to 
 the potential for exposure to the chemical or to the 
 potential ability of the chemical to cause one or more 
 of the following:
 (i) Significant adverse acute human health 
 effects.
 (ii) In humans--
 (I) cancer or teratogenic effects; 
 or
 (II) serious or irreversible 
 reproductive dysfunctions, neurological 
 disorders, heritable genetic mutations, 
 disruption of endocrine function, or 
 other chronic health effects.
 (iii) A significant adverse effect on the 
 environment because of the chemical's--
 (I) toxicity;
 (II) toxicity and persistence in 
 the environment; or
 (III) toxicity and tendency to 
 bioaccumulate in the environment.
 (B) Deletions.--The Administrator may delete an 
 element of information from the set of information 
 needed for a preliminary assessment of potential 
 toxicity if the Administrator determines that--
 (i) deleting the element will facilitate 
 compliance with this section; and
 (ii) following the deletion, the set of 
 elements of information will be adequate to 
 allow the conduct of a preliminary assessment 
 of potential toxicity at least as reliably as 
 would occur through use of the Screening 
 Information Data Set.
 (3) Modifications of elements of information.--The 
 Administrator may modify an element of information needed for a 
 preliminary assessment of potential toxicity if the 
 Administrator determines that--
 (A) modifying the element is likely to--
 (i) facilitate the completion or enhance 
 the reliability of a preliminary assessment of 
 potential toxicity, taking into account the 
 factors listed in paragraph (2), or
 (ii) facilitate compliance with this 
 section; and
 (B) following the modification, the set of elements 
 of information will be adequate to allow the conduct of 
 a preliminary assessment of potential toxicity at least 
 as reliably as would occur through use of the Screening 
 Information Data Set.
 (e) Chemicals for Which Reporting Is Not Required.--
 (1) In general.--Reporting requirements under this section 
 shall not apply to chemicals listed by the Administrator under 
 paragraph (2).
 (2) Listed chemicals.--The Administrator may determine, for 
 a particular covered chemical, that the set of information 
 referred to in subsection (d) is publicly available. The 
 Administrator shall maintain a list of such chemicals and 
 update the list at least annually.
 (3) Requirement to make information electronically 
 available.--Upon adding a chemical to the list of chemicals for 
 which reporting is not required, the Administrator shall ensure 
 that the information needed to conduct a preliminary assessment 
 of potential toxicity of the chemical is publicly accessible 
 through electronic means.
 (4) Additional determination required for listed 
 chemicals.--Upon adding a chemical to the list of chemicals for 
 which reporting is not required, the Administrator shall make 
 one of the following determinations and publish a statement of 
 the basis for the determination:
 (A) Based on available information, the chemical is 
 a low priority for further consideration or action by 
 the Environmental Protection Agency.
 (B) Based on available information, the chemical is 
 a priority for additional testing.
 (C) Releases of the chemical appear to warrant 
 reporting under 313 of the Emergency Planning and 
 Community Right-To-Know Act (42 U.S.C. 11023).
 (D) Based on available information, regulatory 
 action by the Environmental Protection Agency appears 
 to be warranted.
 (E) Based on available information, regulatory 
 action by another Federal agency appears to be 
 warranted.
 (5) Specific requirements for certain determinations.--(A) 
 For a chemical with respect to which the Administrator makes a 
 determination under paragraph (4)(B), the Administrator shall 
 issue a rule to require testing under section 4 of the Toxic 
 Substances Control Act within 90 days after the date of the 
 determination unless the Administrator by that date has entered 
 into an enforceable voluntary testing agreement for the 
 chemical. If no such rule is issued or voluntary agreement 
 established within such 90 days, or if the data required to be 
 submitted by the rule are not submitted within the period 
 specified by the rule, the requirements of section 313 of the 
 Emergency Planning and Community Right-To-Know Act (42 U.S.C. 
 11023) shall automatically apply to the chemical.
 (B) For chemicals with respect to which the Administrator 
 makes a determination under paragraph (4)(C), the Administrator 
 shall propose by rule adding the chemical to the list of toxic 
 chemicals covered by section 313 of such Act within 90 days 
 after the date of the determination. If no final rule adding 
 the chemical, or final determination not to add the chemical, 
 is issued within 6 months after such date of determination the 
 requirements of section 313 of the Emergency Planning and 
 Community Right-To-Know Act (42 U.S.C. 11023) shall 
 automatically apply to the chemical.
 (C) For chemicals with respect to which the Administrator 
 makes a determination under paragraph (4)(D), the Administrator 
 shall propose by rule an appropriate action within 180 days 
 after the date of the determination. Unless such a rule is 
 proposed within 9 months, or unless the Administrator publishes 
 a determination stating that no such rule is warranted, the 
 requirements of section 313 of the Emergency Planning and 
 Community Right-To-Know Act (42 U.S.C. 11023) shall 
 automatically apply to the chemical.
 (D) For chemicals with respect to which the Administrator 
 makes a determination under paragraph (4)(E), the Administrator 
 shall notify the head of the other Federal agency of the 
 Administrator's determination within 180 days after the date of 
 the determination. Unless such a rule is proposed within 9 
 months, or unless the head of the other Federal agency 
 publishes a determination stating that no such rule is 
 warranted, the requirements of section 313 of the Emergency 
 Planning and Community Right-To-Know Act (42 U.S.C. 11023) 
 shall automatically apply to the chemical.
 (f) Threshold for Reporting.--
 (1) Unstudied chemical threshold amount.--The threshold 
 amounts for purposes of reporting unstudied chemicals under 
 this section are as follows:
 (A) With respect to an unstudied chemical used at a 
 facility, 10,000 pounds of the unstudied chemical per 
 year.
 (B) With respect to an unstudied chemical 
 manufactured (other than as nonproduct output) or 
 processed at a facility, 25,000 pounds of the unstudied 
 chemical per year.
 (C) With respect to an unstudied chemical 
 manufactured as nonproduct output at a facility, 500 
 pounds of the unstudied chemical per year.
 (2) Revisions.--The Administrator may establish a threshold 
 amount for an unstudied chemical different from the amount 
 established by paragraph (1). Such revised threshold shall 
 obtain reporting on at least 80 percent of total releases and 
 production of nonproduct output of the chemical at all 
 facilities subject to the requirements of this section. The 
 amounts established under this paragraph may, at the 
 Administrator's discretion, be based on classes of chemicals or 
 categories of facilities.
 (g) Certification in Lieu of Reporting.--
 (1) In general.--A facility owner or operator who is 
 otherwise required to submit a report under this section with 
 regard to a chemical need not submit such a report if the owner 
 or operator submits a certification that identifies the 
 chemical and states that the set of information referred to in 
 subsection (d) is publicly available for that chemical.
 (2) Format.--Such certification shall provide the name and 
 location of the facility, and shall include a statement, signed 
 by a senior official with management responsibility for the 
 person or persons submitting the certification, regarding the 
 accuracy of the certification. The Administrator may issue 
 rules regarding the format for such certifications.
 (3) Availability.--The Administrator shall make such 
 certifications publicly available in conjunction with, and by 
 the same means as, forms submitted under this section.
 (h) Form.--
 (1) Information required.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than June 1 of the year 
 commencing 18 months after the date of enactment of 
 this Act, the Administrator shall publish a uniform 
 unstudied chemical release form for facilities covered 
 by this section. If the Administrator does not publish 
 such a form, owners and operators of facilities subject 
 to the requirements of this section shall provide the 
 information required under this subsection by letter 
 postmarked on or before the date on which the form is 
 due. In the Administrator's discretion such form either 
 shall be a supplement to the forms required under 
 section 313 of the Emergency Planning and Community 
 Right-To-Know Act (42 U.S.C. 11023), or shall integrate 
 the information required by subparagraph (B) into the 
 forms required under section 313 of the Emergency 
 Planning and Community Right-To-Know Act (42 U.S.C. 
 11023).
 (B) Information required.--The form referred to in 
 subparagraph (A) shall provide for submission of each 
 of the following items of information for each covered 
 unstudied chemical present at the facility in 
 quantities greater than the threshold established under 
 subsection (f):
 (i) The identity of each such chemical, 
 including the structure and, if any, the 
 Chemical Abstracts Service Number.
 (ii) Whether the unstudied chemical at the 
 facility is manufactured as a product output, 
 manufactured as a nonproduct output, processed, 
 or otherwise used, and the general category or 
 categories of use of the chemical.
 (iii) An estimate of the maximum amounts 
 (in ranges) of the unstudied chemical present 
 at the facility at any time during the 
 preceding calendar year.
 (iv) For each wastestream, the waste 
 treatment or disposal methods employed, and an 
estimate of the treatment efficiency typically achieved by such methods 
for that wastestream.
 (v) The annual quantity of the unstudied 
 chemical entering each environmental medium.
 (2) Use of available data.--In order to provide the 
 information required under this section, the owner or operator 
 of a facility may use readily available data (including 
 monitoring data) collected pursuant to other provisions of law, 
 or, where such data are not readily available, reasonable 
 estimates of the amounts involved. Nothing in this section 
 requires the monitoring or measurement of the quantities, 
 concentration, or frequency of any unstudied chemical released 
 into the environment beyond that monitoring and measurement 
 required under other provisions of law or regulation. In order 
 to assure consistency, the Administrator shall require that 
 data be expressed in common units.
 (3) Continued obligation to conduct analyses.--Nothing in 
 paragraph (2) shall be interpreted to relieve the owner or 
 operator of a facility covered by this section of any 
 requirement to conduct mass balance or other analyses as needed 
 in order to identify unstudied compounds covered by this 
 section.
 (i) Use of Release Form.--The release forms required under this 
section are intended to provide information to the Federal, State, and 
local governments and the public, including recipients of, and 
applicants for, technical assistance grants awarded under section 
117(e) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and 
Liability Act of 1980 (as amended by this Act), community advisory 
groups established under section 117(g) of such Act (as amended by this 
Act), and other interested persons. The release form shall be available 
consistent with section 324(a) of the Emergency Planning and Community 
Right-To-Know Act (42 U.S.C. 11044(a)).
 (j) Petitions.--
 (1) In general.--Any person may petition the Administrator 
 to take any of the actions listed in paragraph (2). Within 180 
 days after receipt of a petition, the Administrator shall take 
 one of the following actions:
 (A) Initiate a rulemaking to take the requested 
 action.
 (B) Publish an explanation of why the petition is 
 denied.
 (2) Types of petitions.--A petition under paragraph (1) may 
 request that the Administrator take any of the following 
 actions:
 (A) Add or exclude facilities or classes of 
 facilities required to report under this section under 
 subsection (b).
 (B) Add a chemical or category of chemicals to the 
 chemicals subject to the requirements of this section 
 under subsection (c) on the basis of the potential 
 ability of some or all chemicals in the category to 
 harm human health or the environment.
 (C) Add, delete, or modify elements in the set of 
 information needed to conduct a preliminary assessment 
 of potential toxicity of a chemical under subsection 
 (d).
 (D) Add or delete chemicals from the list of 
 chemicals for which reporting is not required under 
 subsection (e)(2).
 (E) Revise the threshold for purposes of reporting 
 unstudied chemicals under subsection (f).
 (k) EPA Management of Data.--The Administrator shall establish and 
maintain in a computer database a national unstudied chemicals 
inventory based on data submitted to the Administrator under this 
section. The Administrator shall make these data accessible by computer 
telecommunication and other means to any person on a cost reimbursable 
basis.
 (l) Enforcement.--
 (1) In general.--A violation of this section shall be 
 subject to civil and administrative penalties under section 
 325(c) of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-To-Know 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 11045(c)), as if it were a violation of section 
 313 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 11023).
 (2) Burden of proof.--In any enforcement proceeding in 
 which it is alleged that a certification under subsection (g) 
 is erroneous, the burden shall be on the defendant to show that 
 the set of information required under subsection (d) is 
 publicly available.
 (m) Trade Secrets.--Section 322 of the Emergency Planning and 
Community Right-To-Know Act (42 U.S.C. 11042) shall apply to the owner 
or operator of a facility subject to the requirements of this section 
with regard to an unstudied chemical subject to such requirements in 
the same manner as that section applies to persons described in 
subsection (a)(1) of that section with regard to a hazardous chemical, 
an extremely hazardous substance, and a toxic chemical.
 (n) Relationship to Other Law.--Nothing in this section shall--
 (1) preempt any State or local law;
 (2) otherwise affect any State or local law or the 
 authority of any State or local government to adopt or enforce 
 any State or local law; or
 (3) affect or modify in any way the obligations or 
 liabilities of any person under other Federal law.
 (o) Effective Date of Regulations.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), 
 regulations implementing this section shall take effect 60 days 
 after the date of promulgation.
 (2) Certain regulations.--The following regulations shall 
 take effect on July 1 of the year commencing 24 months after 
 the date of promulgation:
 (A) Additions to the facilities or classes of 
 facilities required to report under this section under 
 subsection (b).
 (B) Additions to the unstudied chemicals subject to 
 the requirements of this Act under subsection 
 (c)(1)(B).
 (C) Additions to and significant modifications of 
 the set of information under subsection (d).
 (D) Deletions from the list of chemicals under 
 subsection (e)(2) for which reporting is not required 
 under this section.
 (E) Decreases in the threshold for purposes of 
 reporting unstudied chemicals under subsection (f).
 (p) Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the following 
definitions apply:
 (1) The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of 
 the Environmental Protection Agency.
 (2) The term ``manufacture'' means to produce, prepare, 
 import, or compound an unstudied chemical.
 (3) The term ``process'' means the preparation of an 
 unstudied chemical, after its manufacture, for distribution in 
 commerce--
 (A) in the same form or physical state as, or in a 
 different form or physical state from, that in which it 
 was received by the person so preparing such chemical; 
 or
 (B) as part of an article containing the unstudied 
 chemical.
 (4) The term ``high molecular weight polymer'' means 
 chemicals that would be exempted from reporting under 
 regulations adopted pursuant to section 5 of the Toxic 
 Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. 2604).
 (5) The term ``nonproduct output'' means the quantity of a 
 reported substance that was generated prior to storage, out-of-
 process recycling, treatment, control, or disposal, and that 
 was not intended for use as a product. The term includes 
 environmental releases of such a substance, off-site transfers 
 of such a substance for energy recovery or recycling, and off-
 site transfers of such a substance as (or in) waste for 
 treatment or disposal.

 TITLE IV--ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE

SEC. 401. ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE.

 Section 116 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9616) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(f) Environmental Justice.--
 ``(1) Purpose.--The purpose of this subsection is to ensure 
 that Superfund sites in economically distressed and socially 
 disenfranchised communities are identified, evaluated, and 
 cleaned up as quickly and effectively as Superfund sites in 
 other areas.
 ``(2) Designation of special priority areas.--Not later 
 than six months after the enactment of this subsection, the 
 President, acting through the Secretary of Commerce, shall 
 publish a list of `special priority areas', which shall be 
 geographic areas in which residents face a high degree of 
 economic distress or social disenfranchisement. The President 
 shall update the list not later than two years after each 
 official census count on social and economic characteristics 
 performed by the Bureau of the Census under title 13, United 
 States Code. The President shall state the reason for including 
 each area on the list. The list shall include--
 ``(A) all census tracts (or where not tracted, all 
 equivalent county divisions as defined by the Bureau of 
 the Census for the purpose of defining poverty areas) 
 in which the poverty rate was more than 20 percent, as 
 determined by the most recent census data available;
 ``(B) areas that consist of parts of one or more 
 census tracts or block numbering areas, and which the 
 President believes experience a high degree of 
pervasive poverty, unemployment, and general distress;
 ``(C) all electoral precincts in which the percent 
 of voting age residents who voted in the three most 
 recent Presidential elections ranks among the lowest 10 
 percent in the United States;
 ``(D) all census tracts or block numbering areas in 
 which more than 50 percent of residents identify 
 themselves as Black, Asian, American Indian, Pacific 
 Islander, Eskimo, or Aleut, or of any other non-white 
 origin or of Hispanic origin, as determined by the 
 Bureau of the Census using the most recent census data 
 available;
 ``(E) areas in which the President determines there 
 is the potential for a higher than average incidence of 
 cancer, neurotoxic effects, disorders of the human 
 reproductive system, endocrine disruption, respiratory 
 disorders, dermatologic disorders, or other health 
 effects that the President believes may be related to 
 exposure to hazardous substances, as determined by the 
 President using data gathered from Federal, State, and 
 local government agencies and other sources of 
 information; and
 ``(F) areas in which the President believes 
 residents may be subject to higher than average 
 exposure to hazardous substances, as determined by the 
 President using data gathered from Federal, State, and 
 local government agencies and other sources of 
 information.
 ``(3) Advertising the right of petition for assessment of 
 release in special priority areas.--Not later than one year 
 after the enactment of this subsection and annually thereafter, 
 the President shall advertise the right of petition for 
 assessment of release, as established under section 105(d), in 
 all special priority areas, using means of communication that 
 the President believes will be effective in reaching residents 
 of such areas. Such means of communication shall include 
 communications media targeted to area residents or posters in 
 public places and places of worship. The President may also 
 provide technical assistance to individuals seeking to exercise 
 such right of petition in such areas.
 ``(4) Designation of special priority facilities.--(A) Not 
 later than one year after enactment of this subsection, and 
 annually thereafter, the President shall publish a list of 
 facilities designated as `special priority facilities', which 
 shall be those facilities which are located in special priority 
 areas and are--
 ``(i) listed in the Comprehensive Environmental 
 Response, Compensation, and Liability Information 
 System (CERCLIS);
 ``(ii) the subject of a petition made under section 
 105(d); or
 ``(iii) other facilities as the President considers 
 appropriate.
 ``(B) In order to maximize efficiency, for each facility 
 designated as a special priority facility, the President shall 
 prepare within 60 days of such designation a preliminary 
 schedule setting out the performance of the preliminary 
 assessment, site inspection, ranking, remedial action 
 selection, and remedial action implementation which complies 
 with the time periods set forth in this subsection.
 ``(5) Preliminary assessment of special priority 
 facilities.--Not later than six months after designating any 
 facility as a special priority facility, the President shall 
 complete a preliminary assessment of the facility.
 ``(6) Site inspection and ranking of special priority 
 facilities.--(A) Not later than one year after designating a 
 facility as a special priority facility, the President shall 
 complete a site inspection of the facility and score the 
 facility using the Hazard Ranking System, unless the 
 President--
 ``(i) finds in performing the preliminary 
 assessment at the facility that a site inspection is 
 not necessary; and
 ``(ii) publishes a statement explaining the reasons 
 that a site inspection is not necessary.
 ``(B) For any facility located in a State which has a 
 cooperative agreement with the Environmental Protection Agency 
 to perform site inspections, the President may amend such 
 agreement to gather the information necessary to comply with 
 this paragraph. Failure to amend such agreement shall not 
 relieve the President of the obligations set forth in this 
 subsection.
 ``(7) Proposed listing of special priority facilities.--Not 
 later than two years after designating a facility as a special 
 priority facility, if the facility ranks highly enough using 
 the Hazard Ranking System to be a candidate for placement on 
 the National Priorities List established under section 105, the 
 President shall propose placing the facility on the National 
 Priorities List and shall publish notice of such proposal.
 ``(8) Listing of special priority facilities.--Not later 
 than three years after designating a facility as a special 
 priority facility, if the facility ranks highly enough using 
 the Hazard Ranking System to be a candidate for placement on 
 the National Priorities List established under section 105, the 
 President shall place the facility on the National Priorities 
 List, except as provided in paragraph (10).
 ``(9) Timeliness in cleaning up special priority 
 facilities.--For any special priority facility placed on the 
 National Priorities List, the President shall ensure that a 
 remedial action is selected not later than 2 years after the 
 facility is placed on the List, and that the remedial action is 
 implemented not later than 3 years after the facility is placed 
 on the List (or within such time period as may be provided 
 under paragraph (11)). Nothing in this section shall be 
 interpreted to change the conditions under which the President 
 shall perform a removal action.
 ``(10) Exception from listing special priority 
 facilities.--The President may refrain from placing a special 
 priority facility on the National Priorities List if--
 ``(A) a remedial action is selected for the 
 facility not later than 3 years after the facility is 
 placed on the list of special priority facilities, and 
 the remedial action is implemented not later than 4 
 years after the facility is placed on the list of 
 special priority facilities (or within such time period 
 as may be provided under paragraph (11));
 ``(B) in the opinion of the President, the remedial 
 action selected and implemented provides the same level 
 of protection of human health and environment as would 
 be provided if the President had selected and 
 implemented a remedial action under this Act; and
 ``(C) in the opinion of the President, the process 
 of selecting the remedial action provides the same 
 level of public participation as would be provided if 
 the President had carried out such process under 
 section 117.
 ``(11) Additional Time Period for Extraordinary 
 Conditions.--For any special priority facility that the 
 President finds to be subject to extraordinarily complex 
 conditions, the dates by which remedial actions are to be 
 selected and implemented under paragraphs (9) and (10) may be 
 extended by one year.
 ``(12) Reporting on the cleanup of special priority 
 facilities.--Not later than four years after the enactment of 
 this subsection, and every two years thereafter, the President 
 shall submit to Congress a report containing the following:
 ``(A) A discussion of the progress made in cleaning 
 up special priority facilities.
 ``(B) A comparison between special priority 
 facilities and other facilities on the National 
 Priorities List of--
 ``(i) the time required for investigation, 
 remedy selection, and remedy implementation at 
 such facilities;
 ``(ii) the type of remedy implemented at 
 such facilities; and
 ``(iii) the level of public participation 
 found in the selection and implementation of 
 the remedy at such facilities.''.

 TITLE V--CHILDREN'S ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH

SEC. 501. CHILDREN'S ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH.

 (a) In General.--Title I of the Comprehensive Environmental 
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601 et 
seq.), is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 128. CHILDREN'S ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH.

 ``(a) Identification and Evaluation of Substances Hazardous to 
Children.--
 ``(1) Listing of substances hazardous to children.--The 
 Administrator of the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease 
 Registry (in this section referred to as `ATSDR') and the 
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall 
 create within 1 year after the date of enactment of this 
 section (and review and revise every 2 years thereafter) a 
 scientifically peer-reviewed list of environmental pollutants 
 commonly found at facilities listed or proposed for listing on 
 the National Priorities List with known, likely, or suspected 
 health risks to which fetuses and children are especially 
 susceptible.
 ``(2) Revision of guidelines for preparation of 
 toxicological profiles.--Not later than 1 year after the date 
 of enactment of this section, the Administrator of ATSDR and 
 the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall 
 revise the guidelines for preparation of toxicological profiles 
 of hazardous substances (as developed pursuant to section 
 104(i)(3)) to include--
 ``(A) consideration of exposure pathways and health 
 effects of particular concern with regard to fetuses 
 and children;
 ``(B) development of exposure levels specific to 
 different age ranges, as appropriate; and
 ``(C) identification of priority data needs 
 specific to fetal and children's environmental health.
 ``(3) Preparation and revision of toxicological profiles.--
 The Administrator of ATSDR shall prepare within 3 years after 
 the date of enactment of this section (and review and revise 
 every 5 years thereafter) scientifically peer-reviewed 
 toxicological profiles of each of the substances listed 
 pursuant to paragraph (1) using the guidelines revised pursuant 
 to paragraph (2). Toxicological profiles for substances listed 
 under section 104(i)(2) before the date of enactment of this 
 section shall be revised using such guidelines not later than 3 
years after such date of enactment.
 ``(b) Revision of Public Health and Environmental Standards.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Administrator of the Environmental 
 Protection Agency or the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services, as appropriate, shall review, and revise where 
 necessary, environmental and public health regulations, risk 
 assessment policies and procedures, and guidance documents, 
 issued or used under this Act, to determine whether they 
 consider and fully protect fetal and children's health.
 ``(2) Review of standards.--In carrying out paragraph (1), 
 not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this 
 section, the Administrator, in cooperation with the Secretary, 
 shall--
 ``(A) develop an administrative process for 
 reviewing regulations, risk assessment policies and 
 procedures, and guidance documents;
 ``(B) develop a peer-reviewed list of regulations, 
 risk assessment policies and procedures, and guidance 
 documents that require revision and prioritize the list 
 based on the degree of risk posed to fetal and 
 children's health; and
 ``(C) identify, through peer review, which 
 regulations, risk assessment policies and procedures, 
 and guidance documents on the list will require 
 additional research in order to be revised and identify 
 the time and resources required to carry out the 
 necessary research.
 ``(3) Revision of standards.--The Administrator shall 
 propose within 3 years after the date of enactment of this 
 section (and review and revise every 5 years thereafter) 
 revised regulations, risk assessment policies and procedures, 
 and guidance documents for those regulations, risk assessment 
 policies and procedures, and guidance documents identified 
 under paragraph (2)(B) that were not also identified under 
 paragraph (2)(C). All regulations, risk assessment policies and 
 procedures, and guidance documents identified under paragraph 
 (2)(B) shall be revised within 6 years after the date of 
 enactment of this section.
 ``(4) Effective date.--If the Administrator or the 
 Secretary revises any regulations, risk assessment policies and 
 procedures, and guidance documents identified under paragraph 
 (2)(B), notwithstanding any other provision of law, the 
 effective date of such revision shall be no later than one year 
 after the date of the issuance of such revision.
 ``(5) Report.--The Administrator shall submit to Congress 
 every 2 years a report on the progress being made in carrying 
 out the objectives of this subsection.
 ``(c) Consideration of Children's Health in Health Assessments.--
When conducting a health assessment at a facility, the Administrator of 
ATSDR shall, at a minimum, consider--
 ``(1) the potential risk to fetal and children's health 
 posed by the facility, including long-term, synergistic, and 
 cumulative health effects;
 ``(2) the existence of potential exposure pathways that are 
 of particular concern with regard to fetuses and children; and
 ``(3) the comparison of expected exposure levels for 
 children posed by a release from the facility and any 
 recommended, child-specific exposure or tolerance levels.
 ``(d) Children's Environmental Health Research.--
 ``(1) In general.--In order to address the priority data 
 needs identified in the toxicological profiles prepared 
 pursuant to subsection (a) and to obtain additional information 
 on the health effects of hazardous substances on fetuses and 
 children, fetal and children's environmental health concerns 
 shall be systematically incorporated into health studies and 
 research programs conducted pursuant to sections 104(i)(5) and 
 104(i)(7) and all other health research initiatives pursuant to 
 this Act.
 ``(2) Guidelines.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this section, the Administrator of ATSDR, in 
 cooperation with the Administrator of the Environmental 
 Protection Agency, the Centers for Disease Control and 
 Prevention, and the Director of the National Institute of 
 Environmental Health Sciences, and the Indian Health Service 
 shall develop guidelines for addressing fetal and children's 
 environmental health issues in health studies and research 
 programs, including studies and research conducted by ATSDR and 
 other Federal agencies, State departments of public health, and 
 university-based investigators.
 ``(3) Child-specific health studies.--Not later than 1 year 
 after the date of enactment of this section, the Administrator 
 of ATSDR, in cooperation with the Administrator of the 
 Environmental Protection Agency, the Centers for Disease 
 Control and Prevention, the Director of the National Institute 
of Environmental Health Sciences, and the Indian Health Service shall 
develop criteria for determining when and what type of child-specific 
health study shall be conducted based on the results of a health 
assessment conducted by the Administrator.
 ``(4) Costs.--It is the sense of Congress that the costs of 
 research programs under this paragraph be borne by the 
 manufacturers and processors of the hazardous substance in 
 question using the same regulations promulgated under section 
 104(i)(5)(D).
 ``(e) National Children's Exposure Registry.--To assist in carrying 
out this section, the Administrator of ATSDR, in cooperation with the 
States, shall establish and maintain not later than 2 years after the 
date of enactment of this section an exposure registry for all children 
exposed to hazardous substances as the result of a release at a 
facility listed on the National Priorities List, where ATSDR determines 
that levels of exposure are significant for children's health.
 ``(f) Children's Environmental Health Education Program.--Not later 
than 3 years after the date of enactment of this section, the 
Administrator of ATSDR, in cooperation with the Administrator of the 
Environmental Protection Agency, the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, the Director of the National Institute of Environmental 
Health Sciences, and the Indian Health Service shall--
 ``(1) assemble, develop as necessary, and distribute to 
 State health departments, tribal health officials, waste site 
 information offices, school districts, health clinics, medical 
 colleges, and, upon request, to physicians and other health 
 professionals, appropriate educational materials (including 
 short courses) on the medical surveillance, screening, and 
 methods of diagnosis and treatment of injury or disease related 
 to exposure to hazardous substances that are of particular 
 concern with regard to fetuses and children;
 ``(2) develop and implement wherever health services are 
 being provided pursuant to section 104(i)(15)(C) a children's 
 environmental health care training program for health care 
 providers serving communities affected by the release of 
 hazardous substances, including training in techniques for 
 assessing exposure of children to hazardous substances, methods 
 of diagnosis and treatment of injury and disease related to 
 exposure to hazardous substances that are of particular concern 
 with regard to fetuses and children, and primary prevention; 
 and
 ``(3) develop and distribute to State health departments, 
 tribal health officials, waste site information offices, school 
 districts, health clinics, and, upon request, to medical 
 colleges, physicians, and other health professionals, a family 
 right-to-know information kit that includes helpful information 
 and guidance to families regarding children's environmental 
 health, including--
 ``(A) information on the potential health effects 
 of exposure to hazardous substances;
 ``(B) practical suggestions on how parents can 
 reduce their children's exposure to hazardous 
 substances;
 ``(C) the rights of families living in affected 
 communities to receive health services under section 
 104(i)(15)(C);
 ``(D) how further information can be obtained on 
 children's environmental health; and
 ``(E) other relevant information, as determined by 
 the Administrator.
 ``(g) Pediatric Peer Review.--All lists, profiles, studies, and 
results of research conducted under this section shall be reported or 
adopted only after appropriate peer review, including review by 
pediatricians and environmental health specialists. Peer reviews shall 
be conducted by panels consisting of no less than 3 members, who shall 
be disinterested scientific experts selected for such purpose by the 
Administrator of ATSDR and the Administrator of the Environmental 
Protection Agency on the basis of their reputation for scientific 
objectivity and lack of institutional ties with any person involved in 
the conduct of the study or research under review, or any person 
involved with the manufacture, processing, marketing, or distribution 
of the hazardous substance, pollutant, or contaminant under 
investigation.''.
 (b) Definition.--Section 101 of the Comprehensive Environmental 
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 is amended by adding 
the following at the end:
 ``(39) The term `children' means individuals under 18 years 
 of age.''.

 TITLE VI--BROWNFIELD REMEDIATION AND ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP

 Subtitle A--Brownfields

SEC. 601. BROWNFIELDS TITLE.

 The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and 
Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601 and following) is amended by 
adding the following new title at the end:

 ``TITLE V--BROWNFIELD REMEDIATION AND ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP

``SEC. 501. DEFINITIONS.

 ``For purposes of this title:
 ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise specified in this 
 title, the terms used in this title shall have the meanings 
 provided by section 101 of this Act.
 ``(2) Brownfield site.--The term `brownfield site' means a 
 parcel of land that contains or contained abandoned or under-
 used commercial or industrial facilities, the expansion or 
 redevelopment of which may be complicated by the presence or 
 potential presence of hazardous substances, pollutants, or 
 contaminants.
 ``(3) Disposal.--The term `disposal' has the meaning given 
 the term in section 1004 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 
 U.S.C. 6903).
 ``(4) Environmental contamination.--The term `environmental 
 contamination' means the existence at a brownfield site of one 
 or more hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants that 
 may pose a threat to human health or the environment.
 ``(5) Grant.--The term `grant' includes a cooperative 
 agreement.
 ``(6) Local government.--The term `local government' has 
 the meaning given the term `unit of general local government' 
 in the first sentence of section 102(a)(1) of the Housing and 
 Community Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5302(a)(1)), 
 except that the term includes an Indian tribe.
 ``(7) Site assessment.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `site assessment' means 
 an investigation that determines the nature and extent 
 of a release or potential release of a hazardous 
 substance at a brownfield site and meets the 
 requirements of subparagraph (B).
 ``(B) Investigation.--For the purposes of this 
 paragraph, an investigation that meets the requirements 
 of this subparagraph--
 ``(i) shall include--
 ``(I) an onsite evaluation; and
 ``(II) sufficient testing, 
 sampling, and other field-data-
 gathering activities to accurately 
 determine whether the brownfield site 
 is contaminated and the threats to 
 human health and the environment posed 
 by the release of hazardous substances, 
 pollutants, or contaminants at the 
 brownfield site; and
 ``(ii) may include--
 ``(I) review of such information 
 regarding the brownfield site and 
 previous uses as is available at the 
 time of the review; and
 ``(II) an offsite evaluation, if 
 appropriate.

``SEC. 502. INVENTORY, ASSESSMENT, AND TRAINING GRANT PROGRAM.

 ``(a) In General.--The Administrator shall establish a program to 
award grants to local governments to inventory brownfield sites, to 
conduct site assessments of brownfield sites, and to provide training 
in the cleanup of brownfield sites, including associated rivers and 
streams. Public participation in the program shall be provided for, 
encouraged, and assisted by the Administrator. The Administrator shall 
develop and publish minimum guidelines for demonstrating meaningful 
community involvement.
 ``(b) Scope of Program.--
 ``(1) Grant awards.--To carry out subsection (a), the 
 Administrator may, on approval of an application, provide 
 grants to a local government.
 ``(2) Grant application.--An application for a grant under 
 this section shall include, to the extent practicable, each of 
 the following:
 ``(A) An identification of the potential brownfield 
 sites for which assistance is sought and a description 
 of the effect of the brownfield sites on the community, 
 including a description of the nature and extent of any 
 known or suspected environmental contamination within 
 the sites.
 ``(B) A description of the need of the applicant 
 for financial assistance to inventory brownfield sites, 
 to conduct site assessments, and to provide training in 
 brownfield site cleanup.
 ``(C) A demonstration of the potential of the grant 
 assistance to stimulate economic development or 
 creation of recreational areas, including the extent to 
 which the assistance will stimulate the availability of 
 other funds for site assessment, site identification, 
 or environmental remediation and subsequent 
redevelopment of the areas in which eligible brownfield sites are 
situated.
 ``(D) A description of the local commitment as of 
 the date of the application, which shall include a 
 community involvement plan that demonstrates meaningful 
 community involvement, including the training and 
 participation of local citizens in brownfield site 
 cleanup.
 ``(E) An identification of the brownfield sites 
 that have associated rivers and streams, and, for those 
 sites, a description of the potential for involving 
 local citizens in restoring those rivers and streams, 
 including the training and participation of local 
 citizens to perform the restoration work.
 ``(F) A plan that shows how the site assessment, 
 site identification, or environmental remediation and 
 subsequent development will be implemented, including--
 ``(i) an environmental plan that ensures 
 the use of sound environmental procedures;
 ``(ii) an explanation of the appropriate 
 government authority and support for the 
 project as in existence on the date of the 
 application;
 ``(iii) proposed funding mechanisms for any 
 additional work; and
 ``(iv) a proposed land ownership plan.
 ``(G) A statement on the long-term benefits and the 
 sustainability of the proposed project that includes--
 ``(i) the ability of the project to be 
 replicated nationally and measures of success 
 of the project; and
 ``(ii) to the extent known, the potential 
 of the plan for each area in which an eligible 
 brownfield site is situated to stimulate 
 economic development of the area or creation of 
 recreational areas on completion of the 
 environmental remediation.
 ``(H) Such other factors as the Administrator 
 considers relevant to carry out this title.
 ``(3) Approval of application.--
 ``(A) In general.--In making a decision whether to 
 approve an application under this subsection, the 
 Administrator shall consider each of the following:
 ``(i) The need of the local government for 
 financial assistance to carry out this section.
 ``(ii) The ability of the applicant to 
 carry out an inventory, site assessment, and 
 training under this section.
 ``(iii) The extent to which the applicant 
 will involve local citizens in carrying out 
 this section.
 ``(iv) The proximity of, and give priority 
 to, predominantly low-income and under-
 developed industrial areas.
 ``(B) Grant conditions.--As a condition of awarding 
 a grant under this section, the Administrator--
 ``(i) shall require the recipient of the 
 grant to notify the State in which the 
 recipient is located of the receipt of the 
 grant;
 ``(ii) shall require the recipient of the 
 grant to submit a report under subsection (d) 
 on local citizen involvement; and
 ``(iii) may, on the basis of the criteria 
 considered under subparagraph (A), attach such 
 other conditions to the grant as the 
 Administrator determines appropriate.
 ``(4) Grant amount.--The amount of a grant awarded to any 
 local government under subsection (a) for inventory, site 
 assessment, and training for cleanup of one or more brownfield 
 sites shall not exceed $200,000, unless the Administrator 
 determines that a particular applicant warrants a larger 
 amount. An applicant for a grant in excess of $200,000 shall 
 submit information to the Administrator regarding economic or 
 environmental conditions that may warrant funding in excess of 
 $200,000. The Administrator may award funding in excess of 
 $200,000 only upon a determination that such an action will 
 achieve particularly significant environmental and economic 
 benefits.
 ``(5) Termination of grants.--If the Administrator 
 determines that a local government that receives a grant under 
 this subsection is in violation of a condition of a grant 
 referred to in paragraph (3)(B), the Administrator may 
 terminate the grant made to the local government and require 
 full or partial repayment of the grant.
 ``(6) Authority to award grants to states.--The 
 Administrator may award a grant to a State under the program 
established under this section if the Administrator determines that a 
grant to the State is necessary in order to facilitate the receipt of 
funds by one or more local governments that otherwise do not have the 
capabilities, such as personnel and other resources, to manage grants 
under the program.
 ``(c) State Inventories.--Within 2 years after the enactment of 
this Act, each State shall submit to the Administrator such information 
as the Administrator shall, by rule, require regarding brownfield sites 
within that State. Based on such information, within 3 years after the 
enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall compile a National 
Brownfields Registry. If a State fails to comply with the rules 
promulgated under this subsection, no grant may be made under section 
513 for a brownfield site in that State.
 ``(d) Report on Local Citizen Involvement.--Each recipient of a 
grant awarded under the program established under this section shall 
submit to the Administrator, not later than one year after receipt of 
the grant, a report on the extent to which local citizens are involved 
in carrying out the projects funded by the grant, including a statement 
of the percentage of the grant funds used to involve local citizens in 
carrying out such projects.

``SEC. 503. GRANTS FOR REVOLVING LOAN PROGRAMS.

 ``(a) In General.--
 ``(1) Establishment.--The Administrator shall establish a 
 program to award grants to be used by local governments to 
 capitalize revolving loan funds for the cleanup of brownfield 
 sites, including associated rivers and streams.
 ``(2) Loans.--The loans may be provided by the local 
 government to finance cleanups of brownfield sites by the local 
 government, or by an owner or a prospective purchaser 
 (including a local government) of a brownfield site, including 
 associated rivers and streams, at which a cleanup is being 
 conducted or is proposed to be conducted.
 ``(b) Scope of Program.--
 ``(1) In general.--
 ``(A) Grants.--In carrying out subsection (a), the 
 Administrator may award a grant to a local government 
 that submits an application to the Administrator that 
 is approved by the Administrator.
 ``(B) Use of grant.--The grant shall be used by the 
 local government to capitalize a revolving loan fund to 
 be used for cleanup of one or more brownfield sites.
 ``(C) Grant application.--An application for a 
 grant under this section shall be in such form as the 
 Administrator determines appropriate. At a minimum, the 
 application shall include the following:
 ``(i) Evidence that the grant applicant has 
 the financial controls and resources to 
 administer a revolving loan fund in accordance 
 with this subtitle.
 ``(ii) Provisions that ensure each of the 
 following:
 ``(I) The grant applicant has the 
 ability to monitor the use of funds 
 provided to loan recipients under this 
 subtitle.
 ``(II) Any cleanup conducted by the 
 applicant is protective of human health 
 and the environment.
 ``(III) There will be adequate 
 public participation in the selection 
 of criteria for any cleanup, including 
 an opportunity for public meeting.
 ``(IV) Any cleanup funded under 
 this Act will comply with all laws that 
 apply to the cleanup.
 ``(iii) Identification of the criteria to 
 be used by the local government in providing 
 for loans under the program. The criteria shall 
 include the financial standing of the 
 applicants for the loans, the use to which the 
 loans will be put, the provisions to be used to 
 ensure repayment of the loan funds, and the 
 following:
 ``(I) A complete description of the 
 financial standing of the applicant 
 that includes a description of the 
 assets, cash flow, and liabilities of 
 the applicant.
 ``(II) A written statement that 
 attests that the cleanup of the site 
 would not occur without access to the 
 revolving loan fund.
 ``(III) The proposed method, and 
 anticipated period of time required, to 
 clean up the environmental 
 contamination at the brownfield site.
 ``(IV) An estimate of the proposed 
 total cost of the cleanup to be 
 conducted at the brownfield site.
 ``(V) An analysis that demonstrates 
 the potential of the brownfield site 
 for stimulating economic development or 
 creation of recreational areas on 
 completion of the cleanup of the 
 brownfield site.
 ``(VI) An analysis that 
 demonstrates the potential for 
 involving local citizens in the cleanup 
 of the brownfield site.
 ``(VII) Such other additional 
 factors as the Administrator considers 
 relevant to carry out this section.
 ``(2) Grant approval.--In determining whether to award a 
 grant under this section, the Administrator shall consider--
 ``(A) the need of the local government for 
 financial assistance to clean up brownfield sites that 
 are the subject of the application, taking into 
 consideration the financial resources available to the 
 local government;
 ``(B) the ability of the local government to ensure 
 that the applicants repay the loans in a timely manner;
 ``(C) the extent to which the cleanup of the 
 brownfield site or sites would reduce health and 
 environmental risks caused by the release of hazardous 
 substances, pollutants, or contaminants at, or from, 
 the brownfield site or sites;
 ``(D) the demonstrable potential of the brownfield 
 site or sites for stimulating economic development or 
 creation of recreational areas on completion of the 
 cleanup;
 ``(E) the demonstrated ability of the local 
 government to administer such a loan program;
 ``(F) the demonstrated experience of the local 
 government regarding brownfield sites and the reuse of 
 contaminated land, including whether the government has 
 received any grant under any other provision of this 
 Act to assess brownfield sites, except that applicants 
 who have not previously received such a grant may be 
 considered for awards under this section;
 ``(G) the experience of administering any loan 
 programs by the entity, including the loan repayment 
 rates;
 ``(H) the demonstrations made regarding the ability 
 of the local government to ensure a fair distribution 
 of grant funds among brownfield sites within the 
 jurisdiction of the local government;
 ``(I) the extent to which the applicant will 
 involve local citizens in the cleanup of brownfield 
 sites; and
 ``(J) such other factors as the Administrator 
 considers relevant to carry out this section.
 ``(3) Grant amount.--The amount of a grant made to an 
 applicant under this section shall not exceed $500,000, unless 
 the Administrator determines that a particular applicant 
 warrants a larger amount. An applicant for a grant in excess of 
 $500,000 shall submit information to the Administrator 
 regarding economic or environmental conditions that may warrant 
 funding in excess of $500,000. The Administrator may award 
 funding in excess of $500,000 only upon a determination that 
 such an action will achieve particularly significant 
 environmental and economic benefits.
 ``(4) Revolving loan fund approval.--Each application for a 
 grant to capitalize a revolving loan fund under this section 
 shall, as a condition of approval by the Administrator, include 
 a written statement by the local government that cleanups to be 
 funded under the loan program of the local government shall be 
 conducted under the auspices of, and in compliance with, the 
 State voluntary cleanup program or State Superfund program or 
 Federal authority.
 ``(c) Grant Agreements.--Each grant under this section for a 
revolving loan fund shall be made pursuant to a grant agreement. At a 
minimum, the grant agreement shall include provisions that ensure the 
following:
 ``(1) Compliance with law.--The local government will 
 include in all loan agreements a requirement that the loan 
 recipient shall comply with all laws applicable to the cleanup 
 and shall ensure that the cleanup is protective of human health 
 and the environment.
 ``(2) Repayment.--The local government will require 
 repayment of the loan consistent with this subtitle.
 ``(3) Use of funds.--The local government will use the 
 funds solely for purposes of establishing and capitalizing a 
 loan program in accordance with this subtitle and of cleaning 
 up the environmental contamination at the brownfield site or 
 sites.
 ``(4) Repayment of funds.--The local government will 
 require in each loan agreement, and take necessary steps to 
ensure, that the loan recipient will use the loan funds solely for the 
purposes stated in paragraph (3), and will require the return of any 
excess funds immediately on a determination by the appropriate local 
official that the cleanup has been completed.
 ``(5) Nontransferability.--The funds will not be 
 transferable, unless the Administrator agrees to the transfer 
 in writing.
 ``(6) Liens.--
 ``(A) Definitions.--In this paragraph, the terms 
 `security interest' and `purchaser' have the meanings 
 given the terms in section 6323(h) of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986.
 ``(B) Liens.--A lien in favor of the grant 
 recipient shall arise on the contaminated property 
 subject to a loan under this section, as well as on any 
 personal property, accounts, or other assets if 
 identified in the agreement establishing the loan.
 ``(C) Coverage.--The lien shall cover all real 
 property included in the legal description of the 
 property at the time the loan agreement provided for in 
 this section is signed, and all rights to the property, 
 and shall continue until the terms and conditions of 
 the loan agreement have been fully satisfied.
 ``(D) Timing.--The lien shall--
 ``(i) arise at the time a security interest 
 is appropriately recorded in the real property 
 records of the appropriate office of the State, 
 county, or other governmental subdivision, as 
 designated by State law, in which the real 
 property, personal property, accounts, or other 
 assets subject to the lien are located; and
 ``(ii) be subject to the rights of any 
 purchaser, holder of a security interest, or 
 judgment lien creditor whose interest is or has 
 been perfected under applicable State law 
 before the notice has been filed in the 
 appropriate office of the State, county, or 
 other governmental subdivision, as designated 
 by State law, in which the real property, 
 personal property, accounts, or other assets 
 subject to the lien are located.
 ``(7) Notice to state.--The local government will notify 
 the State in which the local government is located of the 
 receipt of the grant and of the identity of recipients of loans 
 made under the revolving loan fund.
 ``(8) Report on local citizen involvement.--The local 
 government will submit a report under subsection (f) on local 
 citizen involvement.
 ``(d) Audits.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Inspector General of the 
 Environmental Protection Agency shall audit a portion of the 
 grants awarded under this section to ensure that all funds are 
 used for the purposes set forth in this section.
 ``(2) Future grants.--The result of the audit shall be 
 taken into account in awarding any future grants to the local 
 government.
 ``(e) Authority To Award Grants to States.--The Administrator may 
award a grant to a State under the program established under this 
section at the request of a local government in the State if the 
Administrator determines that a grant to the State is necessary in 
order to facilitate the receipt of funds by one or more local 
governments that otherwise do not have the capabilities, such as 
personnel and other resources, to manage grants under the program.
 ``(f) Report on Local Citizen Involvement.--Each recipient of a 
grant awarded under the program established under this section shall 
submit to the Administrator, not later than one year after receipt of 
the grant, a report on the extent to which local citizens are involved 
in projects funded by loans made under the revolving loan fund, 
including a statement of the percentage of the grant funds used to 
involve local citizens in carrying out such projects.

``SEC. 504. REPORTS.

 ``(a) In General.--Not later than one year after the date of 
enactment of this Act, and not later than January 31 of each of the 3 
calendar years thereafter, the Administrator shall prepare and submit a 
report describing the results of each program established under this 
subtitle to--
 ``(1) the Committees on Commerce and on Transportation and 
 Infrastructure of the House of Representatives; and
 ``(2) the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the 
 Senate.
 ``(b) Contents of Report.--Each report shall, with respect to each 
of the programs established under this subtitle, include a description 
of--
 ``(1) the number of applications received by the 
 Administrator during the preceding calendar year;
 ``(2) the number of applications approved by the 
 Administrator during the preceding calendar year; and
 ``(3) the allocation of assistance under sections 502 and 
 503 among the local governments.

``SEC. 505. LIMITATIONS ON USE OF FUNDS.

 ``(a) Excluded Facilities.--(1) A grant for site inventory and 
assessment under section 502 or to capitalize a revolving loan fund 
under section 503 may not be used for any activity involving any of the 
following:
 ``(A) A facility or portion of a facility that is the 
 subject of a response action (including a facility or portion 
 of a facility with respect to which a record of decision, other 
 than a no-action record of decision, has been issued) under 
 title I of this Act, unless a preliminary assessment, site 
 investigation, or response action has been completed at such 
 facility or portion of a facility and the President has decided 
 not to take further response action at such facility or portion 
 of a facility.
 ``(B) A facility listed, or proposed for listing, on the 
 National Priorities List maintained by the President under 
 title I of this Act.
 ``(C) An NPL-caliber facility, as defined in paragraph (2).
 ``(D) A facility that is subject to corrective action under 
 section 3004(u) or 3008(h) of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 
 U.S.C. 6924(u) or 6928(h)) to which a corrective action permit 
 or order has been issued or modified to require the 
 implementation of corrective measures.
 ``(E) Any land disposal unit with respect to which a 
 closure notification under subtitle C of the Solid Waste 
 Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6921 et seq.) has been submitted and 
 closure requirements have been specified in a closure plan or 
 permit.
 ``(F) A facility at which there has been a release of a 
 polychlorinated biphenyl and that is subject to the Toxic 
 Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. 2601 et seq.).
 ``(G) A facility with respect to which an administrative or 
 judicial order or decree requiring cleanup has been issued or 
 entered into by the President under--
 ``(i) the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
 Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601 
 et seq.);
 ``(ii) the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901 
 et seq.);
 ``(iii) the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 
 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.);
 ``(iv) the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. 
 2601 et seq.); or
 ``(v) the Safe Drinking Water Act (42 U.S.C. 300f 
 et seq.).
 ``(H) The portion of a facility at which assistance for 
 response activities may be obtained under subtitle I of the 
 Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6991 et seq.) from the 
 Leaking Underground Storage Tank Trust Fund established by 
 section 9508 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 ``(I) A facility owned or operated by a department, agency, 
 or instrumentality of the United States, except for land held 
 in trust by the United States for an Indian tribe.
 ``(2) For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `NPL-caliber 
facility' means a facility for which the President, in consultation 
with the State concerned, has prepared or is preparing a hazardous 
ranking system scoring package or that satisfies such other definition 
as the Administrator may promulgate by regulation. The term does not 
include a facility for which the President--
 ``(A) has obtained a score under the hazardous ranking 
 system; and
 ``(B) based on that score, has made a determination not to 
 list on the National Priorities List.
 ``(3) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the President may, on a 
facility-by-facility basis, allow a grant under section 502 or section 
503 to be used for an activity involving any facility listed in 
subparagraph (D), (E), (F), (G)(ii), (G)(iii), (G)(iv), (G)(v), (H), or 
(I) of paragraph (1). In the case of a facility listed in subparagraph 
(I), the President may use the authority in the preceding sentence only 
if the facility is not a facility described in subparagraph (A), (B), 
(C), or (G)(i).
 ``(b) Cost-Sharing.--A grant made under this subtitle may not be 
used to pay any fine or penalty owed to a State or the Federal 
Government, or to meet any Federal cost-sharing requirement.
 ``(c) Other Limitations.--
 ``(1) In general.--Funds made available to a local 
 government under the grant programs established under section 
 502 shall be used only to inventory and assess brownfield sites 
 as authorized by this subtitle. Funds made available to a local 
 government under the grant programs established under section 
 503 shall be used only for capitalizing a revolving loan fund 
 as authorized by this subtitle.
 ``(2) Responsibility for cleanup action.--Funds made 
 available under this subtitle may not be used to relieve a 
 local government of the commitment or responsibilities of the 
 local government under State law to assist or carry out cleanup 
 actions at brownfield sites.

``SEC. 506. EFFECT ON OTHER LAWS.

 ``Nothing in this subtitle changes, modifies, or otherwise affects 
the liability of any person or the obligations imposed or authorities 
provided under any other law or regulation.

``SEC. 507. REGULATIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Administrator may issue such regulations as 
are necessary to carry out this subtitle.
 ``(b) Procedures and Standards.--The regulations shall include such 
procedures and standards as the Administrator considers necessary, 
including procedures and standards for evaluating an application for a 
grant or loan submitted under this subtitle.

``SEC. 508. AUTHORIZATIONS OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``(a) Expenditures From the Superfund.--Amounts in the Hazardous 
Substance Superfund established by section 9507 of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 shall be made available consistent with, and for the 
purposes of carrying out, the grant programs established under sections 
502 and 503.
 ``(b) Site Assessment Program.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out section 502 $40,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 1999 through 2003.
 ``(c) Economic Redevelopment Assistance Program.--There is 
authorized to be appropriated to carry out section 503 $80,000,000 for 
each of fiscal years 1999 through 2003.
 ``(d) Availability of Funds.--The amounts appropriated under this 
section shall remain available until expended.''.

SEC. 602. RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEMONSTRATION.

 Section 311(c) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9660(c)) is amended 
to read as follows:
 ``(c) Hazardous Substance Research and Response Activities.--
 ``(1) Authority.--The Administrator is authorized to 
 conduct and support, through grants, cooperative agreements, 
 contracts, and research, demonstrations surveys and technical 
 assistance, with respect to the detection, assessment, 
 remediation, and evaluation of the effects on and risks to 
 human health and the environment from hazardous substances.
 ``(2) Grants and agreements.--The Administrator may award 
 grants to, and enter into cooperative agreements under this 
 section with, a State, tribe, consortium of tribes, or 
 interstate agency, municipality, education institution, or 
 other agency or organization for the development and 
 implementation of training, technology transfer, and 
 information dissemination programs to strengthen environmental 
 response activities, including enforcement, at the Federal, 
 State, tribal, and local levels. The Administrator may 
 establish such requirements for such grants and cooperative 
 agreements as the Administrator determines to be appropriate. 
 The Administrator may award such grants and cooperative 
 agreements using funds appropriated under this Act.''.

SEC. 803. ASSISTANCE FOR WORKFORCE TRAINING.

 Section 117 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9660), as amended by 
this Act, is further amended by adding at the end thereof the 
following:
 ``(l) Assistance for Workforce Training.--The Administrator shall 
provide grants and such other forms of assistance as the Administrator 
deems appropriate for brownfields workforce training programs in 
communities that contain brownfield sites. Assistance provided under 
this section may include--
 ``(1) expansion of environmental training and curriculum 
 development at colleges located near brownfields sites;
 ``(2) establishment of environmental education and training 
 centers or other community-based job training organizations; 
 and
 ``(3) such other activities as the Administrator considers 
 appropriate.''.

 Subtitle B--Innocent Landowners and Prospective Purchaser Liability

SEC. 621. INNOCENT LANDOWNERS.

 (a) Environmental Site Assessment.--Section 107 of the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 
of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9607) is amended by adding at the end the following 
new subsection:
 ``(o) Innocent Landowners.--
 ``(1) Conduct of environmental assessment.--A person who 
 has acquired real property shall have made all appropriate 
 inquiry within the meaning of subparagraph (B) of section 
101(35) if he establishes that, within 180 days prior to the time of 
acquisition, an environmental site assessment of the real property was 
conducted which meets the requirements of paragraph (2).
 ``(2) Definition of environmental site assessment.--For 
 purposes of this subsection, the term `environmental site 
 assessment' means an assessment conducted in accordance with 
 the standards set forth in the American Society for Testing and 
 Materials (ASTM) Standard E1527-94, titled `Standard Practice 
 for Environmental Site Assessments: Phase I Environmental Site 
 Assessment Process' or with alternative standards issued by 
 rule by the President or promulgated or developed by others and 
 designated by rule by the President. Before issuing or 
 designating alternative standards, the President shall first 
 conduct a study of commercial and industrial practices 
 concerning environmental site assessments in the transfer of 
 real property in the United States. Any such standards issued 
 or designated by the President shall also be deemed to 
 constitute commercially reasonable and generally accepted 
 standards and practices for purposes of this paragraph. In 
 issuing or designating any such standards, the President shall 
 consider requirements governing each of the following:
 ``(A) Interviews of owners, operators, and 
 occupants of the property to determine information 
 regarding the potential for contamination.
 ``(B) Review of historical sources as necessary to 
 determine previous uses and occupancies of the property 
 since the property was first developed. For purposes of 
 this subclause, the term `historical sources' means any 
 of the following, if they are reasonably ascertainable: 
 recorded chain of title documents regarding the real 
 property, including all deeds, easements, leases, 
 restrictions, and covenants, aerial photographs, fire 
 insurance maps, property tax files, USGS 7.5 minutes 
 topographic maps, local street directories, building 
 department records, zoning/land use records, and any 
 other sources that identify past uses and occupancies 
 of the property.
 ``(C) Determination of the existence of recorded 
 environmental cleanup liens against the real property 
 which have arisen pursuant to Federal, State, or local 
 statutes.
 ``(D) Review of reasonably ascertainable Federal, 
 State, and local government records of sites or 
 facilities that are likely to cause or contribute to 
 contamination at the real property, including, as 
 appropriate, investigation reports for such sites or 
 facilities; records of activities likely to cause or 
 contribute to contamination at the real property, 
 including landfill and other disposal location records, 
 underground storage tank records, hazardous waste 
 handler and generator records and spill reporting 
 records; and such other reasonably ascertainable 
 Federal, State, and local government environmental 
 records which could reflect incidents or activities 
 which are likely to cause or contribute to 
 contamination at the real property.
 ``(E) A visual site inspection of the real property 
 and all facilities and improvements on the real 
 property and a visual inspection of immediately 
 adjacent properties, including an investigation of any 
 hazardous substance use, storage, treatment, and 
 disposal practices on the property.
 ``(F) Any specialized knowledge or experience on 
 the part of the landowner.
 ``(G) The relationship of the purchase price to the 
 value of the property if uncontaminated.
 ``(H) Commonly known or reasonably ascertainable 
 information about the property.
 ``(I) The obviousness of the presence or likely 
 presence of contamination at the property, and the 
 ability to detect such contamination by appropriate 
 investigation.
 A record shall be considered to be `reasonably ascertainable' 
 for purposes of this paragraph if a copy or reasonable 
 facsimile of the record is publicly available by request 
 (within reasonable time and cost constraints) and the record is 
 practically reviewable.
 ``(3) Appropriate inquiry.--A person shall not be treated 
 as having made all appropriate inquiry under paragraph (1) 
 unless--
 ``(A) the person has maintained a compilation of 
 the information reviewed and gathered in the course of 
 the environmental site assessment;
 ``(B) the person exercised appropriate care with 
 respect to hazardous substances found at the facility 
 by taking reasonable steps to stop on-going releases, 
 prevent threatened future releases of hazardous 
 substances, and prevent or limit human or natural 
 resource exposure to hazardous substances previously 
 released into the environment; and
 ``(C) the person provides full cooperation, 
 assistance, and facility access to persons authorized 
 to conduct response actions or natural resource 
 restoration at the facility, including the cooperation 
 and access necessary for the installation, integrity, 
 operation, and maintenance of any complete or partial 
 response action or natural resource restoration at the 
 facility.''.
 (b) Cross Reference.--Section 101(35)(B) (42 U.S.C. 9601(35)(B)) is 
amended by inserting after ``all appropriate inquiry'' the following: 
``(as specified in section 107(o))''.

SEC. 622. LIMITATIONS ON LIABILITY FOR RESPONSE COSTS FOR PROSPECTIVE 
 PURCHASERS.

 (a) Limitations on Liability.--Section 107 of the Comprehensive 
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 
U.S.C. 9607) is further amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection:
 ``(p) Limitations on Liability for Prospective Purchasers.--
Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) through (4) of subsection (a), to the 
extent the liability of a person, with respect to a release or the 
threat of a release from a facility, is based solely on subsection 
(a)(1), the person shall not be liable under this Act if the person--
 ``(1) is a bona fide prospective purchaser of the facility; 
 and
 ``(2) does not impede the performance of any response 
 action or natural resource restoration at a facility.''.
 (b) Prospective Purchaser and Windfall Lien.--Section 107 of the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 
of 1980 (as amended by subsection (a)) is amended by adding after 
subsection (p) the following new subsection:
 ``(q) Prospective Purchaser and Windfall Lien.--
 ``(1) In general.--In any case in which there are 
 unrecovered response costs at a facility for which an owner of 
 the facility is not liable by reason of subsection (p), and the 
 conditions described in paragraph (3) are met, the United 
 States shall have a lien on the facility, or may obtain, from 
 the appropriate responsible party or parties, a lien on other 
 property or other assurances of payment satisfactory to the 
 Administrator, for the unrecovered costs.
 ``(2) Amount; duration.--The lien--
 ``(A) shall be for an amount not to exceed the 
 increase in fair market value of the property 
 attributable to the response action at the time of a 
 subsequent sale or other disposition of the property;
 ``(B) shall arise at the time costs are first 
 incurred by the United States with respect to a 
 response action at the facility;
 ``(C) shall be subject to the requirements for 
 notice and validity specified in subsection (l)(3); and
 ``(D) shall continue until the earlier of 
 satisfaction of the lien or recovery of all response 
 costs incurred at the facility.
 ``(3) Conditions.--The conditions referred to in paragraph 
 (1) are the following:
 ``(A) Response action.--A response action for which 
 there are unrecovered costs is carried out at the 
 facility.
 ``(B) Fair market value.--The response action 
 increases the fair market value of the facility above 
 the fair market value of the facility that existed on 
 the date that is 180 days before the response action 
 was commenced.''.
 (c) Definition of Bona Fide Prospective Purchaser.--Section 101 of 
the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability 
Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601), as amended by this Act, is further 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(40) Bona fide prospective purchaser.--The term `bona 
 fide prospective purchaser' means a person who acquires 
 ownership of a facility after the date of enactment of the 
 Children's Protection and Community Cleanup Act of 1998, or a 
 tenant of such a person, who can establish each of the 
 following by a preponderance of the evidence:
 ``(A) Disposal prior to acquisition.--All active 
 disposal of hazardous substances at the facility 
 occurred before the person acquired the facility.
 ``(B) Inquiry.--
 ``(i) In general.--The person made all 
 appropriate inquiry into the previous ownership 
 and uses of the facility in accordance with 
 generally accepted good commercial and 
 customary standards and practices.
 ``(ii) Standards.--The ASTM standards 
 described in section 107(o)(2) or the 
 alternative standards issued or designated by 
 the President pursuant to that section shall 
 satisfy the requirements of this subparagraph.
 ``(iii) Residential property.--In the case 
 of property in residential or other similar use 
 at the time of purchase by a nongovernmental or 
 noncommercial entity, a site inspection and 
 title search that reveal no basis for further 
 investigation shall satisfy the requirements of 
 this subparagraph.
 ``(C) Notices.--The person provided all legally 
 required notices with respect to the discovery or 
 release of any hazardous substances at the facility.
 ``(D) Care.--The person exercised appropriate care 
 with respect to hazardous substances found at the 
 facility by taking reasonable steps to--
 ``(i) stop ongoing releases;
 ``(ii) prevent threatened future releases 
 of hazardous substances; and
 ``(iii) prevent or limit human or natural 
 resource exposure to hazardous substances 
 previously released into the environment.
 ``(E) Cooperation, assistance, and access.--The 
 person provides full cooperation, assistance, and 
 facility access to such persons as are authorized to 
 conduct response actions at the facility, including the 
 cooperation and access necessary for the installation, 
 integrity, operation, and maintenance of any complete 
 or partial response action at the facility.
 ``(F) Relationship.--The person is not liable, or 
 is not affiliated with any other person that is 
 potentially liable, for response costs at the facility, 
 through any direct or indirect familial relationship, 
 or any contractual, corporate, or financial 
 relationship other than that created by the instruments 
 by which title to the facility is conveyed or 
 financed.''.

SEC. 623. CONTIGUOUS OR NEARBY PROPERTIES.

 Section 107 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9607) is further 
amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(r) Contiguous Properties.--(1) A person who owns or operates 
real property that is contiguous to or otherwise similarly situated 
with respect to real property on which there has been a release or 
threatened release of a hazardous substance and that is or may be 
contaminated by such release shall not be considered to be an owner or 
operator of a facility under subsection (a)(1) solely by reason of such 
contamination, if such person establishes by a preponderance of the 
evidence that--
 ``(A) such person exercised due care with respect to the 
 hazardous substance, in light of all relevant facts and 
 circumstances;
 ``(B) such person took precautions against any foreseeable 
 act or omission that resulted in the release or threatened 
 release and the consequences that could foreseeably result from 
 such act or omission; and
 ``(C) such person did not cause or contribute to the 
 release or threatened release.
 ``(2) The President may issue an assurance of no enforcement action 
under this Act to any such person and may grant any such person 
protection against cost recovery and contribution actions pursuant to 
section 113(f)(2).''.

 Subtitle C--Department of Housing and Urban Development Brownfield 
 Grants

SEC. 631. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT GRANTS IN CONNECTION WITH COMMUNITY 
 DEVELOPMENT LOAN GUARANTEES.

 Section 108(q) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 
(42 U.S.C. 5308(q)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(5) Brownfields redevelopment.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall, to the 
 extent amounts are made available pursuant to 
 subparagraph (F) and applications are approved under 
 this paragraph, make grants under this paragraph to 
 eligible public entities for projects for the cleanup 
 and economic redevelopment of brownfield sites. The 
 provisions of paragraphs (1) through (4) of this 
 subsection shall apply to grants under this paragraph 
 and the requirements under this paragraph shall be in 
 addition to the requirements under paragraphs (1) 
 through (4).
 ``(B) Eligible recipients.--Grants under this 
 paragraph may be made only to eligible public entities 
 requesting guarantees under subsection (a) for notes or 
 other obligations to finance a project involving 
 eligible activities under subparagraph (C).
 ``(C) Eligible activities.--Assistance under this 
 paragraph may be used only for the purposes of and in 
 conjunction with projects and activities for the 
 economic redevelopment of brownfield sites.
 ``(D) Selection criteria.--
 ``(i) Additional criterion.--The criteria 
 for awarding assistance under this paragraph 
 shall include the extent to which the applicant 
 has developed an approach or process for the 
 cleanup and redevelopment of brownfield sites 
 and is coordinating such program with 
 appropriate environmental regulatory agencies.
 ``(ii) Priority.--In awarding such 
 assistance, the Secretary shall give priority 
 to eligible entities meeting the selection 
 criteria (established pursuant to paragraph (4) 
 and clause (i)) and proposing a plan involving 
 projects and activities for brownfield sites 
 located within any empowerment zone or 
 enterprise community (as such terms are defined 
 in section 1393(b) of the Internal Revenue Code 
 of 1986).
 ``(E) Coordination with epa.--The Secretary shall 
 consult and coordinate with the Administrator of the 
 Environmental Protection Agency in providing assistance 
 under this paragraph and establishing selection 
 criteria under subparagraph (D) to ensure that 
 activities assisted with amounts provided under this 
 paragraph are consistent and coordinated with efforts 
 of such Agency and other agencies and organizations to 
 clean up and redevelop brownfield sites.
 ``(F) Definition.--For purposes of this paragraph, 
 the term `brownfield site' has the meaning provided by 
 section 501 of this Act.
 ``(G) Authorization of appropriations.--For grants 
 under this paragraph, there is authorized to be 
 appropriated to the Secretary $50,000,000 for each of 
 fiscal years 1999 through 2003.''.

 TITLE VII--NATURAL RESOURCE DAMAGES

SEC. 701. LIABILITY FOR NATURAL RESOURCES DAMAGES.

 Subparagraph (C) of section 107(a) of the Comprehensive 
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 
U.S.C. 9607(a)) is amended by inserting ``and the reasonable costs of 
recovering such damages'' before the semicolon.

SEC. 702. LIMITATIONS ON LIABILITY.

 Section 107(c)(2) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9607(c)(2)) is 
amended by inserting ``, including damages for injury to, destruction 
of, or loss of natural resources'' after ``damages''.

SEC. 703. DAMAGE ASSESSMENT.

 (a) In General.--Section 107(f)(2)(C) of the Comprehensive 
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 
U.S.C. 9607(f)(2)(C)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(C) Damage assessment.--A natural resource damage 
 assessment conducted for the purposes of this Act and made by a 
 Federal, State, or tribal trustee shall be performed, to the 
 extent practicable, in accordance with--
 ``(i) the regulation issued under section 
 301(c); and
 ``(ii) generally accepted scientific and 
 technical standards and appropriate 
 methodologies to ensure the validity and 
 reliability of assessment results.''.
 (b) Regulations.--Section 301(c) of the Comprehensive Environmental 
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9651) is 
amended to read as follows:
 ``(c) Regulations for Damage Assessments.--
 ``(1) In general.--The President, acting through Federal 
 officials designated by the National Contingency Plan under 
 section 107(f)(2), shall issue a regulation for the assessment 
 of damages and costs for injury to, destruction of, or loss of 
 natural resources resulting from a release of a hazardous 
 substance for the purposes of this Act.
 ``(2) Contents.--The regulation under paragraph (1) shall--
 ``(A) specify protocols for conducting assessments 
 in individual cases to determine the injury, 
 destruction, or loss of natural resources;
 ``(B) identify the best available procedures to 
 determine damages for the cost of restoration and 
 assessment;
 ``(C) take into consideration the ability of a 
 natural resource to recover naturally and the 
 availability of replacement or alternative resources; 
 and
 ``(D) identify criteria for the distribution of 
 funds for assessments.
 ``(3) Biennial review.--The regulation under paragraph (1) 
 shall be reviewed and revised as appropriate every 2 years.''.

SEC. 704. STANDARD OF REVIEW.

 (a) Section 107(f) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9607(f)) is amended 
by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) Trustee restoration plans.--
 ``(A) Administrative record.--A trustee for a 
 natural resource designated under this subsection may 
 establish an administrative record on which the trustee 
 will base the selection of a plan for restoration of 
 the resource. The plan shall include a determination of 
 the nature and extent of the injury to, destruction of, 
 or loss of the resource. The administrative record 
 shall be made available to the public at or near the 
 facility at issue.
 ``(B) Public participation.--The President shall 
 issue regulations to establish procedures for the 
 participation of interested persons in the development 
 of an administrative record described in subparagraph 
 (A). The procedures shall include, at a minimum, each 
 of the requirements set forth in section 113(k)(2)(B).
 ``(C) Participation by trustees.--All trustees 
 designated for a natural resource under this subsection 
 may participate in the selection of a restoration plan 
 under this paragraph. The restoration plan may include 
 actions to restore natural resources under the 
 trusteeship of any participating trustee. The President 
 shall issue regulations to govern the implementation of 
 this subparagraph.
 ``(D) Judicial review.--Judicial review of any 
 restoration plan developed under this paragraph with 
 participation by all affected trustees (other than 
 trustees who elect not to participate) shall be limited 
 to the administrative record. Otherwise applicable 
 principles of administrative law shall govern whether 
any supplemental materials may be considered by the court. In 
considering objections to the restoration plan, the court shall uphold 
the decision of a participating trustee in selecting the plan unless 
the objecting party can demonstrate on the administrative record that 
the decision was arbitrary and capricious or otherwise not in 
accordance with law.''.

SEC. 705. CONTAMINATED SEDIMENTS.

 Section 107(f) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9607(f)) is further 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4) Contaminated sediments.--
 ``(A) In general.--With respect to hazardous 
 substances in sediments of the waters of the United 
 States, the presence of hazardous substances at levels 
 above background or reference levels shall be 
 sufficient to establish injury to natural resources 
 under subparagraph (C) of subsection (a).
 ``(B) Report to congress.--Not later than December 
 31, 2000, the Administrator and the appropriate 
 trustees shall jointly transmit to Congress a report 
 regarding how response, remedial, and restoration 
 actions are restoring and protecting natural resources 
 and all associated values, including natural heritage 
 values, affected by each of the following facilities or 
 group of facilities:
 ``(i) Hudson River, New York.
 ``(ii) Newark and New York Bays, New York 
 and New Jersey.
 ``(iii) Housatonic River, Connecticut and 
 Massachusetts.
 ``(iv) New Bedford Harbor, Massachusetts.
 ``(v) Clark Fork River, Montana.
 ``(vi) Lavaca Bay, Texas.
 ``(vii) Palos Verdes, California.
 ``(viii) Fox River, Wisconsin.
 ``(ix) Coeur D'Alene, Idaho.
 ``(x) Hanford, Washington.
 The President may designate other facilities as 
 additions to the list set forth in this subparagraph 
 and, for such additional facilities, the report shall 
 be submitted within 3 years after designation.''.

SEC. 706. RECRUITMENT AND TRAINING PROGRAM.

 Section 107(f) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9607(f)) is further 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(5) Recruitment and Training Program.--
 ``(A) In general.--The trustees designated under 
 this subsection shall conduct a program to assist in 
 the recruitment and training of individuals in an 
 affected community for employment in restoration 
 activities.
 ``(B) Recruitment, training, and employment.--The 
 trustees shall encourage a person conducting a 
 restoration action under this Act to train and employ 
 persons from the affected community in restoration 
 skills.''.

SEC. 707. STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.

 (a) Period in Which Action May Be Brought.--Section 113(g)(1) of 
the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability 
Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9613(g)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``Except as'' and all that follows through 
 subparagraph (B) and inserting the following:
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B) and paragraphs (3) and (4), no action 
 may be commenced for damages (as defined in section 
 101(6)) under this Act unless that action is commenced 
 within 3 years after--
 ``(i) the date of completion by an 
 authorized trustee of a damage assessment in 
 accordance with the regulations promulgated 
 under section 301(c); or
 ``(ii) the date of a plan for restoration 
 of natural resources adopted after adequate 
 public notice, opportunity for comment, and 
 consideration of all public comments.''; and
 (2) by striking ``With respect to'' and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(B) Special rules.--With respect to''; and
 (3) in subparagraph (B), as so designated--
 (A) by moving the remainder of the text of the 
 subparagraph 4 ems to the right; and
 (B) by striking ``in lieu of the dates referred to 
 in subparagraph (A) or (B)''.
 (b) Claims for Recovery of Damages.--Section 112(d)(2) of such Act 
(42 U.S.C. 9612(d)(2)) is amended by striking ``within'' and all that 
follows through the period at the end and inserting ``the period for 
commencing an action for natural resource damages under section 
113(g)(1).''.

SEC. 708. ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES.

 Section 101(16) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601(16)) is amended 
by inserting ``archaeological resources,'' before ``and other such 
resources''.

SEC. 709. CITIZEN SUITS.

 (a) Actions To Recover Natural Resources Damages.--Section 
310(a)(1) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, 
and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9659(a)(1)) is amended by 
inserting before the semicolon the following: ``or against any such 
person to recover damages for injury to, destruction of, or loss of 
natural resources subject to the limitations on the use of sums 
contained in section 107(f)''.
 (b) Notice.--Section 310(d)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 9659(d)(1)) 
is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(D) In the case of an action to recover damages 
 for injury to, destruction of, or loss of natural 
 resources, the trustees for the natural resources 
 designated under section 107(f).''.
 (c) Diligent Prosecution.--Section 310(d)(2) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
9659(d)(2)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(A)'' before ``the President''; and
 (2) by inserting before the period at the end the 
 following: ``; or (B) in the case of an action to recover 
 damages for injury to, destruction of, or loss of natural 
 resources, the trustees for the natural resources designated 
 under section 107(f) have commenced and are diligently 
 performing a natural resource damage assessment or have 
 commenced and are diligently prosecuting an action under this 
 Act for recovery of such damages''.

SEC. 710. TRANSITION RULES.

 (a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), the 
amendments made by this title shall apply only to a claim for damages 
under section 107(a)(2)(C) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 filed on or after the date of 
the enactment of this Act.
 (b) Exceptions.--The amendments made by section 707 of this Act 
shall apply to all claims for damages, whenever filed.

 TITLE VIII--FEDERAL FACILITIES

SEC. 801. FEDERAL ENTITIES AND FACILITIES.

 Section 120 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9620) is amended as 
follows:
 (1) By amending the heading to read as follows:

``SEC. 120. FEDERAL ENTITIES AND FACILITIES.''.

 (2) By amending paragraph (1) of subsection (a) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(1)(A) Each department, agency, and instrumentality of 
 the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of the United 
 States shall be subject to, and comply with, all Federal, 
 State, interstate and local requirements, both substantive and 
 procedural (including any requirements for permits, reporting, 
 or any provisions for injunctive relief and such sanctions as 
 may be imposed by a court to enforce such relief), regarding 
 response actions and damages related to, or management of, 
 hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants in the same 
 manner, and to the same extent, as any nongovernmental entity 
 is subject to such requirements, including reimbursement of 
 response costs and attorneys' fees, payment of natural resource 
 damages, and enforcement and liability under sections 106 and 
 107 of this title and the payment of reasonable service 
 charges.
 ``(B) The Federal, State, interstate, and local substantive 
 and procedural requirements referred to in subparagraph (A) 
 include, but are not limited to, all administrative orders and 
 all civil and administrative penalties and fines, regardless of 
 whether such penalties and fines are punitive or coercive in 
 nature or are imposed for isolated, intermittent, or continuing 
 violations. The United States hereby expressly waives any 
 immunity otherwise applicable to the United States with respect 
 to any such substantive or procedural requirement (including, 
 but not limited to, any injunctive relief, administrative order 
 or civil or administrative penalty or fine referred to in the 
 preceding sentence, or reasonable service charge).
 ``(C) The reasonable service charges referred to in this 
 paragraph include, but are not limited to, fees or charges 
 assessed in connection with the processing and issuance of 
 permits, renewal of permits, amendments to permits, review of 
 plans, studies, and other documents, and inspection and 
 monitoring of facilities, as well as any other 
 nondiscriminatory charges that are assessed in connection with 
a State, interstate, or local response program.
 ``(D) Neither the United States, nor any agent, employee, 
 or officer thereof, shall be immune or exempt from any process 
 or sanction of any State or Federal court with respect to the 
 enforcement of any injunctive relief.
 ``(E) No agent, employee, or officer of the United States 
 shall be personally liable for any civil penalty under any 
 Federal or State law relating to response actions with respect 
 to any act or omission within the scope of their official 
 duties. An agent, employee, or officer of the United States 
 shall be subject to any criminal sanction (including, but not 
 limited to, any fine or imprisonment) under any Federal or 
 State response law, but no department, agency, or 
 instrumentality of the executive, legislative, or judicial 
 branch of the United States shall be subject to any such 
 sanctions.
 ``(F) The waiver of sovereign immunity provided in this 
 paragraph shall not apply to the extent a State law would apply 
 any standard or requirement to such Federal department, agency, 
 or instrumentality in a manner which is more stringent than 
 such standard or requirement would be applied to any other 
 person.
 ``(G)(i) The Administrator may issue an order under section 
 106 of this Act to any department, agency, or instrumentality 
 of the executive, legislative, or judicial branch of the United 
 States. The Administrator shall initiate an administrative 
 enforcement action against such a department, agency, or 
 instrumentality in the same manner and under the same 
 circumstances as action would be initiated against any other 
 person.
 ``(ii) No administrative order issued to such department, 
 agency, or instrumentality shall become final until such 
 department, agency, or instrumentality has had the opportunity 
 to confer with the Administrator.
 ``(iii) Unless a State law in effect on the date of 
 enactment of the Children's Protection and Community Cleanup 
 Act of 1998, or a State Constitution, requires the funds to be 
 used in a different manner, all funds collected by a State from 
 the Federal Government from penalties and fines imposed for 
 violation of any substantive or procedural requirement referred 
 to in subsection (a) of this section shall be used by the State 
 only for projects designed to improve or protect the 
 environment or to defray the costs of environmental protection 
 or enforcement.
 ``(I) Each such department, agency, and instrumentality 
 shall have the right to contribution protection set forth in 
 section 113, when such department, agency, or instrumentality 
 resolves its liability under this Act.''.
 (3) By striking paragraph (4) of subsection (a).
 (4) By inserting ``(other than the indemnification 
 requirements of section 119)'' after ``responsibility'' in 
 subsection (a)(3).
 (5) By inserting after subsection (e) the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(7) Notification of and concurrence from the 
 administrator or state.--(A) Before the commencement of any 
 nonemergency removal action by a department, agency, or 
 instrumentality of the United States, such department, agency, 
 or instrumentality shall--
 ``(i) notify the Administrator and the State of the 
 planned removal action; and
 ``(ii) in the case of facilities which are listed 
 or proposed for listing on the National Priorities 
 List, obtain concurrence in the planned removal action 
 from the Administrator, and in the case of facilities 
 which are not listed or proposed for listing on the 
 National Priorities List, obtain concurrence in the 
 planned removal action from the State.
 The lack of concurrence under this subparagraph shall not delay 
 the commencement of the remedial investigation and feasibility 
 study in accordance with the time requirements of this section.
 ``(B) As soon as possible after any emergency removal 
 action is initiated by a department, agency, or instrumentality 
 of the United States, but in no case more than 24 hours after 
 such action is initiated, the department, agency, or 
 instrumentality shall notify the Administrator and the State of 
 the removal action.
 ``(C) The requirements of this paragraph shall not affect, 
 alter, or supplant, directly or indirectly, the applicability 
 of any State law to the removal action concerned.''.
 (6) In subsection (h)(3)(C)(i)--
 (A) by redesignating subclauses (III) and (IV) as 
 subclauses (IV) and (V), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting after subclause (II) the 
 following:
 ``(III) the Federal agency 
 requesting deferral has entered into, 
 with the appropriate regulatory agency, 
 an enforceable agreement that 
 contains--
 ``(aa) an enforceable 
 cleanup plan which may be 
 modified for good cause as 
 provided in the agreement and 
 which can be a record of 
 decision, a State- or EPA-
 approved closure plan or 
 corrective action decision, or 
 any other similar document 
 containing remedial alternative 
 analyses, projections for long-
 term operations and 
 maintenance, cost estimates, 
 and enforceable schedules with 
 milestones for intermediate and 
 final completion of cleanup; 
 and
 ``(bb) identification of 
 any institutional controls to 
 be relied upon during and after 
 the period of deferral/response 
 actions, designation of the 
 party bearing responsibility to 
 monitor effectiveness of 
 controls, and descriptions of 
 the enforcement mechanisms and 
 remedies for any breach of such 
 controls;''.
 (7) By adding at the end of subsection (h)(3)(C) the 
 following new clause:
 ``(v) If either the provision requiring 
 concurrence of the Governor for Federal 
 facilities listed on the National Priorities 
 List in clause (i), or the provision requiring 
 a finding of suitability for transfer by the 
 Governor for Federal facilities not listed on 
 the National Priorities List in clause (i), is 
 found by a court of competent jurisdiction to 
 be unconstitutional, the remaining provisions 
 of this subparagraph shall be deemed 
 invalid.''.
 (8) In subsection (h)(3)(C)(ii)--
 (A) by redesignating subclause (III) as subclause 
 (IX) and in that subclause by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) by redesignating subclause (IV) as subclause 
 (X) and in that subclause--
 (i) by striking ``adequately addresses'' 
 and inserts ``, if approved, would result in 
 sufficient funding to comply fully with all''; 
 and
 (ii) by striking ``action, subject to 
 congressional authorizations and 
 appropriations.'' and inserting ``action; 
 and'';
 (C) by inserting after subclause (II) the 
 following:
 ``(III) provide that all 
 restrictions on the use of the property 
 shall apply to, and be binding upon, 
 any transferee or assignee of the 
 contract, shall run with the land, that 
 both parties intend that such 
 restrictions shall run with the land 
 and be enforceable against future 
 transferees, successors, and assigns, 
 and that the United States and the 
 State in which the property is located 
 are third-party beneficiaries for the 
 purposes of enforcing the land use 
 restrictions until such time as the 
 restrictions are determined by the 
 appropriate regulatory agency to no 
 longer be necessary to protect human 
 health and the environment;
 ``(IV) provide for access by the 
 United States and the State in which 
 the property is located, to perform 
 oversight or any cleanup activities 
 required by the transfer agreement or 
 by this subsection;
 ``(V) provide a clear statement of 
 the scope of the parties' respective 
 duties to indemnify each other, if any;
 ``(VI) provide a clear delineation 
 of cleanup responsibilities, and 
 financial commitments regarding cleanup 
 obligations, of the transferring agency 
 and the transferee, including 
 operations and maintenance;
 ``(VII) provide a clear delineation 
 of the parties' respective cleanup 
 responsibilities in the event new 
 information is discovered subsequent to 
 transfer, such as previously unknown 
 contamination or risk information;
 ``(VIII) provide a clear statement 
 of the responsibilities of the 
 respective parties to perform 
 additional cleanup should actual land 
 use change from the use reasonably 
 anticipated at the time the remedy is 
 selected, or should actual exposures be 
 greater than represented in the risk 
 assessment;''; and
 (D) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(XI) provide that if the 
 transferee is to perform the cleanup, 
 the following additional safeguards 
 will be required:
 ``(aa) The transferee shall 
 provide adequate financial 
 assurances to cover the costs 
 of the proposed response 
 action.
 ``(bb) The transferee shall 
 provide proof of technical and 
 managerial capability to 
 implement the selected 
 remedy.''.
 (9) By amending clause (iv) of subsection (h)(3)(C) to read 
 as follows:
 ``(iv) Federal responsibility.--A deferral 
 under this subparagraph shall not diminish the 
 obligations and liability of a Federal agency 
 under any State or Federal law, including 
 obligations and liabilities under section 106, 
 section 107, and this section.''.

SEC. 802. ADJOINING STATES.

 Section 121(f) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9621(f)) is amended 
by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) The President shall provide to any State within a 50-mile 
radius of a remedial action at a Federal facility a reasonable 
opportunity to review and comment on each of the following:
 ``(A) The remedial investigation and feasibility study and 
 all data and technical documents leading to its issuance.
 ``(B) The planned remedial action identified in the 
 remedial investigation and feasibility study.
 ``(C) The engineering design following selection of the 
 final remedial action.
 ``(D) Other technical data and reports relating to 
 implementation of the remedy.
 ``(E) Any proposed finding or decision by the President to 
 exercise the authority of subsection (d)(4).''.

SEC. 803. ENFORCEABILITY OF FEDERAL COMPLIANCE AGREEMENTS.

 Section 120(e) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9620), as amended by 
this Act, is further amended by adding the following at the end:
 ``(8) State requirements.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of this Act, an interagency agreement under this 
 section shall not impair or diminish the authority of a State 
 or any other person to enforce compliance with requirements of 
 State or Federal law, unless those requirements have been--
 ``(A) specifically addressed in the agreement; or
 ``(B) waived;
 (without objection) after notice to the State on or before the 
 date on which the response action is selected.''.

 TITLE IX--LIABILITY

SEC. 901. LIABILITY EXEMPTIONS.

 (a) Liability Exemptions.--Section 107 of the Comprehensive 
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 
U.S.C. 9607), as amended by title VI, is further amended by adding at 
the end the following:
 ``(s) Liability Exemptions.--
 ``(1) De micromis exemption.--(A) Notwithstanding 
 paragraphs (1) through (4) of subsection (a), a person shall 
 not be liable to the United States or any other person 
 (including liability for contribution) under this Act for any 
 response costs incurred with respect to a facility if--
 ``(i) liability is based solely on paragraph (3) or 
 (4) of subsection (a);
 ``(ii) the person can demonstrate that the total of 
 materials containing a hazardous substance that the 
 person arranged for disposal or treatment of, arranged 
 with a transporter for transport for disposal or 
 treatment, of, or accepted for transport for disposal 
 or treatment, at the facility, was less than 55 gallons 
 of liquid materials or less than 100 pounds of solid 
 materials; and
 ``(iii) the acts upon which liability is based took 
 place wholly before July 1, 1997.
 ``(B) Subparagraph (A) shall not apply in a case in which 
 the President, in the President's sole discretion, determines 
that the material containing hazardous substances referred to in 
subparagraph (A) contributed significantly or could contribute 
significantly, either individually or in the aggregate, to the cost of 
the response action with respect to the facility.
 ``(2) Small party exemption.--(A) Notwithstanding 
 paragraphs (1) through (4) of subsection (a), a person who does 
 not impede the performance of a response action or natural 
 resource restoration at a facility shall not be liable to the 
 extent liability at such facility is based solely on paragraph 
 (3) or (4) of this subsection, and the person arranged for 
 disposal, treatment, or transport for disposal or treatment, or 
 accepted for transport for disposal or treatment, of only 
 municipal solid waste or sewage sludge owned or possessed by 
 such person, and the person is--
 ``(i) the owner, operator, or lessee of residential 
 property from which all of the municipal solid waste 
 attributable to such person was generated;
 ``(ii) a small business; or
 ``(iii) a small non-profit organization.
 ``(B) This paragraph shall have no effect on the liability 
 of any other person.''.
 (b) Removal of Petroleum Exemption.--Section 101(14) of such Act 
(42 U.S.C. 9601(14)) is amended by striking the sentence starting with 
``The term does not include petroleum''.
 (c) Increased Liability for Willful and Intentional Releases.--
Section 107(c) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 9607(c)) is amended by adding at 
the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) In the case of a person who is liable for a release or threat 
of release of a hazardous substance, if the release or threat of 
release was willful and intentional, the person may be liable to the 
United States for punitive damages in an amount at least equal to, and 
not more than two times, the amount of any costs incurred by the Fund 
as a result of such release or threat of release.''.
 (d) Small Business Defined.--Section 101 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
9601), as amended by this Act, is further amended by adding at the end 
the following new paragraphs:
 ``(41) Small business.--(A) The term `small business' 
 refers to any business entity that--
 ``(i) including its parents, subsidiaries, and 
 other affiliates, during the tax year of the entity 
 preceding the date of transmittal of notification that 
 the entity is a potentially responsible party under 
 this Act, employs no more than 100 individuals; and
 ``(ii) is a `small business concern' as defined 
 under the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 631 et seq.).
 ``(B) For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term 
 `affiliate' has the meaning of that term provided in the 
 definition of `small business concern' in regulations 
 promulgated by the Small Business Administration in accordance 
 with the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 631 et seq.).
 ``(42) Small nonprofit organization.--The term `small 
 nonprofit organization' refers to any chapter, office, or 
 department of a nonprofit organization employing fewer than 100 
 individuals at the location from which all of the municipal 
 solid waste attributable to such organization with respect to 
 the facility was generated.''.

 TITLE X--FUNDING

SEC. 1001. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 Section 111(a) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9611(a)) is amended 
by striking ``$8,500,000,000 for the 5-year period beginning on the 
date of enactment of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act 
of 1986, and not more than $5,100,000,000 for the period commencing 
October 1, 1991, and ending September 30, 1994'' and inserting 
``$9,600,000,000 for the period commencing October 1, 1998, and ending 
September 30, 2003''.

SEC. 1002. AGENCY FOR TOXIC SUBSTANCES AND DISEASE REGISTRY.

 Section 111(m) (relating to ATSDR) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(m) Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry.--There 
shall be directly available to the Agency for Toxic Substances and 
Disease Registry to be used for the purpose of carrying out activities 
described in subsection (c)(4) of this section and section 104(i) of 
this Act not less than $150,000,000 per fiscal year for each of fiscal 
years 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, and 2003, of which $50,000,000 per fiscal 
year shall be available for the purposes of section 104(i)(15)(C). Any 
funds so made available which are not obligated by the end of the 
fiscal year in which made available shall be turned back to the 
Fund.''.

SEC. 1003. LIMITATIONS ON RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEMONSTRATION 
 PROGRAMS.

 Section 111(n) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(n) Limitations on Research, Development, and Demonstration 
Program.--
 ``(1) Section 311(a).--From the amounts available in the 
 Fund, not more than the following amounts may be used for the 
 purposes of section 311(a) of this title (relating to hazardous 
 substance research, demonstration, and training activities):
 ``(A) For fiscal year 1999, $40,000,000.
 ``(B) For fiscal year 2000, $50,000,000.
 ``(C) For fiscal year 2001, $55,000,000.
 ``(D) For fiscal year 2002, $55,000,000.
 ``(E) For fiscal year 2003, $55,000,000.
 No more than 10 percent of such amounts shall be used for 
 training under section 311(a) of this title for any fiscal 
 year.
 ``(2) Section 311(d).--For each of the fiscal years 1999, 
 2000, 2001, 2002, and 2003, not more than $5,000,000 of the 
 amounts available in the Fund may be used for the purposes of 
 section 311(d) of this title (relating to university hazardous 
 substance research centers).''.

SEC. 1004. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FROM GENERAL REVENUES.

 (a) Authorization.--Section 111(p)(1) is amended to read as 
follows:
 ``(1) In general.--The following sums are authorized to be 
 appropriated, out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise 
 appropriated, to the Hazardous Substance Superfund:
 ``(A) For fiscal year 1999, $250,000,000.
 ``(B) For fiscal year 2000, $250,000,000.
 ``(C) For fiscal year 2001, $250,000,000.
 ``(D) For fiscal year 2002, $250,000,000.
 ``(E) For fiscal year 2003, $250,000,000.
 In addition, there is authorized to be appropriated to the 
 Hazardous Substance Superfund for each fiscal year an amount 
 equal to so much of the aggregate amount authorized to be 
 appropriated under this subsection as has not been appropriated 
 before the beginning of the fiscal year involved.''.
 (b) Repeal of Duplicative Authorization.--(1) Subsection (b) of 
section 517 of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (26 
U.S.C. 9507 note) is hereby repealed.
 (2) Section 9507(a)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is 
amended by striking out ``section 517(b) of the Superfund Revenue Act 
of 1986'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``section 111(p) of the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 
of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9611(p))''.

SEC. 1005. ADDITIONAL LIMITATIONS.

 Section 111 is amended by adding after subsection (p) the following 
new subsections:
 ``(q) Information Offices.--For each of the fiscal years 1999, 
2000, 2001, 2002, and 2003, not more than $50,000,000 of the amounts 
available in the Fund may be used for the purposes of section 117(c) of 
this Act (relating to Community Information and Access Offices).''.

SEC. 1006. WORKER TRAINING AND EDUCATION GRANTS.

 Section 111(c)(12) (42 U.S.C. 9611(c)(12)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``and section 117(l) of this Act'' after 
 ``of 1986'';
 (2) by striking ``$10,000,000'' and inserting 
 ``$15,000,000''; and
 (3) by striking ``and 1994'' and inserting ``, 1994, 1998, 
 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, and 2003''.

SEC. 1007. EXTENSION OF HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SUPERFUND.

 (a) Extension of Taxes.--
 (1) Paragraph (1) of section 59A(e) of the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986 is amended to read as follows:
 ``(1) In general.--The tax imposed by this section shall 
 apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1998, and 
 before January 1, 2004.''
 (2) Paragraph (1) of section 4611(e) of such Code is 
 amended to read as follows:
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 Hazardous Substance Superfund financing rate under this section 
 shall apply after December 31, 1998, and before January 1, 
 2004.''
 (3) Paragraph (2) of section 4611(e) of such Code is 
 amended--
 (A) by striking ``1993'' and inserting ``2001'',
 (B) by striking ``1994'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``2002'', and
 (C) by striking ``1995'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``2003''.
 (4)(A) Subsection (e) of section 4611 of such Code is 
 amended by striking paragraph (3).
 (B) Paragraph (2) of section 59(e) of such Code is amended 
 to read as follows:
 ``(2) Earlier termination.--The tax imposed by this section 
 shall not apply to taxable years beginning during a calendar 
 year during which no tax is imposed under section 4611(a) by 
 reason of paragraph (2) of section 4611(e).''
 (b) Extension of Repayment Deadline for Superfund Borrowing.--
Subparagraph (B) of section 9507(d)(3) of such Code is amended by 
striking ``December 31, 1995'' and inserting ``December 31, 2003''.
 (c) Trust Fund Purposes.--Paragraph (1) of section 9507(c) of such 
Code is amended by striking subparagraphs (A) and (B) and inserting the 
following new subparagraphs:
 ``(A) to carry out the purposes of subsections (b), 
 (c), and (d) of section 111 of CERCLA; or
 ``(B) hereafter authorized by a law which does not 
 authorize the expenditure out of the Superfund for a 
 general purpose not covered by subparagraph (A).''
 (d) Inclusion of Certain Punitive Damages in Superfund.--Section 
9507(b)(5) of such Code is amended by inserting ``and section 
107(c)(4)'' after ``107(c)(3)''.
 (e) Coordination With Other Provisions.--Paragraph (2) of section 
9507(e) of such Code is amended by striking ``CERCLA'' and all that 
follows through ``Acts)'' and inserting ``CERCLA, the Superfund 
Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, and the Children's 
Protection and Community Cleanup Act of 1998 (or in any amendment made 
by any of such Acts)''.

 TITLE XI--MISCELLANEOUS

SEC. 1101. PENALTIES.

 (a) Doubling of Penalties and Inflation Adjustment.--Section 109 of 
the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability 
Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9609) is amended--
 (1) in subsections (a), (b), and (c), by striking 
 ``$25,000'' and inserting ``$50,000 (based on fiscal year 1998 
 constant dollars)''; and
 (2) in subsections (b) and (c), by striking ``$75,000'' and 
 inserting ``$150,000 (based on fiscal year 1998 constant 
 dollars)''.
 (b) Penalties for Certain Additional Violations.--Section 109 is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1), by adding at the end the 
 following new subparagraphs:
 ``(F) A violation of the requirements of section 
 110 (relating to employee protection).
 ``(G) A violation of any restriction, limitation, 
 or control imposed under an institutional control 
 instrument in use at a facility.''; and
 (2) in subsections (b) and (c), by inserting after 
 paragraph (5) the following new paragraphs:
 ``(6) A violation of the requirements of section 110 
 (relating to employee protection).
 ``(7) A violation of any restriction, limitation, or 
 control imposed under an institutional control instrument in 
 use at a facility.''.

SEC. 1102. EMPLOYEE PROTECTION.

 Section 110(b) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9610(b)) is 
amended--
 (1) in the first sentence, by striking ``thirty days'' and 
 inserting ``6 months'';
 (2) in the third sentence, by striking ``such investigation 
 to be made as he deems appropriate.'' and inserting ``an 
 investigation to be made.''; and
 (3) in the sentence beginning with ``If he finds that such 
 violation did occur''--
 (A) by inserting ``(1)'' before ``to take such 
 affirmative''; and
 (B) by inserting before the period at the end the 
 following: ``, and (2) to pay such civil penalty under 
 section 109 as the Secretary deems appropriate''.

SEC. 1103. RADIOACTIVELY CONTAMINATED SITES.

 (a) Protectiveness of Cleanup Standards.--Section 121(b) of the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 
of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9621(b)), as amended by this Act, is further amended 
by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4) A remedial action that attains applicable or relevant and 
appropriate requirements shall be considered to be protective of human 
health and the environment unless the President determines that 
attainment of the requirements is not sufficiently protective, in which 
case the President shall establish additional requirements that will 
ensure that the remedial action will be protective of human health and 
the environment. For purposes of this paragraph, the President shall 
consider the decontamination regulations for site termination issued by 
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission on July 21, 1997, to not be 
sufficiently protective.''.
 (b) Revision to Definition of Federally Permitted Release.--Section 
101(10)(K) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 9601(10)(K)) is amended by inserting 
before the period at the end the following: ``, if such license, 
permit, regulation, or order adequately protects ground water''.
 (c) Coverage of NRC Licensees.--Section 120(a)(2) of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 9620(a)(2)) is amended--
 (1) in the heading, by striking out ``facilities.--'' and 
 inserting ``facilities and nrc licensees.--''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following: ``The requirements 
 of this paragraph that apply to Federal facilities are also 
 applicable to facilities subject to licenses or decontamination 
 regulations for license termination issued by the Nuclear 
 Regulatory Commission under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954.''.
 (d) Taxation of Uranium Yellowcake and Uranium Dioxide.--
 (1) Imposition of tax.--Section 4661(b) of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end of the 
 table the following:

 ``Uranium yellowcake...................... 233.33 
 ``Uranium dioxide......................... 2222.22''.
 (2) Special rule.--Section 4662(b) of such Code is amended 
 by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(11) Uranium dioxide.--Under regulations prescribed by 
 the Secretary, uranium dioxide shall be treated as a taxable 
 chemical only if it is used as a fuel in a nuclear reactor 
 (and, for purposes of section 4661(a), the person so using it 
 shall be treated as the manufacturer thereof).''.
 <all>