HR 5721 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5721
To amend the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to restore and strengthen civil rights
laws that ban discrimination in employment, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
September 26, 1990
Mr. MICHEL introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the
Committees on Education and Labor and the Judiciary
A BILL
To amend the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to restore and strengthen civil rights
laws that ban discrimination in employment, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Civil Rights Act of 1990'.
SEC. 2. FINDING AND PURPOSE.
 (a) FINDING- Congress finds that additional protections and remedies under
 Federal law are needed to deter unlawful discrimination.
 (b) PURPOSE- The purpose of this Act is to strengthen existing protections
 and remedies available under Federal civil rights laws to provide more
 effective deterrence.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 Section 701 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e) is amended
 by adding at the end of the following:
 `(l) The term `complaining party' means the Commission, the Attorney General,
 or a person who may bring an action or proceeding under this title.
 `(m) The term `demonstrates' means meets the burden of production and
 persuasion.
 `(n) The term `required by business necessity' means that the challenged
 practice has a manifest relationship to the employment in question or that
 the respondent's legitimate employment goals are significantly served by,
 even if they do not require, the challenged practice or group of practices.
 `(o) The term `respondent' means an employer, employment agency, labor
 organization, joint labor-management committee, controlling apprenticeship
 or other training or retraining programs, including on-the-job training
 programs, or those Federal entities subject to the provisions of section
 717 (or the heads thereof).'.
SEC. 4. DISPARATE IMPACT CASES.
 Section 703 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-2) is amended
 by adding at the end the following:
 `(k) PROOF OF UNLAWFUL EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES IN DISPARATE IMPACT CASES- (1)
 An unlawful employment practice based on disparate impact is established
 only when--
 `(A) a complaining party identifies a particular employment practice and
 demonstrates that such practice causes a disparate impact on the basis of
 race, color, religion, sex, or national origin; and the respondent fails
 to demonstrate that such practice is required by business necessity; or
 `(B) a complaining party identifies a combination of two or more employment
 practices and demonstrates that such combination causes a disparate impact
 on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin, and that each
 employment practice in such combination has contributed to the exclusion; and
 the respondent fails to demonstrate that such combination would not cause a
 disparate impact but for employment practices required by business necessity.
 `(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of this title (other than subsection
 (i)), a rule barring the employment of an individual who currently and
 knowingly uses or possesses an illegal drug as defined in Schedules I and
 II of section 102(6) of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802(6)),
 other than the use or possession of a drug taken under the supervision of a
 licensed health care professional, or any other use or possession authorized
 by the Controlled Substances Act or any other provision under Federal law,
 shall be considered an unlawful employment practice under this title only
 if such rule is adopted or applied with an intent to discriminate because
 of the race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.
 `(3) The mere existence of a statistical imbalance in an employer's workforce
 on account of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin is not alone
 sufficient to establish a prime facie case of disparate impact violation.'.
SEC. 5. CLARIFYING PROHIBITION AGAINST IMPERMISSIBLE CONSIDERATION OF RACE,
COLOR, RELIGION, SEX OR NATIONAL ORIGIN IN EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 703 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42
 U.S.C. 2000e-2), as amended by section 4, is amended by adding at the end
 the following:
 `(l) DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICE NEED NOT BE SOLE CONTRIBUTING FACTOR- Except
 as otherwise provided in this title, an unlawful employment practice is
 established when the complaining party demonstrates that race, color,
 religion, sex, or national origin was a major contributing factor for
 any employment practice, even though other factors also contributed to
 such practice.'.
 (b) ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS- Section 706(g) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5(g)) is amended by inserting before the period in the last
 sentence the following: `or, in the case where a violation is established
 under section 703(1), if the respondent establishes that it would have
 taken the same action in the absence of discrimination.'.
SEC. 6. FACILITATING PROMPT AND ORDERLY RESOLUTION OF CHALLENGES TO EMPLOYMENT
PRACTICES IMPLEMENTING LITIGATED OR CONSENT JUDGMENTS OR ORDERS.
 Section 703 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-2) as amended
 by sections 4 and 5, is amended by adding at the end of the following:
 `(m) FINALITY OF LITIGATED OR CONSENT JUDGMENTS OR ORDERS- (1)
 Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and except as provided in
 paragraph (2), an employment practice specifically required by a litigated
 or consent judgment or order resolving a claim of employment discrimination
 under this title may not be challenged in a claim under the United States
 Constitution or Federal civil rights laws by a person who, at the time of
 the entry of such judgment or order, was an applicant for employment with
 or an employee of the entity covered by such decree, whose interests would
 likely be affected by the consent decree, and who had--
 `(A) actual notice that such judgment or order would likely affect the
 interests of such person and that later challenge by such person would be
 barred; and
 `(B) a reasonable opportunity to challenge such judgment or order.
 `(2) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed--
 `(A) to alter the standards for intervention under rule 24 of the Federal
 Rules of Civil Procedure;
 `(B) to apply to the rights of parties to the action in which the litigated
 or consent judgment or order was entered, or of members of a class
 represented or sought to be represented in such action, or of members of
 a group on whose behalf relief was sought in such action by the Federal
 Government; or
 `(C) to prevent challenges to a litigated or consent judgment or order on
 the ground that such judgment or order was obtained through collusion or
 fraud, is transparently invalid, or was entered by a court lacking subject
 matter jurisdiction.'.
SEC. 7. EXPANSION OF RIGHT TO CHALLENGE DISCRIMINATORY SENIORITY SYSTEMS.
 Section 706(e) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5(e)) is
 amended by adding at the end the following: `For purposes of this section,
 an alleged unlawful employment practice occurs when a seniority system is
 adopted, when an individual becomes subject to a seniority system, or when
 a person aggrieved is injured by the application of a seniority system, or
 provision thereof, that is alleged to have been adopted by an intentionally
 discriminatory purpose, in violation of this title, whether or not that
 discriminatory purpose is apparent on the face of the Seniority provision.'.
SEC. 8. PROVIDING FOR ADDITIONAL EQUITABLE RELIEF IN CERTAIN CASES OF
INTENTIONAL DISCRIMINATION.
 Section 706 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000-5) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (g)--
 (A) by inserting `(1)' after `(g)'; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 `(2) In fashioning equitable remedies for an unlawful employment practice or
 group of unlawful employment practices (other than an unlawful employment
 practice established in accordance with section 703(k) and other than an
 unlawful employment practice for which back pay may be awarded under this
 title), the court may require the respondent to pay the complaining party
 an amount not to exceed $100,000 if the court finds that--
 `(A) an additional equitable remedy beyond those otherwise available is
 needed to deter the respondent from future violations of this title; and
 `(B) such an award is otherwise justified by the equities.
In no event shall the complaining party recover in excess of $100,000 for
either an unlawful employment practice or a group of unlawful employment
practices to which this paragraph applies.
 `(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, if a person
 is aggrieved by an unlawful employment practice to which paragraph (2)
 applies, then such a person may commence a civil action in an appropriate
 district court of the United States for temporary or preliminary injunctive
 relief, without regard to any waiting period that would otherwise prevent
 the commencement of a civil action under this title.
 `(4) All issues in cases arising under this title shall be heard and
 determined by a judge, a specified in subsection (f).'.
SEC. 9. ALLOWING THE AWARD OF EXPERT FEES.
 Section 706(k) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5(k))
 is amended by inserting `(including expert fees) and' after `attorney's fee'.
SEC. 10. EXPANSION OF PROTECTIONS AGAINST ALL RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN THE
PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACTS.
 Section 1977 of the Revised Statutes of the United States (42 U.S.C. 1981)
 is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(a)' before `All persons within'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 `(b) The rights protected by this section are protected against impairment
 by nongovernmental discrimination as well as against impairment under
 color of State law. This section affords the same protection against
 discrimination in the performance, breach, modification or termination
 of a contract and in the enjoyment of all benefits, privileges, terms,
 and conditions of the contractual relationship, as it does in the making
 or enforcement of that contract.'.
SEC. 11. PROVIDING CIVIL RIGHTS PROTECTIONS TO CONGRESSIONAL EMPLOYEES.
 Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.) is
 amended by adding at the end the following:
`SEC. 719. CONGRESSIONAL COVERAGE.
 `Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, this title shall apply
 to the Congress of the United States. The means for enforcing this title
 as this title applies to each House of Congress shall be as determined by
 the House of Congress.'.
SEC. 12. SEVERABILITY.
 If any provision of this Act, or an amendment made by this Act, or the
 application of such provision to any person or circumstances is held to
 be invalid, the remainder of this Act and the amendments made by this Act,
 and the application of such provision to other persons and circumstances,
 shall not be affected thereby.
SEC. 13. EFFECTIVE DATE; APPLICATION OF AMENDMENTS.
 (a) EFFECTIVE DATE- This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall
 take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) APPLICATION OF AMENDMENTS- The amendments made by this Act shall not
 apply with respect to claims arising before the date of the enactment of
 this Act.