[Congressional Bills 110th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 3915 Referred in Senate (RFS)]

 1st Session
 H. R. 3915

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 December 3, 2007

Received; read twice and referred to the Committee on Banking, Housing, 
 and Urban Affairs

_______________________________________________________________________

 AN ACT

To amend the Truth in Lending Act to reform consumer mortgage practices 
 and provide accountability for such practices, to establish licensing 
and registration requirements for residential mortgage originators, to 
provide certain minimum standards for consumer mortgage loans, and for 
 other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Mortgage Reform 
and Anti-Predatory Lending Act of 2007''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
 TITLE I--RESIDENTIAL MORTGAGE LOAN ORIGINATION

 Subtitle A--Licensing System for Residential Mortgage Loan Originators

Sec. 101. Purposes and methods for establishing a mortgage licensing 
 system and registry.
Sec. 102. Definitions.
Sec. 103. License or registration required.
Sec. 104. State license and registration application and issuance.
Sec. 105. Standards for State license renewal.
Sec. 106. System of registration administration by Federal banking 
 agencies.
Sec. 107. Secretary of Housing and Urban Development backup authority 
 to establish a loan originator licensing 
 system.
Sec. 108. Backup authority to establish a nationwide mortgage licensing 
 and registry system.
Sec. 109. Fees.
Sec. 110. Background checks of loan originators.
Sec. 111. Confidentiality of information.
Sec. 112. Liability provisions.
Sec. 113. Enforcement under HUD backup licensing system.
 Subtitle B--Residential Mortgage Loan Origination Standards

Sec. 121. Definitions.
Sec. 122. Residential mortgage loan origination.
Sec. 123. Prohibition on steering incentives.
Sec. 124. Liability.
Sec. 125. Regulations.
 TITLE II--MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR MORTGAGES

Sec. 201. Ability to repay.
Sec. 202. Net tangible benefit for refinancing of residential mortgage 
 loans.
Sec. 203. Safe harbor and rebuttable presumption.
Sec. 204. Liability.
Sec. 205. Defense to foreclosure.
Sec. 206. Additional standards and requirements.
Sec. 207. Rule of construction.
Sec. 208. Effect on State laws.
Sec. 209. Regulations.
Sec. 210. Amendments to civil liability provisions.
Sec. 211. Lender rights in the context of borrower deception.
Sec. 212. Six-month notice required before reset of hybrid adjustable 
 rate mortgages.
Sec. 213. Required disclosures.
Sec. 214. Disclosures required in monthly statements for residential 
 mortgage loans.
Sec. 215. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 216. Effective date.
Sec. 217. Report by the GAO.
 TITLE III--HIGH-COST MORTGAGES

Sec. 301. Definitions relating to high-cost mortgages.
Sec. 302. Amendments to existing requirements for certain mortgages.
Sec. 303. Additional requirements for certain mortgages.
Sec. 304. Amendment to provision governing correction of errors.
Sec. 305. Regulations.
Sec. 306. Effective date.
 TITLE IV--OFFICE OF HOUSING COUNSELING

Sec. 401. Short title.
Sec. 402. Establishment of Office of Housing Counseling.
Sec. 403. Counseling procedures.
Sec. 404. Grants for housing counseling assistance.
Sec. 405. Requirements to use HUD-certified counselors under HUD 
 programs.
Sec. 406. Study of defaults and foreclosures.
Sec. 407. Definitions for counseling-related programs.
Sec. 408. Updating and simplification of mortgage information booklet.
 TITLE V--MORTGAGE DISCLOSURES UNDER REAL ESTATE SETTLEMENT PROCEDURES 
 ACT OF 1974

Sec. 501. Universal mortgage disclosure in good faith estimate of 
 settlement services costs.
 TITLE VI--MORTGAGE SERVICING

Sec. 601. Escrow and impound accounts relating to certain consumer 
 credit transactions.
Sec. 602. Disclosure notice required for consumers who waive escrow 
 services.
Sec. 603. Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 1974 amendments.
Sec. 604. Mortgage servicing studies required.
Sec. 605. Escrows included in repayment analysis.
 TITLE VII--APPRAISAL ACTIVITIES

Sec. 701. Property appraisal requirements.
Sec. 702. Unfair and deceptive practices and acts relating to certain 
 consumer credit transactions.
Sec. 703. Appraisal subcommittee of FIEC, appraiser independence, and 
 approved appraiser education.
Sec. 704. Study required on improvements in appraisal process and 
 compliance programs.
Sec. 705. Consumer appraisal disclosure.

 TITLE I--RESIDENTIAL MORTGAGE LOAN ORIGINATION

 Subtitle A--Licensing System for Residential Mortgage Loan Originators

SEC. 101. PURPOSES AND METHODS FOR ESTABLISHING A MORTGAGE LICENSING 
 SYSTEM AND REGISTRY.

 In order to increase uniformity, reduce regulatory burden, enhance 
consumer protection, and reduce fraud, the States, through the 
Conference of State Bank Supervisors and the American Association of 
Residential Mortgage Regulators, are hereby encouraged to establish a 
Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry for the residential 
mortgage industry that accomplishes all of the following objectives:
 (1) Provides uniform license applications and reporting 
 requirements for State-licensed loan originators.
 (2) Provides a comprehensive licensing and supervisory 
 database.
 (3) Aggregates and improves the flow of information to and 
 between regulators.
 (4) Provides increased accountability and tracking of loan 
 originators.
 (5) Streamlines the licensing process and reduces the 
 regulatory burden.
 (6) Enhances consumer protections and supports anti-fraud 
 measures.
 (7) Provides consumers with easily accessible information 
 regarding the employment history of, and publicly adjudicated 
 disciplinary and enforcement actions against, loan originators.

SEC. 102. DEFINITIONS.

 For purposes of this subtitle, the following definitions shall 
apply:
 (1) Federal banking agencies.--The term ``Federal banking 
 agencies'' means the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
 System, the Comptroller of the Currency, the Director of the 
 Office of Thrift Supervision, the National Credit Union 
 Administration, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
 (2) Depository institution.--The term ``depository 
 institution'' has the same meaning as in section 3 of the 
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act and includes any credit union.
 (3) Loan originator.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``loan originator''--
 (i) means an individual who--
 (I) takes a residential mortgage 
 loan application;
 (II) assists a consumer in 
 obtaining or applying to obtain a 
 residential mortgage loan; or
 (III) offers or negotiates terms of 
 a residential mortgage loan, for direct 
 or indirect compensation or gain, or in 
 the expectation of direct or indirect 
 compensation or gain;
 (ii) includes any individual who represents 
 to the public, through advertising or other 
 means of communicating or providing information 
 (including the use of business cards, 
 stationery, brochures, signs, rate lists, or 
 other promotional items), that such individual 
 can or will provide or perform any of the 
 activities described in clause (i);
 (iii) does not include any individual who 
 is not otherwise described in clause (i) or 
 (ii) and who performs purely administrative or 
 clerical tasks on behalf of a person who is 
 described in any such clause.
 (iv) does not include a person or entity 
 that only performs real estate brokerage 
 activities and is licensed or registered in 
 accordance with applicable State law, unless 
 the person or entity is compensated by a 
 lender, a mortgage broker, or other loan 
 originator or by any agent of such lender, 
 mortgage broker, or other loan originator.
 (B) Other definitions relating to loan 
 originator.--For purposes of this subsection, an 
 individual ``assists a consumer in obtaining or 
 applying to obtain a residential mortgage loan'' by, 
 among other things, advising on loan terms (including 
 rates, fees, other costs), preparing loan packages, or 
 collecting information on behalf of the consumer with 
 regard to a residential mortgage loan.
 (C) Administrative or clerical tasks.--The term 
 ``administrative or clerical tasks'' means the receipt, 
 collection, and distribution of information common for 
 the processing or underwriting of a loan in the 
 mortgage industry and communication with a consumer to 
 obtain information necessary for the processing or 
 underwriting of a residential mortgage loan.
 (D) Real estate brokerage activity defined.--The 
 term ``real estate brokerage activity'' means any 
 activity that involves offering or providing real 
 estate brokerage services to the public, including--
 (i) acting as a real estate agent or real 
 estate broker for a buyer, seller, lessor, or 
 lessee of real property;
 (ii) listing or advertising real property 
 for sale, purchase, lease, rental, or exchange;
 (iii) providing advice in connection with 
 sale, purchase, lease, rental, or exchange of 
 real property;
 (iv) bringing together parties interested 
 in the sale, purchase, lease, rental, or 
 exchange of real property;
 (v) negotiating, on behalf of any party, 
 any portion of a contract relating to the sale, 
 purchase, lease, rental, or exchange of real 
 property (other than in connection with 
 providing financing with respect to any such 
 transaction);
 (vi) engaging in any activity for which a 
 person engaged in the activity is required to 
 be registered or licensed as a real estate 
 agent or real estate broker under any 
 applicable law; and
 (vii) offering to engage in any activity, 
 or act in any capacity, described in clause 
 (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), or (vi).
 (4) Loan processor or underwriter.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``loan processor or 
 underwriter'' means an individual who performs clerical 
 or support duties at the direction of and subject to 
 the supervision and instruction of--
 (i) a State-licensed loan originator; or
 (ii) a registered loan originator.
 (B) Clerical or support duties.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), the term ``clerical or support 
 duties'' may include--
 (i) the receipt, collection, distribution, 
 and analysis of information common for the 
 processing or underwriting of a residential 
 mortgage loan; and
 (ii) communicating with a consumer to 
 obtain the information necessary for the 
 processing or underwriting of a loan, to the 
 extent that such communication does not include 
 offering or negotiating loan rates or terms, or 
 counseling consumers about residential mortgage 
 loan rates or terms.
 (5) Nationwide mortgage licensing system and registry.--The 
 term ``Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry'' 
 means a mortgage licensing system developed and maintained by 
 the Conference of State Bank Supervisors and the American 
 Association of Residential Mortgage Regulators for the State 
 licensing and registration of State-licensed loan originators 
 and the registration of registered loan originators or any 
 system established by the Secretary under section 108.
 (6) Registered loan originator.--The term ``registered loan 
 originator'' means any individual who--
 (A) meets the definition of loan originator and is 
 an employee of a depository institution or a subsidiary 
 of a depository institution; and
 (B) is registered with, and maintains a unique 
 identifier through, the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing 
 System and Registry.
 (7) Residential mortgage loan.--The term ``residential 
 mortgage loan'' means any loan primarily for personal, family, 
 or household use that is secured by a mortgage, deed of trust, 
 or other equivalent consensual security interest on a dwelling 
 (as defined in section 103(v) of the Truth in Lending Act) or 
 residential real estate upon which is constructed or intended 
 to be constructed a dwelling (as so defined).
 (8) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Housing and Urban Development.
 (9) State-licensed loan originator.--The term ``State-
 licensed loan originator'' means any individual who--
 (A) is a loan originator;
 (B) is not an employee of a depository institution 
 or any subsidiary of a depository institution; and
 (C) is licensed by a State or by the Secretary 
 under section 107 and registered as a loan originator 
 with, and maintains a unique identifier through, the 
 Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry.
 (10) Unique identifier.--The term ``unique identifier'' 
 means a number or other identifier that--
 (A) permanently identifies a loan originator; and
 (B) is assigned by protocols established by the 
 Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry and 
 the Federal banking agencies to facilitate electronic 
 tracking of loan originators and uniform identification 
 of, and public access to, the employment history of and 
 the publicly adjudicated disciplinary and enforcement 
 actions against loan originators.

SEC. 103. LICENSE OR REGISTRATION REQUIRED.

 (a) In General.--An individual may not engage in the business of a 
loan originator without first--
 (1) obtaining and maintaining--
 (A) a registration as a registered loan originator; 
 or
 (B) a license and registration as a State-licensed 
 loan originator; and
 (2) obtaining a unique identifier.
 (b) Loan Processors and Underwriters.--
 (1) Supervised loan processors and underwriters.--A loan 
 processor or underwriter who does not represent to the public, 
 through advertising or other means of communicating or 
 providing information (including the use of business cards, 
 stationery, brochures, signs, rate lists, or other promotional 
 items), that such individual can or will perform any of the 
 activities of a loan originator shall not be required to be a 
 State-licensed loan originator or a registered loan originator.
 (2) Independent contractors.--A loan processor or 
 underwriter may not work as an independent contractor unless 
 such processor or underwriter is a State-licensed loan 
 originator or a registered loan originator.

SEC. 104. STATE LICENSE AND REGISTRATION APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE.

 (a) Background Checks.--In connection with an application to any 
State for licensing and registration as a State-licensed loan 
originator, the applicant shall, at a minimum, furnish to the 
Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry information 
concerning the applicant's identity, including--
 (1) fingerprints for submission to the Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation, and any governmental agency or entity authorized 
 to receive such information for a State and national criminal 
 history background check; and
 (2) personal history and experience, including 
 authorization for the System to obtain--
 (A) an independent credit report obtained from a 
 consumer reporting agency described in section 603(p) 
 of the Fair Credit Reporting Act; and
 (B) information related to any administrative, 
 civil or criminal findings by any governmental 
 jurisdiction.
 (b) Issuance of License.--The minimum standards for licensing and 
registration as a State-licensed loan originator shall include the 
following:
 (1) The applicant has not had a loan originator or similar 
 license revoked in any governmental jurisdiction during the 5-
 year period immediately preceding the filing of the present 
 application.
 (2) The applicant has not been convicted, pled guilty or 
 nolo contendere in a domestic, foreign, or military court of a 
 felony during the 7-year period immediately preceding the 
 filing of the present application.
 (3) The applicant has demonstrated financial 
 responsibility, character, and general fitness such as to 
 command the confidence of the community and to warrant a 
 determination that the loan originator will operate honestly, 
 fairly, and efficiently within the purposes of this subtitle.
 (4) The applicant has completed the pre-licensing education 
 requirement described in subsection (c).
 (5) The applicant has passed a written test that meets the 
 test requirement described in subsection (d).
 (c) Pre-Licensing Education of Loan Originators.--
 (1) Minimum educational requirements.--In order to meet the 
 pre-licensing education requirement referred to in subsection 
 (b)(4), a person shall complete at least 20 hours of education 
 approved in accordance with paragraph (2), which shall include 
 at least 3 hours of Federal law and regulations and 3 hours of 
 ethics which shall include instruction on fraud, consumer 
 protection and fair lending issues.
 (2) Approved educational courses.--For purposes of 
 paragraph (1), pre-licensing education courses shall be 
 reviewed, and published by the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing 
 System and Registry.
 (3) Limitation and standards.--
 (A) Limitation.--To maintain the independence of 
 the approval process, the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing 
 System and Registry shall not directly or indirectly 
 offer pre-licensure educational courses for loan 
 originators.
 (B) Standards.--In approving courses under this 
 section, the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and 
 Registry shall apply reasonable standards in the review 
 and approval of courses.
 (d) Testing of Loan Originators.--
 (1) In general.--In order to meet the written test 
 requirement referred to in subsection (b)(5), an individual 
 shall pass, in accordance with the standards established under 
 this subsection, a qualified written test developed by the 
 Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry and 
 administered by an approved test provider.
 (2) Qualified test.--A written test shall not be treated as 
 a qualified written test for purposes of paragraph (1) unless--
 (A) the test consists of a minimum of 100 
 questions; and
 (B) the test adequately measures the applicant's 
 knowledge and comprehension in appropriate subject 
 areas, including--
 (i) ethics;
 (ii) Federal law and regulation pertaining 
 to mortgage origination;
 (iii) State law and regulation pertaining 
 to mortgage origination; and
 (iv) Federal and State law and regulation, 
 including instruction on fraud, consumer 
 protection, and fair lending issues.
 (3) Minimum competence.--
 (A) Passing score.--An individual shall not be 
 considered to have passed a qualified written test 
 unless the individual achieves a test score of not less 
 than 75 percent correct answers to questions.
 (B) Initial retests.--An individual may retake a 
 test 3 consecutive times with each consecutive taking 
 occurring in less than 14 days after the preceding 
 test.
 (C) Subsequent retests.--After 3 consecutive tests, 
 an individual shall wait at least 14 days before taking 
 the test again.
 (D) Retest after lapse of license.--A State-
 licensed loan originator who fails to maintain a valid 
 license for a period of 5 years or longer shall retake 
 the test, not taking into account any time during which 
 such individual is a registered loan originator.

SEC. 105. STANDARDS FOR STATE LICENSE RENEWAL.

 (a) In General.--The minimum standards for license renewal for 
State-licensed loan originators shall include the following:
 (1) The loan originator continues to meet the minimum 
 standards for license issuance.
 (2) The loan originator has satisfied the annual continuing 
 education requirements described in subsection (b).
 (b) Continuing Education for State-Licensed Loan Originators.--
 (1) In general.--In order to meet the annual continuing 
 education requirements referred to in subsection (a)(2), a 
 State-licensed loan originator shall complete at least 8 hours 
 of education approved in accordance with paragraph (2), which 
 shall include at least 3 hours of Federal law and regulations 
 and 2 hours of ethics, including education on fraud, consumer 
 protection, and fair lending issues.
 (2) Approved educational courses.--For purposes of 
 paragraph (1), continuing education courses shall be reviewed, 
 and published by the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and 
 Registry.
 (3) Calculation of continuing education credits.--A State-
 licensed loan originator--
 (A) may only receive credit for a continuing 
 education course in the year in which the course is 
 taken; and
 (B) may not take the same approved course in the 
 same or successive years to meet the annual 
 requirements for continuing education.
 (4) Instructor credit.--A State-licensed loan originator 
 who is approved as an instructor of an approved continuing 
 education course may receive credit for the originator's own 
 annual continuing education requirement at the rate of 2 hours 
 credit for every 1 hour taught.
 (5) Limitation and standards.--
 (A) Limitation.--To maintain the independence of 
 the approval process, the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing 
 System and Registry shall not directly or indirectly 
 offer any continuing education courses for loan 
 originators.
 (B) Standards.--In approving courses under this 
 section, the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and 
 Registry shall apply reasonable standards in the review 
 and approval of courses.

SEC. 106. SYSTEM OF REGISTRATION ADMINISTRATION BY FEDERAL BANKING 
 AGENCIES.

 (a) Development.--
 (1) In general.--The Federal banking agencies shall jointly 
 develop and maintain a system for registering employees of 
 depository institutions or subsidiaries of depository 
 institutions as registered loan originators with the Nationwide 
 Mortgage Licensing System and Registry. The system shall be 
 implemented before the end of the 1-year period beginning on 
 the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) Registration requirements.--In connection with the 
 registration of any loan originator who is an employee of a 
 depository institution or a subsidiary of a depository 
 institution with the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and 
 Registry, the appropriate Federal banking agency shall, at a 
 minimum, furnish or cause to be furnished to the Nationwide 
 Mortgage Licensing System and Registry information concerning 
 the employees's identity, including--
 (A) fingerprints for submission to the Federal 
 Bureau of Investigation, and any governmental agency or 
 entity authorized to receive such information for a 
 State and national criminal history background check; 
 and
 (B) personal history and experience, including 
 authorization for the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing 
 System and Registry to obtain information related to 
 any administrative, civil or criminal findings by any 
 governmental jurisdiction.
 (b) Coordination.--
 (1) Unique identifier.--The Federal banking agencies, 
 through the Financial Institutions Examination Council, shall 
 coordinate with the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and 
 Registry to establish protocols for assigning a unique 
 identifier to each registered loan originator that will 
 facilitate electronic tracking and uniform identification of, 
 and public access to, the employment history of and publicly 
 adjudicated disciplinary and enforcement actions against loan 
 originators.
 (2) Nationwide mortgage licensing system and registry 
 development.--To facilitate the transfer of information 
 required by subsection (a)(2), the Nationwide Mortgage 
 Licensing System and Registry shall coordinate with the Federal 
 banking agencies, through the Financial Institutions 
 Examination Council, concerning the development and operation, 
 by such System and Registry, of the registration functionality 
 and data requirements for loan originators.
 (c) Consideration of Factors and Procedures.--In establishing the 
registration procedures under subsection (a) and the protocols for 
assigning a unique identifier to a registered loan originator, the 
Federal banking agencies shall make such de minimis exceptions as may 
be appropriate to paragraphs (1)(A) and (2) of section 103(a), shall 
make reasonable efforts to utilize existing information to minimize the 
burden of registering loan originators, and shall consider methods for 
automating the process to the greatest extent practicable consistent 
with the purposes of this subtitle.

SEC. 107. SECRETARY OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT BACKUP AUTHORITY 
 TO ESTABLISH A LOAN ORIGINATOR LICENSING SYSTEM.

 (a) Back up Licensing System.--If, by the end of the 1-year period, 
or the 2-year period in the case of a State whose legislature meets 
only biennially, beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act or 
at any time thereafter, the Secretary determines that a State does not 
have in place by law or regulation a system for licensing and 
registering loan originators that meets the requirements of sections 
104 and 105 and subsection (d) or does not participate in the 
Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry, the Secretary shall 
provide for the establishment and maintenance of a system for the 
licensing and registration by the Secretary of loan originators 
operating in such State as State-licensed loan originators.
 (b) Licensing and Registration Requirements.--The system 
established by the Secretary under subsection (a) for any State shall 
meet the requirements of sections 104 and 105 for State-licensed loan 
originators.
 (c) Unique Identifier.--The Secretary shall coordinate with the 
Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry to establish 
protocols for assigning a unique identifier to each loan originator 
licensed by the Secretary as a State-licensed loan originator that will 
facilitate electronic tracking and uniform identification of, and 
public access to, the employment history of and the publicly 
adjudicated disciplinary and enforcement actions against loan 
originators.
 (d) State Licensing Law Requirements.--For purposes of this 
section, the law in effect in a State meets the requirements of this 
subsection if the Secretary determines the law satisfies the following 
minimum requirements:
 (1) A State loan originator supervisory authority is 
 maintained to provide effective supervision and enforcement of 
 such law, including the suspension, termination, or nonrenewal 
 of a license for a violation of State or Federal law.
 (2) The State loan originator supervisory authority ensures 
 that all State-licensed loan originators operating in the State 
 are registered with Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and 
 Registry.
 (3) The State loan originator supervisory authority is 
 required to regularly report violations of such law, as well as 
 enforcement actions and other relevant information, to the 
 Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry.
 (e) Temporary Extension of Period.--The Secretary may extend, by 
not more than 6 months, the 1-year or 2-year period, as the case may 
be, referred to in subsection (a) for the licensing of loan originators 
in any State under a State licensing law that meets the requirements of 
sections 104 and 105 and subsection (d) if the Secretary determines 
that such State is making a good faith effort to establish a State 
licensing law that meets such requirements, license mortgage 
originators under such law, and register such originators with the 
Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry.
 (f) Limitation on HUD-Licensed Loan Originators.--Any loan 
originator who is licensed by the Secretary under a system established 
under this section for any State may not use such license to originate 
loans in any other State.

SEC. 108. BACKUP AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH A NATIONWIDE MORTGAGE LICENSING 
 AND REGISTRY SYSTEM.

 If at any time the Secretary determines that the Nationwide 
Mortgage Licensing System and Registry is failing to meet the 
requirements and purposes of this subtitle for a comprehensive 
licensing, supervisory, and tracking system for loan originators, the 
Secretary shall establish and maintain such a system to carry out the 
purposes of this subtitle and the effective registration and regulation 
of loan originators.

SEC. 109. FEES.

 The Federal banking agencies, the Secretary, and the Nationwide 
Mortgage Licensing System and Registry may charge reasonable fees to 
cover the costs of maintaining and providing access to information from 
the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry to the extent 
such fees are not charged to consumers for access such system and 
registry.

SEC. 110. BACKGROUND CHECKS OF LOAN ORIGINATORS.

 (a) Access to Records.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 
in providing identification and processing functions, the Attorney 
General shall provide access to all criminal history information to the 
appropriate State officials responsible for regulating State-licensed 
loan originators to the extent criminal history background checks are 
required under the laws of the State for the licensing of such loan 
originators.
 (b) Agent.--For the purposes of this section and in order to reduce 
the points of contact which the Federal Bureau of Investigation may 
have to maintain for purposes of subsection (a), the Conference of 
State Bank Supervisors or a wholly owned subsidiary may be used as a 
channeling agent of the States for requesting and distributing 
information between the Department of Justice and the appropriate State 
agencies.

SEC. 111. CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION.

 (a) System Confidentiality.--Except as otherwise provided in this 
section, any requirement under Federal or State law regarding the 
privacy or confidentiality of any information or material provided to 
the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry or a system 
established by the Secretary under section 108, and any privilege 
arising under Federal or State law (including the rules of any Federal 
or State court) with respect to such information or material, shall 
continue to apply to such information or material after the information 
or material has been disclosed to the system. Such information and 
material may be shared with all State and Federal regulatory officials 
with mortgage industry oversight authority without the loss of 
privilege or the loss of confidentiality protections provided by 
Federal and State laws.
 (b) Nonapplicability of Certain Requirements.--Information or 
material that is subject to a privilege or confidentiality under 
subsection (a) shall not be subject to--
 (1) disclosure under any Federal or State law governing the 
 disclosure to the public of information held by an officer or 
 an agency of the Federal Government or the respective State; or
 (2) subpoena or discovery, or admission into evidence, in 
 any private civil action or administrative process, unless with 
 respect to any privilege held by the Nationwide Mortgage 
 Licensing System and Registry or the Secretary with respect to 
 such information or material, the person to whom such 
 information or material pertains waives, in whole or in part, 
 in the discretion of such person, that privilege.
 (c) Coordination With Other Law.--Any State law, including any 
State open record law, relating to the disclosure of confidential 
supervisory information or any information or material described in 
subsection (a) that is inconsistent with subsection (a) shall be 
superseded by the requirements of such provision to the extent State 
law provides less confidentiality or a weaker privilege.
 (d) Public Access to Information.--This section shall not apply 
with respect to the information or material relating to the employment 
history of, and publicly adjudicated disciplinary and enforcement 
actions against, loan originators that is included in Nationwide 
Mortgage Licensing System and Registry for access by the public.

SEC. 112. LIABILITY PROVISIONS.

 The Secretary, any State official or agency, any Federal banking 
agency, or any organization serving as the administrator of the 
Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry or a system 
established by the Secretary under section 108, or any officer or 
employee of any such entity, shall not be subject to any civil action 
or proceeding for monetary damages by reason of the good-faith action 
or omission of any officer or employee of any such entity, while acting 
within the scope of office or employment, relating to the collection, 
furnishing, or dissemination of information concerning persons who are 
loan originators or are applying for licensing or registration as loan 
originators.

SEC. 113. ENFORCEMENT UNDER HUD BACKUP LICENSING SYSTEM.

 (a) Summons Authority.--The Secretary may--
 (1) examine any books, papers, records, or other data of 
 any loan originator operating in any State which is subject to 
 a licensing system established by the Secretary under section 
 107; and
 (2) summon any loan originator referred to in paragraph (1) 
 or any person having possession, custody, or care of the 
 reports and records relating to such loan originator, to appear 
 before the Secretary or any delegate of the Secretary at a time 
 and place named in the summons and to produce such books, 
 papers, records, or other data, and to give testimony, under 
 oath, as may be relevant or material to an investigation of 
 such loan originator for compliance with the requirements of 
 this subtitle.
 (b) Examination Authority.--
 (1) In general.--If the Secretary establishes a licensing 
 system under section 107 for any State, the Secretary shall 
 appoint examiners for the purposes of administering such 
 section.
 (2) Power to examine.--Any examiner appointed under 
 paragraph (1) shall have power, on behalf of the Secretary, to 
 make any examination of any loan originator operating in any 
 State which is subject to a licensing system established by the 
 Secretary under section 107 whenever the Secretary determines 
 an examination of any loan originator is necessary to determine 
 the compliance by the originator with this subtitle.
 (3) Report of examination.--Each examiner appointed under 
 paragraph (1) shall make a full and detailed report of 
 examination of any loan originator examined to the Secretary.
 (4) Administration of oaths and affirmations; evidence.--In 
 connection with examinations of loan originators operating in 
 any State which is subject to a licensing system established by 
 the Secretary under section 107, or with other types of 
 investigations to determine compliance with applicable law and 
 regulations, the Secretary and examiners appointed by the 
 Secretary may administer oaths and affirmations and examine and 
 take and preserve testimony under oath as to any matter in 
 respect to the affairs of any such loan originator.
 (5) Assessments.--The cost of conducting any examination of 
 any loan originator operating in any State which is subject to 
 a licensing system established by the Secretary under section 
 107 shall be assessed by the Secretary against the loan 
 originator to meet the Secretary's expenses in carrying out 
 such examination.
 (c) Cease and Desist Proceeding.--
 (1) Authority of secretary.--If the Secretary finds, after 
 notice and opportunity for hearing, that any person is 
 violating, has violated, or is about to violate any provision 
 of this subtitle, or any regulation thereunder, with respect to 
 a State which is subject to a licensing system established by 
 the Secretary under section 107, the Secretary may publish such 
 findings and enter an order requiring such person, and any 
 other person that is, was, or would be a cause of the 
 violation, due to an act or omission the person knew or should 
 have known would contribute to such violation, to cease and 
 desist from committing or causing such violation and any future 
 violation of the same provision, rule, or regulation. Such 
 order may, in addition to requiring a person to cease and 
 desist from committing or causing a violation, require such 
 person to comply, or to take steps to effect compliance, with 
 such provision or regulation, upon such terms and conditions 
 and within such time as the Secretary may specify in such 
 order. Any such order may, as the Secretary deems appropriate, 
 require future compliance or steps to effect future compliance, 
 either permanently or for such period of time as the Secretary 
 may specify, with such provision or regulation with respect to 
 any loan originator.
 (2) Hearing.--The notice instituting proceedings pursuant 
 to paragraph (1) shall fix a hearing date not earlier than 30 
 days nor later than 60 days after service of the notice unless 
 an earlier or a later date is set by the Secretary with the 
 consent of any respondent so served.
 (3) Temporary order.--Whenever the Secretary determines 
 that the alleged violation or threatened violation specified in 
 the notice instituting proceedings pursuant to paragraph (1), 
 or the continuation thereof, is likely to result in significant 
 dissipation or conversion of assets, significant harm to 
 consumers, or substantial harm to the public interest prior to 
 the completion of the proceedings, the Secretary may enter a 
 temporary order requiring the respondent to cease and desist 
 from the violation or threatened violation and to take such 
 action to prevent the violation or threatened violation and to 
 prevent dissipation or conversion of assets, significant harm 
 to consumers, or substantial harm to the public interest as the 
 Secretary deems appropriate pending completion of such 
 proceedings. Such an order shall be entered only after notice 
 and opportunity for a hearing, unless the Secretary determines 
 that notice and hearing prior to entry would be impracticable 
 or contrary to the public interest. A temporary order shall 
 become effective upon service upon the respondent and, unless 
 set aside, limited, or suspended by the Secretary or a court of 
 competent jurisdiction, shall remain effective and enforceable 
 pending the completion of the proceedings.
 (4) Review of temporary orders.--
 (A) Review by secretary.--At any time after the 
 respondent has been served with a temporary cease-and-
 desist order pursuant to paragraph (3), the respondent 
 may apply to the Secretary to have the order set aside, 
 limited, or suspended. If the respondent has been 
 served with a temporary cease-and-desist order entered 
 without a prior hearing before the Secretary, the 
 respondent may, within 10 days after the date on which 
 the order was served, request a hearing on such 
 application and the Secretary shall hold a hearing and 
 render a decision on such application at the earliest 
 possible time.
 (B) Judicial review.--Within--
 (i) 10 days after the date the respondent 
 was served with a temporary cease-and-desist 
 order entered with a prior hearing before the 
 Secretary; or
 (ii) 10 days after the Secretary renders a 
 decision on an application and hearing under 
 paragraph (1), with respect to any temporary 
 cease-and-desist order entered without a prior 
 hearing before the Secretary,
 the respondent may apply to the United States district 
 court for the district in which the respondent resides 
 or has its principal place of business, or for the 
 District of Columbia, for an order setting aside, 
 limiting, or suspending the effectiveness or 
 enforcement of the order, and the court shall have 
 jurisdiction to enter such an order. A respondent 
 served with a temporary cease-and-desist order entered 
 without a prior hearing before the Secretary may not 
 apply to the court except after hearing and decision by 
 the Secretary on the respondent's application under 
 subparagraph (A).
 (C) No automatic stay of temporary order.--The 
 commencement of proceedings under subparagraph (B) 
 shall not, unless specifically ordered by the court, 
 operate as a stay of the Secretary's order.
 (5) Authority of the secretary to prohibit persons from 
 serving as loan originators.--In any cease-and-desist 
 proceeding under paragraph (1), the Secretary may issue an 
 order to prohibit, conditionally or unconditionally, and 
 permanently or for such period of time as the Secretary shall 
 determine, any person who has violated this subtitle or 
 regulations thereunder, from acting as a loan originator if the 
 conduct of that person demonstrates unfitness to serve as a 
 loan originator.
 (d) Authority of the Secretary To Assess Money Penalties.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary may impose a civil penalty 
 on a loan originator operating in any State which is subject to 
 licensing system established by the Secretary under section 107 
 if the Secretary finds, on the record after notice and 
 opportunity for hearing, that such loan originator has violated 
 or failed to comply with any requirement of this subtitle or 
 any regulation prescribed by the Secretary under this subtitle 
 or order issued under subsection (c).
 (2) Maximum amount of penalty.--The maximum amount of 
 penalty for each act or omission described in paragraph (1) 
 shall be $5,000 for each day the violation continues.

 Subtitle B--Residential Mortgage Loan Origination Standards

SEC. 121. DEFINITIONS.

 Section 103 of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1602) is amended 
by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(cc) Definitions Relating to Mortgage Origination and Residential 
Mortgage Loans.--
 ``(1) Commission.--Unless otherwise specified, the term 
 `Commission' means the Federal Trade Commission.
 ``(2) Federal banking agencies.--The term `Federal banking 
 agencies' means the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
 System, the Comptroller of the Currency, the Director of the 
 Office of Thrift Supervision, the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Corporation, and the National Credit Union Administration 
 Board.
 ``(3) Mortgage originator.--The term `mortgage 
 originator'--
 ``(A) means any person who--
 ``(i) takes a residential mortgage loan 
 application;
 ``(ii) assists a consumer in obtaining or 
 applying to obtain a residential mortgage loan; 
 or
 ``(iii) offers or negotiates terms of a 
 residential mortgage loan, for direct or 
 indirect compensation or gain, or in the 
 expectation of direct or indirect compensation 
 or gain;
 ``(B) includes any person who represents to the 
 public, through advertising or other means of 
 communicating or providing information (including the 
 use of business cards, stationery, brochures, signs, 
 rate lists, or other promotional items), that such 
 person can or will provide any of the services or 
 perform any of the activities described in subparagraph 
 (A); and
 ``(C) does not include any person who is not 
 otherwise described in subparagraph (A) or (B) and who 
 performs purely administrative or clerical tasks on 
 behalf of a person who is described in any such 
 subparagraph.
 ``(4) Nationwide mortgage licensing system and registry.--
 The term `Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry' 
 has the same meaning as in section 102(5) of the Mortgage 
 Reform and Anti-Predatory Lending Act of 2007.
 ``(5) Other definitions relating to mortgage originator.--
 For purposes of this subsection, a person `assists a consumer 
 in obtaining or applying to obtain a residential mortgage loan' 
 by, among other things, advising on residential mortgage loan 
 terms (including rates, fees, and other costs), preparing 
 residential mortgage loan packages, or collecting information 
 on behalf of the consumer with regard to a residential mortgage 
 loan.
 ``(6) Residential mortgage loan.--The term `residential 
 mortgage loan' means any consumer credit transaction that is 
 secured by a mortgage, deed of trust, or other equivalent 
 consensual security interest on a dwelling or on residential 
 real property that includes a dwelling, other than a consumer 
 credit transaction under an open end credit plan or a reverse 
 mortgage.
 ``(7) Secretary.--The term `Secretary', when used in 
 connection with any transaction or person involved with a 
 residential mortgage loan, means the Secretary of Housing and 
 Urban Development.
 ``(8) Securitization vehicle.--The term `securitization 
 vehicle' means a trust, corporation, partnership, limited 
 liability entity, or special purpose entity that--
 ``(A) is the issuer, or is created by the issuer, 
 of mortgage pass-through certificates, participation 
 certificates, mortgage-backed securities, or other 
 similar securities backed by a pool of assets that 
 includes residential mortgage loans; and
 ``(B) holds such loans.
 ``(9) Securitizer.--The term `securitizer' means the person 
 that transfers, conveys, or assigns, or causes the transfer, 
 conveyance, or assignment of, residential mortgage loans, 
 including through a special purpose vehicle, to any 
 securitization vehicle, excluding any trustee that holds such 
 loans solely for the benefit of the securitization vehicle.
 ``(10) Servicer.--The term `servicer' has the same meaning 
 as in section 6(i)(2) of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures 
 Act of 1974.''.

SEC. 122. RESIDENTIAL MORTGAGE LOAN ORIGINATION.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 2 of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 
1631 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 129 the following 
new section:
``Sec. 129A. Residential mortgage loan origination
 ``(a) Duty of Care.--
 ``(1) Standard.--Subject to regulations prescribed under 
 this subsection, each mortgage originator shall, in addition to 
 the duties imposed by otherwise applicable provisions of State 
 or Federal law--
 ``(A) be qualified and, when required, registered 
 and licensed as a mortgage originator in accordance 
 with applicable State or Federal law including subtitle 
 A of title I of the Mortgage Reform and Anti-Predatory 
 Lending Act of 2007;
 ``(B) with respect to each consumer seeking or 
 inquiring about a residential mortgage loan, diligently 
 work to present the consumer with a range of 
 residential mortgage loan products for which the 
 consumer likely qualifies and which are appropriate to 
 the consumer's existing circumstances, based on 
 information known by, or obtained in good faith by, the 
 originator;
 ``(C) make full, complete, and timely disclosure to 
 each such consumer of--
 ``(i) the comparative costs and benefits of 
 each residential mortgage loan product offered, 
 discussed, or referred to by the originator;
 ``(ii) the nature of the originator's 
 relationship to the consumer (including the 
 cost of the services to be provided by the 
 originator and a statement that the mortgage 
 originator is or is not acting as an agent for 
 the consumer, as the case may be); and
 ``(iii) any relevant conflicts of interest;
 ``(D) certify to the creditor, with respect to any 
 transaction involving a residential mortgage loan, that 
 the mortgage originator has fulfilled all requirements 
 applicable to the originator under this section with 
 respect to the transaction; and
 ``(E) include the unique identifier of the 
 originator provided by the Nationwide Mortgage 
 Licensing System and Registry on all loan documents.
 ``(2) Clarification of extent of duty to present range of 
 products and appropriate products.--
 ``(A) No duty to offer products for which 
 originator is not authorized to take an application.--
 Paragraph (1)(B) shall not be construed as requiring--
 ``(i) a mortgage originator to present to 
 any consumer any specific residential mortgage 
 loan product that is offered by a creditor 
 which does not accept consumer referrals from, 
 or consumer applications submitted by or 
 through, such originator; or
 ``(ii) a creditor to offer products that 
 the creditor does not offer to the general 
 public.
 ``(B) Appropriate loan product.--For purposes of 
 paragraph (1)(B), a residential mortgage loan shall be 
 presumed to be appropriate for a consumer if--
 ``(i) the mortgage originator determines in 
 good faith, based on then existing information 
 and without undergoing a full underwriting 
 process, that the consumer has a reasonable 
 ability to repay and, in the case of a 
 refinancing of an existing residential mortgage 
 loan, receives a net tangible benefit, as 
 determined in accordance with regulations 
 prescribed under subsections (a) and (b) of 
 section 129B.
 ``(ii) the loan does not have predatory 
 characteristics or effects (such as equity 
 stripping and excessive fees and abusive terms) 
 as determined in accordance with regulations 
 prescribed under paragraph (4).
 ``(3) Rules of construction.--No provision of this 
 subsection shall be construed as--
 ``(A) creating an agency or fiduciary relationship 
 between a mortgage originator and a consumer if the 
 originator does not hold himself or herself out as such 
 an agent or fiduciary; or
 ``(B) restricting a mortgage originator from 
 holding himself or herself out as an agent or fiduciary 
 of a consumer subject to any additional duty, 
 requirement, or limitation applicable to agents or 
 fiduciaries under any Federal or State law.
 ``(4) Regulations.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Federal banking agencies, in 
 consultation with the Secretary, the Chairman of the 
 State Liaison Committee to the Financial Institutions 
 Examination Council, and the Commission, shall jointly 
 prescribe regulations to--
 ``(i) further define the duty established 
 under paragraph (1);
 ``(ii) implement the requirements of this 
 subsection;
 ``(iii) establish the time period within 
 which any disclosure required under paragraph 
 (1) shall be made to the consumer; and
 ``(iv) establish such other requirements 
 for any mortgage originator as such regulatory 
 agencies may determine to be appropriate to 
 meet the purposes of this subsection.
 ``(B) Complementary and nonduplicative 
 disclosures.--The agencies referred to in subparagraph 
 (A) shall endeavor to make the required disclosures to 
 consumers under this subsection complementary and 
 nonduplicative with other disclosures for mortgage 
 consumers to the extent such efforts--
 ``(i) are practicable; and
 ``(ii) do not reduce the value of any such 
 disclosure to recipients of such disclosures.
 ``(5) Compliance procedures required.--The Federal banking 
 agencies shall prescribe regulations requiring depository 
 institutions to establish and maintain procedures reasonably 
 designed to assure and monitor the compliance of such 
 depository institutions, the subsidiaries of such institutions, 
 and the employees of such institutions or subsidiaries with the 
 requirements of this section and the registration procedures 
 established under section 106 of the Mortgage Reform and Anti-
 Predatory Lending Act of 2007.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 2 of the 
Truth in Lending Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to 
section 129 the following new item:

``129A. Residential mortgage loan origination.''.

SEC. 123. PROHIBITION ON STEERING INCENTIVES.

 Section 129A of the Truth in Lending Act (as added by section 
122(a)) is amended by inserting after subsection (a) the following new 
subsection:
 ``(b) Prohibition on Steering Incentives.--
 ``(1) Amount of originator compensation cannot vary based 
 on terms.--No mortgage originator may receive from any person, 
 and no person may pay to any mortgage originator, directly or 
 indirectly, any incentive compensation, including yield spread 
 premium or any equivalent compensation or gain, that is based 
 on, or varies with, the terms (other than the amount of 
 principal) of any loan that is not a qualified mortgage (as 
 defined in section 129B(c)(3)).
 ``(2) Regulations.--The Federal banking agencies, in 
 consultation with the Secretary and the Commission, shall 
 jointly prescribe regulations to prohibit--
 ``(A) mortgage originators from steering any 
 consumer to a residential mortgage loan that--
 ``(i) the consumer lacks a reasonable 
 ability to repay (in accordance with 
 regulations prescribed under section 129B(a));
 ``(ii) in the case of a refinancing of a 
 residential mortgage loan, does not provide the 
 consumer with a net tangible benefit (in 
 accordance with regulations prescribed under 
 section 129B(b)); or
 ``(iii) has predatory characteristics or 
 effects (such as equity stripping, excessive 
 fees, or abusive terms);
 ``(B) mortgage originators from steering any 
 consumer from a residential mortgage loan for which the 
 consumer is qualified that is a qualified mortgage (as 
 defined in section 129B(c)(3)) to a residential 
 mortgage loan that is not a qualified mortgage; and
 ``(C) abusive or unfair lending practices that 
 promote disparities among consumers of equal credit 
 worthiness but of different race, ethnicity, gender, or 
 age.
 ``(3) Rules of construction.--No provision of this 
 subsection shall be construed as--
 ``(A) limiting or affecting the ability of a 
 mortgage originator to sell residential mortgage loans 
 to subsequent purchasers;
 ``(B) restricting a consumer's ability to finance, 
 including through rate or principal, any origination 
 fees or costs permitted under this subsection, or the 
 originator's ability to receive such fees or costs 
 (including compensation) from any person, so long as 
 such fees or costs were fully and clearly disclosed to 
 the consumer earlier in the application process as 
 required by 129A(a)(1)(C)(ii) and do not vary based on 
 the terms of the loan or the consumer's decision about 
 whether to finance such fees or costs; or
 ``(C) prohibiting incentive payments to a mortgage 
 originator based on the number of residential mortgage 
 loans originated within a specified period of time.''.

SEC. 124. LIABILITY.

 Section 129A of the Truth in Lending Act is amended by inserting 
after subsection (b) (as added by section 123) the following new 
subsection:
 ``(c) Liability for Violations.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of providing a cause of 
 action for any failure by a mortgage originator to comply with 
 any requirement imposed under this section and any regulation 
 prescribed under this section, subsections (a) and (b) of 
 section 130 shall be applied with respect to any such failure 
 by substituting `mortgage originator' for `creditor' each place 
 such term appears in each such subsection.
 ``(2) Maximum.--The maximum amount of any liability of a 
 mortgage originator under paragraph (1) to a consumer for any 
 violation of this section shall not exceed an amount equal to 3 
 times the total amount of direct and indirect compensation or 
 gain accruing to the mortgage originator in connection with the 
 residential mortgage loan involved in the violation, plus the 
 costs to the consumer of the action, including a reasonable 
 attorney's fee.''.

SEC. 125. REGULATIONS.

 The regulations required or authorized to be prescribed under this 
title or the amendments made by this title--
 (1) shall be prescribed in final form before the end of the 
 12-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this 
 Act; and
 (2) shall take effect not later than 18 months after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act.

 TITLE II--MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR MORTGAGES

SEC. 201. ABILITY TO REPAY.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 2 of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 
1631 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 129A (as added by 
section 122(a)) the following new section:
``Sec. 129B. Minimum standards for residential mortgage loans
 ``(a) Ability To Repay.--
 ``(1) In general.--In accordance with regulations 
 prescribed jointly by the Federal banking agencies, in 
 consultation with the Commission, no creditor may make a 
 residential mortgage loan unless the creditor makes a 
 reasonable and good faith determination based on verified and 
 documented information that, at the time the loan is 
 consummated, the consumer has a reasonable ability to repay the 
 loan, according to its terms, and all applicable taxes, 
 insurance, and assessments.
 ``(2) Multiple loans.--If the creditor knows, or has reason 
 to know, that 1 or more residential mortgage loans secured by 
 the same dwelling will be made to the same consumer, the 
 creditor shall make a reasonable and good faith determination, 
 based on verified and documented information, that the consumer 
 has a reasonable ability to repay the combined payments of all 
 loans on the same dwelling according to the terms of those 
 loans and all applicable taxes, insurance, and assessments.
 ``(3) Basis for determination.--A determination under this 
 subsection of a consumer's ability to repay a residential 
 mortgage loan shall be based on consideration of the consumer's 
 credit history, current income, expected income the consumer is 
 reasonably assured of receiving, current obligations, debt-to-
 income ratio, employment status, and other financial resources 
 other than the consumer's equity in the dwelling or real 
 property that secures repayment of the loan.
 ``(4) Nonstandard loans.--
 ``(A) Variable rate loans that defer repayment of 
 any principal or interest.--For purposes of 
 determining, under this subsection, a consumer's 
 ability to repay a variable rate residential mortgage 
 loan that allows or requires the consumer to defer the 
 repayment of any principal or interest, the creditor 
 shall take into consideration a fully amortizing 
 repayment schedule.
 ``(B) Interest-only loans.--For purposes of 
 determining, under this subsection, a consumer's 
 ability to repay a residential mortgage loan that 
 permits or requires the payment of interest only, the 
 creditor shall take into consideration the payment 
 amount required to amortize the loan by its final 
 maturity.
 ``(C) Calculation for negative amortization.--In 
 making any determination under this subsection, a 
 creditor shall also take into consideration any balance 
 increase that may accrue from any negative amortization 
 provision.
 ``(D) Calculation process.--For purposes of making 
 any determination under this subsection, a creditor 
 shall calculate the monthly payment amount for 
 principal and interest on any residential mortgage loan 
 by assuming--
 ``(i) the loan proceeds are fully disbursed 
 on the date of the consummation of the loan;
 ``(ii) the loan is to be repaid in 
 substantially equal monthly amortizing payments 
 for principal and interest over the entire term 
 of the loan with no balloon payment, unless the 
 loan contract requires more rapid repayment 
 (including balloon payment), in which case the 
 contract's repayment schedule shall be used in 
 this calculation; and
 ``(iii) the interest rate over the entire 
 term of the loan is a fixed rate equal to the 
 fully indexed rate at the time of the loan 
 closing, without considering the introductory 
 rate.
 ``(5) Fully-indexed rate defined.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term `fully indexed rate' means the index rate 
 prevailing on a residential mortgage loan at the time the loan 
 is made plus the margin that will apply after the expiration of 
 any introductory interest rates.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 2 of the 
Truth in Lending Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to 
section 129A (as added by section 122(b)) the following new item:

``129B. Minimum standards for residential mortgage loans.''.

SEC. 202. NET TANGIBLE BENEFIT FOR REFINANCING OF RESIDENTIAL MORTGAGE 
 LOANS.

 Section 129B of the Truth in Lending Act (as added by section 
201(a)) is amended by inserting after subsection (a) the following new 
subsection:
 ``(b) Net Tangible Benefit for Refinancing of Residential Mortgage 
Loans.--
 ``(1) In general.--In accordance with regulations 
 prescribed under paragraph (3), no creditor may extend credit 
 in connection with any residential mortgage loan that involves 
 a refinancing of a prior existing residential mortgage loan 
 unless the creditor reasonably and in good faith determines, at 
 the time the loan is consummated and on the basis of 
 information known by or obtained in good faith by the creditor, 
 that the refinanced loan will provide a net tangible benefit to 
 the consumer.
 ``(2) Certain loans providing no net tangible benefit.--A 
 residential mortgage loan that involves a refinancing of a 
 prior existing residential mortgage loan shall not be 
 considered to provide a net tangible benefit to the consumer if 
 the costs of the refinanced loan, including points, fees and 
 other charges, exceed the amount of any newly advanced 
 principal without any corresponding changes in the terms of the 
 refinanced loan that are advantageous to the consumer.
 ``(3) Net tangible benefit.--The Federal banking agencies 
 shall jointly prescribe regulations defining the term `net 
 tangible benefit' for purposes of this subsection.''.

SEC. 203. SAFE HARBOR AND REBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION.

 Section 129B of the Truth in Lending Act is amended by inserting 
after subsection (b) (as added by section 202) the following new 
subsection:
 ``(c) Presumption of Ability To Repay and Net Tangible Benefit.--
 ``(1) In general.--Any creditor with respect to any 
 residential mortgage loan, and any assignee or securitizer of 
 such loan, may presume that the loan has met the requirements 
 of subsections (a) and (b), if the loan is a qualified mortgage 
 or a qualified safe harbor mortgage.
 ``(2) Rebuttable presumption.--Any presumption established 
 under paragraph (1) with respect to any residential mortgage 
 loan shall be rebuttable only--
 ``(A) against the creditor of such loan; and
 ``(B) if such loan is a qualified safe harbor 
 mortgage.
 ``(3) Definitions.--For purposes of this section the 
 following definitions shall apply:
 ``(A) Most recent conventional mortgage rate.--The 
 term `most recent conventional mortgage rate' means the 
 contract interest rate on commitments for fixed-rate 
 first mortgages most recently published in the Federal 
 Reserve Statistical Release on selected interest rates 
 (daily or weekly), and commonly referred to as the H.15 
 release (or any successor publication), in the week 
 preceding a date of determination for purposes of 
 applying this subsection.
 ``(B) Qualified mortgage.--The term `qualified 
 mortgage' means--
 ``(i) any residential mortgage loan that 
 constitutes a first lien on the dwelling or 
 real property securing the loan and either--
 ``(I) has an annual percentage rate 
 that does not equal or exceed the yield 
 on securities issued by the Secretary 
 of the Treasury under chapter 31 of 
 title 31, United States Code, that bear 
 comparable periods of maturity by more 
 than 3 percentage points; or
 ``(II) has an annual percentage 
 rate that does not equal or exceed the 
 most recent conventional mortgage rate, 
 or such other annual percentage rate as 
 may be established by regulation under 
 paragraph (6), by more than 175 basis 
 points;
 ``(ii) any residential mortgage loan that 
 is not the first lien on the dwelling or real 
 property securing the loan and either--
 ``(I) has an annual percentage rate 
 that does not equal or exceed the yield 
 on securities issued by the Secretary 
 of the Treasury under chapter 31 of 
 title 31, United States Code, that bear 
 comparable periods of maturity by more 
 than 5 percentage points; or
 ``(II) has an annual percentage 
 rate that does not equal or exceed the 
 most recent conventional mortgage rate, 
 or such other annual percentage rate as 
 may be established by regulation under 
 paragraph (6), by more than 375 basis 
 points;
 ``(iii) a loan made or guaranteed by the 
 Secretary of Veterans Affairs; and
 ``(iv) a mortgage insured under title II of 
 the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1707 et 
 seq.).
 ``(C) Qualified safe harbor mortgage.--The term 
 `qualified safe harbor mortgage' means any residential 
 mortgage loan--
 ``(i) for which the income and financial 
 resources of the consumer are verified and 
 documented;
 ``(ii) for which the residential mortgage 
 loan underwriting process is based on the 
 fully-indexed rate, and takes into account all 
 applicable taxes, insurance, and assessments;
 ``(iii) which does not provide for a 
 repayment schedule that results in negative 
 amortization at any time;
 ``(iv) meets such other requirements as may 
 be established by regulation; and
 ``(v) for which any of the following 
 factors apply with respect to such loan:
 ``(I) The periodic payment amount 
 for principal and interest are fixed 
 for a minimum of 5 years under the 
 terms of the loan.
 ``(II) In the case of a variable 
 rate loan, the annual percentage rate 
 varies based on a margin that is less 
 than 3 percent over a single generally 
 accepted interest rate index that is 
 the basis for determining the rate of 
 interest for the mortgage.
 ``(III) The loan does not cause the 
 consumer's total monthly debts, 
 including amounts under the loan, to 
 exceed a percentage established by 
 regulation of his or her monthly gross 
 income or such other maximum percentage 
 of such income as may be prescribed by 
 regulation under paragraph (6).
 ``(4) Determination of comparison to treasury securities.--
 ``(A) In general.--Without regard to whether a 
 residential mortgage loan is subject to or reportable 
 under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act of 1975 and 
 subject to subparagraph (B), the difference between the 
 annual percentage rate of such loan and the yield on 
 securities issued by the Secretary of the Treasury 
 under chapter 31 of title 31, United States Code, 
 having comparable periods of maturity shall be 
 determined using the same procedures and methods of 
 calculation applicable to loans that are subject to the 
 reporting requirements under the Home Mortgage 
 Disclosure Act of 1975.
 ``(B) Date of determination of yield.--The yield on 
 the securities referred to in subparagraph (A) shall be 
 determined, for purposes of such subparagraph and 
 paragraph (3) with respect to any residential mortgage 
 loan, as of the 15th day of the month preceding the 
 month in which a completed application is submitted for 
 such loan.
 ``(5) APR in case of introductory offer.--For purposes of 
 making a determination of whether a residential mortgage loan 
 that provides for a fixed interest rate for an introductory 
 period and then resets or adjusts to a variable rate is a 
 qualified mortgage, the determination of the annual percentage 
 rate, as determined in accordance with regulations prescribed 
 by the Board under section 107, shall be based on the greater 
 of the introductory rate and the fully indexed rate of 
 interest.
 ``(6) Regulations.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Federal banking agencies 
 shall jointly prescribe regulations to carry out the 
 purposes of this subsection.
 ``(B) Revision of safe harbor criteria.--The 
 Federal banking agencies may jointly prescribe 
 regulations that revise, add to, or subtract from the 
 criteria that define a qualified mortgage and a 
 qualified safe harbor mortgage to the extent necessary 
 and appropriate to effectuate the purposes of this 
 subsection, to prevent circumvention or evasion of this 
 subsection, or to facilitate compliance with this 
 subsection.
 ``(7) Rule of construction.--No provision of this 
 subsection may be construed as implying that a residential 
 mortgage loan may be presumed to violate subsection (a) or (b) 
 if such loan is not a qualified mortgage or a qualified safe 
 harbor mortgage.''.

SEC. 204. LIABILITY.

 Section 129B of the Truth in Lending Act is amended by inserting 
after subsection (c) (as added by section 203) the following new 
subsection:
 ``(d) Liability for Violations.--
 ``(1) In general.--
 ``(A) Rescission.--In addition to any other 
 liability under this title for a violation by a 
 creditor of subsection (a) or (b) (for example under 
 section 130) and subject to the statute of limitations 
 in paragraph (7), a civil action may be maintained 
 against a creditor for a violation of subsection (a) or 
 (b) with respect to a residential mortgage loan for the 
 rescission of the loan, and such additional costs as 
 the obligor may have incurred as a result of the 
 violation and in connection with obtaining a rescission 
 of the loan, including a reasonable attorney's fee.
 ``(B) Cure.--A creditor shall not be liable for 
 rescission under subparagraph (A) with respect to a 
 residential mortgage loan if, no later than 90 days 
 after the receipt of notification from the consumer 
 that the loan violates subsection (a) or (b), the 
 creditor provides a cure.
 ``(2) Limited assignee and securitizer liability.--
 Notwithstanding sections 125(e) and 131 and except as provided 
 in paragraph (3), a civil action which may be maintained 
 against a creditor with respect to a residential mortgage loan 
 for a violation of subsection (a) or (b) may be maintained 
 against any assignee or securitizer of such residential 
 mortgage loan, who has acted in good faith, for the following 
 liabilities only:
 ``(A) Rescission of the loan.
 ``(B) Such additional costs as the obligor may have 
 incurred as a result of the violation and in connection 
 with obtaining a rescission of the loan, including a 
 reasonable attorney's fee.
 ``(3) Assignee and securitizer exemption.--No assignee or 
 securitizer of a residential mortgage loan shall be liable 
 under paragraph (2) with respect to such loan if--
 ``(A) no later than 90 days after the receipt of 
 notification from the consumer that the loan violates 
 subsection (a) or (b), the assignee or securitizer 
 provides a cure so that the loan satisfies the 
 requirements of subsections (a) and (b); or
 ``(B) each of the following conditions are met:
 ``(i) The assignee or securitizer--
 ``(I) has a policy against buying 
 residential mortgage loans other than 
 qualified mortgages or qualified safe 
 harbor mortgages (as defined in 
 subsection (c));
 ``(II) the policy is intended to 
 verify seller or assignor compliance 
 with the representations and warranties 
 required under clause (ii); and
 ``(III) in accordance with 
 regulations which the Federal banking 
 agencies and the Securities and 
 Exchange Commission shall jointly 
 prescribe, exercises reasonable due 
 diligence to adhere to such policy in 
 purchasing residential mortgage loans, 
 including through adequate, thorough, 
 and consistently applied sampling 
 procedures.
 ``(ii) The contract under which such 
 assignee or securitizer acquired the 
 residential mortgage loan from a seller or 
 assignor of the loan contains representations 
 and warranties that the seller or assignor--
 ``(I) is not selling or assigning 
 any residential mortgage loan which is 
 not a qualified mortgage or a qualified 
 safe harbor mortgage; or
 ``(II) is a beneficiary of a 
 representation and warranty from a 
 previous seller or assignor to that 
 effect,
 and the assignee or securitizer in good faith 
 takes reasonable steps to obtain the benefit of 
 such representation or warranty.
 ``(4) Absent parties.--
 ``(A) Absent creditor.--Notwithstanding the 
 exemption provided in paragraph (3), if the creditor 
 with respect to a residential mortgage loan made in 
 violation of subsection (a) or (b) has ceased to exist 
 as a matter of law or has filed for bankruptcy 
 protection under title 11, United States Code, or has 
 had a receiver or liquidating agent appointed, a 
 consumer may maintain a civil action against an 
 assignee to cure, but not rescind, the residential 
 mortgage loan, plus the costs and reasonable attorney's 
 fees incurred in obtaining such remedy.
 ``(B) Absent creditor and assignee.--
 Notwithstanding the exemption provided in paragraph 
 (3), if the creditor with respect to a residential 
 mortgage loan made in violation of subsection (a) or 
 (b) and each assignee of such loan have ceased to exist 
 as a matter of law or have filed for bankruptcy 
 protection under title 11, United States Code, or have 
 had receivers or liquidating agents appointed, the 
 consumer may maintain the civil action referred to in 
 subparagraph (A) against the securitizer.
 ``(5) Cure defined.--For purposes of this subsection, the 
 term `cure' means, with respect to a residential mortgage loan 
 that violates subsection (a) or (b), the modification or 
 refinancing, at no cost to the consumer, of the loan to provide 
 terms that would have satisfied the requirements of subsections 
 (a) and (b) if the loan had contained such terms as of the 
 origination of the loan and the payment of such additional 
 costs as the obligor may have incurred as a result of the 
 violation and in connection with obtaining a cure of the loan, 
 including a reasonable attorney's fee.
 ``(6) Disagreement over cure.--If any creditor, assignee, 
 or securitizer and a consumer fail to reach agreement on a cure 
 with respect to a residential mortgage loan that violates 
 subsection (a) or (b), or the consumer fails to accept a cure 
 proffered by a creditor, assignee, or securitizer--
 ``(A) the creditor, assignee, or securitizer may 
 provide the cure; and
 ``(B) the consumer may challenge the adequacy of 
 the cure during the 6-month period beginning when the 
 cure is provided.
 If the consumer's challenge, under this paragraph, of a cure is 
 successful, the creditor, assignee, or securitizer shall be 
 liable to the consumer for rescission of the loan and such 
 additional costs under paragraph (2).
 ``(7) Inability to provide or obtain rescission.--If a 
 creditor, assignee, or securitizer cannot provide, or a 
 consumer cannot obtain, rescission under paragraph (1) or (2), 
 the liability of such creditor, assignee, or securitizer shall 
 be met by providing the financial equivalent of a rescission, 
 together with such additional costs as the obligor may have 
 incurred as a result of the violation and in connection with 
 obtaining a rescission of the loan, including a reasonable 
 attorney's fee.
 ``(8) No class actions against assignee or securitizer 
 under paragraph (2).--Only individual actions may be brought 
 against an assignee or securitizer of a residential mortgage 
 loan for a violation of subsection (a) or (b).
 ``(9) Statute of limitations.--The liability of a creditor, 
 assignee, or securitizer under this subsection shall apply in 
 any original action against a creditor under paragraph (1) or 
 an assignee or securitizer under paragraph (2) which is brought 
 before--
 ``(A) in the case of any residential mortgage loan 
 other than a loan to which subparagraph (B) applies, 
 the end of the 3-year period beginning on the date the 
 loan is consummated; or
 ``(B) in the case of a residential mortgage loan 
 that provides for a fixed interest rate for an 
 introductory period and then resets or adjusts to a 
 variable rate or that provides for a nonamortizing 
 payment schedule and then converts to an amortizing 
 payment schedule, the earlier of--
 ``(i) the end of the 1-year period 
 beginning on the date of such reset, 
 adjustment, or conversion; or
 ``(ii) the end of the 6-year period 
 beginning on the date the loan is consummated.
 ``(10) Pools and investors in pools excluded.--In the case 
 of residential mortgage loans acquired or aggregated for the 
 purpose of including such loans in a pool of assets held for 
 the purpose of issuing or selling instruments representing 
 interests in such pools including through a securitization 
 vehicle, the terms `assignee' and `securitizer', as used in 
 this section, do not include the securitization vehicle, the 
 pools of such loans or any original or subsequent purchaser of 
 any interest in the securitization vehicle or any instrument 
 representing a direct or indirect interest in such pool.''.

SEC. 205. DEFENSE TO FORECLOSURE.

 Section 129B of the Truth in Lending Act is amended by inserting 
after subsection (d) (as added by section 204) the following new 
subsection:
 ``(e) Defense to Foreclosure.--Notwithstanding any other provision 
of law--
 ``(1) when the holder of a residential mortgage loan or 
 anyone acting for such holder initiates a judicial or 
 nonjudicial foreclosure--
 ``(A) a consumer who has the right to rescind under 
 this section with respect to such loan against the 
 creditor or any assignee or securitizer may assert such 
 right as a defense to foreclosure or counterclaim to 
 such foreclosure against the holder, or
 ``(B) if the foreclosure proceeding begins after 
 the end of the period during which a consumer may bring 
 an action for rescission under subsection (d) and the 
 consumer would have had a valid basis for such an 
 action if it had been brought before the end of such 
 period, the consumer may seek actual damages incurred 
 by reason of the violation which gave rise to the right 
 of rescission, together with costs of the action, 
 including a reasonable attorney's fee against the 
 creditor or any assignee or securitizer; and
 ``(2) such holder or anyone acting for such holder or any 
 other applicable third party may sell, transfer, convey, or 
 assign a residential mortgage loan to a creditor, any assignee, 
 or any securitizer, or their designees, to effect a rescission 
 or cure.''.

SEC. 206. ADDITIONAL STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 129B of the Truth in Lending Act is 
amended by inserting after subsection (e) (as added by section 205) the 
following new subsections:
 ``(f) Prohibition on Certain Prepayment Penalties.--
 ``(1) Prohibited on certain loans.--A residential mortgage 
 loan that is not a qualified mortgage (as defined in subsection 
 (c)) may not contain terms under which a consumer must pay a 
 prepayment penalty for paying all or part of the principal 
 after the loan is consummated.
 ``(2) Phased-out penalties on qualified mortgages.--A 
 qualified mortgage (as defined in subsection (c)) may not 
 contain terms under which a consumer must pay a prepayment 
 penalty for paying all or part of the principal after the loan 
 is consummated in excess of the following limitations:
 ``(A) During the 1-year period beginning on the 
 date the loan is consummated, the prepayment penalty 
 shall not exceed an amount equal to 3 percent of the 
 outstanding balance on the loan.
 ``(B) During the 1-year period beginning after the 
 period described in subparagraph (A), the prepayment 
 penalty shall not exceed an amount equal to 2 percent 
 of the outstanding balance on the loan.
 ``(C) During the 1-year period beginning after the 
 1-year period described in subparagraph (B), the 
 prepayment penalty shall not exceed an amount equal to 
 1 percent of the outstanding balance on the loan.
 ``(D) After the end of the 3-year period beginning 
 on the date the loan is consummated, no prepayment 
 penalty may be imposed on a qualified mortgage.
 ``(3) Prohibited after initial period on loans with a 
 reset.--A qualified mortgage with a fixed interest rate for an 
 introductory period that adjusts or resets after such period 
 may not contain terms under which a consumer must pay a 
 prepayment penalty for paying all or part of the principal 
 after the beginning of the 3-month period ending on the date of 
 the adjustment or reset.
 ``(4) Option for no prepayment penalty required.--A 
 creditor may not offer a consumer a residential mortgage loan 
 product that has a prepayment penalty for paying all or part of 
 the principal after the loan is consummated as a term of the 
 loan without offering the consumer a residential mortgage loan 
 product that does not have a prepayment penalty as a term of 
 the loan.
 ``(g) Single Premium Credit Insurance Prohibited.--No creditor may 
finance, directly or indirectly, in connection with any residential 
mortgage loan or with any extension of credit under an open end 
consumer credit plan secured by the principal dwelling of the consumer 
(other than a reverse mortgage), any credit life, credit disability, 
credit unemployment or credit property insurance, or any other 
accident, loss-of-income, life or health insurance, or any payments 
directly or indirectly for any debt cancellation or suspension 
agreement or contract, except that--
 ``(1) insurance premiums or debt cancellation or suspension 
 fees calculated and paid in full on a monthly basis shall not 
 be considered financed by the creditor; and
 ``(2) this subsection shall not apply to credit 
 unemployment insurance for which the unemployment insurance 
 premiums are reasonable and at no additional cost to the 
 consumer, the creditor receives no direct or indirect 
 compensation in connection with the unemployment insurance 
 premiums, and the unemployment insurance premiums are paid 
 pursuant to another insurance contract and not paid to an 
 affiliate of the creditor.
 ``(h) Arbitration.--
 ``(1) In general.--No residential mortgage loan and no 
 extension of credit under an open end consumer credit plan 
 secured by the principal dwelling of the consumer, other than a 
 reverse mortgage, may include terms which require arbitration 
 or any other nonjudicial procedure as the method for resolving 
 any controversy or settling any claims arising out of the 
 transaction.
 ``(2) Post-controversy agreements.--Subject to paragraph 
 (3), paragraph (1) shall not be construed as limiting the right 
 of the consumer and the creditor, any assignee, or any 
 securitizer to agree to arbitration or any other nonjudicial 
 procedure as the method for resolving any controversy at any 
 time after a dispute or claim under the transaction arises.
 ``(3) No waiver of statutory cause of action.--No provision 
 of any residential mortgage loan or of any extension of credit 
 under an open end consumer credit plan secured by the principal 
 dwelling of the consumer (other than a reverse mortgage), and 
 no other agreement between the consumer and the creditor 
 relating to the residential mortgage loan or extension of 
 credit referred to in paragraph (1), shall be applied or 
 interpreted so as to bar a consumer from bringing an action in 
 an appropriate district court of the United States, or any 
 other court of competent jurisdiction, pursuant to section 130 
 or any other provision of law, for damages or other relief in 
 connection with any alleged violation of this section, any 
 other provision of this title, or any other Federal law.
 ``(i) Duty of Securitizer To Retain Access to Loans.--Any 
securitizer shall reserve the right and preserve an ability, in any 
document or contract establishing any pool of assets that includes any 
residential mortgage loan--
 ``(1) to identify and obtain access to any such loan in the 
 pool; and
 ``(2) to provide for and obtain a remedy under this title 
 for the obligor under any such loan.
 ``(j) Effect of Foreclosure on Preexisting Lease.--
 ``(1) In general.--In the case of any foreclosure on any 
 dwelling or residential real property securing an extension of 
 credit made under a contract entered into after the date of the 
 enactment of the Mortgage Reform and Anti-Predatory Lending Act 
 of 2007, any successor in interest in such property pursuant to 
 the foreclosure shall assume such interest subject to--
 ``(A) the provision, by the successor in interest, 
 of a notice to vacate to any bona fide tenant at least 
 90 days before the effective date of the notice to 
 vacate; and
 ``(B) the rights of any bona fide tenant, as of the 
 date of such notice of foreclosure--
 ``(i) under any bona fide lease entered 
 into before the notice of foreclosure to occupy 
 the premises until the end of the remaining 
 term of the lease or the end of the 6-month 
 period beginning on the date of the notice of 
 foreclosure, whichever occurs first, subject to 
 the receipt by the tenant of the 90-day notice 
 under subparagraph (A); or
 ``(ii) without a lease or with a lease 
 terminable at will under State law, subject to 
 the receipt by the tenant of the 90-day notice 
 under subparagraph (A).
 ``(2) Bona fide lease or tenancy.--For purposes of this 
 section, a lease or tenancy shall be considered bona fide only 
 if--
 ``(A) the mortgagor under the contract is not the 
 tenant;
 ``(B) the lease or tenancy was the result of an 
 arms-length transaction; or
 ``(C) the lease or tenancy requires the receipt of 
 rent that is not substantially less than fair market 
 rent for the property.
 ``(k) Mortgages With Negative Amortization.--No creditor may extend 
credit to a borrower in connection with a consumer credit transaction 
under an open or closed end consumer credit plan secured by a dwelling 
or residential real property that includes a dwelling, other than a 
reverse mortgage, that provides or permits a payment plan that may, at 
any time over the term of the extension of credit, result in negative 
amortization unless, before such transaction is consummated--
 ``(1) the creditor provides the consumer with a statement 
 that--
 ``(A) the pending transaction will or may, as the 
 case may be, result in negative amortization;
 ``(B) describes negative amortization in such 
 manner as the Federal banking agencies shall prescribe;
 ``(C) negative amortization increases the 
 outstanding principal balance of the account; and
 ``(D) negative amortization reduces the consumer's 
 equity in the dwelling or real property; and
 ``(2) in the case of a first-time borrower with respect to 
 a residential mortgage loan that is not a qualified mortgage, 
 the first-time borrower provides the creditor with sufficient 
 documentation to demonstrate that the consumer received 
 homeownership counseling from organizations or counselors 
 certified by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development as 
 competent to provide such counseling.
 ``(l) Annual Contact Information.--At least once annually and 
whenever there is a change in ownership of a residential mortgage loan, 
the servicer with respect to a residential mortgage loan shall provide 
a written notice to the consumer identifying the name of the creditor 
or any assignee or securitizer who should be contacted by the consumer 
for any reason concerning the consumer's rights with respect to the 
loan.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment Relating to Enforcement.--Section 108(a) 
of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1607(a)) is amended by inserting 
after paragraph (6) the following new paragraph:
 ``(7) sections 21B and 21C of the Securities Exchange Act 
 of 1934, in the case of a broker or dealer, other than a 
 depository institution, by the Securities and Exchange 
 Commission.''.

SEC. 207. RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.

 Except as otherwise expressly provided in section 129A or 129B of 
the Truth in Lending Act (as added by this Act), no provision of such 
section 129A or 129B shall be construed as superseding, repealing, or 
affecting any duty, right, obligation, privilege, or remedy of any 
person under any other provision of the Truth in Lending Act or any 
other provision of Federal or State law.

SEC. 208. EFFECT ON STATE LAWS.

 (a) In General.--Section 129B(d) of the Truth in Lending Act (as 
added by section 204) shall supersede any State law or application 
thereof that provides additional remedies against any assignee, 
securitizer, or securitization vehicle, and the remedies described in 
such section shall constitute the sole remedies against any assignee, 
securitizer, or securitization vehicle, for a violation of subsection 
(a) or (b) of section 129B of such Act or any other State law the terms 
of which address the specific subject matter of subsection (a) 
(determination of ability to repay) or (b) (requirement of a net 
tangible benefit) of such section 129B.
 (b) Rules of Construction.--No provision of this section shall be 
construed as limiting--
 (1) the application of any State law against a creditor;
 (2) the availability of remedies based upon fraud, 
 misrepresentation, deception, false advertising, or civil 
 rights laws--
 (A) against any assignee, securitizer, or 
 securitization vehicle for its own conduct relating to 
 the making of a residential mortgage loan to a 
 consumer; or
 (B) against any assignee, securitizer, or 
 securitization vehicle in the sale or purchase of 
 residential mortgage loans or securities; or
 (3) the application of any other State law against any 
 assignee, securitizer, or securitization vehicle except as 
 specifically provided in subsection (a) of this section.

SEC. 209. REGULATIONS.

 Regulations required or authorized to be prescribed under this 
title or the amendments made by this title--
 (1) shall be prescribed in final form before the end of the 
 12-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this 
 Act; and
 (2) shall take effect not later than 18 months after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 210. AMENDMENTS TO CIVIL LIABILITY PROVISIONS.

 (a) Increase in Amount of Civil Money Penalties for Certain 
Violations.--Section 130(a)(2) of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 
1640(a)(2)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``$100'' and inserting ``$200'';
 (2) by striking ``$1,000'' and inserting ``$2,000'';
 (3) by striking ``$200'' and inserting ``$400'';
 (4) by striking ``$2,000'' and inserting ``$4,000''; and
 (5) by striking ``$500,000'' and inserting ``$1,000,000''.
 (b) Statute of Limitations Extended for Section 129 Violations.--
Section 130(e) of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1640(e)) is 
amended--
 (1) in the first sentence, by striking ``Any action'' and 
 inserting ``Except as provided in the subsequent sentence, any 
 action''; and
 (2) by inserting after the first sentence the following new 
 sentence: ``Any action under this section with respect to any 
 violation of section 129 may be brought in any United States 
 district court, or in any other court of competent 
 jurisdiction, before the end of the 3-year period beginning on 
 the date of the occurrence of the violation.''.

SEC. 211. LENDER RIGHTS IN THE CONTEXT OF BORROWER DECEPTION.

 Section 130 of the Truth in Lending Act is amended by adding at the 
end the following new subsection:
 ``(j) Exemption From Liability and Rescission in Case of Borrower 
Fraud or Deception.--In addition to any other remedy available by law 
or contract, no creditor, assignee, or securitizer shall be liable to 
an obligor under this section, nor shall it be subject to the right of 
rescission of any obligor under 129B, if such obligor, or co-obligor, 
knowingly, or willfully and with actual knowledge furnished material 
information known to be false for the purpose of obtaining such 
residential mortgage loan.''.

SEC. 212. SIX-MONTH NOTICE REQUIRED BEFORE RESET OF HYBRID ADJUSTABLE 
 RATE MORTGAGES.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 2 of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 
1631 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 128 the following 
new section:
``Sec. 128A. Reset of hybrid adjustable rate mortgages
 ``(a) Hybrid Adjustable Rate Mortgages Defined.--For purposes of 
this section, the term `hybrid adjustable rate mortgage' means a 
consumer credit transaction secured by the consumer's principal 
residence with a fixed interest rate for an introductory period that 
adjusts or resets to a variable interest rate after such period.
 ``(b) Notice of Reset and Alternatives.--During the 1-month period 
that ends 6 months before the date on which the interest rate in effect 
during the introductory period of a hybrid adjustable rate mortgage 
adjusts or resets to a variable interest rate, the creditor or servicer 
of such loan shall provide a written notice, separate and distinct from 
all other correspondence to the consumer, that includes the following:
 ``(1) Any index or formula used in making adjustments to or 
 resetting the interest rate and a source of information about 
 the index or formula.
 ``(2) An explanation of how the new interest rate and 
 payment would be determined, including an explanation of how 
 the index was adjusted, such as by the addition of a margin.
 ``(3) A good faith estimate, based on accepted industry 
 standards, of the creditor or servicer of the amount of the 
 monthly payment that will apply after the date of the 
 adjustment or reset, and the assumptions on which this estimate 
 is based.
 ``(4) A list of alternatives consumers may pursue before 
 the date of adjustment or reset, and descriptions of the 
 actions consumers must take to pursue these alternatives, 
 including--
 ``(A) refinancing;
 ``(B) renegotiation of loan terms;
 ``(C) payment forbearances; and
 ``(D) pre-foreclosure sales.
 ``(5) The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and Internet 
 addresses of counseling agencies or programs reasonably 
 available to the consumer that have been certified or approved 
 and made publicly available by the Secretary of Housing and 
 Urban Development or a State housing finance authority (as 
 defined in section 1301 of the Financial Institutions Reform, 
 Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989).
 ``(6) The address, telephone number, and Internet address 
 for the State housing finance authority (as so defined) for the 
 State in which the consumer resides.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 2 of the 
Truth in Lending Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to 
section 128 the following new item:

``128A. Reset of hybrid adjustable rate mortgages.''.

SEC. 213. REQUIRED DISCLOSURES.

 (a) Additional Information.--Section 128(a) of Truth in Lending Act 
(15 U.S.C. 1638(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraphs:
 ``(16) In the case of an extension of credit that is 
 secured by the dwelling of a consumer, under which the annual 
 rate of interest is variable, or with respect to which the 
 regular payments may otherwise be variable, in addition to the 
 other disclosures required under this subsection, the 
 disclosures provided under this subsection shall state the 
 maximum amount of the regular required payments on the loan, 
 based on the maximum interest rate allowed, introduced with the 
 following language in conspicuous type size and format: `Your 
 payment can go as high as $__', the blank to be filled in with 
 the maximum possible payment amount.
 ``(17) In the case of a residential mortgage loan for which 
 an escrow or impound account will be established for the 
 payment of all applicable taxes, insurance, and assessments, 
 the following statement: `Your payments will be increased to 
 cover taxes and insurance. In the first year, you will pay an 
 additional $__ [insert the amount of the monthly payment to the 
 account] every month to cover the costs of taxes and 
 insurance.'.
 ``(18) In the case of a variable rate residential mortgage 
 loan for which an escrow or impound account will be established 
 for the payment of all applicable taxes, insurance, and 
 assessments--
 ``(A) the amount of initial monthly payment due 
 under the loan for the payment of principal and 
 interest, and the amount of such initial monthly 
 payment including the monthly payment deposited in the 
 account for the payment of all applicable taxes, 
 insurance, and assessments; and
 ``(B) the amount of the fully indexed monthly 
 payment due under the loan for the payment of principal 
 and interest, and the amount of such fully indexed 
 monthly payment including the monthly payment deposited 
 in the account for the payment of all applicable taxes, 
 insurance, and assessments.
 ``(19) In the case of a residential mortgage loan, the 
 aggregate amount of settlement charges for all settlement 
 services provided in connection with the loan, the amount of 
 charges that are included in the loan and the amount of such 
 charges the borrower must pay at closing, the approximate 
 amount of the wholesale rate of funds in connection with the 
 loan, and the aggregate amount of other fees or required 
 payments in connection with the loan.
 ``(20) In the case of a residential mortgage loan, the 
 aggregate amount of fees paid to the mortgage originator in 
 connection with the loan, the amount of such fees paid directly 
 by the consumer, and any additional amount received by the 
 originator from the creditor based on the interest rate of the 
 loan.''.
 (b) Timing.--Section 128(b) of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 
1638(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Residential mortgage loan disclosures.--In the case 
 of a residential mortgage loan, the information required to be 
 disclosed under subsection (a) with respect to such loan shall 
 be disclosed before the earlier of--
 ``(A) the time required under the first sentence of 
 paragraph (1); or
 ``(B) the end of the 3-day period beginning on the 
 date the application for the loan from a consumer is 
 received by the creditor.''.
 (c) Enhanced Mortgage Loan Disclosures.--Section 128(b)(2) of the 
Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``(2) In the'' and inserting the following:
 ``(2) Mortgage disclosures.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the'';
 (2) by striking ``a residential mortgage transaction, as 
 defined in section 103(w)'' and inserting ``any extension of 
 credit that is secured by the dwelling of a consumer'';
 (3) by striking ``shall be made in accordance'' and all 
 that follows through ``extended, or'';
 (4) by striking ``If the'' and all that follows through the 
 end of the paragraph and inserting the following new 
 subparagraphs:
 ``(B) Statement and timing of disclosures.--In the 
 case of an extension of credit that is secured by the 
 dwelling of a consumer, in addition to the other 
 disclosures required by subsection (a), the disclosures 
 provided under this paragraph shall state in 
 conspicuous type size and format, the following: `You 
 are not required to complete this agreement merely 
 because you have received these disclosures or signed a 
 loan application.'.
 ``(i) state in conspicuous type size and 
 format, the following: `You are not required to 
 complete this agreement merely because you have 
 received these disclosures or signed a loan 
 application.'; and
 ``(ii) be furnished to the borrower not 
 later than 7 business days before the date of 
 consummation of the transaction, subject to 
 subparagraph (D).
 ``(C) Variable rates or payment schedules.--In the 
 case of an extension of credit that is secured by the 
 dwelling of a consumer, under which the annual rate of 
 interest is variable, or with respect to which the 
 regular payments may otherwise be variable, in addition 
 to the other disclosures required by subsection (a), 
 the disclosures provided under this paragraph shall 
 label the payment schedule as follows: `Payment 
 Schedule: Payments Will Vary Based on Interest Rate 
 Changes.'.
 ``(D) Updating apr.--In any case in which the 
 disclosure statement provided 7 business days before 
 the date of consummation of the transaction contains an 
 annual percentage rate of interest that is no longer 
 accurate, as determined under section 107(c), the 
 creditor shall furnish an additional, corrected 
 statement to the borrower, not later than 3 business 
 days before the date of consummation of the 
 transaction.''.

SEC. 214. DISCLOSURES REQUIRED IN MONTHLY STATEMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL 
 MORTGAGE LOANS.

 Section 128 of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1638) is amended 
by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(e) Periodic Statements for Residential Mortgage Loans.--
 ``(1) In general.--The creditor, assignee, or servicer with 
 respect to any residential mortgage loan shall transmit to the 
 obligor, for each billing cycle, a statement setting forth each 
 of the following items, to the extent applicable, in a 
 conspicuous and prominent manner:
 ``(A) The amount of the principal obligation under 
 the mortgage.
 ``(B) The current interest rate in effect for the 
 loan.
 ``(C) The date on which the interest rate may next 
 reset or adjust.
 ``(D) The amount of any prepayment fee to be 
 charged, if any.
 ``(E) A description of any late payment fees.
 ``(F) A telephone number and electronic mail 
 address that may be used by the obligor to obtain 
 information regarding the mortgage.
 ``(G) Such other information as the Board may 
 prescribe in regulations.
 ``(2) Development and use of standard form.--The Federal 
 banking agencies shall jointly develop and prescribe a standard 
 form for the disclosure required under this subsection, taking 
 into account that the statements required may be transmitted in 
 writing or electronically.''.

SEC. 215. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 For fiscal years 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2012, there are 
authorized to be appropriated to the Attorney General a total of--
 (1) $31,250,000 to support the employment of 30 additional 
 agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and 2 additional 
 dedicated prosecutors at the Department of Justice to 
 coordinate prosecution of mortgage fraud efforts with the 
 offices of the United States Attorneys; and
 (2) $750,000 to support the operations of interagency task 
 forces of the Federal Bureau of Investigation in the areas with 
 the 15 highest concentrations of mortgage fraud.

SEC. 216. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 The amendments made by this title shall apply to transactions 
consummated on or after the effective date of the regulations specified 
in section 209.

SEC. 217. REPORT BY THE GAO.

 (a) Report Required.--The Comptroller General shall conduct a study 
to determine the effects the enactment of this Act will have on the 
availability and affordability of credit for homebuyers and mortgage 
lending, including the effect--
 (1) on the mortgage market for mortgages that are not 
 within the safe harbor provided in the amendments made by this 
 title;
 (2) on the ability of prospective homebuyers to obtain 
 financing;
 (3) on the ability of homeowners facing resets or 
 adjustments to refinance--for example, do they have fewer 
 refinancing options due to the unavailability of certain loan 
 products that were available before the enactment of this Act;
 (4) on minorities' ability to access affordable credit 
 compared with other prospective borrowers;
 (5) on home sales and construction;
 (6) of extending the rescission right, if any, on 
 adjustable rate loans and its impact on litigation;
 (7) of State foreclosure laws and, if any, an investor's 
 ability to transfer a property after foreclosure;
 (8) of expanding the existing provisions of the Home 
 Ownership and Equity Protection Act of 1994;
 (9) of prohibiting prepayment penalties on high-cost 
 mortgages; and
 (10) of establishing counseling services under the 
 Department of Housing and Urban Development and offered through 
 the Office of Housing Counseling.
 (b) Report.--Before the end of the 1-year period beginning on the 
date of the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General shall submit 
a report to the Congress containing the findings and conclusions of the 
Comptroller General with respect to the study conducted pursuant to 
subsection (a).

 TITLE III--HIGH-COST MORTGAGES

SEC. 301. DEFINITIONS RELATING TO HIGH-COST MORTGAGES.

 (a) High-Cost Mortgage Defined.--Section 103(aa) of the Truth in 
Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1602(aa)) is amended by striking all that 
precedes paragraph (2) and inserting the following:
 ``(aa) High-Cost Mortgage.--
 ``(1) Definition.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `high-cost mortgage', 
 and a mortgage referred to in this subsection, means a 
 consumer credit transaction that is secured by the 
 consumer's principal dwelling, other than a reverse 
 mortgage transaction, if--
 ``(i) in the case of a credit transaction 
 secured--
 ``(I) by a first mortgage on the 
 consumer's principal dwelling, the 
 annual percentage rate at consummation 
 of the transaction will exceed by more 
 than 8 percentage (10 percentage 
 points, if the dwelling is personal 
 property and the transaction is for 
 less than $50,000) points the yield on 
 Treasury securities having comparable 
 periods of maturity on the 15th day of 
 the month immediately preceding the 
 month in which the application for the 
 extension of credit is received by the 
 creditor; or
 ``(II) by a subordinate or junior 
 mortgage on the consumer's principal 
 dwelling, the annual percentage rate at 
 consummation of the transaction will 
 exceed by more than 10 percentage 
 points the yield on Treasury securities 
 having comparable periods of maturity 
 on the 15th day of the month 
 immediately preceding the month in 
 which the application for the extension 
 of credit is received by the creditor;
 ``(ii) the total points and fees payable in 
 connection with the transaction exceed--
 ``(I) in the case of a transaction 
 for $20,000 or more, 5 percent of the 
 total transaction amount; or
 ``(II) in the case of a transaction 
 for less than $20,000, the lesser of 8 
 percent of the total transaction amount 
 or $1,000; or
 ``(iii) the credit transaction documents 
 permit the creditor to charge or collect 
 prepayment fees or penalties more than 36 
 months after the transaction closing or such 
 fees or penalties exceed, in the aggregate, 
 more than 2 percent of the amount prepaid.
 ``(B) Introductory rates taken into account.--For 
 purposes of subparagraph (A)(i), the annual percentage 
 rate of interest shall be determined based on the 
 following interest rate:
 ``(i) In the case of a fixed-rate 
 transaction in which the annual percentage rate 
 will not vary during the term of the loan, the 
 interest rate in effect on the date of 
 consummation of the transaction.
 ``(ii) In the case of a transaction in 
 which the rate of interest varies solely in 
 accordance with an index, the interest rate 
 determined by adding the index rate in effect 
 on the date of consummation of the transaction 
 to the maximum margin permitted at any time 
 during the transaction agreement.
 ``(iii) In the case of any other 
 transaction in which the rate may vary at any 
 time during the term of the loan for any 
 reason, the interest charged on the transaction 
 at the maximum rate that may be charged during 
 the term of the transaction.''.
 (b) Adjustment of Percentage Points.--Section 103(aa)(2) of the 
Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1602(aa)(2)) is amended by striking 
subparagraph (B) and inserting the following new subparagraph:
 ``(B) An increase or decrease under subparagraph 
 (A)--
 ``(i) may not result in the number of 
 percentage points referred to in paragraph 
 (1)(A)(i)(I) being less than 6 percentage 
 points or greater than 10 percentage points; 
 and
 ``(ii) may not result in the number of 
 percentage points referred to in paragraph 
 (1)(A)(i)(II) being less than 8 percentage 
 points or greater than 12 percentage points.''.
 (c) Points and Fees Defined.--
 (1) In general.--Section 103(aa)(4) of the Truth in Lending 
 Act (15 U.S.C. 1602(aa)(4)) is amended--
 (A) by striking subparagraph (B) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(B) all compensation paid directly or indirectly 
 by a consumer or creditor to a mortgage broker from any 
 source, including a mortgage originator that originates 
 a loan in the name of the originator in a table-funded 
 transaction;'';
 (B) in subparagraph (C)(ii), by inserting ``except 
 where applied to the charges set forth in section 
 106(e)(1) where a creditor may receive indirect 
 compensation solely as a result of obtaining 
 distributions of profits from an affiliated entity 
 based on its ownership interest in compliance with 
 section 8(c)(4) of the Real Estate Settlement 
 Procedures Act of 1974'' before the semicolon at the 
 end;
 (C) in subparagraph (C)(iii), by striking ``; and'' 
 and inserting ``, except as provided for in clause 
 (ii);'';
 (D) by redesignating subparagraph (D) as 
 subparagraph (G); and
 (E) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the 
 following new subparagraphs:
 ``(D) premiums or other charges payable at or 
 before closing for any credit life, credit disability, 
 credit unemployment, or credit property insurance, or 
 any other accident, loss-of-income, life or health 
 insurance, or any payments directly or indirectly for 
 any debt cancellation or suspension agreement or 
 contract, except that insurance premiums or debt 
 cancellation or suspension fees calculated and paid in 
 full on a monthly basis shall not be considered 
 financed by the creditor;
 ``(E) except as provided in subsection (cc), the 
 maximum prepayment fees and penalties which may be 
 charged or collected under the terms of the credit 
 transaction;
 ``(F) all prepayment fees or penalties that are 
 incurred by the consumer if the loan refinances a 
 previous loan made or currently held by the same 
 creditor or an affiliate of the creditor; and''.
 (2) Calculation of points and fees for open-end consumer 
 credit plans.--Section 103(aa) of the Truth in Lending Act (15 
 U.S.C. 1602(aa)) is amended--
 (A) by redesignating paragraph (5) as paragraph 
 (6); and
 (B) by inserting after paragraph (4) the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(5) Calculation of points and fees for open-end consumer 
 credit plans.--In the case of open-end consumer credit plans, 
 points and fees shall be calculated, for purposes of this 
 section and section 129, by adding the total points and fees 
 known at or before closing, including the maximum prepayment 
 penalties which may be charged or collected under the terms of 
 the credit transaction, plus the minimum additional fees the 
 consumer would be required to pay to draw down an amount equal 
 to the total credit line.''.
 (d) High Cost Mortgage Lender.--Section 103(f) of the Truth in 
Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1602(f)) is amended by striking the last 
sentence and inserting the following new sentence: ``Any person who 
originates or brokers 2 or more mortgages referred to in subsection 
(aa) in any 12-month period, any person who originates 1 or more such 
mortgages through a mortgage broker in any 12 month period, or, in 
connection with a table funding transaction of such a mortgage, any 
person to whom the obligation is initially assigned at or after 
settlement shall be considered to be a creditor for purposes of this 
title.''.
 (e) Bona Fide Discount Loan Discount Points and Prepayment 
Penalties.--Section 103 of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1602) is 
amended by inserting after subsection (cc) (as added by section 121) 
the following new subsection:
 ``(dd) Bona Fide Discount Points and Prepayment Penalties.--For the 
purposes of determining the amount of points and fees for purposes of 
subsection (aa), either the amounts described in paragraph (1) or (4) 
of the following paragraphs, but not both, may be excluded:
 ``(1) Exclusion of bona fide discount points.--The discount 
 points described in 1 of the following subparagraphs shall be 
 excluded from determining the amounts of points and fees with 
 respect to a high-cost mortgage for purposes of subsection 
 (aa):
 ``(A) Up to and including 2 bona fide discount 
 points payable by the consumer in connection with the 
 mortgage, but only if the interest rate from which the 
 mortgage's interest rate will be discounted does not 
 exceed by more than 1 percentage point the required net 
 yield for a 90-day standard mandatory delivery 
 commitment for a reasonably comparable loan from either 
 the Federal National Mortgage Association or the 
 Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, whichever is 
 greater.
 ``(B) Unless 2 bona fide discount points have been 
 excluded under subparagraph (A), up to and including 1 
 bona fide discount point payable by the consumer in 
 connection with the mortgage, but only if the interest 
 rate from which the mortgage's interest rate will be 
 discounted does not exceed by more than 2 percentage 
 points the required net yield for a 90-day standard 
 mandatory delivery commitment for a reasonably 
 comparable loan from either the Federal National 
 Mortgage Association or the Federal Home Loan Mortgage 
 Corporation, whichever is greater.
 ``(2) Definition.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term 
 `bona fide discount points' means loan discount points which 
 are knowingly paid by the consumer for the purpose of reducing, 
 and which in fact result in a bona fide reduction of, the 
 interest rate or time-price differential applicable to the 
 mortgage.
 ``(3) Exception for interest rate reductions inconsistent 
 with industry norms.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to discount 
 points used to purchase an interest rate reduction unless the 
 amount of the interest rate reduction purchased is reasonably 
 consistent with established industry norms and practices for 
 secondary mortgage market transactions.
 ``(4) Allowance of conventional prepayment penalty.--
 Subsection (aa)(1)(4)(E) shall not apply so as to include a 
 prepayment penalty or fee that is authorized by law other than 
 this title and may be imposed pursuant to the terms of a high-
 cost mortgage (or other consumer credit transaction secured by 
 the consumer's principal dwelling) if--
 ``(A) the annual percentage rate applicable with 
 respect to such mortgage or transaction (as determined 
 for purposes of subsection (aa)(1)(A)(i))--
 ``(i) in the case of a first mortgage on 
 the consumer's principal dwelling, does not 
 exceed by more than 2 percentage points the 
 yield on Treasury securities having comparable 
 periods of maturity on the 15th day of the 
 month immediately preceding the month in which 
 the application for the extension of credit is 
 received by the creditor; or
 ``(ii) in the case of a subordinate or 
 junior mortgage on the consumer's principal 
 dwelling, does not exceed by more than 4 
 percentage points the yield on such Treasury 
 securities; and
 ``(B) the total amount of any prepayment fees or 
 penalties permitted under the terms of the high-cost 
 mortgage or transaction does not exceed 2 percent of 
 the amount prepaid.''.

SEC. 302. AMENDMENTS TO EXISTING REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN MORTGAGES.

 (a) Prepayment Penalty Provisions.--Section 129(c)(2) of the Truth 
in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1639(c)(2)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``and'' after the semicolon at the end of 
 subparagraph (C);
 (2) by redesignating subparagraph (D) as subparagraph (E); 
 and
 (3) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(D) the amount of the principal obligation of the 
 mortgage exceeds the maximum principal obligation 
 limitation (for the applicable size residence) under 
 section 203(b)(2) of the National Housing Act for the 
 area in which the residence subject to the mortgage is 
 located; and''.
 (b) No Balloon Payments.--Section 129(e) of the Truth in Lending 
Act (15 U.S.C. 1639(e)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(e) No Balloon Payments.--No high-cost mortgage may contain a 
scheduled payment that is more than twice as large as the average of 
earlier scheduled payments. This subsection shall not apply when the 
payment schedule is adjusted to the seasonal or irregular income of the 
consumer.''.
 (c) No Lending Without Due Regard to Ability To Repay.--Section 
129(h) of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1639(h)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``Payment Ability of Consumer.--A creditor 
 shall not'' and inserting ``Payment Ability of Consumer.--
 ``(1) Pattern or practice.--
 ``(A) In general.--A creditor shall not'';
 (2) by inserting after subparagraph (A) (as so designated 
 by paragraph (1) of this subsection) the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(B) Presumption of violation.--There shall be a 
 presumption that a creditor has violated this 
 subsection if the creditor engages in a pattern or 
 practice of making high-cost mortgages without 
 verifying or documenting the repayment ability of 
 consumers with respect to such mortgages.''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(2) Prohibition on extending credit without regard to 
 payment ability of consumer.--
 ``(A) In general.--A creditor may not extend credit 
 to a consumer under a high-cost mortgage unless a 
 reasonable creditor would believe at the time the 
 mortgage is closed that the consumer or consumers that 
 are residing or will reside in the residence subject to 
 the mortgage will be able to make the scheduled 
 payments associated with the mortgage, based upon a 
 consideration of current and expected income, current 
 obligations, employment status, and other financial 
 resources, other than equity in the residence.
 ``(B) Presumption of ability.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, there shall be a rebuttable presumption 
 that a consumer is able to make the scheduled payments 
 to repay the obligation if, at the time the high-cost 
 mortgage is consummated, the consumer's total monthly 
 debts, including amounts under the mortgage, do not 
 exceed 50 percent of his or her monthly gross income as 
 verified by tax returns, payroll receipts, or other 
 third-party income verification.''.

SEC. 303. ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN MORTGAGES.

 (a) Additional Requirements for Certain Mortgages.--Section 129 of 
the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1639) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsections (j), (k) and (l) as 
 subsections (n), (o) and (p) respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (i) the following new 
 subsections:
 ``(j) Recommended Default.--No creditor shall recommend or 
encourage default on an existing loan or other debt prior to and in 
connection with the closing or planned closing of a high-cost mortgage 
that refinances all or any portion of such existing loan or debt.
 ``(k) Late Fees.--
 ``(1) In general.--No creditor may impose a late payment 
 charge or fee in connection with a high-cost mortgage--
 ``(A) in an amount in excess of 4 percent of the 
 amount of the payment past due;
 ``(B) unless the loan documents specifically 
 authorize the charge or fee;
 ``(C) before the end of the 15-day period beginning 
 on the date the payment is due, or in the case of a 
 loan on which interest on each installment is paid in 
 advance, before the end of the 30-day period beginning 
 on the date the payment is due; or
 ``(D) more than once with respect to a single late 
 payment.
 ``(2) Coordination with subsequent late fees.--If a payment 
 is otherwise a full payment for the applicable period and is 
 paid on its due date or within an applicable grace period, and 
 the only delinquency or insufficiency of payment is 
 attributable to any late fee or delinquency charge assessed on 
 any earlier payment, no late fee or delinquency charge may be 
 imposed on such payment.
 ``(3) Failure to make installment payment.--If, in the case 
 of a loan agreement the terms of which provide that any payment 
 shall first be applied to any past due principal balance, the 
 consumer fails to make an installment payment and the consumer 
 subsequently resumes making installment payments but has not 
 paid all past due installments, the creditor may impose a 
 separate late payment charge or fee for any principal due 
 (without deduction due to late fees or related fees) until the 
 default is cured.
 ``(l) Acceleration of Debt.--No high-cost mortgage may contain a 
provision which permits the creditor, in its sole discretion, to 
accelerate the indebtedness. This provision shall not apply when 
repayment of the loan has been accelerated by default, pursuant to a 
due-on-sale provision, or pursuant to a material violation of some 
other provision of the loan documents unrelated to the payment 
schedule.
 ``(m) Restriction on Financing Points and Fees.--No creditor may 
directly or indirectly finance, in connection with any high-cost 
mortgage, any of the following:
 ``(1) Any prepayment fee or penalty payable by the consumer 
 in a refinancing transaction if the creditor or an affiliate of 
 the creditor is the noteholder of the note being refinanced.
 ``(2) Any points or fees.''.
 (b) Prohibitions on Evasions.--Section 129 of the Truth in Lending 
Act (15 U.S.C. 1639) is amended by inserting after subsection (p) (as 
so redesignated by subsection (a)(1)) the following new subsection:
 ``(q) Prohibitions on Evasions, Structuring of Transactions, and 
Reciprocal Arrangements.--A creditor may not take any action in 
connection with a high-cost mortgage--
 ``(1) to structure a loan transaction as an open-end credit 
 plan or another form of loan for the purpose and with the 
 intent of evading the provisions of this title; or
 ``(2) to divide any loan transaction into separate parts 
 for the purpose and with the intent of evading provisions of 
 this title.''.
 (c) Modification or Deferral Fees.--Section 129 of the Truth in 
Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1639) is amended by inserting after subsection 
(q) (as added by subsection (b) of this section) the following new 
subsection:
 ``(r) Modification and Deferral Fees Prohibited.--A creditor may 
not charge a consumer any fee to modify, renew, extend, or amend a 
high-cost mortgage, or to defer any payment due under the terms of such 
mortgage, unless the modification, renewal, extension or amendment 
results in a lower annual percentage rate on the mortgage for the 
consumer and then only if the amount of the fee is comparable to fees 
imposed for similar transactions in connection with consumer credit 
transactions that are secured by a consumer's principal dwelling and 
are not high-cost mortgages.''.
 (d) Payoff Statement.--Section 129 of the Truth in Lending Act (15 
U.S.C. 1639) is amended by inserting after subsection (r) (as added by 
subsection (c) of this section) the following new subsection:
 ``(s) Payoff Statement.--
 ``(1) Fees.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B), no creditor or servicer may charge a 
 fee for informing or transmitting to any person the 
 balance due to pay off the outstanding balance on a 
 high-cost mortgage.
 ``(B) Transaction fee.--When payoff information 
 referred to in subparagraph (A) is provided by 
 facsimile transmission or by a courier service, a 
 creditor or servicer may charge a processing fee to 
 cover the cost of such transmission or service in an 
 amount not to exceed an amount that is comparable to 
 fees imposed for similar services provided in 
 connection with consumer credit transactions that are 
 secured by the consumer's principal dwelling and are 
 not high-cost mortgages.
 ``(C) Fee disclosure.--Prior to charging a 
 transaction fee as provided in subparagraph (B), a 
 creditor or servicer shall disclose that payoff 
 balances are available for free pursuant to 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(D) Multiple requests.--If a creditor or servicer 
 has provided payoff information referred to in 
 subparagraph (A) without charge, other than the 
 transaction fee allowed by subparagraph (B), on 4 
 occasions during a calendar year, the creditor or 
 servicer may thereafter charge a reasonable fee for 
 providing such information during the remainder of the 
 calendar year.
 ``(2) Prompt delivery.--Payoff balances shall be provided 
 within 5 business days after receiving a request by a consumer 
 or a person authorized by the consumer to obtain such 
 information.''.
 (e) Pre-Loan Counseling Required.--Section 129 of the Truth in 
Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1639) is amended by inserting after subsection 
(s) (as added by subsection (d) of this section) the following new 
subsection:
 ``(t) Pre-Loan Counseling.--
 ``(1) In general.--A creditor may not extend credit to a 
 consumer under a high-cost mortgage without first receiving 
 certification from a counselor that is approved by the 
 Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, or at the 
 discretion of the Secretary, a state housing finance authority, 
 that the consumer has received counseling on the advisability 
 of the mortgage. Such counselor shall not be employed by the 
 creditor or an affiliate of the creditor or be affiliated with 
 the creditor.
 ``(2) Disclosures required prior to counseling.--No 
 counselor may certify that a consumer has received counseling 
 on the advisability of the high-cost mortgage unless the 
 counselor can verify that the consumer has received each 
 statement required (in connection with such loan) by this 
 section or the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 1974 
 with respect to the transaction.
 ``(3) Regulations.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban 
 Development may prescribe such regulations as the Secretary 
 determines to be appropriate to carry out the requirements of 
 paragraph (1).''.
 (f) Flipping Prohibited.--Section 129 of the Truth in Lending Act 
(15 U.S.C. 1639) is amended by inserting after subsection (t) (as added 
by subsection (e)) the following new subsection:
 ``(u) Flipping.--
 ``(1) In general.--No creditor may knowingly or 
 intentionally engage in the unfair act or practice of flipping 
 in connection with a high-cost mortgage.
 ``(2) Flipping defined.--For purposes of this subsection, 
 the term `flipping' means the making of a loan or extension of 
 credit in the form a high-cost mortgage to a consumer which 
 refinances an existing mortgage when the new loan or extension 
 of credit does not have reasonable, net tangible benefit (as 
 determined in accordance with regulations prescribed under 
 section 129B(b)) to the consumer considering all of the 
 circumstances, including the terms of both the new and the 
 refinanced loans or credit, the cost of the new loan or credit, 
 and the consumer's circumstances.''.

SEC. 304. AMENDMENT TO PROVISION GOVERNING CORRECTION OF ERRORS.

 Section 130(b) of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1640(b)) is 
amended to read as follows:
 ``(b) Correction of Errors.--A creditor has no liability under this 
section or section 108 or 112 for any failure to comply with any 
requirement imposed under this chapter or chapter 5, if--
 ``(1) within 30 days of the loan closing and prior to the 
 institution of any action, the consumer is notified of or 
 discovers the violation, appropriate restitution is made, and 
 whatever adjustments are necessary are made to the loan to 
 either, at the choice of the consumer--
 ``(A) make the loan satisfy the requirements of 
 this chapter; or
 ``(B) in the case of a high-cost mortgage, change 
 the terms of the loan in a manner beneficial to the 
 consumer so that the loan will no longer be a high-cost 
 mortgage; or
 ``(2) within 60 days of the creditor's discovery or receipt 
 of notification of an unintentional violation or bona fide 
 error as described in subsection (c) and prior to the 
 institution of any action, the consumer is notified of the 
 compliance failure, appropriate restitution is made, and 
 whatever adjustments are necessary are made to the loan to 
 either, at the choice of the consumer--
 ``(A) make the loan satisfy the requirements of 
 this chapter; or
 ``(B) in the case of a high-cost mortgage, change 
 the terms of the loan in a manner beneficial so that 
 the loan will no longer be a high-cost mortgage.''.

SEC. 305. REGULATIONS.

 (a) In General.--The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System shall publish regulations implementing this title and the 
amendments made by this title in final form before the end of the 6-
month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) Consumer Mortgage Education.--
 (1) Regulations.--The Board of Governors of the Federal 
 Reserve System may prescribe regulations requiring or 
 encouraging creditors to provide consumer mortgage education to 
 prospective customers or direct such customers to qualified 
 consumer mortgage education or counseling programs in the 
 vicinity of the residence of the consumer.
 (2) Coordination with state law.--No requirement 
 established by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
 System pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be construed as 
 affecting or superseding any requirement under the law of any 
 State with respect to consumer mortgage counseling or 
 education.

SEC. 306. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 The amendments made by this title shall take effect at the end of 
the 6-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act 
and shall apply to mortgages referred to in section 103(aa) of the 
Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1602(aa)) consummated after the end of 
such period.

 TITLE IV--OFFICE OF HOUSING COUNSELING

SEC. 401. SHORT TITLE.

 This title may be cited as the ``Expand and Preserve Home Ownership 
Through Counseling Act''.

SEC. 402. ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE OF HOUSING COUNSELING.

 Section 4 of the Department of Housing and Urban Development Act 
(42 U.S.C. 3533) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection:
 ``(g) Office of Housing Counseling.--
 ``(1) Establishment.--There is established, in the Office 
 of the Secretary, the Office of Housing Counseling.
 ``(2) Director.--There is established the position of 
 Director of Housing Counseling. The Director shall be the head 
 of the Office of Housing Counseling and shall be appointed by 
 the Secretary. Such position shall be a career-reserved 
 position in the Senior Executive Service.
 ``(3) Functions.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Director shall have ultimate 
 responsibility within the Department, except for the 
 Secretary, for all activities and matters relating to 
 homeownership counseling and rental housing counseling, 
 including--
 ``(i) research, grant administration, 
 public outreach, and policy development 
 relating to such counseling; and
 ``(ii) establishment, coordination, and 
 administration of all regulations, 
 requirements, standards, and performance 
 measures under programs and laws administered 
 by the Department that relate to housing 
 counseling, homeownership counseling (including 
 maintenance of homes), mortgage-related 
 counseling (including home equity conversion 
 mortgages and credit protection options to 
 avoid foreclosure), and rental housing 
 counseling, including the requirements, 
 standards, and performance measures relating to 
 housing counseling.
 ``(B) Specific functions.--The Director shall carry 
 out the functions assigned to the Director and the 
 Office under this section and any other provisions of 
 law. Such functions shall include establishing rules 
 necessary for--
 ``(i) the counseling procedures under 
 section 106(g)(1) of the Housing and Urban 
 Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 
 1701x(h)(1));
 ``(ii) carrying out all other functions of 
 the Secretary under section 106(g) of the 
 Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968, 
 including the establishment, operation, and 
 publication of the availability of the toll-
 free telephone number under paragraph (2) of 
 such section;
 ``(iii) carrying out section 5 of the Real 
 Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 1974 (12 
 U.S.C. 2604) for home buying information 
 booklets prepared pursuant to such section;
 ``(iv) carrying out the certification 
 program under section 106(e) of the Housing and 
 Urban Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 
 1701x(e));
 ``(v) carrying out the assistance program 
 under section 106(a)(4) of the Housing and 
 Urban Development Act of 1968, including 
 criteria for selection of applications to 
 receive assistance;
 ``(vi) carrying out any functions regarding 
 abusive, deceptive, or unscrupulous lending 
 practices relating to residential mortgage 
 loans that the Secretary considers appropriate, 
 which shall include conducting the study under 
 section 6 of the Expand and Preserve Home 
 Ownership Through Counseling Act;
 ``(vii) providing for operation of the 
 advisory committee established under paragraph 
 (4) of this subsection;
 ``(viii) collaborating with community-based 
 organizations with expertise in the field of 
 housing counseling; and
 ``(ix) providing for the building of 
 capacity to provide housing counseling services 
 in areas that lack sufficient services.
 ``(4) Advisory committee.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall appoint an 
 advisory committee to provide advice regarding the 
 carrying out of the functions of the Director.
 ``(B) Members.--Such advisory committee shall 
 consist of not more than 12 individuals, and the 
 membership of the committee shall equally represent all 
 aspects of the mortgage and real estate industry, 
 including consumers.
 ``(C) Terms.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
 (D), each member of the advisory committee shall be 
 appointed for a term of 3 years. Members may be 
 reappointed at the discretion of the Secretary.
 ``(D) Terms of initial appointees.--As designated 
 by the Secretary at the time of appointment, of the 
 members first appointed to the advisory committee, 4 
 shall be appointed for a term of 1 year and 4 shall be 
 appointed for a term of 2 years.
 ``(E) Prohibition of pay; travel expenses.--Members 
 of the advisory committee shall serve without pay, but 
 shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in 
 lieu of subsistence, in accordance with applicable 
 provisions under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, 
 United States Code.
 ``(F) Advisory role only.--The advisory committee 
 shall have no role in reviewing or awarding housing 
 counseling grants.
 ``(5) Scope of homeownership counseling.--In carrying out 
 the responsibilities of the Director, the Director shall ensure 
 that homeownership counseling provided by, in connection with, 
 or pursuant to any function, activity, or program of the 
 Department addresses the entire process of homeownership, 
 including the decision to purchase a home, the selection and 
 purchase of a home, issues arising during or affecting the 
 period of ownership of a home (including refinancing, default 
 and foreclosure, and other financial decisions), and the sale 
 or other disposition of a home.''.

SEC. 403. COUNSELING PROCEDURES.

 (a) In General.--Section 106 of the Housing and Urban Development 
Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 1701x) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new subsection:
 ``(g) Procedures and Activities.--
 ``(1) Counseling procedures.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall establish, 
 coordinate, and monitor the administration by the 
 Department of Housing and Urban Development of the 
 counseling procedures for homeownership counseling and 
 rental housing counseling provided in connection with 
 any program of the Department, including all 
 requirements, standards, and performance measures that 
 relate to homeownership and rental housing counseling.
 ``(B) Homeownership counseling.--For purposes of 
 this subsection and as used in the provisions referred 
 to in this subparagraph, the term `homeownership 
 counseling' means counseling related to homeownership 
 and residential mortgage loans. Such term includes 
 counseling related to homeownership and residential 
 mortgage loans that is provided pursuant to--
 ``(i) section 105(a)(20) of the Housing and 
 Community Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 
 5305(a)(20));
 ``(ii) in the United States Housing Act of 
 1937--
 ``(I) section 9(e) (42 U.S.C. 
 1437g(e));
 ``(II) section 8(y)(1)(D) (42 
 U.S.C. 1437f(y)(1)(D));
 ``(III) section 18(a)(4)(D) (42 
 U.S.C. 1437p(a)(4)(D));
 ``(IV) section 23(c)(4) (42 U.S.C. 
 1437u(c)(4));
 ``(V) section 32(e)(4) (42 U.S.C. 
 1437z-4(e)(4));
 ``(VI) section 33(d)(2)(B) (42 
 U.S.C. 1437z-5(d)(2)(B));
 ``(VII) sections 302(b)(6) and 
 303(b)(7) (42 U.S.C. 1437aaa-1(b)(6), 
 1437aaa-2(b)(7)); and
 ``(VIII) section 304(c)(4) (42 
 U.S.C. 1437aaa-3(c)(4));
 ``(iii) section 302(a)(4) of the American 
 Homeownership and Economic Opportunity Act of 
 2000 (42 U.S.C. 1437f note);
 ``(iv) sections 233(b)(2) and 258(b) of the 
 Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 12773(b)(2), 12808(b));
 ``(v) this section and section 101(e) of 
 the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 
 (12 U.S.C. 1701x, 1701w(e));
 ``(vi) section 220(d)(2)(G) of the Low-
 Income Housing Preservation and Resident 
 Homeownership Act of 1990 (12 U.S.C. 
 4110(d)(2)(G));
 ``(vii) sections 422(b)(6), 423(b)(7), 
 424(c)(4), 442(b)(6), and 443(b)(6) of the 
 Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 12872(b)(6), 12873(b)(7), 
 12874(c)(4), 12892(b)(6), and 12893(b)(6));
 ``(viii) section 491(b)(1)(F)(iii) of the 
 McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 
 U.S.C. 11408(b)(1)(F)(iii));
 ``(ix) sections 202(3) and 810(b)(2)(A) of 
 the Native American Housing and Self-
 Determination Act of 1996 (25 U.S.C. 4132(3), 
 4229(b)(2)(A));
 ``(x) in the National Housing Act--
 ``(I) in section 203 (12 U.S.C. 
 1709), the penultimate undesignated 
 paragraph of paragraph (2) of 
 subsection (b), subsection (c)(2)(A), 
 and subsection (r)(4);
 ``(II) subsections (a) and (c)(3) 
 of section 237 (12 U.S.C. 1715z-2); and
 ``(III) subsections (d)(2)(B) and 
 (m)(1) of section 255 (12 U.S.C. 1715z-
 20);
 ``(xi) section 502(h)(4)(B) of the Housing 
 Act of 1949 (42 U.S.C. 1472(h)(4)(B)); and
 ``(xii) section 508 of the Housing and 
 Urban Development Act of 1970 (12 U.S.C. 1701z-
 7).
 ``(C) Rental housing counseling.--For purposes of 
 this subsection, the term `rental housing counseling' 
 means counseling related to rental of residential 
 property, which may include counseling regarding future 
 homeownership opportunities and providing referrals for 
 renters and prospective renters to entities providing 
 counseling and shall include counseling related to such 
 topics that is provided pursuant to--
 ``(i) section 105(a)(20) of the Housing and 
 Community Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 
 5305(a)(20));
 ``(ii) in the United States Housing Act of 
 1937--
 ``(I) section 9(e) (42 U.S.C. 
 1437g(e));
 ``(II) section 18(a)(4)(D) (42 
 U.S.C. 1437p(a)(4)(D));
 ``(III) section 23(c)(4) (42 U.S.C. 
 1437u(c)(4));
 ``(IV) section 32(e)(4) (42 U.S.C. 
 1437z-4(e)(4));
 ``(V) section 33(d)(2)(B) (42 
 U.S.C. 1437z-5(d)(2)(B)); and
 ``(VI) section 302(b)(6) (42 U.S.C. 
 1437aaa-1(b)(6));
 ``(iii) section 233(b)(2) of the Cranston-
 Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 
 U.S.C. 12773(b)(2));
 ``(iv) section 106 of the Housing and Urban 
 Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 1701x);
 ``(v) section 422(b)(6) of the Cranston-
 Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 
 U.S.C. 12872(b)(6));
 ``(vi) section 491(b)(1)(F)(iii) of the 
 McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 
 U.S.C. 11408(b)(1)(F)(iii));
 ``(vii) sections 202(3) and 810(b)(2)(A) of 
 the Native American Housing and Self-
 Determination Act of 1996 (25 U.S.C. 4132(3), 
 4229(b)(2)(A)); and
 ``(viii) the rental assistance program 
 under section 8 of the United States Housing 
 Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f).
 ``(2) Standards for materials.--The Secretary, in 
 conjunction with the advisory committee established under 
 subsection (g)(4) of the Department of Housing and Urban 
 Development Act, shall establish standards for materials and 
 forms to be used, as appropriate, by organizations providing 
 homeownership counseling services, including any recipients of 
 assistance pursuant to subsection (a)(4).
 ``(3) Mortgage software systems.--
 ``(A) Certification.--The Secretary shall provide 
 for the certification of various computer software 
 programs for consumers to use in evaluating different 
 residential mortgage loan proposals. The Secretary 
 shall require, for such certification, that the 
 mortgage software systems take into account--
 ``(i) the consumer's financial situation 
 and the cost of maintaining a home, including 
 insurance, taxes, and utilities;
 ``(ii) the amount of time the consumer 
 expects to remain in the home or expected time 
 to maturity of the loan;
 ``(iii) such other factors as the Secretary 
 considers appropriate to assist the consumer in 
 evaluating whether to pay points, to lock in an 
 interest rate, to select an adjustable or fixed 
 rate loan, to select a conventional or 
 government-insured or guaranteed loan and to 
 make other choices during the loan application 
 process.
 If the Secretary determines that available existing 
 software is inadequate to assist consumers during the 
 residential mortgage loan application process, the 
 Secretary shall arrange for the development by private 
 sector software companies of new mortgage software 
 systems that meet the Secretary's specifications.
 ``(B) Use and initial availability.--Such certified 
 computer software programs shall be used to supplement, 
 not replace, housing counseling. The Secretary shall 
 provide that such programs are initially used only in 
 connection with the assistance of housing counselors 
 certified pursuant to subsection (e).
 ``(C) Availability.--After a period of initial 
 availability under subparagraph (B) as the Secretary 
 considers appropriate, the Secretary shall take 
 reasonable steps to make mortgage software systems 
 certified pursuant to this paragraph widely available 
 through the Internet and at public locations, including 
 public libraries, senior-citizen centers, public 
 housing sites, offices of public housing agencies that 
 administer rental housing assistance vouchers, and 
 housing counseling centers.
 ``(4) National public service multimedia campaigns to 
 promote housing counseling.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Director of Housing 
 Counseling shall develop, implement, and conduct 
 national public service multimedia campaigns designed 
 to make persons facing mortgage foreclosure, persons 
 considering a subprime mortgage loan to purchase a 
 home, elderly persons, persons who face language 
 barriers, low-income persons, and other potentially 
 vulnerable consumers aware that it is advisable, before 
 seeking or maintaining a residential mortgage loan, to 
 obtain homeownership counseling from an unbiased and 
 reliable sources and that such homeownership counseling 
 is available, including through programs sponsored by 
 the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
 ``(B) Contact information.--Each segment of the 
 multimedia campaign under subparagraph (A) shall 
 publicize the toll-free telephone number and web site 
 of the Department of Housing and Urban Development 
 through which persons seeking housing counseling can 
 locate a housing counseling agency in their State that 
 is certified by the Secretary of Housing and Urban 
 Development and can provide advice on buying a home, 
 renting, defaults, foreclosures, credit issues, and 
 reverse mortgages.
 ``(C) Authorization of appropriations.--There are 
 authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary, not to 
 exceed $3,000,000 for fiscal years 2008, 2009, and 
 2010, for the develop, implement, and conduct of 
 national public service multimedia campaigns under this 
 paragraph.
 ``(5) Education programs.--The Secretary shall provide 
 advice and technical assistance to States, units of general 
 local government, and nonprofit organizations regarding the 
 establishment and operation of, including assistance with the 
 development of content and materials for, educational programs 
 to inform and educate consumers, particularly those most 
 vulnerable with respect to residential mortgage loans (such as 
 elderly persons, persons facing language barriers, low-income 
 persons, and other potentially vulnerable consumers), regarding 
 home mortgages, mortgage refinancing, home equity loans, and 
 home repair loans.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments to Grant Program for Homeownership 
Counseling Organizations.--Section 106(c)(5)(A)(ii) of the Housing and 
Urban Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 1701x(c)(5)(A)(ii)) is 
amended--
 (1) in subclause (III), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in subclause (IV) by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by inserting after subclause (IV) the following new 
 subclause:
 ``(V) notify the housing or 
 mortgage applicant of the availability 
 of mortgage software systems provided 
 pursuant to subsection (g)(3).''.

SEC. 404. GRANTS FOR HOUSING COUNSELING ASSISTANCE.

 Section 106(a) of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 (12 
U.S.C. 1701x(a)(3)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(4) Homeownership and Rental Counseling Assistance.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall make financial 
 assistance available under this paragraph to States, units of 
 general local governments, and nonprofit organizations 
 providing homeownership or rental counseling (as such terms are 
 defined in subsection (g)(1)).
 ``(B) Qualified entities.--The Secretary shall establish 
 standards and guidelines for eligibility of organizations 
 (including governmental and nonprofit organizations) to receive 
 assistance under this paragraph.
 ``(C) Distribution.--Assistance made available under this 
 paragraph shall be distributed in a manner that encourages 
 efficient and successful counseling programs.
 ``(D) Authorization of appropriations.--There are 
 authorized to be appropriated $45,000,000 for each of fiscal 
 years 2008 through 2011 for--
 ``(i) the operations of the Office of Housing 
 Counseling of the Department of Housing and Urban 
 Development;
 ``(ii) the responsibilities of the Secretary under 
 paragraphs (2) through (5) of subsection (g); and
 ``(iii) assistance pursuant to this paragraph for 
 entities providing homeownership and rental 
 counseling.''.

SEC. 405. REQUIREMENTS TO USE HUD-CERTIFIED COUNSELORS UNDER HUD 
 PROGRAMS.

 Section 106(e) of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 (12 
U.S.C. 1701x(e)) is amended--
 (1) by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(1) Requirement for assistance.--An organization may not 
 receive assistance for counseling activities under subsection 
 (a)(1)(iii), (a)(2), (a)(4), (c), or (d) of this section, or 
 under section 101(e), unless the organization, or the 
 individuals through which the organization provides such 
 counseling, has been certified by the Secretary under this 
 subsection as competent to provide such counseling.'';
 (2) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) by inserting ``and for certifying 
 organizations'' before the period at the end of the 
 first sentence; and
 (B) in the second sentence by striking ``for 
 certification'' and inserting ``, for certification of 
 an organization, that each individual through which the 
 organization provides counseling shall demonstrate, 
 and, for certification of an individual,'';
 (3) in paragraph (3), by inserting ``organizations and'' 
 before ``individuals'';
 (4) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (5); and
 (5) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new 
 paragraphs:
 ``(3) Requirement under hud programs.--Any homeownership 
 counseling or rental housing counseling (as such terms are 
 defined in subsection (g)(1)) required under, or provided in 
 connection with, any program administered by the Department of 
 Housing and Urban Development shall be provided only by 
 organizations or counselors certified by the Secretary under 
 this subsection as competent to provide such counseling.
 ``(4) Outreach.--The Secretary shall take such actions as 
 the Secretary considers appropriate to ensure that individuals 
 and organizations providing homeownership or rental housing 
 counseling are aware of the certification requirements and 
 standards of this subsection and of the training and 
 certification programs under subsection (f).''.

SEC. 406. STUDY OF DEFAULTS AND FORECLOSURES.

 The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall conduct an 
extensive study of the root causes of default and foreclosure of home 
loans, using as much empirical data as are available. The study shall 
also examine the role of escrow accounts in helping prime and nonprime 
borrowers to avoid defaults and foreclosures. Not later than 12 months 
after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit 
to the Congress a preliminary report regarding the study. Not later 
than 24 months after such date of enactment, the Secretary shall submit 
a final report regarding the results of the study, which shall include 
any recommended legislation relating to the study, and recommendations 
for best practices and for a process to identify populations that need 
counseling the most.

SEC. 407. DEFINITIONS FOR COUNSELING-RELATED PROGRAMS.

 Section 106 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 (12 
U.S.C. 1701x), as amended by the preceding provisions of this title, is 
further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(h) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
 ``(1) Nonprofit organization.--The term `nonprofit 
 organization' has the meaning given such term in section 104(5) 
 of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 
 U.S.C. 12704(5)), except that subparagraph (D) of such section 
 shall not apply for purposes of this section.
 ``(2) State.--The term `State' means each of the several 
 States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the District of 
 Columbia, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, 
 Guam, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, the Trust Territories 
 of the Pacific, or any other possession of the United States.
 ``(3) Unit of general local government.--The term `unit of 
 general local government' means any city, county, parish, town, 
 township, borough, village, or other general purpose political 
 subdivision of a State.''.

SEC. 408. UPDATING AND SIMPLIFICATION OF MORTGAGE INFORMATION BOOKLET.

 Section 5 of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 1974 (12 
U.S.C. 2604) is amended--
 (1) in the section heading, by striking ``special'' and 
 inserting ``home buying'';
 (2) by striking subsections (a) and (b) and inserting the 
 following new subsections:
 ``(a) Preparation and Distribution.--The Secretary shall prepare, 
at least once every 5 years, a booklet to help consumers applying for 
federally related mortgage loans to understand the nature and costs of 
real estate settlement services. The Secretary shall prepare the 
booklet in various languages and cultural styles, as the Secretary 
determines to be appropriate, so that the booklet is understandable and 
accessible to homebuyers of different ethnic and cultural backgrounds. 
The Secretary shall distribute such booklets to all lenders that make 
federally related mortgage loans. The Secretary shall also distribute 
to such lenders lists, organized by location, of homeownership 
counselors certified under section 106(e) of the Housing and Urban 
Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 1701x(e)) for use in complying with 
the requirement under subsection (c) of this section.
 ``(b) Contents.--Each booklet shall be in such form and detail as 
the Secretary shall prescribe and, in addition to such other 
information as the Secretary may provide, shall include in plain and 
understandable language the following information:
 ``(1) A description and explanation of the nature and 
 purpose of the costs incident to a real estate settlement or a 
 federally related mortgage loan. The description and 
 explanation shall provide general information about the 
 mortgage process as well as specific information concerning, at 
 a minimum--
 ``(A) balloon payments;
 ``(B) prepayment penalties; and
 ``(C) the trade-off between closing costs and the 
 interest rate over the life of the loan.
 ``(2) An explanation and sample of the uniform settlement 
 statement required by section 4.
 ``(3) A list and explanation of lending practices, 
 including those prohibited by the Truth in Lending Act or other 
 applicable Federal law, and of other unfair practices and 
 unreasonable or unnecessary charges to be avoided by the 
 prospective buyer with respect to a real estate settlement.
 ``(4) A list and explanation of questions a consumer 
 obtaining a federally related mortgage loan should ask 
 regarding the loan, including whether the consumer will have 
 the ability to repay the loan, whether the consumer 
 sufficiently shopped for the loan, whether the loan terms 
 include prepayment penalties or balloon payments, and whether 
 the loan will benefit the borrower.
 ``(5) An explanation of the right of rescission as to 
 certain transactions provided by sections 125 and 129 of the 
 Truth in Lending Act.
 ``(6) A brief explanation of the nature of a variable rate 
 mortgage and a reference to the booklet entitled `Consumer 
 Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages', published by the Board 
 of Governors of the Federal Reserve System pursuant to section 
 226.19(b)(1) of title 12, Code of Federal Regulations, or to 
 any suitable substitute of such booklet that such Board of 
 Governors may subsequently adopt pursuant to such section.
 ``(7) A brief explanation of the nature of a home equity 
 line of credit and a reference to the pamphlet required to be 
 provided under section 127A of the Truth in Lending Act.
 ``(8) Information about homeownership counseling services 
 made available pursuant to section 106(a)(4) of the Housing and 
 Urban Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 1701x(a)(4)), a 
 recommendation that the consumer use such services, and 
 notification that a list of certified providers of 
 homeownership counseling in the area, and their contact 
 information, is available.
 ``(9) An explanation of the nature and purpose of escrow 
 accounts when used in connection with loans secured by 
 residential real estate and the requirements under section 10 
 of this Act regarding such accounts.
 ``(10) An explanation of the choices available to buyers of 
 residential real estate in selecting persons to provide 
 necessary services incidental to a real estate settlement.
 ``(11) An explanation of a consumer's responsibilities, 
 liabilities, and obligations in a mortgage transaction.
 ``(12) An explanation of the nature and purpose of real 
 estate appraisals, including the difference between an 
 appraisal and a home inspection.
 ``(13) Notice that the Office of Housing of the Department 
 of Housing and Urban Development has made publicly available a 
 brochure regarding loan fraud and a World Wide Web address and 
 toll-free telephone number for obtaining the brochure.
The booklet prepared pursuant to this section shall take into 
consideration differences in real estate settlement procedures that may 
exist among the several States and territories of the United States and 
among separate political subdivisions within the same State and 
territory.'';
 (3) in subsection (c), by inserting at the end the 
 following new sentence: ``Each lender shall also include with 
 the booklet a reasonably complete or updated list of 
 homeownership counselors who are certified pursuant to section 
 106(e) of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 (12 
 U.S.C. 1701x(e)) and located in the area of the lender.''; and
 (4) in subsection (d), by inserting after the period at the 
 end of the first sentence the following: ``The lender shall 
 provide the HUD-issued booklet in the version that is most 
 appropriate for the person receiving it.''.

 TITLE V--MORTGAGE DISCLOSURES UNDER REAL ESTATE SETTLEMENT PROCEDURES 
 ACT OF 1974

SEC. 501. UNIVERSAL MORTGAGE DISCLOSURE IN GOOD FAITH ESTIMATE OF 
 SETTLEMENT SERVICES COSTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 5 of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures 
Act of 1974 (12 U.S.C. 2604) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (c), by adding after the period at the 
 end the following: ``Each such good faith estimate shall 
 include the disclosure required under subsection (f) in the 
 form prescribed by the Secretary pursuant to such subsection, 
 except that if the Secretary at any time issues any regulations 
 requiring the use of a standard or uniform form or statement in 
 providing the good faith estimate required under this 
 subsection and prescribing such standard or uniform form or 
 statement, such disclosure shall not be required after the 
 effective date of such regulations.''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(f) Universal Mortgage Disclosure Requirement for Good Faith 
Estimates.--
 ``(1) Disclosure.--The disclosure required under this 
 subsection is a written statement regarding the federally 
 related mortgage loan for which the good faith estimate under 
 subsection (c) is made, that consists of the following 
 statements, appropriately and in good faith completed by the 
 lender in accordance with the terms of the federally related 
 mortgage loan involved in the settlement:
 ``(A) `Your Loan Amount will be' and `$____', each 
 statement appearing in a separate column of the 
 disclosure.
 ``(B) `Your Loan is', `A Fixed Rate Loan', and `An 
 Adjustable Rate Loan ', each statement appearing in a 
 separate column and each of the last two such 
 statements preceded by a checkbox.
 ``(C) `Your Loan Term is', `___ years', and `___ 
 years', each statement appearing in a separate column, 
 and the second such statement shall appear in the same 
 column as the statement required by subparagraph (B) 
 regarding fixed rate loans and the third such statement 
 shall appear in the same column as the statement 
 required by subparagraph (B) regarding adjustable rate 
 loans;
 ``(D) `Your Estimated Interest Rate (APR) is', 
 `___%', and `___% initially, then it will adjust. In 
 ___ months, Your rate may adjust to a maximum of ___%', 
 each statement appearing in a separate column, the 
 second such statement shall appear in the same column 
 as the statement required by subparagraph (B) regarding 
 fixed rate loans and the third such statement shall 
 appear in the same column as the statement required by 
 subparagraph (B) regarding adjustable rate loans, and 
 the blanks relating to estimated interest rate shall be 
 completed by the lender using an annual percentage rate 
 determined in accordance with the Truth in Lending Act.
 ``(E) `Your Total Estimated Monthly Payment 
 (Including loan Principal and Interest, and property 
 Taxes (based on current rates) and Insurance (PITI)) 
 is', `$____ which represents ___% of Your estimated 
 monthly income', and `$____ which represents ___% of 
 Your estimated monthly income. When Your interest rate 
 initially adjusts, Your maximum monthly payment may be 
 as high as $____ which represents ___% of Your 
 estimated monthly income', each statement appearing in 
 a separate column, and the second such statement shall 
 appear in the same column as the statement required by 
 subparagraph (B) regarding fixed rate loans and the 
 third such statement shall appear in the same column as 
 the statement required by subparagraph (B) regarding 
 adjustable rate loans.
 ``(F) `Your Rate Lock Period is' and `___ days. 
 After You lock into Your interest rate, You must go to 
 settlement within this number of days to be guaranteed 
 this interest rate.', each statement appearing in a 
 separate column.
 ``(G) `Does Your loan have a prepayment penalty?', 
 `YES, Your maximum prepayment penalty is $____', and 
 `NO', the first such statement and the last two such 
 statements appearing in a separate column, and each of 
 the last two such statements preceded by a checkbox.
 ``(H) `Does Your loan have a balloon payment?', 
 `YES, Your balloon payment of $____ is due in ___ 
 months', and `NO', the first such statement and the 
 last two such statements appearing in a separate 
 column, and each of the last two such statements 
 preceded by a checkbox.
 ``(I) `Your Total Estimated Settlement Charges Will 
 be $____ (a)' and `Your Total Estimated Down Payment 
 will be $____ (b)', each statement appearing in a 
 separate column.
 ``(J) `Your Total Estimated Cash Needed at Closing 
 Will Be' and `$____ (a+b)', each statement appearing in 
 a separate column.
 ``(K) `This represents a simple summary of Your 
 Good Faith Estimate (GFE). To understand the terms of 
 Your loan, You must see disclosure forms and the Truth 
 in Lending Act.', such statement appearing directly 
 below the entirety of the remainder of the disclosure.
 ``(2) Standard form.--
 ``(A) Development and use.--The Secretary, in 
 consultation with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, 
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the 
 Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision, shall 
 develop and prescribe a standard form for the 
 disclosure required under this subsection, which shall 
 be used without variation in all transactions in the 
 United States that involve federally related mortgage 
 loans.
 ``(B) Appearance.--The standard form developed 
 pursuant to this paragraph shall--
 ``(i) set forth each statement required 
 under a separate subparagraph under paragraph 
 (1) on a separate row of the disclosure;
 ``(ii) be set forth in 8-point type;
 ``(iii) be not more than 6 inches in width 
 or 3.5 inches in height;
 ``(iv) include such boldface type and 
 shading as the Secretary considers appropriate;
 ``(v) include such parenthetical statements 
 directing the borrower to the terms of the loan 
 (such as `see terms') as the Secretary 
 considers appropriate, in such places as the 
 Secretary considers appropriate; and
 ``(vi) be located in the upper one-third of 
 the first page of the good faith estimate 
 required under subsection (c) in a manner that 
 allows the identity, address, phone number, and 
 other relevant information of the lender, the 
 identity, address, phone number, and other 
 relevant information of the borrower, and the 
 address of the property for which the federally 
 related mortgage loan is to be made, to be 
 located above the standard form.''.
 (b) Regulations.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development 
shall issue regulations prescribing the standard form and the use of 
such form, as required by the amendment made by subsection (a), not 
later than the expiration of the 180-day period beginning upon the date 
of the enactment of this Act, and such regulations shall take effect 
upon issuance.

 TITLE VI--MORTGAGE SERVICING

SEC. 601. ESCROW AND IMPOUND ACCOUNTS RELATING TO CERTAIN CONSUMER 
 CREDIT TRANSACTIONS.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 2 of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 
1631 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 129B (as added by 
section 201) the following new section:

``SEC. 129C. ESCROW OR IMPOUND ACCOUNTS RELATING TO CERTAIN CONSUMER 
 CREDIT TRANSACTIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b) or (c), a 
creditor, in connection with the formation or consummation of a 
consumer credit transaction secured by a first lien on the principal 
dwelling of the consumer, other than a consumer credit transaction 
under an open end credit plan or a reverse mortgage, shall establish, 
at the time of the consummation of such transaction, an escrow or 
impound account for the payment of taxes and hazard insurance, and, if 
applicable, flood insurance, mortgage insurance, ground rents, and any 
other required periodic payments or premiums with respect to the 
property or the loan terms, as provided in, and in accordance with, 
this section.
 ``(b) When Required.--No impound, trust, or other type of account 
for the payment of property taxes, insurance premiums, or other 
purposes relating to the property may be required as a condition of a 
real property sale contract or a loan secured by a first deed of trust 
or mortgage on the principal dwelling of the consumer, other than a 
consumer credit transaction under an open end credit plan or a reverse 
mortgage, except when--
 ``(1) any such impound, trust, or other type of escrow or 
 impound account for such purposes is required by Federal or 
 State law;
 ``(2) a loan is made, guaranteed, or insured by a State or 
 Federal governmental lending or insuring agency;
 ``(3) the consumer's debt-to-income ratio at the time the 
 home mortgage is established taking into account income from 
 all sources including the consumer's employment exceeds 50 
 percent;
 ``(4) the transaction is secured by a first mortgage or 
 lien on the consumer's principal dwelling and the annual 
 percentage rate on the credit, at the time of consummation of 
 the transaction, will exceed by more than 3.0 percentage points 
 the yield on Treasury securities having comparable periods of 
 maturity on the 15th day of the month immediately preceding the 
 month in which the application of the extension of credit is 
 received by the creditor;
 ``(5) a consumer obtains a mortgage referred to in section 
 103(aa);
 ``(6) the original principal amount of such loan at the 
 time of consummation of the transaction is--
 ``(A) 90 percent or more of the sale price, if the 
 property involved is purchased with the proceeds of the 
 loan; or
 ``(B) 90 percent or more of the appraised value of 
 the property securing the loan;
 ``(7) the combined principal amount of all loans secured by 
 the real property exceeds 95 percent of the appraised value of 
 the property securing the loans at the time of consummation of 
 the last mortgage transaction;
 ``(8) the consumer was the subject of a proceeding under 
 title 11, United States Code, at any time during the 7-year 
 period preceding the date of the transaction (as determined on 
 the basis of the date of entry of the order for relief or the 
 date of adjudication, as the case may be, with respect to such 
 proceeding and included in a consumer report on the consumer 
 under the Fair Credit Reporting Act) ; or
 ``(9) so required by the Board pursuant to regulation.
 ``(c) Duration of Mandatory Escrow or Impound Account.--An escrow 
or impound account established pursuant to subsection (b), shall remain 
in existence for a minimum period of 5 years and until such borrower 
has sufficient equity in the dwelling securing the consumer credit 
transaction so as to no longer be required to maintain private mortgage 
insurance, or such other period as may be provided in regulations to 
address situations such as borrower delinquency, unless the underlying 
mortgage establishing the account is terminated.
 ``(d) Clarification on Escrow Accounts for Loans Not Meeting 
Statutory Test.--For mortgages not covered by the requirements of 
subsection (b), no provision of this section shall be construed as 
precluding the establishment of an impound, trust, or other type of 
account for the payment of property taxes, insurance premiums, or other 
purposes relating to the property--
 ``(1) on terms mutually agreeable to the parties to the 
 loan;
 ``(2) at the discretion of the lender or servicer, as 
 provided by the contract between the lender or servicer and the 
 borrower; or
 ``(3) pursuant to the requirements for the escrowing of 
 flood insurance payments for regulated lending institutions in 
 section 102(d) of the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973.
 ``(e) Administration of Mandatory Escrow or Impound Accounts.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as may otherwise be provided for 
 in this title or in regulations prescribed by the Board, escrow 
 or impound accounts established pursuant to subsection (b) 
 shall be established in a federally insured depository 
 institution.
 ``(2) Administration.--Except as provided in this section 
 or regulations prescribed under this section, an escrow or 
 impound account subject to this section shall be administered 
 in accordance with--
 ``(A) the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 
 1974 and regulations prescribed under such Act;
 ``(B) the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 and 
 regulations prescribed under such Act; and
 ``(C) the law of the State, if applicable, where 
 the real property securing the consumer credit 
 transaction is located.
 ``(3) Applicability of payment of interest.--If prescribed 
 by applicable State or Federal law, each creditor shall pay 
 interest to the consumer on the amount held in any impound, 
 trust, or escrow account that is subject to this section in the 
 manner as prescribed by that applicable State or Federal law.
 ``(4) Penalty coordination with respa.--Any action or 
 omission on the part of any person which constitutes a 
 violation of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 1974 
 or any regulation prescribed under such Act for which the 
 person has paid any fine, civil money penalty, or other damages 
 shall not give rise to any additional fine, civil money 
 penalty, or other damages under this section, unless the action 
 or omission also constitutes a direct violation of this 
 section.
 ``(f) Disclosures Relating to Mandatory Escrow or Impound 
Account.--In the case of any impound, trust, or escrow account that is 
subject to this section, the creditor shall disclose by written notice 
to the consumer at least 3 business days before the consummation of the 
consumer credit transaction giving rise to such account or in 
accordance with timeframes established in prescribed regulations the 
following information:
 ``(1) The fact that an escrow or impound account will be 
 established at consummation of the transaction.
 ``(2) The amount required at closing to initially fund the 
 escrow or impound account.
 ``(3) The amount, in the initial year after the 
 consummation of the transaction, of the estimated taxes and 
 hazard insurance, including flood insurance, if applicable, and 
 any other required periodic payments or premiums that reflects, 
 as appropriate, either the taxable assessed value of the real 
 property securing the transaction, including the value of any 
 improvements on the property or to be constructed on the 
 property (whether or not such construction will be financed 
 from the proceeds of the transaction) or the replacement costs 
 of the property.
 ``(4) The estimated monthly amount payable to be escrowed 
 for taxes, hazard insurance (including flood insurance, if 
 applicable) and any other required periodic payments or 
 premiums.
 ``(5) The fact that, if the consumer chooses to terminate 
 the account at the appropriate time in the future, the consumer 
 will become responsible for the payment of all taxes, hazard 
 insurance, and flood insurance, if applicable, as well as any 
 other required periodic payments or premiums on the property 
 unless a new escrow or impound account is established.
 ``(g) Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the following 
definitions shall apply:
 ``(1) Flood insurance.--The term `flood insurance' means 
 flood insurance coverage provided under the national flood 
 insurance program pursuant to the National Flood Insurance Act 
 of 1968.
 ``(2) Hazard insurance.--The term `hazard insurance' shall 
 have the same meaning as provided for `hazard insurance', 
 `casualty insurance', `homeowner's insurance', or other similar 
 term under the law of the State where the real property 
 securing the consumer credit transaction is located.''.
 (b) Implementation.--
 (1) Regulations.--The Board of Governors of the Federal 
 Reserve System, the Comptroller of the Currency, the Director 
 of the Office of Thrift Supervision, the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration 
 Board, (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Federal 
 banking agencies'') and the Federal Trade Commission shall 
 prescribe, in final form, such regulations as determined to be 
 necessary to implement the amendments made by subsection (a) 
 before the end of the 180-day period beginning on the date of 
 the enactment of this Act.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) 
 shall only apply to covered mortgage loans consummated after 
 the end of the 1-year period beginning on the date of the 
 publication of final regulations in the Federal Register.
 (c) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 2 of the 
Truth in Lending Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to 
section 129B (as added by section 201) the following new item:

``129C. Escrow or impound accounts relating to certain consumer credit 
 transactions.''.

SEC. 602. DISCLOSURE NOTICE REQUIRED FOR CONSUMERS WHO WAIVE ESCROW 
 SERVICES.

 (a) In General.--Section 129C of the Truth in Lending Act (as added 
by section 601) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection:
 ``(h) Disclosure Notice Required for Consumers Who Waive Escrow 
Services.--
 ``(1) In general.--If--
 ``(A) an impound, trust, or other type of account 
 for the payment of property taxes, insurance premiums, 
 or other purposes relating to real property securing a 
 consumer credit transaction is not established in 
 connection with the transaction; or
 ``(B) a consumer chooses, at any time after such an 
 account is established in connection with any such 
 transaction and in accordance with any statute, 
 regulation, or contractual agreement, to close such 
 account,
 the creditor or servicer shall provide a timely and clearly 
 written disclosure to the consumer that advises the consumer of 
 the responsibilities of the consumer and implications for the 
 consumer in the absence of any such account.
 ``(2) Disclosure requirements.--Any disclosure provided to 
 a consumer under paragraph (1) shall include the following:
 ``(A) Information concerning any applicable fees or 
 costs associated with either the non-establishment of 
 any such account at the time of the transaction, or any 
 subsequent closure of any such account.
 ``(B) A clear and prominent notice that the 
 consumer is responsible for personally and directly 
 paying the non-escrowed items, in addition to paying 
 the mortgage loan payment, in the absence of any such 
 account, and the fact that the costs for taxes, 
 insurance, and related fees can be substantial.
 ``(C) A clear explanation of the consequences of 
 any failure to pay non-escrowed items, including the 
 possible requirement for the forced placement of 
 insurance by the creditor or servicer and the 
 potentially higher cost (including any potential 
 commission payments to the servicer) or reduced 
 coverage for the consumer in the event of any such 
 creditor-placed insurance.''.
 (b) Implementation.--
 (1) Regulations.--The Federal banking agencies and the 
 Federal Trade Commission shall prescribe, in final form, such 
 regulations as such agencies determine to be necessary to 
 implement the amendments made by subsection (a) before the end 
 of the 180-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of 
 this Act.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) 
 shall only apply in accordance with the regulations established 
 in paragraph (1) and beginning on the date occurring 180-days 
 after the date of the publication of final regulations in the 
 Federal Register.

SEC. 603. REAL ESTATE SETTLEMENT PROCEDURES ACT OF 1974 AMENDMENTS.

 (a) Servicer Prohibitions.--Section 6 of the Real Estate Settlement 
Procedures Act of 1974 (12 U.S.C. 2605) is amended by adding at the end 
the following new subsections:
 ``(k) Servicer Prohibitions.--
 ``(1) In general.--A servicer of a federally related 
 mortgage shall not--
 ``(A) obtain force-placed hazard insurance unless 
 there is a reasonable basis to believe the borrower has 
 failed to comply with the loan contract's requirements 
 to maintain property insurance;
 ``(B) charge fees for responding to valid qualified 
 written requests (as defined in regulations which the 
 Secretary shall prescribe) under this section;
 ``(C) fail to take timely action to respond to a 
 borrower's requests to correct errors relating to 
 allocation of payments, final balances for purposes of 
 paying off the loan, or avoiding foreclosure, or other 
 standard servicer's duties;
 ``(D) fail to respond within 10 business days to a 
 request from a borrower to provide the identity, 
 address, and other relevant contact information about 
 the owner assignee of the loan; or
 ``(E) fail to comply with any other obligation 
 found by the Secretary, by regulation, to be 
 appropriate to carry out the consumer protection 
 purposes of this Act.
 ``(2) Force-placed insurance defined.--For purposes of this 
 subsection and subsections (l) and (m), the term `force-placed 
 insurance' means hazard insurance coverage obtained by a 
 servicer of a federally related mortgage when the borrower has 
 failed to maintain or renew hazard insurance on such property 
 as required of the borrower under the terms of the mortgage.
 ``(l) Requirements for Force-Placed Insurance.--A servicer of a 
federally related mortgage shall not be construed as having a 
reasonable basis for obtaining force-placed insurance unless the 
requirements of this subsection have been met.
 ``(1) Written notices to borrower.--A servicer may not 
 impose any charge on any borrower for force-placed insurance 
 with respect to any property securing a federally related 
 mortgage unless--
 ``(A) the servicer has sent, by first-class mail, a 
 written notice to the borrower containing--
 ``(i) a reminder of the borrower's 
 obligation to maintain hazard insurance on the 
 property securing the federally related 
 mortgage;
 ``(ii) a statement that the servicer does 
 not have evidence of insurance coverage of such 
 property;
 ``(iii) a clear and conspicuous statement 
 of the procedures by which the borrower may 
 demonstrate that the borrower already has 
 insurance coverage; and
 ``(iv) a statement that the servicer may 
 obtain such coverage at the borrower's expense 
 if the borrower does not provide such 
 demonstration of the borrower's existing 
 coverage in a timely manner;
 ``(B) the servicer has sent, by first-class mail, a 
 second written notice, at least 30 days after the 
 mailing of the notice under subparagraph (A) that 
 contains all the information described in each clauses 
 of such subparagraph; and
 ``(C) the servicer has not received from the 
 borrower any demonstration of hazard insurance coverage 
 for the property securing the mortgage by the end of 
 the 15-day period beginning on the date the notice 
 under subparagraph (B) was sent by the servicer.
 ``(2) Sufficiency of demonstration.--A servicer of a 
 federally related mortgage shall accept any reasonable form of 
 written confirmation from a borrower of existing insurance 
 coverage, which shall include the existing insurance policy 
 number along with the identity of, and contact information for, 
 the insurance company or agent.
 ``(3) Termination of force-placed insurance.--Within 15 
 days of the receipt by a servicer of confirmation of a 
 borrower's existing insurance coverage, the servicer shall--
 ``(A) terminate the force-placed insurance; and
 ``(B) refund to the consumer all force-placed 
 insurance premiums paid by the borrower during any 
 period during which the borrower's insurance coverage 
 and the force-placed insurance coverage were each in 
 effect, and any related fees charged to the consumer's 
 account with respect to the force-placed insurance 
 during such period.
 ``(4) Clarification with respect to flood disaster 
 protection act.--No provision of this section shall be 
 construed as prohibiting a servicer from providing simultaneous 
 or concurrent notice of a lack of flood insurance pursuant to 
 section 102(e) of the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973.
 ``(m) Limitations on Force-Placed Insurance Charges.--All charges 
for force-placed insurance premiums shall be bona fide and reasonable 
in amount.
 ``(n) Prompt Crediting of Payments Required.--
 ``(1) In general.--All amounts received by a lender or a 
 servicer on a home loan at the address where the borrower has 
 been instructed to make payments shall be accepted and 
 credited, or treated as credited, on the business day received, 
 to the extent that the borrower has made the full contractual 
 payment and has provided sufficient information to credit the 
 account.
 ``(2) Scheduled method.--If a servicer uses the scheduled 
 method of accounting, any regularly scheduled payment made 
 prior to the scheduled due date shall be credited no later than 
 the due date.
 ``(3) Notice of noncredit.--If any payment is received by a 
 lender or a servicer on a home loan and not credited, or 
 treated as credited, the borrower shall be notified within 10 
 business days by mail at the borrower's last known address of 
 the disposition of the payment, the reason the payment was not 
 credited, or treated as credited to the account, and any 
 actions necessary by the borrower to make the loan current.''.
 (b) Increase in Penalty Amounts.--Section 6(f) of the Real Estate 
Settlement Procedures Act of 1974 (12 U.S.C. 2605(f)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraphs (1)(B) and (2)(B), by striking ``$1,000'' 
 each place such term appears and inserting ``$2,000''; and
 (2) in paragraph (2)(B)(i), by striking ``$500,000'' and 
 inserting ``$1,000,000''.
 (c) Decrease in Response Times.--Section 6(e) of the Real Estate 
Settlement Procedures Act of 1974 (12 U.S.C. 2605(e)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking ``20 days'' and 
 inserting ``10 days'';
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking ``60 days'' and inserting 
 ``30 days''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Limited extension of response time.--The 30-day 
 period described in paragraph (2) may be extended for not more 
 than 30 days if, before the end of such 30-day period, the 
 servicer notifies the borrower of the extension and the reasons 
 for the delay in responding.''.
 (d) Requests for Pay-Off Amounts.--Section 6(e) of the Real Estate 
Settlement Procedures Act of 1974 (12 U.S.C. 2605(e)) is amended by 
inserting after paragraph (4) (as added by subsection (c) of this 
section) the following new paragraph:
 ``(5) Requests for pay-off amounts.--A creditor or servicer 
 shall send a payoff balance within 7 business days of the 
 receipt of a written request for such balance from or on behalf 
 of the borrower.''.
 (e) Prompt Refund of Escrow Accounts Upon Payoff.--Section 6(g) of 
the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 1974 (12 U.S.C. 2605(g)) 
is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``Any 
balance in any such account that is within the servicer's control at 
the time the loan is paid off shall be promptly returned to the 
borrower within 20 business days or credited to a similar account for a 
new mortgage loan to the borrower with the same lender.''.

SEC. 604. MORTGAGE SERVICING STUDIES REQUIRED.

 (a) Mortgage Servicing Practices.--
 (1) Study.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, 
 in consultation with the Federal banking agencies, and the 
 Federal Trade Commission, shall conduct a comprehensive study 
 on mortgage servicing practices and their potential for fraud 
 and abuse.
 (2) Issues to be included.--In addition to other issues the 
 Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, the Federal banking 
 agencies, and the Federal Trade Commission may determine to be 
 appropriate and possibly pertinent to the study conducted under 
 paragraph (1), the study shall include the following issues:
 (A) A survey of the industry in order to examine 
 the issue of the timely or effective posting of 
 payments by servicers.
 (B) The employment of daily interest when payments 
 are made after a due date.
 (C) The charging of late fees on the entire 
 outstanding principal.
 (D) The charging of interest on servicing fees.
 (E) The utilization of collection practices that 
 failed to comply with the Fair Debt Collection 
 Practices Act.
 (F) The charging of prepayment penalties when not 
 authorized by either the note or law.
 (G) The employment of unconscionable forbearance 
 agreements.
 (H) Foreclosure abuses.
 (3) Report.--Before the end of the 12-month period 
 beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
 Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall submit a 
 report on the study conducted under this subsection to the 
 Committee on Financial Services of the House of Representatives 
 and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the 
 Senate.
 (b) Mortgage Servicing Improvements.--
 (1) Study.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, 
 in consultation with the Federal banking agencies, and the 
 Federal Trade Commission, shall conduct a comprehensive study 
 on means to improve the best practices of the mortgage 
 servicing industry, and Federal and State laws governing such 
 industry.
 (2) Report.--Before the end of the 18-month period 
 beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
 Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall submit a 
 report on the study conducted under this subsection to the 
 Committee on Financial Services of the House of Representatives 
 and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the 
 Senate, together with such recommendations for administrative 
 or legislative action as the Secretary, in consultation with 
 the Board and the Commission, may determine to be appropriate.

SEC. 605. ESCROWS INCLUDED IN REPAYMENT ANALYSIS.

 (a) In General.--Section 128(b) of the Truth in Lending Act (15 
U.S.C. 1638(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(4) Repayment analysis required to include escrow 
 payments.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of any consumer 
 credit transaction secured by a first mortgage or lien 
 on the principal dwelling of the consumer, other than a 
 consumer credit transaction under an open end credit 
 plan or a reverse mortgage, for which an impound, 
 trust, or other type of account has been or will be 
 established in connection with the transaction for the 
 payment of property taxes, hazard and flood (if any) 
 insurance premiums, or other periodic payments or 
 premiums with respect to the property, the information 
 required to be provided under subsection (a) with 
 respect to the number, amount, and due dates or period 
 of payments scheduled to repay the total of payments 
 shall take into account the amount of any monthly 
 payment to such account for each such repayment in 
 accordance with section 10(a)(2) of the Real Estate 
 Settlement Procedures Act of 1974.
 ``(B) Assessment value.--The amount taken into 
 account under subparagraph (A) for the payment of 
 property taxes, hazard and flood (if any) insurance 
 premiums, or other periodic payments or premiums with 
 respect to the property shall reflect the taxable 
 assessed value of the real property securing the 
 transaction after the consummation of the transaction, 
 including the value of any improvements on the property 
 or to be constructed on the property (whether or not 
 such construction will be financed from the proceeds of 
 the transaction), if known, and the replacement costs 
 of the property for hazard insurance, in the initial 
 year after the transaction.''.

 TITLE VII--APPRAISAL ACTIVITIES

SEC. 701. PROPERTY APPRAISAL REQUIREMENTS.

 Section 129 of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1639) is amended 
by inserting after subsection (u) (as added by section 303(f)) the 
following new subsection:
 ``(v) Property Appraisal Requirements.--
 ``(1) In general.--A creditor may not extend credit in the 
 form of a mortgage referred to in section 103(aa) to any 
 consumer without first obtaining a written appraisal of the 
 property to be mortgaged prepared in accordance with the 
 requirements of this subsection.
 ``(2) Appraisal requirements.--
 ``(A) Physical property visit.--An appraisal of 
 property to be secured by a mortgage referred to in 
 section 103(aa) does not meet the requirement of this 
 subsection unless it is performed by a qualified 
 appraiser who conducts a physical property visit of the 
 interior of the mortgaged property.
 ``(B) Second appraisal under certain 
 circumstances.--
 ``(i) In general.--If the purpose of a 
 mortgage referred to in section 103(aa) is to 
 finance the purchase or acquisition of the 
 mortgaged property from a person within 180 
 days of the purchase or acquisition of such 
 property by that person at a price that was 
 lower than the current sale price of the 
 property, the creditor shall obtain a second 
 appraisal from a different qualified appraiser. 
 The second appraisal shall include an analysis 
 of the difference in sale prices, changes in 
 market conditions, and any improvements made to 
 the property between the date of the previous 
 sale and the current sale.
 ``(ii) No cost to consumer.--The cost of 
 any second appraisal required under clause (i) 
 may not be charged to the consumer.
 ``(C) Qualified appraiser defined.--For purposes of 
 this subsection, the term `qualified appraiser' means a 
 person who--
 ``(i) is certified or licensed by the State 
 in which the property to be appraised is 
 located; and
 ``(ii) performs each appraisal in 
 conformity with the Uniform Standards of 
 Professional Appraisal Practice and title XI of 
 the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, 
 and Enforcement Act of 1989, and the 
 regulations prescribed under such title, as in 
 effect on the date of the appraisal.
 ``(3) Free copy of appraisal.--A creditor shall provide 1 
 copy of each appraisal conducted in accordance with this 
 subsection in connection with a mortgage referred to in section 
 103(aa) to the consumer without charge, and at least 3 days 
 prior to the transaction closing date.
 ``(4) Consumer notification.--At the time of the initial 
 mortgage application, the consumer shall be provided with a 
 statement by the creditor that any appraisal prepared for the 
 mortgage is for the sole use of the creditor, and that the 
 consumer may choose to have a separate appraisal conducted at 
 their own expense.
 ``(5) Violations.--In addition to any other liability to 
 any person under this title, a creditor found to have willfully 
 failed to obtain an appraisal as required in this subsection 
 shall be liable to the consumer for the sum of $2,000.''.

SEC. 702. UNFAIR AND DECEPTIVE PRACTICES AND ACTS RELATING TO CERTAIN 
 CONSUMER CREDIT TRANSACTIONS.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 2 of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 
1631 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 129C (as added by 
section 601) the following new section:

``SEC. 129D. UNFAIR AND DECEPTIVE PRACTICES AND ACTS RELATING TO 
 CERTAIN CONSUMER CREDIT TRANSACTIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--It shall be unlawful, in providing any services 
for a consumer credit transaction secured by the principal dwelling of 
the consumer, to engage in any unfair or deceptive act or practice as 
described in or pursuant to regulations prescribed under this section.
 ``(b) Appraisal Independence.--For purposes of subsection (a), 
unfair and deceptive practices shall include--
 ``(1) any appraisal of a property offered as security for 
 repayment of the consumer credit transaction that is conducted 
 in connection with such transaction in which a person with an 
 interest in the underlying transaction compensates, coerces, 
 extorts, colludes, instructs, induces, bribes, or intimidates a 
 person conducting or involved in an appraisal, or attempts, to 
 compensate, coerce, extort, collude, instruct, induce, bribe, 
 or intimidate such a person, for the purpose of causing the 
 appraised value assigned, under the appraisal, to the property 
 to be based on any factor other than the independent judgment 
 of the appraiser;
 ``(2) mischaracterizing, or suborning any 
 mischaracterization of, the appraised value of the property 
 securing the extension of the credit;
 ``(3) seeking to influence an appraiser or otherwise to 
 encourage a targeted value in order to facilitate the making or 
 pricing of the transaction; and
 ``(4) failing to timely compensate an appraiser for a 
 completed appraisal regardless of whether the transaction 
 closes.
 ``(c) Exceptions.--The requirements of subsection (b) shall not be 
construed as prohibiting a mortgage lender, mortgage broker, mortgage 
banker, real estate broker, appraisal management company, employee of 
an appraisal management company, or any other person with an interest 
in a real estate transaction from asking an appraiser to provide 1 or 
more of the following services:
 ``(1) Consider additional, appropriate property 
 information, including the consideration of additional 
 comparable properties to make or support an appraisal.
 ``(2) Provide further detail, substantiation, or 
 explanation for the appraiser's value conclusion.
 ``(3) Correct errors in the appraisal report.
 ``(d) Rulemaking Proceedings.--The Board, the Comptroller of the 
Currency, the Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision, the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration 
Board, and the Federal Trade Commission--
 ``(1) shall, for purposes of this section, jointly 
 prescribe regulations defining with specificity acts or 
 practices which are unfair or deceptive in the provision of 
 mortgage lending services for a consumer credit transaction 
 secured by the principal dwelling of the consumer or mortgage 
 brokerage services for such a transaction and defining any 
 terms in this section or such regulations; and
 ``(2) may jointly issue interpretive guidelines and general 
 statements of policy with respect to unfair or deceptive acts 
 or practices in the provision of mortgage lending services for 
 a consumer credit transaction secured by the principal dwelling 
 of the consumer and mortgage brokerage services for such a 
 transaction, within the meaning of subsections (a), (b), and 
 (c).
 ``(e) Penalties.--
 ``(1) First violation.--In addition to the enforcement 
 provisions referred to in section 130, each person who violates 
 this section shall forfeit and pay a civil penalty of not more 
 than $10,000 for each day any such violation continues.
 ``(2) Subsequent violations.--In the case of any person on 
 whom a civil penalty has been imposed under paragraph (1), 
 paragraph (1) shall be applied by substituting `$20,000' for 
 `$10,000' with respect to all subsequent violations.
 ``(3) Assessment.--The agency referred to in subsection (a) 
 or (c) of section 108 with respect to any person described in 
 paragraph (1) shall assess any penalty under this subsection to 
 which such person is subject.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 2 of the 
Truth in Lending Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to 
section 129C (as added by section 601) the following new item:

``129D. Unfair and deceptive practices and acts relating to certain 
 consumer credit transactions.''.

SEC. 703. APPRAISAL SUBCOMMITTEE OF FIEC, APPRAISER INDEPENDENCE, AND 
 APPROVED APPRAISER EDUCATION.

 (a) Consumer Protection Mission.--
 (1) Purpose.--A purpose for the establishment and operation 
 of the Appraisal Subcommittee of the Financial Institutions 
 Examination Council (hereafter in this section referred to as 
 the ``Appraisal Subcommittee'') shall be to establish a 
 consumer protection mandate.
 (2) Functions of appraisal subcommittee.--It shall be a 
 function of the Appraisal Subcommittee to protect the consumer 
 from improper appraisal practices and the predations of 
 unlicensed appraisers.
 (3) Threshold levels.--In establishing a threshold level 
 under section 1112(b) of the Financial Institutions Reform, 
 Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (12 U.S.C. 3341(b)), each 
 agency shall determine in writing that the threshold level 
 provides reasonable protection for consumers who purchase 1-4 
 unit single-family residences.
 (b) Annual Report of Appraisal Subcommittee.--The annual report of 
the Appraisal Subcommittee under section 1103(a)(4) of Financial 
Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 shall detail 
the activities of the Appraisal Subcommittee, including the results of 
all audits of State appraiser regulatory agencies, and provide an 
accounting of disapproved actions and warnings taken in the previous 
year, including a description of the conditions causing the 
disapproval.
 (c) Open Meetings.--All meetings of the Appraisal Subcommittee 
shall be held in public session after notice in the Federal Register.
 (d) Regulations.--The Appraisal Subcommittee may prescribe 
regulations after notice and opportunity for comment. Any regulations 
prescribed by the Appraisal Subcommittee shall (unless otherwise 
provided in this section or title XI of the Financial Institutions 
Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989) be limited to the 
following functions: temporary practice, national registry, information 
sharing, and enforcement. For purposes of prescribing regulations, the 
Appraisal Subcommittee shall establish an advisory committee of 
industry participants, including appraisers, lenders, consumer 
advocates, and government agencies, and hold regular meetings.
 (e) Field Appraisals and Appraisal Reviews.--All field appraisals 
performed at a property within a State shall be prepared by appraisers 
licensed in the State where the property is located. All Uniform 
Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice-compliant appraisal 
reviews shall be performed by an appraiser who is duly licensed by a 
State appraisal board.
 (f) State Agency Reporting Requirement.--Each State with an 
appraiser certifying and licensing agency whose certifications and 
licenses comply with title XI of the Financial Institutions Reform, 
Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 shall transmit reports on 
sanctions, disciplinary actions, license and certification revocations, 
and license and certification suspensions on a timely basis to the 
national registry of the Appraisal Subcommittee.
 (g) Registry Fees Modified.--
 (1) In general.--The annual registry fees for persons 
 performing appraisals in federally related transactions shall 
 be increased from $25 to $40. The maximum amount up to which 
 the Appraisal Subcommittee may adjust any registry fees shall 
 be increased from $50 to $80 per annum. The Appraisal 
 Subcommittee shall consider at least once every 5 years whether 
 to adjust the dollar amount of the registry fees to account for 
 inflation. In implementing any change in registry fees, the 
 Appraisal Subcommittee shall provide flexibility to the States 
 for multi-year certifications and licenses already in place, as 
 well as a transition period to implement the changes in 
 registry fees.
 (2) Incremental revenues.--Incremental revenues collected 
 pursuant to the increases required by this section shall be 
 placed in a separate account at the United States Treasury, 
 entitled the Appraisal Subcommittee Account.
 (h) Grants and Reports.--
 (1) In general.--Amounts appropriated for or collected by 
 the Appraisal Subcommittee after the date of the enactment of 
 this Act shall, in addition to other uses authorized, be used--
 (A) to make grants to State appraiser regulatory 
 agencies to help defray those costs relating to 
 enforcement activities; and
 (B) to report to all State appraiser certifying and 
 licensing agencies when a license or certification is 
 surrendered, revoked, or suspended.
 (2) Limitation on obligations.--Obligations authorized 
 under this section may not exceed 75 percent of the fiscal year 
 total of incremental increase in fees collected and deposited 
 in the Appraisal Subcommittee Account pursuant to section 
 703(g) of this Act.
 (i) Criteria.--
 (1) Definition.--For purposes of this section and title XI 
 of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement 
 Act of 1989 (notwithstanding section 1116(c) of such title), 
 the term ``State licensed appraiser'' means an individual who 
 has satisfied the requirements for State licensing in a State 
 or territory whose criteria for the licensing of a real estate 
 appraiser currently meet or exceed the minimum criteria issued 
 by the Appraisal Qualifications Board of The Appraisal 
 Foundation for the licensing of real estate appraisers.
 (2) Minimum qualification requirements.--Any requirements 
 established for individuals in the position of ``Trainee 
 Appraiser'' and ``Supervisory Appraiser'' shall meet or exceed 
 the minimum qualification requirements of the Appraiser 
 Qualifications Board of The Appraisal Foundation. The Appraisal 
 Subcommittee shall have the authority to enforce these 
 requirements.
 (j) Monitoring of State Appraiser Certifying and Licensing 
Agencies.--The Appraisal Subcommittee shall monitor State appraiser 
certifying and licencing agencies for the purpose of determining 
whether a State agency's funding and staffing are consistent with the 
requirements of title XI of the Financial Institutions Reform, 
Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989, whether a State agency processes 
complaints and completes exams in a reasonable time period, and whether 
a State agency reports claims and disciplinary actions on a timely 
basis to the national registry maintained by the Appraisal 
Subcommittee. The Appraisal Subcommittee shall have the authority to 
impose interim sanctions and suspensions.
 (k) Reciprocity.--A State appraiser certifying or licensing agency 
shall issue a reciprocal certification or license for an individual 
from another State when--
 (1) the appraiser licensing and certification program of 
 such other State is in compliance with the provisions of this 
 title; and
 (2) the appraiser holds a valid certification from a State 
 whose requirements for certification or licensing meet or 
 exceed the licensure standards established by the State where 
 an individual seeks appraisal licensure.
 (l) Consideration of Professional Appraisal Designations.--No 
provision of section 1122(d) of the Financial Institutions Reform, 
Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 shall be construed as prohibiting 
consideration of designations conferred by recognized national 
professional appraisal organizations, such as sponsoring organizations 
of The Appraisal Foundation.
 (m) Appraiser Independence.--
 (1) Prohibitions on interested parties in a real estate 
 transaction.--No mortgage lender, mortgage broker, mortgage 
 banker, real estate broker, appraisal management company, 
 employee of an appraisal management company, nor any other 
 person with an interest in a real estate transaction involving 
 an appraisal shall improperly influence, or attempt to 
 improperly influence, through coercion, extortion, collusion, 
 compensation, instruction, inducement, intimidation, non-
 payment for services rendered, or bribery, the development, 
 reporting, result, or review of a real estate appraisal sought 
 in connection with a mortgage loan.
 (2) Exceptions.--The requirements of paragraph (1) shall 
 not be construed as prohibiting a mortgage lender, mortgage 
 broker, mortgage banker, real estate broker, appraisal 
 management company, employee of an appraisal management 
 company, or any other person with an interest in a real estate 
 transaction from asking an appraiser to provide 1 or more of 
 the following services:
 (A) Consider additional, appropriate property 
 information, including the consideration of additional 
 comparable properties to make or support an appraisal.
 (B) Provide further detail, substantiation, or 
 explanation for the appraiser's value conclusion.
 (C) Correct errors in the appraisal report.
 (3) Prohibitions on conflicts of interest.--No certified or 
 licensed appraiser conducting an appraisal may have a direct or 
 indirect interest, financial or otherwise, in the property or 
 transaction involving the appraisal.
 (4) Mandatory reporting.--Any mortgage lender, mortgage 
 broker, mortgage banker, real estate broker, appraisal 
 management company, employee of an appraisal management 
 company, or any other person with an interest in a real estate 
 transaction involving an appraisal who has a reasonable basis 
 to believe an appraiser is violating applicable laws, or is 
 otherwise engaging in unethical conduct, shall refer the matter 
 to the applicable State appraiser certifying and licensing 
 agency.
 (5) Regulations.--The Federal financial institutions 
 regulatory agencies (as defined in section 1003(1) of the 
 Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council Act of 1978) 
 shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry 
 out the provisions of this subsection.
 (6) Penalties.--Any person who violates any provision of 
 this subsection shall be subject to civil penalties under 
 section 8(i)(2) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act or section 
 206(k)(2) of the Federal Credit Union Act, as appropriate.
 (7) Proceeding.--A proceeding with respect to a violation 
 of this subsection shall be an administrative proceeding which 
 may be conducted by a Federal financial institutions regulatory 
 agency in accordance with the procedures set forth in 
 subchapter II of chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code.
 (n) Approved Education.--The Appraisal Subcommittee shall encourage 
the States to accept courses approved by the Appraiser Qualification 
Board's Course Approval Program.

SEC. 704. STUDY REQUIRED ON IMPROVEMENTS IN APPRAISAL PROCESS AND 
 COMPLIANCE PROGRAMS.

 (a) Study.--The Comptroller General shall conduct a comprehensive 
study on possible improvements in the appraisal process generally, and 
specifically on the consistency in and the effectiveness of, and 
possible improvements in, State compliance efforts and programs in 
accordance with title XI of the Financial Institutions Reform, 
Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989. In addition, this study shall 
examine the existing de minimis loan levels established by Federal 
regulators for compliance under title XI and whether there is a need to 
revise them to reflect the addition of consumer protection to the 
purposes and functions of the Appraisal Subcommittee.
 (b) Report.--Before the end of the 18-month period beginning on the 
date of the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General shall submit 
a report on the study under subsection (a) to the Committee on 
Financial Services of the House of Representatives and the Committee on 
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate, together with such 
recommendations for administrative or legislative action, at the 
Federal or State level, as the Comptroller General may determine to be 
appropriate.

SEC. 705. CONSUMER APPRAISAL DISCLOSURE.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 2 of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 
1631 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 129D (as added by 
section 702) the following new section:

``SEC. 129E. CONSUMER APPRAISAL DISCLOSURE.

 ``In any case in which an appraisal is performed in connection with 
an extension of credit secured by an interest in real property, the 
creditor or other mortgage originator shall make available to the 
applicant for the extension of credit a copy of all appraisal valuation 
reports upon completion but no later than 3 business days prior to the 
transaction closing date.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 2 of the 
Truth in Lending Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to 
section 129D (as added by section 702) the following new item:

``129E. Consumer appraisal disclosure.''.

 Passed the House of Representatives November 15, 2007.

 Attest:

 LORRAINE C. MILLER,

 Clerk.