Calendar No. 196
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1461
[Report No. 101-99]
A BILL
To enhance the navigation safety of oil tankers, and for other purposes.
August 1 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Read twice and placed on the calendar
S 1461 PCS
Calendar No. 196
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1461
[Report No. 101-99]
To enhance the navigation safety of oil tankers, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
August 1 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. HOLLINGS, from the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation,
reported the following original bill; which was read twice and placed on
the calendar
A BILL
To enhance the navigation safety of oil tankers, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SHORT TITLE
 SECTION 1. This Act may be cited as the `Oil Tanker Navigation Safety Act
 of 1989'.
DEFINITIONS
 SEC. 2. As used in this Act, the term--
 (1) `affected oil tanker' means an oil tanker operating in waters subject
 to the jurisdiction of the United States that transfers oil in bulk at
 ports or terminals of the United States;
 (2) `Commandant' means the Commandant of the Coast Guard;
 (3) `oil' means oil of any kind or in any form, including petroleum, fuel
 oil, sludge, oil refuse, and oil mixed with waters other than dredged spoil;
 (4) `oil tanker' means a self-propelled vessel constructed, converted,
 or adapted to carry oil in bulk in its cargo spaces;
 (5) `pilotage waters' means waters subject to the jurisdiction of the
 United States in which affected oil tankers are required to be under the
 direction and control of an individual licensed as a first class pilot,
 except as otherwise determined by the Secretary;
 (6) `Prince William Sound' means all navigable waters within the jurisdiction
 of the State of Alaska and the United States north of Hinchinbrook Entrance
 to the Port of Valdez, Alaska;
 (7) `Secretary' means the Secretary of the department in which the Coard
 Guard is operating; and
 (8) `spill' includes any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting,
 emptying, or dumping.
TITLE I--PROVISIONS APPLICABLE NATIONALLY LICENSED PERSONNEL
 SEC. 101. (a) INITIATION OF RULEMAKING PROCEEDING- Within six days after the
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall initiate a rulemaking
 proceeding to require for each affected oil tanker transiting pilotage
 waters that, except when pilotage of any such tanker is provided by a
 qualified pilot who is also licensed by a State--
 (1) there be one deck officer and one lookout on the navigation bridge
 in addition to the mate and helmsman on watch, to assist in navigation,
 communications, and lookout responsibilities;
 (2) no less than two individuals on board hold first class pilot licenses
 with endorsements for the waters being transited, as insured by the
 Secretary under section 7101 of title 46, United States Code; and
 (3) no less than one of the personnel required by paragraph (1) to be
 on the navigation bridge fix and record the position of the tanker on a
 nautical chart of the area at least once every six minutes and, during a
 period determined by the Secretary of no more than sixty days, retain and
 make available the annotated chart for inspection by the Secretary.
 (b) A final rule under the proceeding referred to in subsection (a) shall
 be in effect within one hundred and eighty days after the date of enactment
 of this Act. The final rule may waive or modify any of the requirements
 specified in subsection (a), to the extent that the Secretary determines
 such requirement will not enhance oil tanker navigation safety, including
 protection of the environment.
MOTOR VEHICLE DRIVING RECORDS OF VESSEL PERSONNEL
 SEC. 102. (a) ACCESS TO REGISTER- Section 206(b) of the National Driver
 Register Act of 1982 (23 U.S.C. 401 note) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraph (5) (as so designated by section 4(b)(1)
 of the Rail Safety Improvement Act of 1988) as paragraph (6); and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(7) Any individual who has applied for or received a merchant mariner's
 document under section 7302 of title 46, United States Code, a license or
 certificate of registry under section 7101 of title 46, United States Code,
 or a renewal of such merchant mariner's document, license, or certificate of
 registry to serve on or operate a commercial vessel may request the chief
 driver licensing official of a State to transmit information regarding
 the individual under subsection (a) of this section to the Commandant of
 the Coast Guard. The Commandant may receive such information and shall,
 prior to using such information in any adverse action regarding the
 merchant mariner's document, license, or certificate of registry of the
 individual, make such information available to the individual for review
 and written comment. The Commandant shall not otherwise divulge or use
 such information, except to verify information required to be reported to
 the Commandant by an individual applying for such a merchant mariner's
 document, license, certificate of registry, or renewal and to evaluate
 whether the individual meets the minimum standards required in order
 to receive such a merchant mariner's document, license, certificate, or
 renewal. There shall be no access to information in the Register under this
 paragraph if such information was entered in the Register more than five
 years before the date of such request, unless such information relates
 to revocations or suspensions which are still in effect on the date of
 the request. Information submitted to the Register by States under the
 Act of July 14, 1960 (74 Stat. 526), or under this title shall be subject
 to access for the purpose of this paragraph during the transition to the
 Register described under section 203(c) of this title.'.
 (b) SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION AUTHORITY- (1) Section 7704 of title 46, United
 States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(d) If it is shown at a hearing under this chapter that a holder has
 been convicted of a serious criminal offense, has been convicted within
 the previous five years of an offense described in section 205(a)(3) (A)
 or (B) of the National Driver Register Act of 1982 (23 U.S.C. 401 note),
 has had a license to operate a motor vehicle denied, cancelled, revoked,
 or suspended in any jurisdiction of the United States for cause, where the
 cause would reflect adversely on the holder's fitness to serve, or fails
 in any way to meet the standards for issuance prescribed in sections 7101
 and 7302 of this title, the license, certificate of registry, or merchant
 mariner's document may be revoked or suspended.'.
 (2) Section 7704(a) of title 46, United States Code, is amended by inserting,
 immediately before the period at the end, the following: `and `serious
 criminal offense' means a crime so heinous in nature that the commission of
 such offense would reflect adversely on the offender's character and on the
 offender's fitness to serve consistent with the interest of safety at sea'.
 (c) RULEMAKING PROCEEDING- Not later than ninety days after the date of
 enactment of this Act, the Commandant shall initiate a rulemaking proceeding
 to require that each individual who has applied for or received a merchant
 mariner's document under section 7302 of title 46, United States Code, a
 license or certificate of registry under section 7101 of title 46, United
 States Code, or a renewal of such merchant mariner's document, license,
 or certificate of registry to serve on or operate a commercial vessel shall--
 (1) request the chief driver licensing official of each State in which
 such individual has within five years applied for or held a motor vehicle
 operator's license to provide to the Commandant such information as the
 Commandant may determine appropriate with respect to such individual's
 driving record; and
 (2) make the request authorized in section 206(b)(7) of the National
 Driver Register Act of 1982 (23 U.S.C. 401 note) for the transmittal to the
 Commandant of such information as the Commandant may determine appropriate.
The rulemaking proceeding shall be completed not later than one hundred and
eighty days after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (d) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- (1) The catchline to section 7704 of title 46,
 United States, is amended to read as follows:
`Sec. 7704. Dangerous drugs and other grounds for suspension or revocation'.
 (2) The item relating to section 7704 in the analysis to chapter 77 of
 title 46, United States Code, is amended to read as follows:
`7704. Dangerous drugs and other grounds for suspension or revocation.'.
ALCOHOL TESTING; ALCOHOL REHABILITATION INFORMATION
 SEC. 103. (a) TESTING REQUIREMENT- The Secretary shall issue a final rule to
 require the periodic, random, and reasonable cause, as well as post-accident,
 testing for use of alcohol by those individuals who, pursuant to licenses
 or merchant mariner's documents issued by the Commandant, perform safety
 sensitive functions (as determined by the Secretary) on affected oil
 tankers. The final rule shall--
 (1) be designed to identify those persons who perform such safety sensitive
 functions on such an oil tanker while impaired by or under the influence
 of alcohol;
 (2) include provisions, procedures, and safeguards analogous to those set
 forth in the Final Rule published on November 21, 1988, at pages 47064
 through 47082 of the Federal Register; and
 (3) be published as a final rule within ninety days after enactment of
 this Act.
 (b) INFORMATION ON INDIVIDUAL'S ALCOHOL REHABILITATION- The Secretary shall
 conduct a rulemaking proceeding to determine whether to require that the
 Coast Guard be informed, on a confidential basis, whenever an individual
 who has applied for or received a license or merchant mariner's document
 to perform such safety sensitive functions on a commercial vessel is
 undergoing treatment in an alcohol rehabilitation program. The proceeding
 shall consider, among other matters--
 (1) which categories of individuals shall be subject to such information
 on their treatment in an alcohol rehabilitation program; and
 (2) which persons, including such individuals, the owners and operators
 of vessels, and organizations representing masters, pilots, and others
 licensed or documented to perform such safety sensitive functions, shall
 provide such information.
PROHIBITION ON SERVICE
 SEC. 104. The Secretary shall temporarily suspend and take possession of
 the merchant mariner's document or license of an individual performing
 safety sensitive functions (as determined by the Secretary) on an affected
 oil tanker, pending completion of an expedited hearing under chapter 77
 of title 46, United States Code, which shall be commenced within fifteen
 days after such temporary suspension, if there is probable cause to believe
 that the individual--
 (1) has served in such capacity while impaired by or under the influence
 of alcohol;
 (2) has been denied a motor vehicle license by a State for cause within
 the previous five years;
 (3) has had any cancellation, revocation, or suspension of a motor vehicle
 operator's license by a State for cause within the previous five years; or
 (4) has been convicted within the previous five years of an offense described
 under section 205(a)(3) (A) or (B) of the National Driver Register Act
 of 1982.
VESSEL TRAFFIC SERVICES
 SEC. 105. (a) LIST OF PORTS REQUIRING VTS ASSISTANCE- The Secretary shall,
 within one year after the date of enactment of this Act, submit a report to
 the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the
 Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries of the House of Representatives
 setting forth a list of ports of the United States that are in need of new,
 expanded, or improved Vessel Traffic Service (VTS) systems. The ports shall
 be ranked in order of the priority of that need and the Secretary shall
 determine that priority on the basis of such factors as the Secretary
 considers appropriate, including the nature, volume, and frequency of
 vessel traffic into and out of such ports, and the risks of collisions,
 spills, and damages associated with such traffic that could be reduced or
 eliminated by installation, expansion, or improvement of a VTS system.
 (b) USER FEE SYSTEM- (1) The Secretary may establish and implement a system
 for the collection of payments by users of VTS systems in ports of the
 United States.
 (2) Any final rule issued by the Secretary to establish and implement such
 a system shall include a schedule of fees established in accordance with
 the provisions of section 9701 of title 31, United States Code.
 (3) Any receipts collected by the Secretary from payments by users of VTS
 systems shall be credited and available to the Secretary without fiscal year
 limitation to meet the costs of construction, installation, improvement,
 and operation of the VTS system for which the payments were made.
 (4) Nothing in this subsection shall alter or expand the duties and liability
 of the United States under existing law for the performance of functions or
 services for which fees or payments are collected. The collection of such
 fees or payments shall not constitute an express or implied undertaking by
 the United States to perform any service or activity in a certain manner
 or to provide any service at a particular time or place.
 (c) LIMITATION- Notwithstanding any other law, except as provided in section
 203, the Secretary shall not construct, improve, expand, or operate any
 new VTS system, unless funds for such construction, improvement, expansion,
 or operation of the new VTS system were obligated on or before the date of
 enactment of this Act, until the Secretary has complied with subsection (a).
POSITION-REPORTING AND IDENTIFICATION EQUIPMENT
 SEC. 106. The Secretary shall, within one year after the date of enactment of
 this Act, complete a rulemaking proceeding to determine whether to require
 that electronic means of vessel position-reporting and identification be
 carried on board affected oil tankers. Among other matters, the proceeding
 shall--
 (1) evaluate whether such electronic means shall be required only for
 tankers above a specific size; and
 (2) consider the minimum standards suitable for such equipment.
OIL TANKER CONSTRUCTION AND SIZE
 SEC. 107. (a) REQUIREMENT FOR DOUBLE HULLS OR DOUBLE BOTTOMS- (1) The
 Secretary shall within one year after the date of enactment of this Act
 complete a rulemaking proceeding to require that all affected oil tankers
 which are newly constructed be equipped with double hulls and double
 bottoms, except to the extent the Secretary determines that either or
 both of such requirements will not enhance oil tanker navigation safety,
 including protection of the environment, or that an equal or greater
 benefit to such oil tanker navigation safety will be achieved by other
 structural requirements.
 (2) The Secretary may require other structural or navigational features
 that the Secretary determines will enhance such oil tanker navigation safety.
 (b) REPORT ON TANKER SIZE- The Secretary shall, within one year after the
 date of enactment of this Act, submit to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
 and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Merchant Marine and
 Fisheries of the House of Representatves a report describing the size, cargo
 capacity, and flag-nation of affected oil tankers, specifying changes in such
 size and cargo capacity over the past twenty years, evaluating the extent
 to which the risks or difficulties associated with oil tanker navigation,
 vessel traffic control, accidents, oilspills, and the containment and
 cleanup of such spills are influenced by or related to an increase in
 such size and cargo capacity, and containing a specific recommendation as
 to whether limitations on such size or cargo capacity should be imposed
 to minimize such risks and difficulties. The report shall also contain a
 recommendation for such legislation as the Secretary determines necessary.
OILSPILL CONTINGENCY PLANS AND APPROVAL
 SEC. 108. (a) REQUIREMENT FOR CONTINGENCY PLANS- Notwithstanding any other
 provision of law, the Secretary shall, within one year after the date of
 enactment of this Act, issue a final rule requiring owners and operators of
 affected oil tankers to prepare and submit to the Secretary for approval a
 contingency plan for the prevention, containment, and cleanup of oilspills
 from their oil tankers. The final rule shall, subject to subsection (b),
 require that each plan be applicable to the operations of such affected
 oil tankers in waters subject to the jurisdiction of the United States
 and that, at a minimum, each plan shall include--
 (1) a clear and precise, detailed description of how the plan relates
 to and is integrated into other approved contingency plans prepared by
 cooperatives, ports, regional entities, States, and Federal agencies as
 part of the National Contingency Plan required by section 311(c) of the
 Act of June 30, 1948 (33 U.S.C. 1321(c));
 (2) procedures for timely notification of appropriate authorities regarding
 the occurrence of a spill;
 (3) minimum training standards and identification of personnel responsible
 for taking corrective action in the case of a spill;
 (4) a detailed description of procedures to be used by the crew of each
 tanker concerned to minimize damage, stop any spilling from the tanker,
 contain and clean up the spilled oil using equipment that is immediately
 available, and determine if and when additional equipment and personnel
 are needed;
 (5) in the event that additional equipment and personnel, beyond that
 which is immediately available on the tanker concerned, is needed to
 provide effective containment and cleanup, a detailed description of each
 organization relied upon, its memberships, the containment and cleanup
 equipment and personnel it has available, arrangements for contacting and
 obtaining such equipment and personnel, the location and time needed to
 deploy such equipment and personnel at the spill site, and the steps that
 must be taken to execute effective containment and cleanup operations,
 including provisions for disposal of recovered oil;
 (6) arrangements for the pre-positioning of oilspill containment and cleanup
 equipment and trained personnel at strategic locations from which they can
 be deployed to the spill site in a sufficiently timely manner, including
 escort vessels with skimming capability, barges to receive recovered oil,
 heavy duty sea booms, pumping transferring and lightering equipment, and
 other appropriate recovery equipment for the protection of the coastal and
 marine environment, including fish hatcheries, sufficient in quantity to
 provide an effective response to a maximum probable spill; and
 (7) requirements that each oil tanker concerned carry equipment, material,
 and personnel sufficient to respond immediately in the event of an oilspill
 so as to minimize and contain it to the maximum extent practicable and
 minimize the damage to the coastal and marine environment, including--
 (A) sufficient heavy-duty oil boom and deployment capability to encircle
 the vessel at one hundred yards or more;
 (B) materials or other equipment to control leakage of oil from the
 vessel; and
 (C) pumps and other necessary equipment,
except to the extent that the Secretary determines after notice and opportunity
for comment that any such requirement is unnecessary for an immediate and
effective response.
 (b) WAIVER OR MODIFICATION- The final rule required by subsection (a)
 may waive or modify any of the requirements specified in subsection
 (a), to the extent the Secretary determines that such requirement will
 not enhance oil tanker navigation safety, including protection of the
 environment. The Secretary may also waive or modify any provision of the
 final rule or other requirements of this section to the extent that such
 waiver or modification is necessary to meet emergency circumstances that
 imperil such oil tanker navigation safety.
 (c) INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE- Subsequent to issuance of the final rule
 described in subsection (a), the Secretary shall provide for regular
 inspection of affected oil tankers and equipment to ensure compliance with
 the requirements of the final rule.
 (d) COOPERATIVE EFFORTS- An owner or operator of an affected oil tanker
 may comply with the requirements of this section through participation in
 a cooperative effort with other persons subject to this section.
 (e) APPROVAL OF PLANS- (1) Upon receiving a contingency plan required by
 this section, the Secretary shall solicit public comment by publishing a
 notice of availability in the Federal Register and shall not approve the
 plan until the public has had a reasonable opportunity thereafter to make
 such comment. In the case of a plan applicable to Prince William Sound,
 the Secretary shall hold a public hearing in the Prince William Sound area
 for the purpose of receiving public comment prior to plan approval.
 (2) In deciding whether to approve a contingency plan required by this
 section, the Secretary shall consider the adequacy of containment and cleanup
 equipment, trained personnel, communications equipment, response time, and
 logistical arrangements for coordination and implementation of the response.
 (3) No such plan shall be approved unless the Secretary determines that
 the equipment, personnel, and arrangements for implementing a response
 listed in the plan are sufficient to respond to the maximum probable spill.
 (4) The Secretary may enter into a cooperative agreement with any State
 to delegate to that State the approval of contingency plans, consistent
 with uniform criteria applicable to all States that shall be established
 by the Secretary.
 (f) GUIDELINES FOR MAXIMUM PROBABLE SPILL- The Secretary shall publish
 guidelines for the determination of the maximum probable spill from affected
 oil tankers in any area within waters subject to the jurisdiction of the
 United States, taking into account the amount of oil being transported,
 stored, or transferred, and the risk of a spill; except that in no event
 shall the maximum probable spill for any such oil tanker be less than the
 largest historic spill from a similar class of oil tanker in that area.
 (g) PROHIBITION- It shall be unlawful to operate an affected oil tanker
 in waters subject to the jurisdiction of the United States that is not in
 compliance with a contingency plan submitted and approved under this section.
 (h) LEGAL EFFECT OF CONTINGENCY PLANS- The provisions of contingency plans
 approved by the Secretary pursuant to subsection (e) shall be deemed to be
 legally binding upon those persons submitting them to the Secretary. The
 district courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction to restrain a
 violation of, compel specific performance of, or otherwise enforce such
 plans upon application by the Secretary or by any State to which the
 Secretary has delegated plan approval authority under subsection (e)(4).
 (i) PUBLIC AWARENESS AND PRACTICE DRILLS- (1) The Secretary shall annually
 publish an up-to-date description of the contingency plans approved by
 the Secretary for oilspills, and an inventory of equipment available to
 respond to such spills.
 (2) The Secretary shall require practice drills under the contingency plans
 approved for oilspills not less than twice each year. The Secretary shall
 review and publish a notice of availability of a report on such drills,
 which shall include a statement of any discrepancy between actual response
 time and available equipment and personnel compared to those listed in the
 contingency plans, and requirements, if any, for changes in the plans or
 their implementation. The Secretary shall require such additional drills
 and changes in arrangements for implementing approved plans as are necessary
 to ensure their effective implementation.
 (j) ACCESSIBILITY OF APPROVED PLANS- Each contingency plan shall be kept on
 file and readily accessible to the Coast Guard, relevant port authorities,
 the personnel of affected oil tankers covered by the plan, and the owner
 or operator involved.
 (k) ACTION BY SECRETARY IN EVENT OF SPILL- Notwithstanding any other
 provision of law, the Secretary shall notify the President immediately
 in the event of an oilspill from an oil tanker in waters subject to the
 jurisdiction of the United States if--
 (1) the extent of the spill is greater than one million gallons of oil; or
 (2) there is a substantial danger to life, property, or the environment
 in the area affected or likely to be affected by the spill.
The President shall, upon such notification, direct that the Secretary, acting
through the Commandant of the Coast Guard, assume direction of the containment
and cleanup of the spill. The assumption by the Secretary of such direction
shall include the authority to direct compliance with the approved contingency
plan and shall not affect the determination of liability for the costs of
containment, cleanup, or damages associated with or resulting from the spill.
INTERNATIONAL INVENTORY OF EQUIPMENT AND CONTRACTORS
 SEC. 109. (a) REQUIREMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL INVENTORY- The Secretary shall
 develop, maintain, make available to the public, and periodically update
 an international inventory of oilspill equipment and personnel that are
 potentially available to the United States in the event of an oilspill
 within waters subject to the jurisdiction of the United States.
 (b) INFORMATION ON EQUIPMENT AND PERSONNEL- The inventory referred to in
 subsection (a) shall, to the extent of available information
 (1) list all equipment, whether in private or governmental custody,
 capable of containing or cleaning up oilspills in the marine environment
 and specify for each the nature, type, age, manufacturer, precise current
 location, name of current owner, name and phone number of the individual
 with authority over its disposition, and such other information as the
 Secretary considers necessary; and
 (2) list all contractors and other persons qualified in the containment or
 cleanup of oilspills in the marine environment and specify for each such
 person the number of personnel and their skills, the nature and capabilities
 of available equipment, the name of the principal officer, the name and
 phone number of an individual with emergency response authority, and such
 other information as the Secretary considers necessary.
 (c) EFFORTS TO OBTAIN INFORMATION- The Secretary shall make diligent
 efforts to obtain the information described in subsection (b) on equipment
 and personnel available in the United States and worldwide.
 (d) ANNUAL REPORT BY CONTRACTORS- The Secretary shall require that any person
 with which the Coast Guard contracts for the containment or cleanup of an
 oilspill in the marine environment shall have annually submitted a report
 to the Coast Guard containing the information described in subsection (b).
NATIONAL COUNCIL ON OILSPILL TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
 SEC. 110.(a) ESTABLISHMENT OF COUNCIL- The Secretary shall establish a
 National Council on Oilspill Technology Research and Development (hereafter
 in this section referred to as the `Council').
 (b) MEMBERSHIP OF COUNCIL- (1) The Council shall consist of fifteen members,
 comprised of--
 (A) one representative each from the Coast Guard, the Environmental
 Protection Agency, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
 the Fish and Wildlife Service, the Minerals Management Service, the Federal
 Emergency Management Agency, the Corps of Engineers, the Department of
 the Navy, and the Department of Energy; and
 (B) six individuals appointed by the Secretary from the private sector,
 including one each from the following: the oil and gas production industry,
 the oil shipping industry, maritime labor, nonprofit organizations with an
 active involvement in marine environmental issues, the scientific research
 community, and the oil and hazardous materials cleanup and response industry.
 (2) The members of the Council shall be knowledgeable in the containment
 and cleanup of oilspills in the marine environment.
 (3) The representative of the Coast Guard shall serve as chairman of
 the Council.
 (4) Appointed members of the Council shall serve until the Council is
 terminated pursuant to subsection (f).
 (c) COUNCIL FUNCTIONS- (1) The Council shall conduct a comprehensive study
 of governmental and nongovernmental research on oilspill containment and
 cleanup. Among other matters, the study shall--
 (A) evaluate whether there should be developed in the United States a
 fleet of large capacity oil skimming vessels;
 (B) determine the feasibility of developing new technologies for dispersing
 or burning spilled oil; and
 (C) assess experience from the 1989 marine oilspill at Valdez, Alaska,
 in terms of modifications of current technology and techniques that may
 be necessary.
 (2) On the basis of the study conducted under paragraph (1), the Council
 shall, not later than twelve months after its establishment, submit to the
 Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the
 Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries of the House of Representatives--
 (A) a bibliography of all existing foreign and domestic research on oilspill
 containment and cleanup;
 (B) a report describing the research and development activities of Federal
 agencies, State and local governmental entities, foreign governments and
 corporations, the academic research community, and industry with respect
 to oilspill containment and cleanup; and
 (C) recommendations concerning additional Federal action with respect to
 such research and development activities.
 (d)(1) COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES- A member of the Council who is not an
 officer or employee of the United States or a member of the Armed Forces,
 when attending meetings of the Council or when otherwise engaged in the
 business of the Council, is entitled to receive--
 (A) compensation at a rate fixed by the Secretary, not exceeding the
 daily equivalent of the current rate of basic pay in effect for GS-18 of
 the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code,
 including travel time; and
 (B) travel or transportation expenses under section 5703 of title 5,
 United States Code.
 (2) A member of the Council who is an officer or employee of the United
 States or a member of the Armed Forces shall not receive additional pay
 based on the member's service to the Council.
 (3) The provisions of this section relating to an officer or employee
 of the United States or a member of the Armed Forces do not apply to a
 member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces unless that member is
 in an active status.
 (e) STAFFING- The Secretary shall provide such staffing and other assistance
 as the Secretary, after consultation with the Chairman of the Council,
 considers necessary for the Council to accomplish its duties.
 (f) TERMINATION- The Council shall cease to exist on the date that is thirty
 days after the date on which the bibliography, report, and recommendations
 referred to in subsection (c) are due.
OILSPILL DISASTER ASSISTANCE
 SEC. 111. (a) DEFINITION- Section 102(2) of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster
 Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5122(2)) is amended by
 inserting `oilspill,' immediately after `flood,'.
 (b) PARTY LIABLE- Section 317(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 5160(a)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `, or through willful misconduct or negligence,' immediately
 after `intentionally'; and
 (2) by inserting `, or the willful misconduct or negligence,' immediately
 after `omission'.
IMPACT ON OTHER LAW
 SEC. 112. Nothing in this Act shall be construed or interpreted as changing,
 diminishing, or preempting in any way the authority of a State, or any
 political subdivision thereof, to regulate oil tankers or to provide for
 oilspill liability or contingency response planning and activities in
 State waters.
AUTHORITY OF SECRETARY IN UNITED STATES WATERS
 SEC. 113. The Secretary may deny the right to enter, exit, or transit waters
 subject to the jurisdictions of the United States to any affected oil tanker
 that is operated in violation of this Act or a regulation prescribed under
 this Act, including the requirements of section 108(g) that affected oil
 tankers be operated in compliance with approved contingency plans.
PENALTIES
 SEC. 114. (a) CIVIL PENALTIES- A person violating this Act or a regulation
 issued under this Act is liable to the United States for a civil penalty
 of not more than $25,000. Each day of a continuing violation is a separate
 violation.
 (b) LIABILITY IN REM- Each vessel that is operated in violation of this
 Act or a regulation issued under this Act is liable in rem for a civil
 penalty as prescribed in subsection (a) of this section.
 (c) CRIMINAL PENALTIES- A person willfully and knowingly violating this Act
 or a regulation issued under this Act shall be fined not more than $50,000,
 imprisoned for not more than five years, or both.
 (d) JURISDICTION- The district courts of the United States have jurisdiction
 to restrain a violation of this Act or a regulation issued under this Act.
REPORT ON USER FEES
 SEC. 115. The Secretary shall, within one hundred and eighty days after the
 date of enactment of this Act, submit to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
 and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Merchant Marine and
 Fisheries of the House of Representatives a report on the need, if any,
 to impose fees upon owners or operators of affected oil tankers or other
 persons in amounts sufficient to offset the additional costs of implementing
 this Act. The Secretary shall include in the report an evaluation of the
 desirability and feasibility of assessing and collecting such fees, the
 adequacy of existing authority for doing so, and recommendations for such
 additional legislation as the Secretary considers necessary.
TITILE II--PROVISIONS APPLICABLE WITH RESPECT TO ALASKA PILOTAGE AT PORT
OF VALDEZ
 SEC. 201. The Secretary shall initiate a rulemaking proceeding within
 sixty days after the date of enactment of this Act to require that all
 affected oil tankers entering and departing the Port of Valdez, Alaska,
 embark and disembark a qualified pilot who also is a pilot licensed by the
 State of Alaska at locations that will ensure that pilotage of all such
 oil tankers in waters adjacent to and north of Bligh Reef is provided by
 such pilots. A rule under such proceeding shall be final and in effect
 within ninety days after the date of enactment of this Act.
BLIGH REEF LIGHT
 SEC. 202. The Secretary shall, within one year after the date of enactment
 of this Act, install and ensure operation of an automated navigation light
 on or adjacent to Bligh Reef in Prince William Sound, Alaska, of sufficient
 power and height to provide effective long-range warning of the location
 of Bligh Reef.
PRINCE WILLIAM SOUND VTS
 SEC. 203. The Secretary shall within one hundred and eighty days after
 the date of enactment of this Act--
 (1) acquire, install, and operate such additional equipment (which may
 consist of radar, closed circuit television, or shipboard dependent
 surveillance), train and locate such personnel, and issue such final
 regulations as are necessary to increase the range of the existing VTS
 system in the Port of Valdez, Alaska, sufficiently to track the locations
 and movements of affected oil tankers transiting Prince William Sound, and
 sound an audible alarm when such tankers depart from designated navigation
 routes; and
 (2) submit to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the
 Senate and the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries of the House of
 Representatives a report on the feasibility and desirability of instituting
 positive control by the Coast Guard on movements of affected oil tankers
 in Prince William Sound with the use of the VTS system, radar, radio
 telecommunications, and satellite-linked transmitters aboard such tankers.
OIL SPILL RECOVERY INSTITUTE
 SEC. 204. (a) ESTABLISHMENT OF INSTITUTE- The Secretary of Commerce shall
 provide for the establishment of a Prince William Sound Oil Spill Recovery
 Institute (hereafter in this section referred to as the `Institute') to
 be administered by the Secretary of Commerce through the University of
 Alaska Institute of Marine Studies and located in Cordova, Alaska.
 (b) FUNCTIONS- The Institute shall conduct research and carry out educational
 and demonstration projects designed to--
 (1) identify and develop the best available techniques, equipment, and
 materials for dealing with oilspills in the arctic and subarctic marine
 environment; and
 (2) complement Federal and State damage assessment efforts and determine,
 document, assess, and understand the long-term effects of the Exxon Valdez
 oilspill on the natural resources of Prince William Sound and its adjacent
 waters, the environment, the economy, and the lifestyle and well-being of
 the people who are dependent upon them.
 (c) ADVISORY BOARD- (1) The policies of the Institute shall be determined
 by an Advisory Board composed of--
 (A) one representative appointed by each of the Commissioners of Fish
 and Game, Environmental Conservation, Natural Resources, and Commerce and
 Economic Development of the State of Alaska;
 (B) one representative appointed by each of the Secretaries of Commerce, the
 Interior, Argiculture, Transportation, and the Navy, and the Administrator
 of the Environmental Protection Agency, all of whom shall be Federal
 employees; and
 (C) three residents from communities in Alaska that were affected by the
 Exxon Valdez oilspill who are knowledgeable about fisheries, other local
 industries, the marine environment, wildlife, public health, safety,
 or education appointed by the Secretary to serve terms of two years each
 from a list of nine qualified individuals submitted by the Governor of
 the State of Alaska.
 (2) The representative of the Secretary of Commerce shall serve as Chairman
 of the Advisory Board.
 (3) Such policies shall include the conduct and support, through contracts
 and grants, on a nationally competitive basis, of the research, projects,
 and studies to be supported by the Institute in accordance with the purposes
 of this section.
 (d) SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL COMMITTEE- (1) The Advisory Board shall
 establish a Scientific and Technical Committee, composed of specialists
 in matters relating to oilspill containment and cleanup technology, arctic
 and subarctic marine ecology, and the living resources and socioeconomics
 of Prince William Sound and its adjacent waters, from the University of
 Alaska and elsewhere in the academic community.
 (2) The Scientific and Technical Committee shall provide such advice to
 the Advisory Board as the Board shall request, including recommendations
 regarding the conduct and support of research, projects, and studies in
 accordance with the purposes of this section.
 (e) DIRECTOR- The Institute shall be administered by a Director who shall
 be appointed by the Secretary of Commerce. The Director may hire such staff
 and incur such expenses on behalf of the Institute as are authorized by
 the Advisory Board.
 (f) EVALUATION- The Secretary of Commerce is authorized to conduct an
 ongoing evaluation of the activities of the Institute to ensure that
 funds received by the Institute are used in a manner consistent with the
 provisions of this section.
 (g) AUDIT- The Comproller General of the United States, and any of his or her
 duly authorized representatives, shall have access, for purposes of audit and
 examination, to any books, documents, papers, and records of the Institute
 that are pertinent to the funds received and expended by the Institute.
 (h) STATUS OF EMPLOYEES- Employees of the Institute shall not, by reason
 of such employment, be considered to be employees of the Federal Government
 for any purpose.
 (i) TERMINATION- The authority for establishment, operation, and funding
 of the Institute shall terminate ten years after the date of enactment of
 this Act.
 (j) AUTHORIZATION OF FUNDING- For the purposes of this section, there are
 authorized to be made available to the Department of Commerce, $5,000,000
 for fiscal year 1989 and $2,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1990 through
 1999. Such funds shall be provided from the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Liability
 Fund in accordance with the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act (43
 U.S.C. 1651 et seq.), as amended by this Act.
TRANS-ALASKA PIPELINE LIABILITY FUND
 SEC. 205. (a) Section 204(c)(3) of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Authorization
 Act (43 U.S.C. 1653(c)(3)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(3)(A) Strict liability for all claims arising out of any one incident
 shall be limited to $750,000,000. Subject to paragraph (4), the owner and
 operator of the vessel shall be jointly and severally liable for the first
 $70,000,000 of such claims that are allowed. Financial responsibility
 for $70,000,000 shall be demonstrated in accordance with the provisions
 of section 311(p) of the Act of June 30, 1948 (33 U.S.C. 1321(p)), before
 the oil is loaded. The Fund shall be liable for the balance of the claims
 that are allowed up to $750,000,000.
 `(B) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, after receiving notice
 that an incident has occurred, upon the request of the Secretary of the
 department in which the Coast Guard is operating, the Fund shall immediately
 deposit $150,000,000 in the account established under section 311(k) of
 the Act of June 30, 1948 (33 U.S.C. 1321(k)), for use by the Coast Guard
 to reimburse Federal and State agencies, including political subdivisions
 of a State, for expenses incurred in connection with the containment and
 cleanup efforts undertaken in response to the incident. The $150,000,000
 so deposited shall be counted against the $750,000,000 available for
 any single incident. When a State or political subdivision thereof has
 commenced containment or cleanup efforts, it may submit a request to
 the Secretary of the department in which the Coast Guard is operating
 for an advance payment from such account to facilitate such efforts. Such
 advances in the aggregate shall not exceed $50,000,000. Any advance from the
 account shall be repaid immediately upon receipt by the State or political
 subdivision of a reimbursement from the owner or operator of the vessel,
 any other party held liable, or the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Liability Fund
 for expenses incurred. Any portion of the $150,000,000 deposited that is
 not expended shall be returned to the Fund.
 `(C) Any government expenditures beyond the $150,000,000 made available
 in subparagraph (B) of this paragraph shall be submitted with all other
 claims for reimbursement from the $600,000,000 remaining. If the total
 claims allowed under this subparagraph exceed $600,000,000, they shall be
 reduced proportionately. The unpaid portion of any claim may be asserted
 and adjudicated under other applicable Federal or State law.'.
 (b) Section 204(c) of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act (43
 U.S.C. 1653(c) et seq.) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (4) through (12) as paragraphs (5) through
 (13), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting immediately after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph:
 `(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (3), any claim not paid by
 the owner or operator of the vessel within one year after its submission
 to the owner or operator may be submitted to and paid by the Fund. Upon
 payment, the Fund shall be subrogated to all rights of the claimant against
 the owner or operator for the amount of such payment, up to the limit of
 liability for the owner and operator set forth in paragraph (3).'.
 (c) Section 204(c)(6) of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act (43
 U.S.C. 1653(c)(6)), as so redesignated by subsection (b), is amended by
 striking `$100,000,000' wherever it occurs and inserting in lieu thereof
 `$750,000,000'.
 (d) Section 204(c)(7) of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act (43
 U.S.C. 1653(c)(7)), as so redesignated by subsection (b), is amended to
 read as follows:
 `(7)(A) The collections under paragraph (6) shall be delivered to the Fund.
 `(B) The Fund shall make available to the Department of Commerce $5,000,000
 for fiscal year 1989, and $2,000,000 for each of the following fiscal
 years through 1999, for the purpose of funding the Prince William Sound
 Oil Spill Recovery Institute established under section 204 of the Oil
 Tanker Navigation Safety Act of 1989.
 `(C) The Fund shall make available to the Secretary of the department in
 which the Coast Guard is operating such funds for fiscal years 1989 and 1990
 as are considered necessary by the Secretary to carry out the provisions
 of sections 202 and 203 of the Oil Tanker Navigation Safety Act of 1989.
 `(D) Costs of administration shall be paid from the money paid to the Fund,
 and all sums not needed for administration, satisfaction of claims, and
 subparagraphs (B) and (C) of this paragraph shall be prudently invested
 in income-producing securities approved by the Secretary. Income from such
 securities shall be added to the principal of the Fund.'.
 (e) Section 204(c) of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act, as
 amended by this section, is further amended by adding at the end the
 following new paragraph:
 `(14) The term `damages' in paragraph (1) includes the loss of taxes, fees,
 royalties, rents, and other revenues incurred by a political subdivision
 of a State due to the injury, destruction, or loss of real property,
 personal property, or natural resources, or diminished economic activity
 resulting from a vessel discharge of oil. This paragraph applies to any
 such discharge occurring on and after January 1, 1989.'.
TITLE III--PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO MISSISSIPPI RIVER RADIO COMMUNICATIONS
ON MISSISSIPPI RIVER
 SEC. 301. The Secretary shall, not later than one year after the date of
 enactment of this Act, issue such regulations as are necessary to ensure
 that vessels transiting the Mississippi River shall have such capability
 as the Secretary considers necessary to--
 (1) receive marine navigation safety warnings; and
 (2) engage in radio communications on designated frequencies with the
 Coast Guard, other vessels on the Mississippi River, and such stations as
 may be specified by the Secretary.
S 1461 PCS----2
S 1461 PCS----3
S 1461 PCS----4