S 3387 IS
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 3387
To improve the health care delivery system and ensure access to affordable
quality health care through reduced liability costs and improved quality of
care, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
October 8 (legislative day, SEPTEMBER 30), 1992
Mr. HATCH (for himself, Mr. DOLE, Mr. CHAFEE, and Mr. DANFORTH) introduced
the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on
the Judiciary
A BILL
To improve the health care delivery system and ensure access to affordable
quality health care through reduced liability costs and improved quality of
care, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SHORT TITLE
 This Act may be cited as the `Health Care Liability Reform and Quality of
 Care Improvement Act of 1992.'
TITLE I--FINDINGS AND PURPOSE
 SEC. 101. FINDINGS- The Congress finds that:
 (a) The Federal Government is a direct provider of health care to many
 Americans; a source of payment for the health care of a much larger number
 of Americans through Medicare, Medicaid and other programs; and a promoter
 of quality assurance efforts. As a result, the Federal Government has a
 major interest in health care issues, including the availability, cost,
 and quality of health care.
 (b) The rising costs of malpractice insurance, litigation, and liability are
 contributing significantly to increases in the cost of health care. These
 and other health care liability problems have adversely affected health
 care consumers and created tensions among the medical and legal professions,
 the insurance industry, and consumers.
 (c) The fear of medical malpractice liability has caused some health care
 providers to practice unnecessary defensive medicine, adding to health
 care costs.
 (d) This fear of liability and the increased costs adversely impact the
 ability of health care professionals to continue to practice in high risk
 specialty areas and certain geographic areas of the country.
 (e) More effective quality assurance activities would reduce the incidence
 of health care injuries, reduce the incidence of medical malpractice,
 and consequently reduce medical liability.
 (f) Improving the effectiveness of the civil judicial system would not
 only deter frivolous actions that increase health care costs but would
 result in fair and expeditious compensation for meritorious claims of
 health care malpractice.
 SEC. 102. PURPOSE- It is the purpose of this Act to:
 (a) Provide incentives to States to enact health care liability tort reforms
 and establish alternative dispute resolution mechanisms to achieve efficient,
 cost effective and expeditious disposition of health care disputes.
 (b) Provide incentives to States to adopt quality assurance reforms to
 reduce the incidence of malpractice.
 (c) Incorporate these reforms on the Federal level through amendments to
 the Federal Tort Claims Act.
 (d) Authorize and require nonbinding arbitration of health care liability
 claims between patients and providers who are Federal employees, receive
 Federal funds or participate in an employee benefit plan or health insurance
 network for the provision of health care, notwithstanding conflicting
 State law, and thereby encourage the fair, cost effective and expeditious
 resolution of claims against health care providers.
TITLE II--HEALTH CARE LIABILITY REFORMS
 SEC. 201. DEFINITIONS- For purposes of titles II, III and IV:
 (a) The term `economic damages' means health care treatment and medical
 expenses, lost wages and income, lost employment, burial expenses, and
 other pecuniary losses incurred by an individual as a result of negligence
 in the provision of health care services as determined by State law.
 (b) The term `noneconomic damages' means physical and emotional pain,
 suffering, physical impairment, emotional distress, mental anguish,
 disfigurement, loss of enjoyment, and loss of companionship, services,
 consortium and other nonpecuniary losses incurred by an individual as a
 result of negligence in the provision of health care services as determined
 by State law.
 (c) The term `health care provider' means any individual and any organization
 or institution that is engaged in the provision of medical care and
 treatment, and is required by State or Federal law or regulation to be
 licensed or certified to engage in the delivery of such health care services.
 (d) The term `health care liability action' means a civil action or
 proceeding in any judicial tribunal or any arbitration proceeding, brought
 pursuant to State law against a health care provider, alleging that injury
 was suffered by the plaintiff as the result of any act or omission by a
 health care provider without regard to the theory of liability asserted
 in the action. This term excludes civil penalty actions by any State or
 State agency or officer or by the United States or by any Federal agency
 or officer.
 (e) The term `injury' means an injury, illness, disease, or other harm
 suffered by an individual as a result of the provision of medical care
 and treatment by a health care provider.
 (f) The term `State' means any State of the United States, the District
 of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands,
 American Samoa, the Northern Mariana Islands, the Trust Territories of the
 Pacific Islands, and any other territory or possession of the United States.
 (g) The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
 (h) The term `person' means any individual, corporation, company,
 association, firm, partnership, society, joint stock company, or any other
 entity, including any governmental entity.
 (i) The term `court' means a court of competent jurisdiction or an
 arbitration panel.
 SEC. 202. IN GENERAL- To receive a Notification of compliance with this
 title pursuant to section 209, the States shall enact, adopt, or otherwise
 have in effect no later than three years from the date of enactment of this
 Act the health care liability reforms set forth in sections 203 through 208.
 SEC. 203. JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY- (a) In any health care liability
 action, the liability of each defendant for noneconomic damages shall
 be several only and shall not be joint. Each defendant shall be liable
 only for the amount of noneconomic damages allocated to that defendant in
 direct proportion to that defendant's percentage of fault, and a separate
 judgment shall be rendered against that defendant for that amount.
 (b) Subsection (a) shall not apply with respect to those persons
 participating in joint conduct in a common scheme by two or more persons who
 consciously and deliberately agreed to jointly participate in such conduct
 with actual knowledge of the wrongfulness of the conduct resulting in a
 tortious act and where such acts proximately caused the injury complained
 of by the plaintiff and for which one or more of such persons is found
 liable for damages.
 SEC. 204. LIMITATION ON NONECONOMIC DAMAGES- (a) Noneconomic damages
 may not be awarded in an amount in excess of $250,000 in any health care
 liability action. The Secretary, for good cause, may waive the requirement
 of this section in determining a State's compliance with this Act pursuant
 to section 209.
 (b) For purposes of this section, in addition to the parties within the
 purview of section 201(d), `any health care liability action' includes
 all actions (including multiple actions) for damages, and includes all
 plaintiffs and all defendants in such actions, which arise out of or were
 caused by the same personal injury or death, whether or not each defendant
 is a health care provider.
 (c) COST-OF-LIVING- The amount described in subsection (a) shall be adjusted
 every three years to reflect changes in the cost-of-living index utilized
 by the Secretary in determination of adjustment in Old Age, Survivors,
 and Disability Insurance benefits. The first such adjustment shall be made
 three years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 SEC. 205. COLLATERAL SOURCE BENEFITS- (a) Except as provided in subsection
 (c), the total amount of damages received by a plaintiff shall be reduced,
 in accordance with subsection (b), by any other payment which has been
 made or which will be made to such plaintiff to compensate such plaintiff
 for an injury, including payments under--
 (1) Federal or State disability or sickness programs;
 (2) Federal, State, or private health insurance programs;
 (3) private disability insurance programs;
 (4) employer wage continuation programs; and
 (5) any other source of payment intended to compensate such plaintiff for
 such injury.
 (b) The amount by which an award of damages to a plaintiff for an injury
 shall be reduced under subsection (a) shall be--
 (1) the total amount of any payments (other than such award) which have
 been made or which will be made to such plaintiff to compensate such
 plaintiff for such injury, less
 (2) the cost incurred by such plaintiff (or by the spouse, parent, or legal
 guardian of such plaintiff) to secure the payments described in clause (1).
 (c) Subsection (a) shall not apply to any payment which the individual is
 required by law or contract to repay out of any damages recovered from a
 negligent health care provider.
 SEC. 206. PERIODIC PAYMENT OF JUDGMENTS- (a) In any health care liability
 action subject to this Act in which damages for future economic damages
 are awarded, no health care provider shall be required to pay for such
 future damages in a single, lump-sum payment but shall be permitted to
 make periodic payments based on when the damages are found by the court
 to be likely to occur or at the time such damages accrue.
 (b) The court may require such health care provider to purchase an annuity
 or fund a reversionary trust to make such periodic payments, if the court
 finds a reasonable basis for concluding that the health care provider may
 be unable to or will not make the periodic payments.
 (c) The judgment of the court awarding such periodic payments may not be
 reopened at any time to contest, amend, or modify the schedule or amount
 of the payments in the absence of fraud or any ground permitting relief
 to be granted after entry of a final judgment.
 (d) This subsection shall not be construed to preclude a settlement
 providing for a single, lump-sum payment.
 SEC. 207. Alternative Dispute Resolution Mechanisms-
 (a) IN GENERAL- It is declared to be the policy of the United States
 to encourage--
 (1) the creation, adoption, and use of alternative dispute resolution
 mechanisms to achieve the fair, cost effective and expeditious disposition
 of civil disputes;
 (2) the modification of procedural and evidentiary rules to the extent
 feasible to accommodate such alternative dispute resolution techniques; and
 (3) acceptance of nonbinding arbitration of health care liability claims
 as specified in title III of this Act.
(b) ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS-
 (1) The State shall establish at least one alternative dispute resolution
 mechanism. The Secretary, for the purpose of determining compliance under
 section 209, shall deem a State to be in compliance with the requirements
 of this section if the State has in effect at least one mediation or
 pretrial screening panel alternative dispute resolution mechanism specified
 in regulations issued by the Secretary in consultation with the Attorney
 General, or if the State has in effect another alternative dispute resolution
 mechanism which the Secretary, in consultation with the Attorney General,
 finds to be equally effective in deterring frivolous actions and resulting
 in fair and expeditious compensation for meritorious claims. The Secretary,
 in consultation with the Administrative Conference of the United States
 and the Attorney General, shall promulgate regulations that specify the
 Secretary's criteria for evaluating the effectiveness of these mechanisms.
 (2) The time period during which a proceeding pursuant to this section is
 pending prior to institution of a civil action shall not be included or
 counted in determining whether any statute of limitations bars a health
 care liability action.
 SEC. 208. QUALITY ASSURANCE REFORM- (a) PROMOTE STATE COOPERATION WITH
 FEDERAL EFFECTIVENESS RESEARCH EFFORTS- The State, through the appropriate
 health authority, shall cooperate with Federal research efforts with respect
 to patient outcomes, clinical effectiveness and clinical practice guidelines.
 (b) IMPROVE THE PERFORMANCE OF STATE MEDICAL BOARDS-
 (1) Each State, through the appropriate health authority, shall collect,
 analyze and supply the Secretary with information and data, as specified
 in regulations to be promulgated by the Secretary, on staffing, revenue,
 disciplinary actions, expenditures, caseloads of the State medical board,
 and use of continuing medical education programs in order to demonstrate
 that the State medical boards meet performance criteria established by
 the Secretary in regulations.
 (2) Each State, through the appropriate health authority, shall impose a
 requirement on the State medical board to require a physician disciplined
 by the State medical board to take a certain number of continuing education
 courses as the board requires, with educational outcome measures required,
 in the subject areas in which the board determines that the physician's
 knowledge is deficient.
 (c) ALTERNATIVE PROGRAMS- The Secretary, for purposes of determining
 compliance under section 209 of the Act, shall deem a State in compliance
 with the requirements of this section if the State has in effect,
 instead of the programs described in subsection (b), a program to reduce
 the incidence of negligence which the Secretary finds to be at least as
 effective in reducing the incidence of negligence as compliance with the
 Secretary's standards promulgated under section 208(b). The Secretary shall
 promulgate regulations that specify the Secretary's criteria for evaluating
 the effectiveness of alternatives to section 208(b), including, for example:
 (1) Requirements for risk management systems to be carried out by
 institutions providing health care in the State;
 (2) Quality assurance systems, administered by the State or professional
 bodies, that review the quality of care rendered by the physicians of the
 State; or
 (3) State programs for the promulgation of standards of care in areas of
 medical practice in which the risk of negligence is greatest, and assurance
 of satisfactory levels of compliance with such standards.
STATE IMPLEMENTATION OF HEALTH CARE LIABILITY REFORMS
 SEC. 209. (a) Implementation-
 (1) The States shall have three years from the effective date of this Act
 in which to enact, adopt, or otherwise comply with the provisions as set
 forth in sections 202 through 208 of this Act.
 (2) DEMONSTRATION PROJECT- The Secretary shall deem a State to be in
 compliance with the requirements of sections 203, 204, 205, 206, and
 207 if a State enacts and places into effect within three years after
 the effective date of this Act a system, approved by the Secretary, for
 prompt payment of those economic damages not payable by State, Federal,
 or private health or disability insurance; wage continuation; or any other
 source of payment intended to compensate an injured person. The system shall
 provide for agreements to be reached for payment of those economic damages
 without any determination of fault and in lieu of any health care liability
 action between the persons making and receiving these payments related to
 the provision of the health care at issue. The Secretary shall approve no
 more than three States' applications under this section. Applications for
 approval shall be considered in accordance with regulations to be issued by
 the Secretary in consultation with the Attorney General. Approval under this
 subsection will not relieve a State from the duty to comply with section 208.
 (b) Notification-
 (1) Notification by the State shall be submitted to the Secretary, with a
 certification by the chief executive officer of the State that, on the date
 the Notification is submitted, the State has enacted, adopted, or otherwise
 has in effect the health care liability reforms set forth in this Act.
 (2) The Notification shall be accompanied by documentation to support the
 Certification required by this subsection, including copies of relevant
 State statutes, rules, procedures, regulations, judicial decisions, State
 constitutional provisions, and opinions of the State Attorney General.
 (3) The Notification shall contain such other information, be in such form,
 and be submitted in such manner, as the Secretary may require.
 (c) Review of notification-
 (1) Within ninety days after receiving a Notification under subsection
 (b), the Secretary shall review the Notification and determine whether the
 Notification demonstrates that the State has enacted, adopted, or otherwise
 has in effect the health care liability reforms set forth in this Act.
 (2) If the Secretary determines that the Notification makes such a
 demonstration, the Secretary shall approve the Notification.
 (3) If, after reviewing a Notification under this subsection, the Secretary
 determines that the Notification does not make the demonstration required
 under such subsection, the Secretary shall, within fifteen days after making
 such determination, provide the State that submitted such Notification with
 a written notice specifying such determination and containing recommendations
 for revisions that would cause the Notification of the State to be approved.
 (4) Within thirty days after receiving a revised Notification, the Secretary
 shall review the revised Notification and determine whether the Notification
 demonstrates that the State has enacted, adopted, or otherwise has in effect
 the health care liability reforms set forth in this Act. If the Secretary
 determines that the revised Notification makes such a demonstration, the
 Secretary shall approve the revised Notification and determine the State
 to be in compliance with the provisions of this Title.
 (d) NONCOMPLIANCE-
 (1) If a State fails to submit to the Secretary a Notification or revised
 Notification pursuant to this Section, the Secretary shall, within fifteen
 days after the time period under section (b)(1) expires, send the State
 written notice of determination of noncompliance.
 (2) If, during the time period determined by the Secretary under
 subsection (c), the Secretary determines that a revised Notification
 does not demonstrate that the State has enacted, adopted, or otherwise
 implemented the health care liability reforms set forth in this Act, and
 that the State's revised Notification is not approved, or if a determination
 of noncompliance is made pursuant to this Section, the Secretary shall,
 within fifteen days after making such determination, provide the State with
 written notice of noncompliance. Such notice shall specify the determination
 of the Secretary and the reasons therefor.
 (3) If, during any time period after a Notification is approved under
 subsection (c), the Secretary determines that the State does not
 currently have in effect the health care liability reforms upon which
 the Notification was approved, the Secretary shall within thirty days of
 making such determination provide the State with written notice of such
 determination and withdraw the approval of the Notification. Such notice
 shall specify the determination of the Secretary and the reasons therefor.
 (e) CONSULTATION WITH THE ATTORNEY GENERAL- In making determinations of
 compliance or noncompliance pursuant to this Act, the Secretary shall consult
 with the Attorney General with respect to any issues of tort law or policy.
 (f) EFFECT OF NONCOMPLIANCE- If a State has been determined to be
 in noncompliance in accordance with the provisions of this section,
 the Secretary shall cause publication of a notice of noncompliance in the
 Federal Register. Sixty days after publication of the notice, the provisions
 of sections 203, 204, 205, and 206 shall apply to all health care liability
 actions upon claims accruing more than three years after the effective date
 of this Act and which arise, in whole or in part, out of an injury caused by
 a health care provider who is entitled to any payment for the health care out
 of which the claim arose pursuant to the provisions of chapter 89 of title
 5 United States Code, of title 10 section 1079 or 1086 United States Code,
 of section 1728 of title 38, United States Code, or title XVIII of XIX of
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq. or 42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.).
 (g) Incentive program-
 (1) WITHHOLDING OF FUNDS FOR NONCOMPLIANCE- If a notice of noncompliance
 for a State has been published pursuant to subsection (f), there shall
 be withheld, beginning on the first fiscal year following the notice of
 noncompliance and continuing each fiscal year thereafter until the notice
 of noncompliance has been rescinded, the amount that would otherwise be
 allocated to such State for each amount in the domestic discretionary
 appropriations category as defined in section 250(c)(4)(A) of the Balanced
 Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985, as amended, provided
 that this subsection does not apply to accounts authorized by the following
 provisions: section 301 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 241);
 section 317 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247b); section
 329 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254b); section 330 of
 the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254c); section 340 of the Public
 Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 256); section 2 of the Employment Security
 Administrative Financing Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 1101); or section 17 of
 the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1786).
 (2) FUNDS TO BE ALLOCATED AFTER COMPLIANCE- If before such withheld funds
 would otherwise expire the notice of noncompliance is rescinded, such
 funds may be obligated by the responsible Federal agency for allocation
 to such State.
WAIVER
 SEC. 210. In the case of any experimental, pilot, or determination project,
 as defined by regulations promulgated by the Secretary in coordination with
 the Attorney General, which, in the judgment of the Secretary, is likely
 to assist in promoting the objectives of this Act, in a State or States,
 the Secretary may waive compliance with any of the requirements of this
 title to the extent and for the period the Secretary finds necessary to
 enable such State or States to carry out such project.
TITLE III--MANDATORY NON-BINDING ARBITRATION
 SEC. 301. PURPOSE- The purpose of this title is to ensure that recipients
 and providers of health care obtain the benefits of a system for submission
 to nonbinding arbitration of health care liability claims and to establish a
 fair, efficient, and inexpensive mechanism for resolution through arbitration
 of health care liability claims.
 SEC. 302. APPLICABILITY- The provisions of this title shall apply to all
 health care liability claims that accrue more than one year after the
 effective date of this Act and which arise in whole, or in part, out of
 health care either--
 (a) provided by a health care provider who is entitled to any payment for
 the health care out of which the claim arose pursuant to the provisions of--
 (i) chapter 89 of title 5 United States Code, section 1079 or 1086 of
 title 10 United States Code, section 1728 of title 38 United States Code,
 title XVIII or XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq. or
 42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.); or
 (ii) any `employee benefit plan' as defined by section 1002(3) of title
 29 United States Code, any `multiple employer welfare arrangement' as
 defined by section 1002(40) of title 29 United States Code or under any
 law providing for `health insurance networks,' if such plan, arrangement or
 network is established by a person or entity engaged in, or an organization
 representing employees engaged in, interstate commerce or in any industry
 or activity affecting commerce; or
 (b) for which a remedy is provided pursuant to the provisions of the
 Federal Tort Claims Act.
 SEC. 303. PREEMPTION- (a) To the extent set forth in this title, this title
 governs any civil action brought against a health care provider, on any
 theory, for alleged injuries arising out of medical care and treatment,
 regardless of whether the theory is a theory predicated upon lack of due
 care, intentional conduct, strict liability or any other theory.
 (b)(1) To the extent set forth in this title, this title supersedes any
 State or Federal law, including any State law enacted pursuant to section
 207, regarding recovery of economic and noneconomic damages. Any issue
 arising under this title that is not governed by any such rule of law
 shall be governed by applicable State or Federal law.
 (2) To the extent set forth in this title, the provisions of this title
 govern any proceeding seeking recovery of economic and noneconomic damages
 which is within the purview of the Federal Tort Claims Act.
 (3) This Act shall not preempt or otherwise govern any civil action
 arising out of health care provided by a health care provider, regardless
 of whether said provider receives Federal funding pursuant to any Federal
 act or is federally regulated, if the liability for the injury would not
 be determined pursuant to the Federal Tort Claims Act or if the health
 care was not provided by a person entitled to payment therefor, in whole
 or in part pursuant to the provisions of--
 (i) chapter 89 of title 5 United States Code, section 1079 or 1086 of
 title 10 United States Code, section 1728 of title 38 United States Code,
 title XVIII or XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq. or
 42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.); or
 (ii) any `employee benefit plan' as defined by section 1003(3) of title
 29 United States Code, any `multiple employer welfare arrangement' as
 defined by section 1002(40) of title 29 United States Code or under any
 law providing for `health insurance networks,' if such plan, arrangement or
 network is established by a person or entity engaged in, or an organization
 representing employees engaged in, interstate commerce or in any industry
 or activity affecting commerce.
 SEC. 304. REQUIREMENT FOR NONBINDING ARBITRATION- Health care providers
 and all other persons shall submit any claims of health care liability
 to nonbinding arbitration. Failure of a plaintiff to submit a health care
 liability claim to nonbinding arbitration shall be a complete defense to
 a health care liability action.
ARBITRATION PROCEDURES
 SEC. 305- (a) Establishment of Arbitration Process-
 (1) Each State is encouraged to establish a nonbinding arbitration process,
 including an arbitration panel consisting of one or more nonjudicial
 arbitrators. The arbitration panel may include at least one health care
 professional. If a State does not have in effect a nonbinding arbitration
 process, the arbitration shall be conducted in accordance with regulations
 to be issued by the Secretary. Each State which does not have an arbitration
 process meeting or exceeding the minimum requirements set forth in this
 title shall be specified in such regulation.
 (2) The Attorney General shall by regulation establish an arbitration
 process that shall apply to claims within the purview of the Federal Tort
 Claims Act. The regulations shall provide for an arbitration process to
 commence upon completion of the administrative claim process specified
 pursuant to sections 2672, 2675 of title 28 United States Code.
 (3) State nonbinding arbitration processes and regulations issued by the
 Secretary and the Attorney General shall provide that when a determination
 is reached by the arbitration panel--
 (A) Any party may give notice that it intends to accept that determination,
 while the other parties remain free to reject the determination and to
 commence a civil action. If all parties reject the determination, no costs
 or attorney's fees shall be assessed against any party;
 (B) A plaintiff who rejects the determination and fails to obtain a final
 judgment that is at least 10 percent greater than the determination shall
 pay the defendant's reasonable costs and reasonable attorney's fees incurred
 after the rejection of the determination; and
 (C) A defendant who rejects the determination and fails to obtain a final
 judgment that is at least ten percent less than the determination shall pay
 the plaintiff's reasonable costs and reasonable attorney's fees incurred
 after rejection of the determination.
 (b) PANEL CHAIRPERSON- If the panel consists of more than one member, a
 member of the panel shall be selected to be chairperson; the chairperson
 shall decide all prehearing procedures.
 (c) TIME- Unless extended by the panel and by agreement of the parties,
 the arbitration panel shall issue a final determination as to liability,
 and damages if applicable, within six months from the date upon which all
 defendants have been served with the notice of claim.
 (d) ASSESSMENT OF COSTS- The award shall include an assessment of costs,
 including the arbitrators' fees, and shall specify which party or parties
 shall pay those costs.
 SEC. 306. AMOUNT OF AWARDS- In making a determination to award damages, if
 any, in any arbitration proceeding pursuant to this title, the arbitrators
 shall ascertain damages as provided by applicable State and Federal law. If
 the plaintiff fails to pay the costs of the arbitration proceeding in
 accordance with an award requiring the plaintiff to pay such an award,
 the defendant shall pay all such costs. Upon payment of such costs by a
 defendant, the defendant shall be subrogated to the right to be reimbursed
 for the award of costs and shall have all rights to the award to the same
 extent that the arbitration panel would be entitled to obtain payment of
 an award for costs pursuant to this title.
 SEC. 307. IMMUNITY OF ARBITRATORS- An arbitrator shall have absolute and
 complete immunity from any suit directly or indirectly arising from any
 arbitral activity.
 SEC. 308. LIMITATIONS- The time for commencement of an arbitration
 proceeding shall be the period specified by applicable State or Federal
 law for commencement of a suit for damages predicated upon a claim of
 medical negligence.
APPLICABILITY TO THE UNITED STATES
 SEC. 309. (a) APPLICABILITY- The provisions of sections 2671 through 2680
 of title 28 United States Code shall apply to a health care liability
 action predicated upon an act or omission of any officer or employee of any
 Federal agency acting within the scope of his or her office or employment.
 (b) ATTORNEY'S FEES- Title 28 of the United States Code is amended by adding
 a new section 2412a following section 2412 of title 28 United States Code,
 as follows:
`AWARD OF ATTORNEY'S FEES IN HEALTH CARE PROCEEDING INVOLVING THE UNITED
STATES.
 `(a) Except as otherwise specifically provided by statute, attorney's fees
 may be awarded against the United States in accordance with subsection
 (b) in a health care liability action brought pursuant to the Federal Tort
 Claims Act where an arbitration proceeding has resulted in a determination
 that at least one party has accepted.
 `(b) The following standards shall apply to the award of any attorney's
 fees pursuant to this Section:
 `(1) Attorney's fees may be awarded only to a prevailing party in the
 litigation, subject to paragraphs (2) and (3). The prevailing party shall
 be entitled to attorney's fees from the nonprevailing party with respect
 to and only to the extent that such party prevails on any claim advanced
 during the litigation, except that the sums of entitled attorney's fees
 shall not exceed the attorney's fees of the nonprevailing party with regard
 to such claim.
 `(2) In determining the amount of attorney's fees for a private party,
 the court shall take into account the degree of success obtained by that
 party relative to its original claim or claims, the prevailing market rates
 in the area for the kind and quality of the legal services furnished, and
 any other factors relevant to whether an award of attorney's fees would be
 reasonable and, if so, what a reasonable amount of attorney's fees would be.
 `(3) In determining the amount of attorney's fees of the United States, the
 court shall determine the number of hours spent by the attorneys employed by
 the United States on the litigation multiplied by the salaries and benefits
 paid those attorneys, and an amount for overhead, computed as an hourly rate.
 `(c) A party seeking an award of attorney's fees under this Section
 shall file an application for fees within thirty days of final judgment
 in the action. The application shall show that the party is eligible to
 receive an award under this Section and the amount sought, including an
 itemized statement from any attorney appearing on behalf of the party
 which sets forth the actual time expended and the rate at which fees are
 computed. Within thirty days after service of the fee application upon
 the party against whom the fees are sought to be awarded, that party may
 file a response setting forth its reasons why an award of fees would not
 be reasonable or why the amount of fees should be reduced. Where an award
 of attorney's fees is sought against any party, the attorney for that party
 shall submit a statement of the total amount of attorney's fees incurred in
 the litigation in order that the court may determine that the fees sought
 in the application do not exceed the amount of fees incurred by that party.
 `(d) As provided in appropriation acts, awards of attorney's fees received
 by an agency on behalf of the United States pursuant to this Section shall
 be credited to an appropriate account of that agency. To the extent provided
 in advance in appropriation acts, such amounts shall be available only to
 pay awards of attorney's fees against that agency on behalf of the United
 States made pursuant to this section. Each such agency is authorized to pay
 any shortfall caused if amounts credited to such account are insufficient
 to pay amounts awarded against such agency on behalf of the United States
 from funds currently available in such account.
 `(e) For the purposes of this Section:
 `(1) `final judgment' means a judgment that is final and not appealable; and
 `(2) `prevailing party' means a party to an action who obtains a favorable
 final judgment other than by settlement, exclusive of interest, on all or
 a portion of the claims asserted during the litigation.'.
TITLE IV--FEDERAL IMPLEMENTATION OF HEALTH CARE LIABILITY REFORMS
LIMITATIONS ON LIABILITY
 SEC. 401- (a) Section 2674 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by
 inserting `(a)' at the beginning of the section, and by adding at the end
 of the section the following new subsections:
 `(b)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, in any health
 care liability action the United States shall not be found jointly and
 severally liable for noneconomic damages, but shall be liable, if at all,
 only for those noneconomic damages directly attributable to its prorata
 share of fault or responsibility for the injury, and not for noneconomic
 damages attributable to the prorata share of fault or responsibility of
 any other person (without regard to whether that person is a party to the
 action) for the injury, including any person bringing the action.
 `(2) This subsection shall not apply as between the United States and
 any person with which it is acting in concert where the concerted action
 proximately caused the injury for which either the United States or that
 person is found liable.
 `(3) For the purposes of this subsection, `concerted action' and `acting
 in concert' mean the conscious acting together in a common scheme of two or
 more persons who consciously and deliberately agreed to jointly participate
 in such conduct with actual knowledge of the wrongfulness of the conduct
 resulting in a tortious act and where such acts proximately caused the
 injury complained of by the plaintiff and for which one or more of such
 persons is found liable for damages.
 `(c)(1) Except as provided in subsection (3), the total amount of damages
 received by an individual shall be reduced, in accordance with subparagraph
 (2), by any other payment which has been made or which will be made to
 such individual to compensate such individual for an injury, including
 payments under--
 (i) Federal or State disability or sickness programs;
 (ii) Federal, State, or private health insurance programs;
 (iii) private disability insurance programs;
 (iv) employer wage continuation programs; and
 (v) any other source of payment intended to compensate such individual
 for such injury.
 `(2) The amount by which an award of damages to an individual for an injury
 shall be reduced under subparagraph (1) shall be--
 (i) the total amount of any payments (other than such award) which have
 been made or which will be made to such individual to compensate such
 individual for such injury, less
 (ii) the amount paid by such individual (or by the spouse, parent, or legal
 guardian of such individual) to secure the payments described in clause (i).
 `(3) Subsection (1) shall not apply to any payment which the individual
 is required by contract or law to repay out of any damages recovered from
 a negligent health care provider.
 `(d) No damages, other than damages for economic loss, shall be awarded
 in excess of $250,000 in any health care liability action against the
 United States.'.
 (b) For purposes of this section, in addition to the parties within the
 purview of section 201(d) of the Health Care Liability Reform and Quality of
 Care Improvement Act of 1992, any `health care liability action' includes
 all actions (including multiple actions) for damages, and includes all
 plaintiffs and all defendants in such actions, which arise out of or were
 caused by the same personal injury or death, whether or not each defendant
 is a health care provider.
 (c) COST-OF-LIVING- The amount described in subsection (a), adding section
 2674(d)(1) of title 28 United States Code, shall be adjusted every three
 years to reflect changes in the cost-of-living index. The first such
 adjustment shall be made three years after the date of the enactment of
 this Act. For purposes of this subsection, the `cost-of-living index'
 means the cost of living index utilized by the Secretary in determination
 of adjustment in Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance benefits.'
PERIODIC PAYMENTS OF JUDGMENTS
 SEC. 402- (a) Chapter 171 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by
 adding the following new section 2681:
`SECTION 2681. PERIODIC PAYMENT OF JUDGMENTS.
 In any health care liability action subject to this chapter in which the
 damages awarded for future economic loss exceed $100,000, the court shall,
 at the request of the United States, enter an order providing that damages
 for future economic loss be paid in whole or in part by periodic payments
 based on when the damages are found likely to occur rather than by a single
 lump-sum payment. The court shall make findings of fact as to the dollar
 amount, frequency and duration of the periodic payments. The United States
 at its discretion may pay the judgment periodically or purchase an annuity
 or fund a reversionary trust for the same purpose. The judgment of the court
 shall be final, and shall not be reopened at any time to contest, amend,
 or modify the schedule or amount of such payments in the absence of fraud or
 any ground permitting relief to be granted after entry of a final judgment.'
 (b) The table of sections of chapter 171 of title 28, United States Code,
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`Sec. 2681. Periodic payments of judgments.'
APPLICABILITY OF AMENDMENTS
 SEC. 403. (a) State alternative dispute resolution procedures shall not
 be applicable to the United States.
 (b) For the purposes of title IV, the term `plaintiff' means any person
 who has allegedly suffered injury from professional services provided by a
 health care provider and who brings a health care liability action or who
 brings such an action on behalf of any person who has allegedly suffered
 injury from such professional services or who brings such an action because
 a person allegedly suffered injury from such services.
 (c) The amendments made by this Title shall apply to all actions filed on
 or after, and all administrative claims pending on or presented on or after,
 the date of enactment of this Act.
TITLE V--CONSTRUCTION OF PROVISIONS
 SEC. 501- IN GENERAL. Nothing in this Act shall be construed--
 (a) To waive or affect any defense of sovereign immunity asserted by any
 State under any law or by the United States.
 (b) To preempt State choice-of-law rules with respect to claims brought
 by a foreign nation or a citizen of a foreign nation.
 (c) To affect the right of any court to transfer venue, to apply the law
 of a foreign nation, or to dismiss a claim of a foreign nation or of a
 citizen of a foreign nation on the ground of inconvenient forum.
 (d) To create or vest jurisdiction in the district courts of the United
 States over any health care liability action subject to this Act (which
 is not otherwise properly in Federal district court).
 (e) To prevent the States from enacting, adopting, or otherwise having in
 effect more comprehensive or additional health care liability reforms than
 those set forth in this Act.
 SEC. 502. SEVERABILITY- If any provision of this Act or the amendments
 made by this Act or the application of the provision to any person or
 circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this Act and such amendments
 and the application of the provision to any other person or circumstance
 shall not be affected by that invalidation.
 SEC. 503. EFFECTIVE DATE- This Act shall become effective on its date
 of enactment.