[Congressional Bills 107th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 2315 Introduced in House (IH)]

107th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 2315

 To protect consumers in managed care plans and in other health 
 coverage.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 June 26, 2001

 Mr. Fletcher (for himself, Mr. Peterson of Minnesota, Mrs. Johnson of 
 Connecticut, Mr. Burr of North Carolina, Mr. Thomas, Mr. Tauzin, Mr. 
 Boehner, Mr. Bilirakis, Mr. Sam Johnson of Texas, Mr. Cooksey, Mr. 
Weldon of Florida, Mr. Hayes, Mr. Pence, Mr. Platts, Ms. Pryce of Ohio, 
 Mr. Goss, Mr. Houghton, Mr. Greenwood, Mr. Portman, Mr. Hobson, Mr. 
Hilleary, Mr. Radanovich, Mr. Simmons, Mr. Crenshaw, Mr. Ballenger, Mr. 
Gibbons, Mr. Buyer, Mr. Collins, Mr. Pitts, Mr. Rogers of Kentucky, Mr. 
 Simpson, Mr. Linder, Mr. Shaw, Mr. Watts of Oklahoma, Mr. Skeen, Mr. 
 Stearns, Mr. Bachus, Mr. Kirk, Mr. Bartlett of Maryland, Mr. English, 
Mr. Weller, Mr. Ramstad, Mr. Otter, Mr. Sununu, Mr. Lewis of Kentucky, 
 Mrs. Cubin, Mr. Isakson, Mr. Shays, Mr. Wicker, Mr. Pickering, Mr. 
 McInnis, Mr. McCrery, and Mr. Camp) introduced the following bill; 
 which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce, and in 
addition to the Committees on Education and the Workforce, and Ways and 
 Means, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in 
 each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the 
 jurisdiction of the committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To protect consumers in managed care plans and in other health 
 coverage.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Patients' Bill of 
Rights Act of 2001''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
 TITLE I--PATIENTS' BILL OF RIGHTS

 Subtitle A--Right to Advice and Care

Sec. 101. Access to emergency medical care.
Sec. 102. Offering of choice of coverage options.
Sec. 103. Patient access to obstetric and gynecological care.
Sec. 104. Access to pediatric care.
Sec. 105. Timely access to specialists.
Sec. 106. Continuity of care.
Sec. 107. Protection of patient-provider communications.
Sec. 108. Patient access to prescription drugs.
Sec. 109. Coverage for individuals participating in approved clinical 
 trials.
Sec. 110. Prohibition of discrimination against providers based on 
 licensure.
Sec. 111. Generally applicable provision.
 Subtitle B--Right to Information About Plans and Providers

Sec. 121. Health plan information.
Sec. 122. Study on the effect of physician compensation methods.
 Subtitle C--Right to Hold Health Plans Accountable

Sec. 131. Amendments to Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
 1974.
Sec. 132. Enforcement.
 ``Sec. 503A. Claims and internal appeals procedures for group 
 health plans.
 ``Sec. 503B. Independent external appeals procedures for group 
 health plans.
 Subtitle D--Remedies

Sec. 141. Availability of court remedies.
Sec. 142. Treatment of State causes of action with respect to certain 
 claims denials by group health plans.
Sec. 143. Limitation on certain class action litigation.
 Subtitle E--State Flexibility

Sec. 151. State flexibility in applying requirements to health 
 insurance issuers and non-Federal 
 Governmental group health plans.
 Subtitle F--Miscellaneous Provisions

Sec. 161. Definitions.
Sec. 162. Exclusions.
 TITLE II--AMENDMENTS TO THE PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT

Sec. 201. Application to certain health insurance coverage.
Sec. 202. Application to individual health insurance coverage.
TITLE III--AMENDMENTS TO THE EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT INCOME SECURITY ACT OF 
 1974

Sec. 301. Application of patient protection standards to group health 
 plans and group health insurance coverage 
 under the Employee Retirement Income 
 Security Act of 1974.
 TITLE IV--AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1986

Sec. 401. Application to group health plans under the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986.
 TITLE V--EFFECTIVE DATE; SEVERABILITY

Sec. 501. Effective date and related rules.
Sec. 502. Severability.
 TITLE VI--INCREASING ACCESS TO AFFORDABLE HEALTH INSURANCE

 Subtitle A--Tax Incentives

Sec. 601. Expansion of availability of Archer medical savings accounts.
 Subtitle B--Association Health Plans

Sec. 621. Rules governing association health plans.
 ``Part 8--Rules Governing Association Health Plans

 ``Sec. 801. Association health plans.
 ``Sec. 802. Certification of association health plans.
 ``Sec. 803. Requirements relating to sponsors and boards of 
 trustees.
 ``Sec. 804. Participation and coverage requirements.
 ``Sec. 805. Other requirements relating to plan documents, 
 contribution rates, and benefit options.
 ``Sec. 806. Maintenance of reserves and provisions for solvency 
 for plans providing health benefits in 
 addition to health insurance coverage.
 ``Sec. 807. Requirements for application and related 
 requirements.
 ``Sec. 808. Notice requirements for voluntary termination.
 ``Sec. 809. Corrective actions and mandatory termination.
 ``Sec. 810. Trusteeship by the Secretary of insolvent 
 association health plans providing health 
 benefits in addition to health insurance 
 coverage.
 ``Sec. 811. State assessment authority.
 ``Sec. 812. Definitions and rules of construction.
Sec. 622. Clarification of treatment of single employer arrangements.
Sec. 623. Clarification of treatment of certain collectively bargained 
 arrangements.
Sec. 624. Enforcement provisions relating to association health plans.
Sec. 625. Cooperation between Federal and State authorities.
Sec. 626. Effective date and transitional and other rules.

 TITLE I--PATIENTS' BILL OF RIGHTS

 Subtitle A--Right to Advice and Care

SEC. 101. ACCESS TO EMERGENCY MEDICAL CARE.

 (a) Coverage of Emergency Services.--
 (1) In general.--If a group health plan, or health 
 insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer, 
 provides or covers any benefits with respect to services in an 
 emergency department of a hospital, the plan or issuer shall 
 cover emergency services (as defined in paragraph (2)(B))--
 (A) without the need for any prior authorization 
 determination;
 (B) whether the health care provider furnishing 
 such services is a participating provider with respect 
 to such services;
 (C) in a manner so that, if such services are 
 provided to a participant or beneficiary by a 
 nonparticipating health care provider, the participant 
 or beneficiary is not liable for amounts that exceed 
 the amounts of liability that would be incurred if the 
 services were provided by a participating health care 
 provider; and
 (D) without regard to any other term or condition 
 of such coverage (other than exclusion or coordination 
 of benefits, or an affiliation or waiting period, 
 permitted under section 2701 of the Public Health 
 Service Act, section 701 of the Employee Retirement 
 Income Security Act of 1974, or section 9801 of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986, and other than 
 applicable cost-sharing).
 (2) Definitions.--In this section:
 (A) Emergency medical condition.--The term 
 ``emergency medical condition'' means--
 (i) a medical condition manifesting itself 
 by acute symptoms of sufficient severity 
 (including severe pain) such that a prudent 
 layperson, who possesses an average knowledge 
 of health and medicine, could reasonably expect 
 the absence of immediate medical attention to 
 result in a condition described in clause (i), 
 (ii), or (iii) of section 1867(e)(1)(A) of the 
 Social Security Act; and
 (ii) a medical condition manifesting itself 
 in a neonate by acute symptoms of sufficient 
 severity (including severe pain) such that a 
 prudent health care professional could 
 reasonably expect the absence of immediate 
 medical attention to result in a condition 
 described in clause (i), (ii), or (iii) of 
 section 1867(e)(1)(A) of the Social Security 
 Act.
 (B) Emergency services.--The term ``emergency 
 services'' means--
 (i) with respect to an emergency medical 
 condition described in subparagraph (A)(i)--
 (I) a medical screening examination 
 (as required under section 1867 of the 
 Social Security Act) that is within the 
 capability of the emergency department 
 of a hospital, including ancillary 
 services routinely available to the 
 emergency department to evaluate such 
 emergency medical condition, and
 (II) within the capabilities of the 
 staff and facilities available at the 
 hospital, such further medical 
 examination and treatment as are 
 required under section 1867 of such Act 
 to stabilize the patient; or
 (ii) with respect to an emergency medical 
 condition described in subparagraph (A)(ii), 
 medical treatment for such condition rendered 
 by a health care provider in a hospital to a 
 neonate, including available hospital ancillary 
 services in response to an urgent request of a 
 health care professional and to the extent 
 necessary to stabilize the neonate.
 (C) Stabilize.--The term ``to stabilize'', with 
 respect to an emergency medical condition, has the 
 meaning given in section 1867(e)(3) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395dd(e)(3)).
 (b) Reimbursement for Maintenance Care and Post-Stabilization 
Care.--If benefits are available under a group health plan, or under 
health insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer, with 
respect to services that are provided as maintenance care or post-
stabilization care covered under the guidelines established under 
section 1852(d)(2) of the Social Security Act, the plan or issuer shall 
provide for reimbursement with respect to such services provided to a 
participant or beneficiary other than through a participating health 
care provider in a manner consistent with subsection (a)(1)(C) (and 
shall otherwise comply with such guidelines).
 (c) Coverage of Emergency Ambulance Services.--
 (1) In general.--If a group health plan, or health 
 insurance coverage provided by a health insurance issuer, 
 provides any benefits with respect to ambulance services and 
 emergency services, the plan or issuer shall cover emergency 
 ambulance services (as defined in paragraph (2))) furnished 
 under the plan or coverage under the same conditions under 
 subparagraphs (A) through (D) of subsection (a)(1) under which 
 coverage is provided for emergency services.
 (2) Emergency ambulance services.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term ``emergency ambulance services'' means 
 ambulance services (as defined for purposes of section 
 1861(s)(7) of the Social Security Act) furnished to transport 
 an individual who has an emergency medical condition (as 
 defined in subsection (a)(2)(A)) to a hospital for the receipt 
 of emergency services (as defined in subsection (a)(2)(B)) in a 
 case in which the emergency services are covered under the plan 
 or coverage pursuant to subsection (a)(1) and a prudent 
 layperson, with an average knowledge of health and medicine, 
 could reasonably expect that the absence of such transport 
 would result in placing the health of the individual in serious 
 jeopardy, serious impairment of bodily function, or serious 
 dysfunction of any bodily organ or part.

SEC. 102. OFFERING OF CHOICE OF COVERAGE OPTIONS.

 (a) Requirement.--If a group health plan provides coverage for 
benefits only through a defined set of participating health care 
professionals, the plan shall offer the participant the option to 
purchase point-of-service coverage (as defined in subsection (b)) for 
all such benefits (including physician pathology services) for which 
coverage is otherwise so limited. Such option shall be made available 
to the participant at the time of enrollment under the plan and at such 
other times as the plan offers the participant a choice of coverage 
options.
 (b) Point-of-Service Coverage Defined.--In this section, the term 
``point-of-service coverage'' means, with respect to benefits 
(including physician pathology services) covered under a group health 
plan, coverage of such benefits when provided by a nonparticipating 
health care professional.
 (c) Small Employer Exemption.--
 (1) In general.--This section shall not apply to any group 
 health plan with respect to a small employer.
 (2) Small employer.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the 
 term ``small employer'' means, in connection with a group 
 health plan with respect to a calendar year and a plan year, an 
 employer who employed an average of at least 2 but not more 
 than 25 employees on business days during the preceding 
 calendar year and who employs at least 2 employees on the first 
 day of the plan year. For purposes of this paragraph, the 
 provisions of subparagraph (C) of section 712(c)(1) shall apply 
 in determining employer size.
 (d) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed--
 (1) as requiring coverage for benefits for a particular 
 type of health care professional;
 (2) as preventing a group health plan from imposing higher 
 premiums or cost-sharing on a participant for the exercise of a 
 point-of-service coverage option; or
 (3) to require that a group health plan include coverage of 
 health care professionals that the plan excludes because of 
 fraud, quality of care, or other similar reasons with respect 
 to such professionals.

SEC. 103. PATIENT ACCESS TO OBSTETRIC AND GYNECOLOGICAL CARE.

 (a) General Rights.--
 (1) Direct access.--A group health plan, and health 
 insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer, 
 described in subsection (b) may not require authorization or 
 referral by the primary care provider described in subsection 
 (b)(2) in the case of a female participant or beneficiary who 
 seeks coverage for obstetric or gynecological care provided by 
 a participating physician or by a participating health care 
 professional who specializes in obstetrics or gynecology and is 
 operating within State licensure and scope of practice laws.
 (2) Obstetric and gynecological care.--Such a plan or 
 issuer shall treat the provision of obstetric and gynecological 
 care, and the ordering of related obstetric and gynecological 
 items and services, pursuant to the direct access described 
 under paragraph (1), by a participating physician or other 
 health care professional who specializes in obstetrics or 
 gynecology as the authorization of the primary care provider.
 (b) Application of Section.--A group health plan, or health 
insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer, described in 
this subsection is a plan or coverage that--
 (1) provides coverage for obstetric or gynecological care; 
 and
 (2) requires the designation by a participant or 
 beneficiary of a participating primary care provider other than 
 a physician who specializes in obstetrics or gynecology.
 (c) Rules of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed--
 (1) to require that a group health plan or health insurance 
 issuer approve or provide coverage for--
 (A) any items or services that are not covered 
 under the terms and conditions of the group health plan 
 or the health insurance coverage;
 (B) any items or services that are not medically 
 necessary and appropriate; or
 (C) any items or services that are provided, 
 ordered, or otherwise authorized under subsection 
 (a)(2) by a physician or other health care professional 
 unless such items or services are related to obstetric 
 or gynecological care;
 (2) to preclude a group health plan or health insurance 
 issuer from requiring that the physician or health care 
 professional described in subsection (a) notify the designated 
 primary care professional or case manager of treatment 
 decisions in accordance with a process implemented by the plan, 
 except that the group health plan or issuer shall not impose 
 such a notification requirement on the participant or 
 beneficiary involved in the treatment decision; or
 (3) to preclude a group health plan or health insurance 
 issuer from requiring authorization, including prior 
 authorization, for items and services (other than routine items 
 and services) from the physician or health care professional 
 described in subsection (a) who specializes in obstetrics and 
 gynecology if the designated primary care provider of the 
 participant or beneficiary would otherwise be required to 
 obtain authorization for such items or services.
For purposes of paragraph (3), routine items and services includes 
annual, prenatal, and perinatal examinations.

SEC. 104. ACCESS TO PEDIATRIC CARE.

 (a) Pediatric Care.--If a group health plan, and a health insurance 
issuer that offers health insurance coverage, requires or provides for 
a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee to designate a participating 
primary care provider for a child of such participant, beneficiary, or 
enrollee, the plan or issuer shall permit the participant, beneficiary, 
or enrollee to designate a physician who specializes in pediatrics as 
the child's primary care provider if such provider participates in the 
network of the plan or issuer.
 (b) Rules of Construction.--With respect to the child of a 
participant, beneficiary, or enrollee, nothing in subsection (a) shall 
be construed to--
 (1) require that the participant, beneficiary, or enrollee 
 obtain prior authorization or a referral from a primary care 
 provider in order to obtain pediatric care from a health care 
 professional other than a physician if the provision of 
 pediatric care by such professional is permitted by the plan or 
 issuer and consistent with State licensure, credentialing, and 
 scope of practice laws and regulations; or
 (2) preclude the participant, beneficiary, or enrollee from 
 designating a health care professional other than a physician 
 as a primary care provider for the child if such designation is 
 permitted by the plan or issuer and the treatment by such 
 professional is consistent with State licensure, credentialing, 
 and scope of practice laws.

SEC. 105. TIMELY ACCESS TO SPECIALISTS.

 (a) Timely Access.--
 (1) In general.--A group health plan, or a health insurance 
 issuer offering health insurance coverage, shall ensure that 
 participants and beneficiaries receive timely coverage for 
 access to specialists with respect to the medical condition of 
 the participant or beneficiary, when such specialty care is a 
 covered benefit under the plan or coverage.
 (2) Rule of construction.--Nothing in paragraph (1) shall 
 be construed--
 (A) to require the coverage under a group health 
 plan or health insurance coverage of benefits or 
 services;
 (B) to prohibit a plan or issuer from including 
 providers in the network only to the extent necessary 
 to meet the needs of the plan's participants and 
 beneficiaries;
 (C) to prohibit a plan or issuer from establishing 
 measures designed to maintain quality and control costs 
 consistent with the responsibilities of the plan or 
 issuer; or
 (D) to override any State licensure or scope-of-
 practice law.
 (3) Access to certain providers.--
 (A) Participating providers.--Nothing in this 
 section shall be construed to prohibit a group health 
 plan or health insurance issuer from requiring that a 
 participant or beneficiary obtain specialty care from a 
 participating specialist.
 (B) Nonparticipating providers.--
 (i) In general.--With respect to specialty 
 care under this section, if a group health plan 
 or health insurance issuer determines that a 
 participating specialist is not available to 
 provide such care to the participant or 
 beneficiary, the plan or issuer shall provide 
 for coverage of such care by a nonparticipating 
 specialist.
 (ii) Treatment of nonparticipating 
 providers.--If a group health plan or health 
 insurance issuer refers a participant or 
 beneficiary to a nonparticipating specialist 
 pursuant to clause (i), such specialty care 
 shall be provided at no additional cost to the 
 participant or beneficiary beyond what the 
 participant or beneficiary would otherwise pay 
 for such specialty care if provided by a 
 participating specialist.
 (b) Referrals.--
 (1) Authorization.--Nothing in this section shall be 
 construed to prohibit a group health plan or health insurance 
 issuer from requiring an authorization in order to obtain 
 coverage for specialty services so long as such authorization 
 is for an appropriate duration or number of referrals.
 (2) Referrals for ongoing special conditions.--
 (A) In general.--A group health plan, or a health 
 insurance issuer offering health insurance coverage, 
 shall permit a participant or beneficiary who has an 
 ongoing special condition (as defined in subparagraph 
 (B)) to receive a referral to a specialist for the 
 treatment of such condition and such specialist may 
 authorize such referrals, procedures, tests, and other 
 medical services with respect to such condition, or 
 coordinate the care for such condition, subject to the 
 terms of a treatment plan referred to in subsection (c) 
 with respect to the condition.
 (B) Ongoing special condition defined.--In this 
 subsection, the term ``ongoing special condition'' 
 means a condition or disease that--
 (i) is life-threatening, degenerative, or 
 disabling; and
 (ii) requires specialized medical care over 
 a prolonged period of time.
 (c) Treatment Plans.--
 (1) In general.--Nothing in this section shall be construed 
 to prohibit a group health plan or health insurance issuer from 
 requiring that specialty care be provided pursuant to a 
 treatment plan so long as the treatment plan is--
 (A) developed by the specialist, in consultation 
 with the case manager or primary care provider, and the 
 participant or beneficiary;
 (B) approved by the plan or issuer in a timely 
 manner if the plan or issuer requires such approval; 
 and
 (C) in accordance with the applicable quality 
 assurance and utilization review standards of the plan 
 or issuer.
 (2) Notification.--Nothing in paragraph (1) shall be 
 construed as prohibiting a group health plan or health 
 insurance issuer from requiring the specialist to provide the 
 plan or issuer with regular updates on the specialty care 
 provided, as well as all other necessary medical information.
 (d) Specialist Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term 
``specialist'' means, with respect to the medical condition of the 
participant or beneficiary, a physician (including an allopathic or 
osteopathic physician) or health care professional who is appropriately 
credentialed or licensed in 1 or more States, who has adequate 
expertise, appropriate training and experience, and routinely treats 
the diagnosis or condition of the participant or beneficiary.

SEC. 106. CONTINUITY OF CARE.

 (a) Termination of Provider.--If a contract between a group health 
plan, and a health insurance issuer that offers health insurance 
coverage, as appropriate, and a treating health care provider is 
terminated (as defined in paragraph (e)(4)), or benefits or coverage 
provided by a health care provider are terminated because of a change 
in the terms of provider participation in such plan or coverage, and an 
individual who is a participant, beneficiary or enrollee under such 
plan or coverage is undergoing an active course of treatment for a 
serious and complex condition, institutional care, pregnancy, or 
terminal illness from the provider at the time the plan or issuer 
receives or provides notice of such termination, the plan or issuer 
shall--
 (1) notify the individual, or arrange to have the 
 individual notified pursuant to subsection (d)(2), on a timely 
 basis of such termination;
 (2) provide the individual with an opportunity to notify 
 the plan or issuer of the individual's need for transitional 
 care; and
 (3) subject to subsection (c), permit the individual to 
 elect to continue to be covered with respect to the active 
 course of treatment with the provider's consent during a 
 transitional period (as provided for under subsection (b)).
Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing a plan or 
issuer from providing the notice under paragraph (1) before the 
effective date of the provider's termination.
 (b) Transitional Period.--
 (1) Serious and complex conditions.--The transitional 
 period under this section with respect to a serious and complex 
 condition shall extend for up to 90 days from the date of the 
 notice described in subsection (a)(1) of the provider's 
 termination.
 (2) Institutional or inpatient care.--
 (A) In general.--The transitional period under this 
 section for institutional or non-elective inpatient 
 care from a provider shall extend until the earlier 
 of--
 (i) the expiration of the 90-day period 
 beginning on the date on which the notice 
 described in subsection (a)(1) of the 
 provider's termination is provided; or
 (ii) the date of discharge of the 
 individual from such care or the termination of 
 the period of institutionalization.
 (B) Scheduled care.--The 90 day limitation 
 described in subparagraph (A)(i) shall include post-
 surgical follow-up care relating to non-elective 
 surgery that has been scheduled before the date of the 
 notice of the termination of the provider under 
 subsection (a)(1).
 (3) Pregnancy.--If--
 (A) a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee was 
 pregnant at the time of a provider's termination of 
 participation; and
 (B) the provider was treating the pregnancy before 
 the date of the termination;
 the transitional period under this subsection with respect to 
 provider's treatment of the pregnancy shall extend through the 
 provision of post-partum care directly related to the delivery.
 (4) Terminal illness.--If--
 (A) a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee was 
 determined to be terminally ill (as determined under 
 section 1861(dd)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act) at 
 the time of a provider's termination of participation; 
 and
 (B) the provider was treating the terminal illness 
 before the date of termination;
 the transitional period under this subsection shall extend for 
 the remainder of the individual's life for care that is 
 directly related to the treatment of the terminal illness.
 (c) Permissible Terms and Conditions.--A group health plan, and a 
health insurance issuer that offers health insurance coverage, may 
condition coverage of continued treatment by a provider under this 
section upon the provider agreeing, in advance in writing, to the 
following:
 (1) The treating health care provider agrees to accept 
 reimbursement from the plan or issuer and individual involved 
 (with respect to cost-sharing) at the rates applicable prior to 
 the start of the transitional period as payment in full (or at 
 the rates applicable under the replacement plan after the date 
 of the termination of the contract with the plan or issuer) and 
 not to impose cost-sharing with respect to the individual in an 
 amount that would exceed the cost-sharing that could have been 
 imposed if the contract referred to in this section had not 
 been terminated (or, if applicable, at the cost-sharing 
 applicable under the replacement plan).
 (2) The treating health care provider agrees to adhere to 
 the quality assurance standards of the plan or issuer 
 responsible for payment under paragraph (1) and to provide to 
 such plan or issuer necessary medical information related to 
 the care provided.
 (3) The treating health care provider agrees otherwise to 
 adhere to such plan's or issuer's policies and procedures, 
 including procedures regarding referrals and obtaining prior 
 authorization and providing services pursuant to a treatment 
 plan (if any) approved by the plan or issuer.
 (d) Rules of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed--
 (1) to require the coverage of benefits which would not 
 have been covered if the provider involved remained a 
 participating provider; or
 (2) with respect to the termination of a contract under 
 subsection (a) to prevent a group health plan or health 
 insurance issuer from requiring that the health care provider--
 (A) notify participants, beneficiaries, or 
 enrollees of their rights under this section; or
 (B) provide the plan or issuer with the name of 
 each participant, beneficiary, or enrollee who the 
 provider believes is eligible for transitional care 
 under this section.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Contract.--The term ``contract between a group health 
 plan, and a health insurance issuer that offers health 
 insurance coverage, and a treating health care provider'' shall 
 include a contract between such a plan or issuer and an 
 organized network of providers.
 (2) Health care provider.--The term ``health care 
 provider'' or ``provider'' means--
 (A) any individual who is engaged in the delivery 
 of health care services in a State and who is required 
 by State law or regulation to be licensed or certified 
 by the State to engage in the delivery of such services 
 in the State; and
 (B) any entity that is engaged in the delivery of 
 health care services in a State and that, if it is 
 required by State law or regulation to be licensed or 
 certified by the State to engage in the delivery of 
 such services in the State, is so licensed.
 (3) Serious and complex condition.--The term ``serious and 
 complex condition'' means, with respect to a participant, 
 beneficiary, or enrollee under the plan or coverage, a 
 condition that is medically determinable and--
 (A) in the case of an acute illness, is a condition 
 serious enough to require specialized medical treatment 
 to avoid the reasonable possibility of death or 
 permanent harm; or
 (B) in the case of a chronic illness or condition, 
 is an illness or condition that--
 (i) is complex and difficult to manage;
 (ii) is disabling or life- threatening; and
 (iii) requires--
 (I) frequent monitoring over a 
 prolonged period of time and requires 
 substantial on-going specialized 
 medical care; or
 (II) frequent ongoing specialized 
 medical care across a variety of 
 domains of care.
 (4) Terminated.--The term ``terminated'' includes, with 
 respect to a contract (as defined in paragraph (1)), the 
 expiration or nonrenewal of the contract with the provider by 
 the group health plan or health insurance issuer, but does not 
 include a termination of the contract by the plan or issuer for 
 failure to meet applicable quality standards or for fraud.

SEC. 107. PROTECTION OF PATIENT-PROVIDER COMMUNICATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Subject to subsection (b), a group health plan, 
and a health insurance issuer that offers health insurance coverage, 
(in relation to a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee) shall not 
prohibit or otherwise restrict a health care professional from advising 
such a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee who is a patient of the 
professional about the health status of the participant, beneficiary, 
or enrollee or medical care or treatment for the condition or disease 
of the participant, beneficiary, or enrollee, regardless of whether 
coverage for such care or treatment are provided under the contract, if 
the professional is acting within the lawful scope of practice.
 (b) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed as requiring a group health plan, or a health insurance 
issuer that offers health insurance coverage, to provide specific 
benefits under the terms of such plan or coverage.
 (c) Nullification.--Any contract provision that restricts or 
prohibits medical communications in violation of subsection (a) shall 
be null and void.

SEC. 108. PATIENT ACCESS TO PRESCRIPTION DRUGS.

 (a) In General.--To the extent that a group health plan, and a 
health insurance issuer that offers health insurance coverage, provides 
coverage for benefits with respect to prescription drugs, and limits 
such coverage to drugs included in a formulary, the plan or issuer 
shall--
 (1) ensure the establishment of a pharmaceutical and 
 therapeutic committee that develops the formulary, the majority 
 of the members of which must be individuals who are physicians 
 or pharmacists; and
 (2) in accordance with the applicable quality assurance and 
 utilization review standards of the plan or issuer, provide for 
 exceptions from the formulary limitation when--
 (A) the prescribing physician (or the prescribing 
 health care professional) requests such an exception;
 (B) the drugs on the formulary within a therapeutic 
 class--
 (i) are (or are likely to be) not as 
 effective for the specific patient as the non-
 formulary drug, or
 (ii) in comparison with the non-formulary 
 drug, have (or are likely to have) greater 
 significant adverse side-effects for the 
 specific patient; and
 (C) the non-formulary drug is medically necessary 
 and appropriate for the specific patient.
 (b) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to prohibit a group health plan, or a health insurance issuer 
that offers health insurance coverage, from excluding coverage for a 
specific drug or class of drugs if such drugs or class of drugs is 
expressly excluded under the terms and conditions of the plan or 
coverage.
 (c) Information Disclosure Required.--Disclosure to patients and 
physicians of information on formulary restrictions is required under 
subsections (a), (b)(10), and (c)(2) of section 121(a).

SEC. 109. COVERAGE FOR INDIVIDUALS PARTICIPATING IN APPROVED CLINICAL 
 TRIALS.

 (a) Coverage.--
 (1) In general.--If a group health plan, and a health 
 insurance issuer that offers health insurance coverage, 
 provides coverage to a qualified individual (as defined in 
 subsection (b)), the plan or issuer--
 (A) may not deny the individual participation in 
 the clinical trial referred to in subsection (b)(2);
 (B) subject to subsections (b), (c), and (d) may 
 not deny (or limit or impose additional conditions on) 
 the coverage of routine patient costs for items and 
 services furnished in connection with participation in 
 the trial; and
 (C) may not discriminate against the individual on 
 the basis of the participant's, beneficiaries, or 
 enrollee's participation in such trial.
 (2) Exclusion of certain costs.--For purposes of this 
 section, routine patient costs do not include costs of items 
 and services (including transportation, tests, measurements, 
 and procedures) that are provided primarily for the purpose of 
 the clinical trial involved or that otherwise are reasonably 
 expected (as determined by the Secretary) to be paid for by the 
 sponsors of an approved clinical trial.
 (3) Use of in-network providers.--If one or more 
 participating providers is participating in a clinical trial, 
 nothing in paragraph (1) shall be construed as preventing a 
 plan or issuer from requiring that a qualified individual 
 participate in the trial through such a participating provider 
 if the provider will accept the individual as a participant in 
 the trial.
 (b) Qualified Individual Defined.--For purposes of subsection (a), 
the term ``qualified individual'' means an individual who is a 
participant or beneficiary in a group health plan or an enrollee in 
health insurance coverage and who meets all the following conditions:
 (1)(A) The individual has a life-threatening or serious 
 illness for which no standard treatment is effective.
 (B) The individual is eligible to participate in an 
 approved clinical trial according to the trial protocol with 
 respect to treatment of such illness.
 (C) The individual's participation in the trial offers 
 meaningful potential for significant clinical benefit for the 
 individual.
 (2) Either--
 (A) the referring physician is a participating 
 health care professional and has concluded that the 
 individual's participation in such trial would be 
 appropriate based upon the individual meeting the 
 conditions described in paragraph (1); or
 (B) the participant, beneficiary, or enrollee 
 provides medical and scientific information 
 establishing that the individual's participation in 
 such trial would be appropriate based upon the 
 individual meeting the conditions described in 
 paragraph (1).
 (c) Payment.--
 (1) In general.--Under this section a group health plan, 
 and a health insurance issuer offering health insurance 
 coverage, shall provide for payment for routine patient costs 
 consistent with subsection (a)(2).
 (2) Payment rate.--In the case of covered items and 
 services provided by--
 (A) a participating provider, the payment rate 
 shall be at the agreed upon rate, or
 (B) a nonparticipating provider, the payment rate 
 shall be at the rate the plan would normally pay for 
 comparable services under subparagraph (A).
 (d) Approved Clinical Trial Defined.--
 (1) In general.--In this section, the term ``approved 
 clinical trial'' means a clinical research study or clinical 
 investigation approved or funded (which may include funding 
 through in-kind contributions) by one or more of the following:
 (A) The National Institutes of Health.
 (B) A cooperative group or center of the National 
 Institutes of Health.
 (C) The Food and Drug Administration, but only with 
 respect to cancer clinical research studies or cancer 
 clinical investigations.
 (D) Either of the following if the conditions 
 described in paragraph (2) are met:
 (i) The Department of Veterans Affairs.
 (ii) The Department of Defense.
 (2) Conditions for departments.--The conditions described 
 in this paragraph, for a study or investigation conducted by a 
 Department, are that the study or investigation has been 
 reviewed and approved through a system of peer review that the 
 Secretary determines--
 (A) to be comparable to the system of peer review 
 of studies and investigations used by the National 
 Institutes of Health, and
 (B) assures unbiased review of the highest 
 scientific standards by qualified individuals who have 
 no interest in the outcome of the review.
 (e) Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to 
preclude a plan or issuer from offering coverage that is broader than 
the coverage required under this section with respect to clinical 
trials.
 (f) Plan Satisfaction of Certain Requirements; Responsibilities of 
Fiduciaries.--
 (1) In general.--For purposes of this section, insofar as a 
 group health plan provides benefits in the form of health 
 insurance coverage through a health insurance issuer, the plan 
 shall be treated as meeting the requirements of this section 
 with respect to such benefits and not be considered as failing 
 to meet such requirements because of a failure of the issuer to 
 meet such requirements so long as the plan sponsor or its 
 representatives did not cause such failure by the issuer.
 (2) Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
 construed to affect or modify the responsibilities of the 
 fiduciaries of a group health plan under part 4 of subtitle B 
 of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
 1974.
 (g) Study and Report.--
 (1) Study.--The Secretary shall study the impact on group 
 health plans and health insurance issuers for covering routine 
 patient care costs for individuals who are entitled to benefits 
 under this section and who are enrolled in an approved clinical 
 trial program.
 (2) Report to congress.--Not later than January 1, 2006, 
 the Secretary shall submit a report to Congress that contains 
 an assessment of--
 (A) any incremental cost to group health plans and 
 health insurance issuers resulting from the provisions 
 of this section;
 (B) a projection of expenditures to such plans and 
 issuers resulting from this section; and
 (C) any impact on premiums resulting from this 
 section.

SEC. 110. PROHIBITION OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST PROVIDERS BASED ON 
 LICENSURE.

 (a) In General.--A group health plan, and a health insurance issuer 
that offers health insurance coverage, shall not discriminate with 
respect to participation or indemnification as to any provider who is 
acting within the scope of the provider's license or certification 
under applicable State law, solely on the basis of such license or 
certification.
 (b) Construction.--Subsection (a) shall not be construed--
 (1) as requiring the coverage under a group health plan or 
 health insurance coverage of a particular benefit or service or 
 to prohibit a plan or issuer from including providers only to 
 the extent necessary to meet the needs of the plan's or 
 issuer's participants, beneficiaries, or enrollees or from 
 establishing any measure designed to maintain quality and 
 control costs consistent with the responsibilities of the plan 
 or issuer;
 (2) to override any State licensure or scope-of-practice 
 law;
 (3) as requiring a plan or issuer that offers network 
 coverage to include for participation every willing provider 
 who meets the terms and conditions of the plan or coverage; or
 (4) as prohibiting a family practice physician with 
 appropriate expertise from providing pediatric, obstetric, 
 gynecological, or other appropriate care.

SEC. 111. GENERALLY APPLICABLE PROVISION.

 Notwithstanding section 102, in the case of a group health plan, 
and a health insurance issuer that offers health insurance coverage, 
that provides benefits under 2 or more coverage options, the 
requirements of this subtitle shall apply separately with respect to 
each coverage option.

 Subtitle B--Right to Information About Plans and Providers

SEC. 121. HEALTH PLAN INFORMATION.

 (a) Requirement.--
 (1) Disclosure.--
 (A) In general.--A group health plan, and a health 
 insurance issuer that offers health insurance coverage, 
 shall provide for the disclosure of the information 
 described in subsection (b) to participants, 
 beneficiaries, and enrollees--
 (i) at the time of the initial enrollment 
 of the participant, beneficiary, or enrollee 
 under the plan or coverage;
 (ii) on an annual basis after enrollment--
 (I) in conjunction with the 
 election period of the plan or coverage 
 if the plan or coverage has such an 
 election period; or
 (II) in the case of a plan or 
 coverage that does not have an election 
 period, in conjunction with the 
 beginning of the plan or coverage year; 
 and
 (iii) in the case of any material reduction 
 to the benefits or information described in 
 paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) of subsection (b), 
 in the form of a summary notice provided not 
 later than the date on which the reduction 
 takes effect.
 (B) Participants, beneficiaries, or enrollees.--The 
 disclosure required under subparagraph (A) shall be 
 provided--
 (i)(I) jointly to each participant and 
 beneficiary who reside at the same address; or
 (II) in the case of a beneficiary who does 
 not reside at the same address as the 
 participant, separately to the participant and 
 such beneficiary; and
 (ii) to each enrollee.
 (2) Disclosure of prescription drug information to 
 participating physicians.--A group health plan, and a health 
 insurance issuer that offers health insurance coverage, shall 
 provide for the disclosure of the information described in 
 subsection (b)(10) and in subsection (c)(2) to participating 
 physicians upon request.
 (3) Provision of information.--Information shall be 
 provided to participants, beneficiaries, and enrollees under 
 this section at the last known address maintained by the plan 
 or issuer with respect to such participants, beneficiaries, or 
 enrollees, to the extent that such information is provided to 
 participants, beneficiaries, or enrollees via the United States 
 Postal Service or other private delivery service.
 (4) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
 construed to prevent a group health plan sponsor and health 
 insurance issuer from entering into an agreement under which 
 either the plan sponsor or the issuer agrees to assume 
 responsibility for compliance with the requirements of this 
 section, in whole or in part, and the party delegating such 
 responsibility is released from liability for compliance with 
 the requirements that are assumed by the other party, to the 
extent the party delegating such responsibility did not cause such 
noncompliance.
 (b) Required Information.--The informational materials to be 
distributed under this section shall include for each option available 
under the group health plan and health insurance coverage the 
following:
 (1) Benefits.--A description of the covered benefits, 
 including--
 (A) any in- and out-of-network benefits;
 (B) specific preventative services covered under 
 the plan or coverage if such services are covered;
 (C) any benefit limitations, including any annual 
 or lifetime benefit limits and any monetary limits or 
 limits on the number of visits, days, or services, and 
 any specific coverage exclusions; and
 (D) any definition of medical necessity used in 
 making coverage determinations by the plan, issuer, or 
 claims administrator.
 (2) Cost sharing.--A description of any cost-sharing 
 requirements, including--
 (A) any premiums, deductibles, coinsurance, 
 copayment amounts, and liability for balance billing 
 above any reasonable and customary charges, for which 
 the participant, beneficiary, or enrollee will be 
 responsible under each option available under the plan;
 (B) any maximum out-of-pocket expense for which the 
 participant, beneficiary, or enrollee may be liable;
 (C) any cost-sharing requirements for out-of-
 network benefits or services received from 
 nonparticipating providers; and
 (D) any additional cost-sharing or charges for 
 benefits and services that are furnished without 
 meeting applicable plan or coverage requirements, such 
 as prior authorization or precertification.
 (3) Service area.--A description of the plan or issuer's 
 service area, including the provision of any out-of-area 
 coverage.
 (4) Participating providers.--A directory of participating 
 providers (to the extent a plan or issuer provides coverage 
 through a network of providers) that includes, at a minimum, 
 the name, address, and telephone number of each participating 
 provider, and information about how to inquire whether a 
 participating provider is currently accepting new patients.
 (5) Choice of primary care provider.--A description of any 
 requirements and procedures to be used by participants, 
 beneficiaries, and enrollees in selecting, accessing, or 
 changing their primary care provider, including providers both 
 within and outside of the network (if the plan or issuer 
 permits out-of-network services), and the right to select a 
 pediatrician as a primary care provider under section 104 for a 
 participant, beneficiary, or enrollee who is a child if such 
 section applies.
 (6) Preauthorization requirements.--A description of the 
 requirements and procedures to be used to obtain 
 preauthorization for health services, if such preauthorization 
 is required.
 (7) Experimental and investigational treatments.--A 
 description of the process for determining whether a particular 
 item, service, or treatment is considered experimental or 
 investigational, and the circumstances under which such 
 treatments are covered by the plan or issuer.
 (8) Specialty care.--A description of the requirements and 
 procedures to be used by participants, beneficiaries, and 
 enrollees in accessing specialty care and obtaining referrals 
 to participating and nonparticipating specialists, including 
 the right to timely coverage for access to specialists care 
 under section 105 if such section applies.
 (9) Clinical trials.--A description the circumstances and 
 conditions under which participation in clinical trials is 
 covered under the terms and conditions of the plan or coverage, 
 and the right to obtain coverage for approved cancer clinical 
 trials under section 109 if such section applies.
 (10) Prescription drugs.--To the extent the plan or issuer 
 provides coverage for prescription drugs, a statement of 
 whether such coverage is limited to drugs included in a 
 formulary, a description of any provisions and cost-sharing 
 required for obtaining on- and off-formulary medications, and a 
 description of the rights of participants, beneficiaries, and 
 enrollees in obtaining access to access to prescription drugs 
 under section 107 if such section applies.
 (11) Emergency services.--A summary of the rules and 
 procedures for accessing emergency services, including the 
 right of a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee to obtain 
 emergency services under the prudent layperson standard under 
 section 101, if such section applies, and any educational 
 information that the plan or issuer may provide regarding the 
 appropriate use of emergency services.
 (12) Claims and appeals.--A description of the plan or 
 issuer's rules and procedures pertaining to claims and appeals, 
 a description of the rights of participants, beneficiaries, or 
 enrollees under sections 503, 503A and 503B of the Employee 
 Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (or sections 2707(b) and 
 2753(b) of the Public Health Service with respect to non-
 Federal governmental plans and individual health insurance 
 coverage) in obtaining covered benefits, filing a claim for 
 benefits, and appealing coverage determinations internally and 
 externally (including telephone numbers and mailing addresses 
 of the appropriate authority), and a description of any 
 additional legal rights and remedies available under section 
 502 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.
 (13) Advance directives and organ donation.--A description 
 of procedures for advance directives and organ donation 
 decisions if the plan or issuer maintains such procedures.
 (14) Information on plans and issuers.--The name, mailing 
 address, and telephone number or numbers of the plan 
 administrator and the issuer to be used by participants, 
 beneficiaries, and enrollees seeking information about plan or 
 coverage benefits and services, payment of a claim, or 
 authorization for services and treatment. The name of the 
 designated decisionmaker (or decisionmakers) appointed under 
 section 502(n)(2) of the Employee Retirement Income Security 
 Act of 1974 for purposes of making final determinations under 
 section 503A of such Act and approving coverage pursuant to the 
 written determination of an independent medical reviewer under 
 section 503B of such Act. Notice of whether the benefits under 
 the plan are provided under a contract or policy of insurance 
 issued by an issuer, or whether benefits are provided directly 
 by the plan sponsor who bears the insurance risk.
 (15) Translation services.--A summary description of any 
 translation or interpretation services (including the 
 availability of printed information in languages other than 
 English, audio tapes, or information in Braille) that are 
 available for non-English speakers and participants, 
 beneficiaries, and enrollees with communication disabilities 
 and a description of how to access these items or services.
 (16) Accreditation information.--Any information that is 
 made public by accrediting organizations in the process of 
 accreditation if the plan or issuer is accredited, or any 
 additional quality indicators (such as the results of enrollee 
 satisfaction surveys) that the plan or issuer makes public or 
 makes available to participants, beneficiaries, and enrollees.
 (17) Notice of requirements.--A description of any rights 
 of participants, beneficiaries, and enrollees that are 
 established by this Act (excluding those described in 
 paragraphs (1) through (16)) if such rights apply. The 
 description required under this paragraph may be combined with 
 the notices required under sections 711(d), 713(b), or 
 606(a)(1) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
1974, and with any other notice provision that the Secretary determines 
may be combined.
 (18) Compensation methods.--A summary description of the 
 methods (including capitation, fee-for-service, salary, 
 withholds, bonuses, bundled payments, per diem, or a 
 combination thereof) used for compensating participating health 
 care professionals (including primary care providers and 
 specialists) and facilities in connection with the provision of 
 health care under the plan or coverage. The requirement of this 
 paragraph shall not be construed as requiring plans or issuers 
 to provide information concerning proprietary payment 
 methodology.
 (19) Availability of additional information.--A statement 
 that the information described in subsection (c), and 
 instructions on obtaining such information (including telephone 
 numbers and, if available, Internet websites), shall be made 
 available upon request.
 (c) Additional Information.--The informational materials to be 
provided upon the request of a participant, beneficiary, or enrollees 
shall include for each option available under a group health plan and 
health insurance coverage the following:
 (1) Status of providers.--The State licensure status of the 
 plan or issuer's participating health care professionals and 
 participating health care facilities, and, if available, the 
 education, training, specialty qualifications or certifications 
 of such professionals.
 (2) Prescription drugs.--Information about whether a 
 specific prescription medication is included in the formulary 
 of the plan or issuer, if the plan or issuer uses a defined 
 formulary.
 (3) External appeals information.--Aggregate information on 
 the number and outcomes of external medical reviews, relative 
 to the sample size (such as the number of covered lives) 
 determined for the plan or issuer's book of business.
 (d) Manner of Disclosure.--The information described in this 
section shall be disclosed in an accessible medium and format that is 
calculated to be understood by the average participant.
 (e) Rules of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to prohibit a group health plan, or a health insurance issuer 
that offers health insurance coverage, from--
 (1) distributing any other additional information 
 determined by the plan or issuer to be important or necessary 
 in assisting participants, beneficiaries, and enrollees in the 
 selection of a health plan; and
 (2) complying with the provisions of this section by 
 providing information in brochures, through the Internet or 
 other electronic media, or through other similar means, so long 
 as participants, beneficiaries, and enrollees are provided with 
 an opportunity to request that informational materials be 
 provided in printed form.
 (f) Conforming Regulations.--The Secretary shall issue regulations 
to coordinate the requirements on group health plans and health 
insurance issuers under this section with the requirements imposed 
under part 1, to reduce duplication with respect to any information 
that is required to be provided under any such requirements.
 (g) Secretarial Enforcement Authority.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 or the Secretary of Labor (as appropriate) may assess a civil 
 monetary penalty against the administrator of a plan or issuer 
 in connection with the failure of the plan or issuer to comply 
 with the requirements of this section.
 (2) Amount of penalty.--The amount of the penalty to be 
 imposed under paragraph (1) shall not exceed $100 for each day 
 for each participant, beneficiary, or enrollee with respect to 
 which the failure to comply with the requirements of this 
 section occurs.
 (3) Failure defined.--For purposes of this subsection, a 
 plan or issuer shall have failed to comply with the 
 requirements of this section with respect to a participant, 
 beneficiary, or enrollee if the plan or issuer failed or 
 refused to comply with the requirements of this section within 
 30 days--
 (A) of the date described in subsection 
 (a)(1)(A)(i);
 (B) of the date described in subsection 
 (a)(1)(A)(ii); or
 (C) of the date on which additional information was 
 requested under subsection (c).
 (h) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 732(a) of the Employee Retirement Income 
 Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1191a(a)) is amended by 
 striking ``section 711'' and inserting ``section 711 and 
 section 121 of the Patients' Bill of Rights Act of 2001''.
 (2) Section 502(b)(3) of the Employee Retirement Income 
 Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1132(b)(3)) is amended by 
 striking ``733(a)(1))'' and inserting ``733(a)(1)), except with 
 respect to the requirements of section 121 of the Patients' 
 Bill of Rights Act of 2001''.

SEC. 122. STUDY ON THE EFFECT OF PHYSICIAN COMPENSATION METHODS.

 (a) Study and Report.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall enter into a contract 
 with the Institute of Medicine for the conduct of a study in 
 accordance with this section, to be submitted to the Secretary 
 and the Secretary of Labor as provided for in paragraph (4).
 (2) Matters to be studied.--The study under paragraph (1) 
 shall include--
 (A) a study, including a survey if necessary, of 
 physician compensation arrangements that are utilized 
 in employer-sponsored group health plans (including 
 group health plans sponsored by government and non-
 government employers) and commercial health insurance 
 products, including--
 (i) all types of compensation arrangements, 
 including financial incentive and risk sharing 
 arrangements and arrangements that do not 
 contain such incentives and risk sharing, that 
 reflect the complexity of organizational 
 relationships between health plans and 
 physicians;
 (ii) arrangements that are based on factors 
 such as utilization management, cost control, 
 quality improvement, and patient or enrollee 
 satisfaction; and
 (iii) arrangements between the plan or 
 issuer and provider, as well as down-stream 
 arrangements between providers and sub-
 contracted providers;
 (B) an analysis of the effect of such differing 
 arrangements on physician behavior with respect to the 
 provision of medical care to patients, including 
 whether and how such arrangements affect the quality of 
 patient care and the ability of physicians to provide 
 care that is medically necessary and appropriate.
 (3) Study design.--The Secretary shall consult with the 
 Director of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality in 
 preparing the scope of work and study design with respect to 
 the contract under paragraph (1).
 (4) Report.--Not later than 24 months after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall forward to the 
 appropriate committees of Congress a copy of the report and 
 study conducted under subsection (a).
 (b) Research.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Director 
 of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, shall 
 conduct and support research to develop scientific evidence 
 regarding the effects of differing physician compensation 
 methods on physician behavior with respect to the provision of 
 medical care to patients, particularly issues relating to the 
 quality of patient care and whether patients receive medically 
 necessary and appropriate care.
 (2) Authorization of appropriations.--For purposes of 
 carrying out this section, there are authorized to be 
 appropriated such sums as may be necessary.

 Subtitle C--Right to Hold Health Plans Accountable

SEC. 131. AMENDMENTS TO EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT INCOME SECURITY ACT OF 
 1974.

 (a) In General.--Part 5 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by inserting after 
section 503 (29 U.S.C. 1133) the following:

``SEC. 503A. CLAIMS AND INTERNAL APPEALS PROCEDURES FOR GROUP HEALTH 
 PLANS.

 ``(a) Initial Claim for Benefits Under Group Health Plans.--
 ``(1) Procedures.--
 ``(A) In general.--A group health plan, and a 
 health insurance issuer that offers health insurance 
 coverage in connection with a group health plan, shall 
 ensure that procedures are in place for--
 ``(i) making a determination on an initial 
 claim for benefits by a participant or 
 beneficiary (or authorized representative) 
 regarding payment or coverage for items or 
 services under the terms and conditions of the 
 plan or coverage involved, including any cost-
 sharing amount that the participant or 
 beneficiary is required to pay with respect to 
 such claim for benefits; and
 ``(ii) notifying a participant or 
 beneficiary (or authorized representative) and 
 the treating health care professional involved 
 regarding a determination on an initial claim 
 for benefits made under the terms and 
 conditions of the plan or coverage, including 
 any cost-sharing amounts that the participant 
 or beneficiary may be required to make with 
 respect to such claim for benefits, and of the 
 right of the participant or beneficiary to an 
 internal appeal under subsection (b).
 ``(B) Access to information.--With respect to an 
 initial claim for benefits, the participant or 
 beneficiary (or authorized representative) and the 
 treating health care professional (if any) shall 
 provide the plan or issuer with access to information 
 requested by the plan or issuer that is necessary to 
 make a determination relating to the claim, not later 
 than 5 days after the date on which the claim is filed 
 or to meet the applicable timelines under clauses (ii) 
 and (iii) of paragraph (2)(A).
 ``(C) Oral requests.--In the case of a claim for 
 benefits involving an expedited or concurrent 
 determination, a participant or beneficiary (or 
 authorized representative) may make an initial claim 
 for benefits orally, but a group health plan, or health 
 insurance issuer that offers health insurance coverage 
 in connection with a group health plan, may require 
 that the participant or beneficiary (or authorized 
 representative) provide written confirmation of such 
 request in a timely manner.
 ``(2) Timeline for making determinations.--
 ``(A) Prior authorization determination.--
 ``(i) In general.--A group health plan, and 
 a health insurance issuer that offers health 
 insurance coverage in connection with a group 
 health plan, shall maintain procedures to 
 ensure that a prior authorization determination 
 on a claim for benefits is made within 14 days 
 from the date on which the plan or issuer 
 receives information that is reasonably 
 necessary to enable the plan or issuer to make 
 a determination on the request for prior 
 authorization, but in no case shall such 
 determination be made later than 21 days after 
 the receipt of the claim for benefits.
 ``(ii) Expedited determination.--
 Notwithstanding clause (i), a group health 
 plan, and a health insurance issuer that offers 
 health insurance coverage in connection with a 
 group health plan, shall maintain procedures 
 for expediting a prior authorization 
 determination on a claim for benefits described 
 in such clause when a request for such an 
 expedited determination is made by a 
 participant or beneficiary (or authorized 
 representative) at any time during the process 
 for making a determination and the treating 
 health care professional substantiates, with 
 the request, that a determination under the 
 procedures described in clause (i) would 
 seriously jeopardize the life or health of the 
 participant or beneficiary. Such determination 
 shall be made within 72 hours after a request 
 is received by the plan or issuer under this 
 clause.
 ``(iii) Concurrent determinations.--A group 
 health plan, and a health insurance issuer that 
 offers health insurance coverage in connection 
 with a group health plan, shall maintain 
 procedures to ensure that a concurrent 
 determination on a claim for benefits that 
 results in a discontinuation of inpatient care 
 is made within 24 hours after the receipt of 
 the claim for benefits.
 ``(B) Retrospective determination.--A group health 
 plan, and a health insurance issuer that offers health 
 insurance coverage in connection with a group health 
 plan, shall maintain procedures to ensure that a 
 retrospective determination on a claim for benefits is 
 made within 30 days of the date on which the plan or 
 issuer receives information that is reasonably 
 necessary to enable the plan or issuer to make a 
 determination on the claim, but in no case shall such 
 determination be made later than 60 days after the 
 receipt of the claim for benefits.
 ``(3) Notice of a denial of a claim for benefits.--Written 
 notice of a denial made under an initial claim for benefits 
 shall be issued to the participant or beneficiary (or 
 authorized representative) and the treating health care 
professional not later than 2 days after the determination (or within 
the 72-hour or 24-hour period referred to in clauses (ii) and (iii) of 
paragraph (2)(A) if applicable).
 ``(4) Requirements of notice of determinations.--The 
 written notice of a denial of a claim for benefits 
 determination under paragraph (3) shall include--
 ``(A) the reasons for the determination (including 
 a summary of the clinical or scientific-evidence based 
 rationale used in making the determination and 
 instruction on obtaining a more complete description 
 written in a manner calculated to be understood by the 
 average participant);
 ``(B) the procedures for obtaining additional 
 information concerning the determination; and
 ``(C) notification of the right to appeal the 
 determination and instructions on how to initiate an 
 appeal in accordance with subsection (b).
 ``(b) Internal Appeal of a Denial of a Claim for Benefits.--
 ``(1) Right to internal appeal.--
 ``(A) In general.--A participant or beneficiary (or 
 authorized representative) may appeal any denial of a 
 claim for benefits under subsection (a) under the 
 procedures described in this subsection.
 ``(B) Time for appeal.--A group health plan, and a 
 health insurance issuer that offers health insurance 
 coverage in connection with a group health plan, shall 
 ensure that a participant or beneficiary (or authorized 
 representative) has a period of not less than 90 days 
 beginning on the date of a denial of a claim for 
 benefits under subsection (a) in which to appeal such 
 denial under this subsection.
 ``(C) Failure to act.--The failure of a plan or 
 issuer to issue a determination on a claim for benefits 
 under subsection (a) within the applicable timeline 
 established for such a determination under such 
 subsection shall be treated as a denial of a claim for 
 benefits for purposes of proceeding to internal review 
 under this subsection.
 ``(D) Plan waiver of internal review.--A group 
 health plan, and a health insurance issuer that offers 
 health insurance coverage in connection with a group 
 health plan, may waive the internal review process 
 under this subsection and permit a participant or 
 beneficiary (or authorized representative) to proceed 
 directly to external review under section 503B.
 ``(2) Timelines for making determinations.--
 ``(A) Oral requests.--In the case of an appeal of a 
 denial of a claim for benefits under this subsection 
 that involves an expedited or concurrent determination, 
 a participant or beneficiary (or authorized 
 representative) may request such appeal orally, but a 
 group health plan, and a health insurance issuer that 
 offers health insurance coverage in connection with a 
 group health plan, may require that the participant or 
 beneficiary (or authorized representative) provide 
 written confirmation of such request in a timely 
 manner.
 ``(B) Access to information.--With respect to an 
 appeal of a denial of a claim for benefits, the 
 participant or beneficiary (or authorized 
 representative) and the treating health care 
 professional (if any) shall provide the plan or issuer 
 with access to information requested by the plan or 
 issuer that is necessary to make a determination 
 relating to the appeal, not later than 5 days after the 
 date on which the request for the appeal is filed or to 
 meet the applicable timelines under clauses (ii) and 
 (iii) of subparagraph (C).
 ``(C) Prior authorization determinations.--
 ``(i) In general.--A group health plan, and 
 a health insurance issuer that offers health 
 insurance coverage in connection with a group 
 health plan, shall maintain procedures to 
 ensure that a determination on an appeal of a 
 denial of a claim for benefits under this 
 subsection is made within 14 days after the 
 date on which the plan or issuer receives 
 information that is reasonably necessary to 
 enable the plan or issuer to make a 
 determination on the appeal, but in no case 
 shall such determination be made later than 21 
 days after the receipt of the request for the 
 appeal.
 ``(ii) Expedited determination.--
 Notwithstanding clause (i), a group health 
 plan, and a health insurance issuer that offers 
 health insurance coverage in connection with a 
 group health plan, shall maintain procedures 
 for expediting a prior authorization 
 determination on an appeal of a denial of a 
 claim for benefits described in clause (i), 
 when a request for such an expedited 
 determination is made by a participant or 
 beneficiary (or authorized representative) at 
 any time during the process for making a 
 determination and the treating health care 
 professional substantiates, with the request, 
 that a determination under the procedures 
 described in clause (i) would seriously 
 jeopardize the life or health of the 
 participant or beneficiary. Such determination 
 shall be made not later than 72 hours after the 
 request for such appeal is received by the plan 
 or issuer under this clause.
 ``(iii) Concurrent determinations.--A group 
 health plan, and a health insurance issuer that 
 offers health insurance coverage in connection 
 with a group health plan, shall maintain 
 procedures to ensure that a concurrent 
 determination on an appeal of a denial of a 
 claim for benefits that results in a 
 discontinuation of inpatient care is made 
 within 24 hours after the receipt of the 
 request for appeal.
 ``(B) Retrospective determination.--A group health 
 plan, and a health insurance issuer that offers health 
 insurance coverage in connection with a group health 
 plan, shall maintain procedures to ensure that a 
 retrospective determination on an appeal of a claim for 
 benefits is made within 30 days of the date on which 
 the plan or issuer receives necessary information that 
 is reasonably required by the plan or issuer to make a 
 determination on the appeal, but in no case shall such 
 determination be made later than 60 days after the 
 receipt of the request for the appeal.
 ``(3) Conduct of review.--
 ``(A) In general.--A review of a denial of a claim 
 for benefits under this subsection shall be conducted 
 by an individual with appropriate expertise who was not 
 directly involved in the initial determination.
 ``(B) Review of medical determinations by 
 physicians.--A review of an appeal of a denial of a 
 claim for benefits that is based on a lack of medical 
 necessity and appropriateness, or based on an 
 experimental or investigational treatment, or requires 
 an evaluation of medical facts, shall be made by a 
 physician with appropriate expertise, including 
 pediatric expertise where necessary, to evaluate the 
 relevant conditions, who was not involved in the 
 initial determination.
 ``(4) Notice of determination.--
 ``(A) In general.--Written notice of a 
 determination made under an internal appeal of a denial 
 of a claim for benefits shall be issued to the 
 participant or beneficiary (or authorized 
 representative) and the treating health care 
 professional not later than 2 days after the completion 
 of the review (or within the 72-hour or 24-hour period 
 referred to in paragraph (2) if applicable).
 ``(B) Final determination.--The determination by a 
 plan or issuer under this subsection shall be treated 
 as the final determination of the plan or issuer on a 
 denial of a claim for benefits.
 ``(C) Failure to act.--The failure of a plan or 
 issuer to issue a determination on an appeal of a 
 denial of a claim for benefits under this subsection 
within the applicable timeline established for such a determination 
shall be treated as a final determination on an appeal of a denial of a 
claim for benefits for purposes of proceeding to external review under 
section 503B.
 ``(D) Requirements of notice.--With respect to a 
 determination made under this subsection, the notice 
 described in subparagraph (A) shall include--
 ``(i) the reasons for the determination 
 (including a summary of the clinical or 
 scientific-evidence based rationale used in 
 making the determination and instruction on 
 obtaining a more complete description written 
 in a manner calculated to be understood by the 
 average participant);
 ``(ii) the procedures for obtaining 
 additional information concerning the 
 determination; and
 ``(iii) notification of the right to an 
 independent external review under section 503B 
 and instructions on how to initiate such a 
 review.
 ``(c) Definitions.--The definitions contained in section 503B(i) 
shall apply for purposes of this section.

``SEC. 503B. INDEPENDENT EXTERNAL APPEALS PROCEDURES FOR GROUP HEALTH 
 PLANS.

 ``(a) Right to External Appeal.--A group health plan, and a health 
insurance issuer that offers health insurance coverage in connection 
with a group health plan, shall provide in accordance with this section 
participants and beneficiaries (or authorized representatives) with 
access to an independent external review for any denial of a claim for 
benefits.
 ``(b) Initiation of the Independent External Review Process.--
 ``(1) Time to file.--A request for an independent external 
 review under this section shall be filed with the plan or 
 issuer not later than 90 days after the date on which the 
 participant or beneficiary receives notice of the denial under 
 section 503A(b)(4) or the date on which the internal review is 
 waived by the plan or issuer under section 503A(b)(1)(D).
 ``(2) Filing of request.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to the succeeding 
 provisions of this subsection, a group health plan, and 
 a health insurance issuer that offers health insurance 
 coverage in connection with a group health plan, may--
 ``(i) except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B)(i), require that a request for review be in 
 writing;
 ``(ii) limit the filing of such a request 
 to the participant or beneficiary involved (or 
 an authorized representative);
 ``(iii) except if waived by the plan or 
 issuer under section 503A(b)(1)(D), condition 
 access to an independent external review under 
 this section upon a final determination of a 
 denial of a claim for benefits under the 
 internal review procedure under section 503A;
 ``(iv) except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B)(ii), require payment of a filing fee to the 
 plan or issuer of a sum that does not exceed 
 $50; and
 ``(v) require that a request for review 
 include the consent of the participant or 
 beneficiary (or authorized representative) for 
 the release of medical information or records 
 of the participant or beneficiary to the 
 qualified external review entity for purposes 
 of conducting external review activities.
 ``(B) Requirements and exception relating to 
 general rule.--
 ``(i) Oral requests permitted in expedited 
 or concurrent cases.--In the case of an 
 expedited or concurrent external review as 
 provided for under subsection (e), the request 
 may be made orally. In such case a written 
 confirmation of such request shall be made in a 
 timely manner. Such written confirmation shall 
 be treated as a consent for purposes of 
 subparagraph (A)(v).
 ``(ii) Exception to filing fee 
 requirement.--
 ``(I) Indigency.--Payment of a 
 filing fee shall not be required under 
 subparagraph (A)(iv) where there is a 
 certification (in a form and manner 
 specified in guidelines established by 
 the Secretary) that the participant or 
 beneficiary is indigent (as defined in 
 such guidelines). In establishing 
 guidelines under this subclause, the 
 Secretary shall ensure that the 
 guidelines relating to indigency are 
 consistent with the poverty guidelines 
 used by the Secretary of Health and 
 Human Services under title XIX of the 
 Social Security Act.
 ``(II) Fee not required.--Payment 
 of a filing fee shall not be required 
 under subparagraph (A)(iv) if the plan 
 or issuer waives the internal appeals 
 process under section 503A(b)(1)(D).
 ``(III) Refunding of fee.--The 
 filing fee paid under subparagraph 
 (A)(iv) shall be refunded if the 
 determination under the independent 
 external review is to reverse the 
 denial which is the subject of the 
 review.
 ``(IV) Increase in amount.--The 
 amount referred to in subparagraph 
 (A)(iv) shall be increased or 
 decreased, for each calendar year that 
 ends after December 31, 2002, by the 
 same percentage as the percentage by 
 which the Consumer Price Index for All 
 Urban Consumers (United States city 
 average), published by the Bureau of 
 Labor Statistics, for September of the 
 preceding calendar year has increased 
 or decreased from the such Index for 
 September of 2002.
 ``(c) Referral to Qualified External Review Entity Upon Request.--
 ``(1) In general.--Upon the filing of a request for 
 independent external review with the group health plan, or 
 health insurance issuer that offers health insurance coverage 
 in connection with a group health plan, the plan or issuer 
 shall refer such request to a qualified external review entity 
 selected in accordance with this section.
 ``(2) Access to plan or issuer and health professional 
 information.--With respect to an independent external review 
 conducted under this section, the participant or beneficiary 
 (or authorized representative), the plan or issuer, and the 
 treating health care professional (if any) shall provide the 
 external review entity with access to information requested by 
 the external review entity that is necessary to conduct a 
 review under this section, as determined by the entity, not 
 later than 5 days after the date on which a request is referred 
 to the qualified external review entity under paragraph (1), or 
 earlier as determined appropriate by the entity to meet the 
 applicable timelines under clauses (ii) and (iii) of subsection 
 (e)(1)(A).
 ``(3) Screening of requests by qualified external review 
 entities.--
 ``(A) In general.--With respect to a request 
 referred to a qualified external review entity under 
 paragraph (1) relating to a denial of a claim for 
 benefits, the entity shall refer such request for the 
 conduct of an independent medical review unless the 
 entity determines that--
 ``(i) any of the conditions described in 
 subsection (b)(2)(A) have not been met;
 ``(ii) the thresholds described in 
 subparagraph (B) have not been met;
 ``(iii) the denial of the claim for 
 benefits does not involve a medically 
 reviewable determination under subsection 
 (d)(2);
 ``(iv) the denial of the claim for benefits 
 relates to a determination regarding whether an 
 individual is a participant or beneficiary who 
 is enrolled under the terms of the plan or 
 coverage (including the applicability of any 
 waiting period under the plan or coverage); or
 ``(v) the denial of the claim for benefits 
 is a determination as to the application of 
 cost-sharing requirements or the application of 
 a specific exclusion or express limitation on 
 the amount, duration, or scope of coverage of 
 items or services under the terms and 
 conditions of the plan or coverage unless the 
 determination is a denial described in 
 subsection (d)(2);
 Upon making a determination that any of clauses (i) 
 through (v) applies with respect to the request, the 
 entity shall determine that the denial of a claim for 
 benefits involved is not eligible for independent 
 medical review under subsection (d), and shall provide 
 notice in accordance with subparagraph (D).
 ``(B) Thresholds.--
 ``(i) In general.--The thresholds described 
 in this subparagraph are that--
 ``(I) the total amount payable 
 under the plan or coverage for the item 
 or service that was the subject of such 
 denial exceeds $100; or
 ``(II) a physician has asserted in 
 writing that there is a significant 
 risk of placing the life, health, or 
 development of the participant or 
 beneficiary in jeopardy if the denial 
 of the claim for benefits is sustained.
 ``(ii) Thresholds not applied.--The 
 thresholds described in this subparagraph shall 
 not apply if the plan or issuer involved waives 
 the internal appeals process with respect to 
 the denial of a claim for benefits involved 
 under section 503A(b)(1)(D).
 ``(C) Process for making determinations.--
 ``(i) No deference to prior 
 determinations.--In making determinations under 
 subparagraph (A), there shall be no deference 
 given to determinations made by the plan or 
 issuer under section 503A or the recommendation 
 of a treating health care professional (if 
 any).
 ``(ii) Use of appropriate personnel.--A 
 qualified external review entity shall use 
 appropriately qualified personnel to make 
 determinations under this section.
 ``(D) Notices and general timelines for 
 determination.--
 ``(i) Notice in case of denial of 
 referral.--If the entity under this paragraph 
 does not make a referral to an independent 
 medical reviewer, the entity shall provide 
 notice to the plan or issuer, the participant 
 or beneficiary (or authorized representative) 
 filing the request, and the treating health 
 care professional (if any) that the denial is 
 not subject to independent medical review. Such 
 notice--
 ``(I) shall be written (and, in 
 addition, may be provided orally) in a 
 manner calculated to be understood by 
 an average participant;
 ``(II) shall include the reasons 
 for the determination; and
 ``(III) include any relevant terms 
 and conditions of the plan or coverage.
 ``(ii) General timeline for 
 determinations.--Upon receipt of information 
 under paragraph (2), the qualified external 
 review entity, and if required the independent 
 medical reviewer, shall make a determination 
 within the overall timeline that is applicable 
 to the case under review as described in 
 subsection (e), except that if the entity 
 determines that a referral to an independent 
 medical reviewer is not required, the entity 
 shall provide notice of such determination to 
 the participant or beneficiary (or authorized 
 representative) within 2 days of such 
 determination.
 ``(d) Independent Medical Review.--
 ``(1) In general.--If a qualified external review entity 
 determines under subsection (c) that a denial of a claim for 
 benefits is eligible for independent medical review, the entity 
 shall refer the denial involved to an independent medical 
 reviewer for the conduct of an independent medical review under 
 this subsection.
 ``(2) Medically reviewable determinations.--For purposes of 
 this section, a denial of a claim for benefits is a medically 
 reviewable determination if the benefit the item or service 
 with respect to which the determination is made would be a 
 covered benefit under the terms and conditions of the plan or 
 coverage but for one (or more) of the following determinations:
 ``(A) Denials based on medical necessity and 
 appropriateness.--The basis of the determination is 
 that the item or service is not medically necessary and 
 appropriate.
 ``(B) Denials based on experimental or 
 investigational treatment.--The basis of the 
 determination is that the item or service is 
 experimental or investigational.
 ``(C) Denials otherwise based on an evaluation of 
 medical facts.--A determination that the item or 
 service or condition is not covered but an evaluation 
 of the medical facts by a health care professional in 
 the specific case involved is necessary to determine 
 whether the item or service or condition is required to 
 be provided under the terms and conditions of the plan 
 or coverage.
 ``(3) Independent medical review determination.--
 ``(A) In general.--An independent medical reviewer 
 under this section shall make a new independent 
 determination with respect to--
 ``(i) whether the item or service or 
 condition that is the subject of the denial is 
 covered under the terms and conditions of the 
 plan or coverage; and
 ``(ii) based upon an affirmative 
 determination under clause (i), whether or not 
 the denial of a claim for a benefit that is the 
 subject of the review should be upheld or 
 reversed.
 ``(B) Standard for determination.--The independent 
 medical reviewer's determination relating to the 
 medical necessity and appropriateness, or the 
 experimental or investigation nature, or the evaluation 
 of the medical facts of the item, service, or condition 
 shall be based on the medical condition of the 
 participant or beneficiary (including the medical 
 records of the participant or beneficiary) and the 
 valid, relevant scientific evidence and clinical 
 evidence. The independent medical reviewer may consider 
 peer-reviewed medical literature or findings and peer-
 reviewed expert opinions and expert consensus. In 
 determining the medical necessity and appropriateness 
 of any item or service for which a claim for benefits 
 is denied, the independent medical reviewer shall 
 consider the effectiveness of the alternative items and 
 services, if any, for which benefits were authorized by 
 the plan or issuer involved for the participant or 
 beneficiary.
 ``(C) No coverage for excluded benefits.--Nothing 
 in this subsection shall be construed to permit an 
 independent medical reviewer to require that a group 
 health plan, or health insurance issuer that offers 
 health insurance coverage in connection with a group 
 health plan, provide coverage for items or services 
 that are specifically excluded or expressly limited 
 under the plan or coverage and that are not covered 
 regardless of any determination relating to medical 
 necessity and appropriateness, experimental or 
 investigational nature of the treatment, or an 
 evaluation of the medical facts in the case involved.
 ``(D) Evidence and information to be used in 
 medical reviews.--In making a determination under this 
 subsection, the independent medical reviewer shall also 
 consider appropriate and available evidence and 
 information, including the following:
 ``(i) The determination made by the plan or 
 issuer with respect to the claim upon internal 
 review and the evidence or guidelines used by 
 the plan or issuer in reaching such 
 determination.
 ``(ii) The recommendation of the treating 
 health care professional and the evidence, 
 guidelines, and rationale used by the treating 
 health care professional in reaching such 
 recommendation.
 ``(iii) Additional evidence or information 
 obtained by the reviewer or submitted by the 
 plan, issuer, participant or beneficiary (or an 
 authorized representative), or treating health 
 care professional.
 ``(iv) The plan or coverage document.
 ``(E) Independent determination.--In making the 
 determination, the independent medical reviewer shall--
 ``(i) consider the claim under review 
 without deference to the determinations made by 
 the plan or issuer under section 503A or the 
 recommendation of the treating health care 
 professional (if any); and
 ``(ii) consider, but not be bound by the 
 definition used by the plan or issuer of 
 `medically necessary and appropriate', or 
 `experimental or investigational', or other 
 equivalent terms that are used by the plan or 
 issuer to describe medical necessity and 
 appropriateness or experimental or 
 investigational nature of the treatment.
 ``(F) Determination of independent medical 
 reviewer.--An independent medical reviewer shall, in 
 accordance with the deadlines described in subsection 
 (e), prepare a written determination to uphold or 
 reverse the denial under review and, in the case of a 
 reversal, the timeframe within which the plan or issuer 
 shall authorize coverage to comply with the 
 determination. Such written determination shall include 
 the specific reasons of the reviewer for such 
 determination, including a summary of the clinical or 
 scientific-evidence based rationale used in making the 
 determination. The reviewer may provide the plan or 
 issuer and the treating health care professional with 
 additional recommendations in connection with such a 
 determination, but any such recommendations shall not 
 be treated as part of the determination and shall not 
 be admissible in any action under section 502.
 ``(e) Timelines and Notifications.--
 ``(1) Timelines for independent medical review.--
 ``(A) Prior authorization determination.--
 ``(i) In general.--The independent medical 
 reviewer (or reviewers) shall make a 
 determination on a denial of a claim for 
 benefits that is referred to the reviewer under 
 subsection (c)(3) not later than 14 days after 
 the receipt of information under subsection 
 (c)(2) if the review involves a prior 
 authorization of items or services.
 ``(ii) Expedited determination.--
 Notwithstanding clause (i), the independent 
 medical reviewer (or reviewers) shall make an 
 expedited determination on a denial of a claim 
 for benefits described in clause (i), when a 
 request for such an expedited determination is 
 made by a participant or beneficiary (or 
 authorized representative) at any time during 
 the process for making a determination, and the 
 treating health care professional 
 substantiates, with the request, that a 
 determination under the timeline described in 
 clause (i) would seriously jeopardize the life 
 or health of the participant or beneficiary. 
 Such determination shall be made not later than 
 72 hours after the receipt of information under 
 subsection (c)(2).
 ``(iii) Concurrent determination.--
 Notwithstanding clause (i), a review described 
 in such subclause shall be completed not later 
 than 24 hours after the receipt of information 
 under subsection (c)(2) if the review involves 
 a discontinuation of inpatient care.
 ``(B) Retrospective determination.--The independent 
 medical reviewer (or reviewers) shall complete a review 
 in the case of a retrospective determination on an 
 appeal of a denial of a claim for benefits that is 
 referred to the reviewer under subsection (c)(3) not 
 later than 30 days after the receipt of information 
 under subsection (c)(2).
 ``(2) Notification of determination.--The external review 
 entity shall ensure that the plan or issuer, the participant or 
 beneficiary (or authorized representative) and the treating 
 health care professional (if any) receives a copy of the 
 written determination of the independent medical reviewer 
 prepared under subsection (d)(3)(F). Nothing in this paragraph 
 shall be construed as preventing an entity or reviewer from 
 providing an initial oral notice of the reviewer's 
 determination.
 ``(3) Form of notices.--Determinations and notices under 
 this subsection shall be written in a manner calculated to be 
 understood by an average participant.
 ``(4) Termination of external review process if approval of 
 a claim for benefits during process.--
 ``(A) In general.--If a plan or issuer--
 ``(i) reverses a determination on a denial 
 of a claim for benefits that is the subject of 
 an external review under this section and 
 authorizes coverage for the claim or provides 
 payment of the claim; and
 ``(ii) provides notice of such reversal to 
 the participant or beneficiary (or authorized 
 representative) and the treating health care 
 professional (if any), and the external review 
 entity responsible for such review,
 the external review process shall be terminated with 
 respect to such denial and any filing fee paid under 
 subsection (b)(2)(A)(iv) shall be refunded.
 ``(B) Treatment of termination.--An authorization 
 of coverage under subparagraph (A) by the plan or 
 issuer shall be treated as a written determination to 
 reverse a denial under section (d)(3)(F) for purposes 
 of liability under section 502(n)(1)(B).
 ``(f) Compliance.--
 ``(1) Application of determinations.--
 ``(A) External review determinations binding on 
 plan.--The determinations of an external review entity 
 and an independent medical reviewer under this section 
 shall be binding upon the plan or issuer involved.
 ``(B) Compliance with determination.--If the 
 determination of an independent medical reviewer is to 
 reverse the denial, the plan or issuer, upon the 
 receipt of such determination, shall authorize coverage 
 to comply with the medical reviewer's determination in 
 accordance with the timeframe established by the 
 medical reviewer under subsection (d)(3)(F).
 ``(2) Failure to comply.--
 ``(A) With timeframe for providing items and 
 services.--If a plan or issuer fails to comply with the 
 timeframe established under paragraph (1)(B) with 
 respect to a participant or beneficiary, where such 
 failure to comply is caused by the plan or issuer, the 
 participant or beneficiary may obtain the items or 
 services involved (in a manner consistent with the 
 determination of the independent external reviewer) 
 from any provider regardless of whether such provider 
 is a participating provider under the plan or coverage.
 ``(B) Reimbursement.--
 ``(i) In general.--Where a participant or 
 beneficiary obtains items or services in 
 accordance with subparagraph (A), the plan or 
 issuer involved shall provide for reimbursement 
 of the costs of such items or services. Such 
 reimbursement shall be made to the treating 
 health care professional or to the participant 
 or beneficiary (in the case of a participant or 
 beneficiary who pays for the costs of such 
 items or services).
 ``(ii) Amount.--The plan or issuer shall 
 fully reimburse a professional, participant or 
 beneficiary under clause (i) for the total 
 costs of the items or services provided 
 (regardless of any plan limitations that may 
 apply to the coverage of such items or 
 services) so long as--
 ``(I) the items or services would 
 have been covered under the terms of 
 the plan or coverage if provided by the 
 plan or issuer; and
 ``(II) the items or services were 
 provided in a manner consistent with 
 the determination of the independent 
 medical reviewer.
 ``(C) Failure to reimburse.--Where a plan or issuer 
 fails to provide reimbursement to a professional, 
 participant or beneficiary in accordance with this 
 paragraph, the professional, participant or beneficiary 
 may commence a civil action (or utilize other remedies 
 available under law) to recover only the amount of any 
 such reimbursement that is unpaid and any necessary 
 legal costs or expenses (including attorneys' fees) 
 incurred in recovering such reimbursement.
 ``(g) Qualifications of Independent Medical Reviewers.--
 ``(1) In general.--In referring a denial to 1 or more 
 individuals to conduct independent medical review under 
 subsection (c), the qualified external review entity shall 
 ensure that--
 ``(A) each independent medical reviewer meets the 
 qualifications described in paragraphs (2) and (3);
 ``(B) with respect to each review at least 1 such 
 reviewer meets the requirements described in paragraphs 
 (4) and (5); and
 ``(C) compensation provided by the entity to the 
 reviewer is consistent with paragraph (6).
 ``(2) Licensure and expertise.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), 
 each independent medical reviewer shall be a physician 
 (who is an allopathic or osteopathic physician) or 
 health care professional who--
 ``(i) is appropriately credentialed or 
 licensed in 1 or more States to deliver health 
 care services; and
 ``(ii) typically treats the diagnosis or 
 condition or provides the type of treatment 
 under review.
 ``(B) Physician review.--In referring a denial for 
 independent medical review under subsection (c), the 
 qualified external review entity shall ensure that, in 
 the case of the review of treatment that is recommended 
 or provided by a physician, such referral may be made 
 only to a physician for such independent medical 
 review.
 ``(3) Independence.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), 
 each independent medical reviewer in a case shall--
 ``(i) not be a related party (as defined in 
 paragraph (7));
 ``(ii) not have a material familial, 
 financial, or professional relationship with 
 such a party; and
 ``(iii) not otherwise have a conflict of 
 interest with such a party (as determined under 
 regulations).
 ``(B) Exception.--Nothing in this subparagraph (A) 
 shall be construed to--
 ``(i) prohibit an individual, solely on the 
 basis of affiliation with the plan or issuer, 
 from serving as an independent medical reviewer 
 if--
 ``(I) a non-affiliated individual 
 is not reasonably available;
 ``(II) the affiliated individual is 
 not involved in the provision of items 
 or services in the case under review;
 ``(III) the fact of such an 
 affiliation is disclosed to the plan or 
 issuer and the participant or 
 beneficiary (or authorized 
 representative) and neither party 
 objects; and
 ``(IV) the affiliated individual is 
 not an employee of the plan or issuer 
 and does not provide services 
 exclusively or primarily to or on 
 behalf of the plan or issuer;
 ``(ii) prohibit an individual who has staff 
 privileges at the institution where the 
 treatment involved takes place from serving as 
 an independent medical reviewer if the 
 affiliation is disclosed to the plan or issuer 
 and the participant or beneficiary (or 
 authorized representative), and neither party 
 objects; or
 ``(iii) prohibit receipt of compensation by 
 an independent medical reviewer from an entity 
 if the compensation is provided consistent with 
 paragraph (6).
 ``(4) Practicing health care professional in same field.--
 ``(A) In general.--The requirement of this 
 paragraph with respect to a reviewer in a case 
 involving treatment, or the provision of items or 
 services, by--
 ``(i) a physician, is that the reviewer be 
 a practicing physician of the same or similar 
 specialty as a physician who typically treats 
 the diagnosis or condition or provides such 
 treatment in the case under review; or
 ``(ii) a health care professional (other 
 than a physician), is that the reviewer be a 
 practicing physician or, if determined 
 appropriate by the qualified external review 
 entity, a health care professional (other than 
 a physician), of the same or similar specialty 
 as the health care professional who typically 
 treats the diagnosis or condition or provides 
 the treatment in the case under review.
 ``(B) Practicing defined.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the term `practicing' means, with respect to 
 an individual who is a physician or other health care 
 professional that the individual provides health care 
 services to individual patients on average at least 2 
 days per week.
 ``(5) Pediatric expertise.--The independent medical 
 reviewer shall have pediatric expertise under paragraph (2) 
 where necessary to evaluate the relevant conditions for the 
 participant or beneficiary involved.
 ``(6) Limitations on reviewer compensation.--Compensation 
 provided by a qualified external review entity to an 
 independent medical reviewer in connection with a review under 
 this section shall--
 ``(A) not exceed a reasonable level; and
 ``(B) not be contingent on the determination 
 rendered by the reviewer.
 ``(7) Related party defined.--For purposes of this section, 
 the term `related party' means, with respect to a denial of a 
 claim under a plan or coverage relating to a participant or 
 beneficiary, any of the following:
 ``(A) The plan, plan sponsor, or issuer involved, 
 or any fiduciary, officer, director, or employee of 
 such plan, plan sponsor, or issuer.
 ``(B) The participant or beneficiary (or authorized 
 representative).
 ``(C) The health care professional that provides 
 the items of services involved in the denial.
 ``(D) The institution at which the items or 
 services (or treatment) involved in the denial are 
 provided.
 ``(E) The manufacturer of any drug or other item 
 that is included in the items or services involved in 
 the denial.
 ``(F) Any other party determined under any 
 regulations to have a substantial interest in the 
 denial involved.
 ``(h) Qualified External Review Entities.--
 ``(1) Selection of qualified external review entities.--
 ``(A) Limitation on plan or issuer selection.--The 
 Secretary shall implement procedures with respect to 
 the selection of qualified external review entities by 
 a plan or issuer to assure that the selection process 
 among qualified external review entities will not 
 create any incentives for external review entities to 
 make a determination in a biased manner. No such 
 selection process under the procedures implemented by 
 the Secretary may give either the patient or the plan 
 or issuer any ability to determine or influence the 
 selection of a qualified external review entity to 
 review the case of any participant or beneficiary.
 ``(B) State authority with respect to qualified 
 external review entities for health insurance 
 issuers.--With respect to health insurance issuers 
 offering health insurance coverage in a State, the 
 State may provide for the designation or selection of 
 qualified external review entities in a manner 
 determined by the State to assure an unbiased 
 determination in conducting external review activities. 
 In conducting reviews under this section, an entity 
 designated or selected under this subparagraph shall 
 comply with provisions of this section.
 ``(2) Contract with qualified external review entity.--
 Except as provided in paragraph (1)(B), the external review 
 process of a plan or issuer under this section shall be 
 conducted under a contract between the plan or issuer and 1 or 
 more qualified external review entities (as defined in 
 paragraph (4)(A)).
 ``(3) Terms and conditions of contract.--The terms and 
 conditions of a contract under paragraph (2) shall--
 ``(A) be consistent with the standards the 
 Secretary shall establish to assure there is no real or 
 apparent conflict of interest in the conduct of 
 external review activities; and
 ``(B) provide that the costs of the external review 
 process shall be borne by the plan or issuer.
 Subparagraph (B) shall not be construed as applying to the 
 imposition of a filing fee under subsection (b)(2)(A)(iv) or 
 costs incurred by the participant or beneficiary (or authorized 
 representative) or treating health care professional (if any) 
 in support of the review, including the provision of additional 
 evidence or information.
 ``(4) Qualifications.--
 ``(A) In general.--In this section, the term 
 `qualified external review entity' means, in relation 
 to a plan or issuer, an entity that is initially 
 certified (and periodically recertified) under 
 subparagraph (C) as meeting the following requirements:
 ``(i) The entity has (directly or through 
 contracts or other arrangements) sufficient 
 medical, legal, and other expertise and 
 sufficient staffing to carry out duties of a 
 qualified external review entity under this 
 section on a timely basis, including making 
 determinations under subsection (b)(2)(A) and 
 providing for independent medical reviews under 
 subsection (d).
 ``(ii) The entity is not a plan or issuer 
 or an affiliate or a subsidiary of a plan or 
 issuer, and is not an affiliate or subsidiary 
of a professional or trade association of plans or issuers or of health 
care providers.
 ``(iii) The entity has provided assurances 
 that it will conduct external review activities 
 consistent with the applicable requirements of 
 this section and standards specified in 
 subparagraph (C), including that it will not 
 conduct any external review activities in a 
 case unless the independence requirements of 
 subparagraph (B) are met with respect to the 
 case.
 ``(iv) The entity has provided assurances 
 that it will provide information in a timely 
 manner under subparagraph (D).
 ``(v) The entity meets such other 
 requirements as the Secretary provides by 
 regulation.
 ``(B) Independence requirements.--
 ``(i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), 
 an entity meets the independence requirements 
 of this subparagraph with respect to any case 
 if the entity--
 ``(I) is not a related party (as 
 defined in subsection (g)(7));
 ``(II) does not have a material 
 familial, financial, or professional 
 relationship with such a party; and
 ``(III) does not otherwise have a 
 conflict of interest with such a party 
 (as determined under regulations).
 ``(ii) Exception for reasonable 
 compensation.--Nothing in clause (i) shall be 
 construed to prohibit receipt by a qualified 
 external review entity of compensation from a 
 plan or issuer for the conduct of external 
 review activities under this section if the 
 compensation is provided consistent with clause 
 (iii).
 ``(iii) Limitations on entity 
 compensation.--Compensation provided by a plan 
 or issuer to, or charged by, a qualified 
 external review entity in connection with 
 reviews under this section shall--
 ``(I) not exceed a reasonable 
 level; and
 ``(II) not be contingent on the 
 determination rendered by the entity or 
 by any independent medical reviewer.
 ``(C) Certification and recertification process.--
 ``(i) In general.--The initial 
 certification and recertification of a 
 qualified external review entity shall be 
 made--
 ``(I) under a process that is 
 recognized or approved by the 
 Secretary; or
 ``(II) by a qualified private 
 standard-setting organization that is 
 approved by the Secretary under clause 
 (iii).
 The Secretary shall promulgate regulations 
 setting forth the process described in 
 subclause (I).
 ``(ii) Process.--The Secretary shall not 
 recognize or approve a process under clause 
 (i)(I) unless the process applies standards (as 
 promulgated in regulations) that ensure that a 
 qualified external review entity--
 ``(I) will carry out (and has 
 carried out, in the case of 
 recertification) the responsibilities 
 of such an entity in accordance with 
 this section, including meeting 
 applicable deadlines;
 ``(II) will meet (and has met, in 
 the case of recertification) 
 appropriate indicators of fiscal 
 integrity;
 ``(III) will maintain (and has 
 maintained, in the case of 
 recertification) appropriate 
 confidentiality with respect to 
 individually identifiable health 
 information obtained in the course of 
 conducting external review activities; 
 and
 ``(IV) in the case of 
 recertification, shall review the 
 matters described in clause (iv).
 ``(iii) Approval of qualified private 
 standard-setting organizations.--For purposes 
 of clause (i)(II), the Secretary may approve a 
 qualified private standard-setting organization 
 if the Secretary finds that the organization 
 only certifies (or recertifies) external review 
 entities that meet at least the standards 
 required for the certification (or 
 recertification) of external review entities 
 under clause (ii).
 ``(iv) Considerations in 
 recertifications.--In conducting 
 recertifications of a qualified external review 
 entity under this paragraph, the Secretary or 
 organization conducting the recertification 
 shall review compliance of the entity with the 
 requirements for conducting external review 
 activities under this section, including the 
 following:
 ``(I) Provision of information 
 under subparagraph (D).
 ``(II) Adherence to applicable 
 deadlines (both by the entity and by 
 independent medical reviewers it refers 
 cases to).
 ``(III) Compliance with limitations 
 on compensation (with respect to both 
 the entity and independent medical 
 reviewers it refers cases to).
 ``(IV) Compliance with applicable 
 independence requirements.
 ``(V) Quality and consistency of 
 medical review determinations with 
 valid, relevant scientific and clinical 
 evidence, as provided under clause 
 (vii).
 ``(v) Period of certification or 
 recertification.--A certification or 
 recertification provided under this paragraph 
 shall extend for a period not to exceed 3 
 years.
 ``(vi) Revocation.--A certification or 
 recertification under this paragraph may be 
 revoked by the Secretary or by the organization 
 providing such certification upon a showing of 
 cause.
 ``(vii) Assurance of quality and 
 consistency with valid, relevant scientific and 
 clinical evidence of external review 
 determinations.--The standards applied under 
 this subparagraph shall include procedures, 
 promulgated by the Secretary in consultation 
 with the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services, to assure that each qualified 
 external review entity is accountable for the 
 quality and consistency of the external review 
 determinations made by its independent medical 
 reviewers with valid, relevant scientific and 
 clinical evidence.
 ``(D) Provision of information.--
 ``(i) In general.--A qualified external 
 review entity shall provide to the Secretary, 
 in such manner and at such times as the 
 Secretary may require, such information 
 (relating to the denials which have been 
 referred to the entity for the conduct of 
 external review under this section) as the 
 Secretary determines appropriate to assure 
 compliance with the independence and other 
 requirements of this section to monitor and 
 assess the quality of its external review 
 activities and lack of bias in making 
 determinations. Such information shall include 
 information described in clause (ii) but shall 
 not include individually identifiable medical 
 information.
 ``(ii) Information to be included.--The 
 information described in this subclause with 
 respect to an entity is as follows:
 ``(I) The number and types of 
 denials for which a request for review 
 has been received by the entity.
 ``(II) The disposition by the 
 entity of such denials, including the 
 number referred to a independent 
 medical reviewer and the reasons for 
 such dispositions (including the 
 application of exclusions), on a plan 
 or issuer-specific basis and on a 
 health care specialty-specific basis.
 ``(III) The length of time in 
 making determinations with respect to 
 such denials.
 ``(IV) Updated information on the 
 information required to be submitted as 
 a condition of certification with 
 respect to the entity's performance of 
 external review activities.
 ``(iii) Information to be provided to 
 certifying organization.--
 ``(I) In general.--In the case of a 
 qualified external review entity which 
 is certified (or recertified) under 
 this subsection by a qualified private 
 standard-setting organization, at the 
 request of the organization, the entity 
 shall provide the organization with the 
 information provided to the Secretary 
 under clause (i).
 ``(II) Additional information.--
 Nothing in this subparagraph shall be 
 construed as preventing such an 
 organization from requiring additional 
 information as a condition of 
 certification or recertification of an 
 entity.
 ``(iv) Use of information.--
 ``(I) In general.--Information 
 provided under this subparagraph may be 
 used by the Secretary and qualified 
 private standard-setting organizations 
 to conduct oversight of qualified 
 external review entities, including 
 recertification of such entities, and 
 shall be made available to the public 
 in an appropriate manner.
 ``(II) Report to congress.--Not 
 later than 2 years after the date on 
 which the Patients' Bill of Rights Act 
 of 2001 takes effect under section 501 
 of such Act, and every 2 years 
 thereafter, the Secretary, in 
 consultation with the Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services, shall 
 prepare and submit to the appropriate 
 committees of Congress, a report that 
 contains--
 ``(aa) a summary of the 
 information provided to the 
 Secretary under clause (ii);
 ``(bb) a description of the 
 effect that the appeals process 
 established under this section 
 and section 503A had on the 
 access of individuals to health 
 insurance and health care;
 ``(cc) a description of the 
 effect on health care costs 
 associated with the 
 implementation of the appeals 
 process described in item (bb); 
 and
 ``(dd) a description of the 
 quality and consistency of 
 determinations by qualified 
 external review entities.
 ``(III) Recommendations.--The 
 Secretary may from time to time submit 
 recommendations to Congress with 
 respect to proposed modifications to 
 the appeals process based on the 
 reports submitted under subclause (II).
 ``(E) Limitation on liability.--No qualified 
 external review entity having a contract with a plan or 
 issuer, and no person who is employed by any such 
 entity or who furnishes professional services to such 
 entity (including as an independent medical reviewer), 
 shall be held by reason of the performance of any duty, 
 function, or activity required or authorized pursuant 
 to this section, to be civilly liable under any law of 
 the United States or of any State (or political 
 subdivision thereof) if there was no actual malice or 
 gross misconduct in the performance of such duty, 
 function, or activity.
 ``(i) Definitions and Related Rules.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) Authorized representative.--The term `authorized 
 representative' means, with respect to a participant or 
 beneficiary--
 ``(A) a person to whom a participant or beneficiary 
 has given express written consent to represent the 
 participant or beneficiary in any proceeding under this 
 section;
 ``(B) a person authorized by law to provide 
 substituted consent for the participant or beneficiary; 
 or
 ``(C) a family member of the participant or 
 beneficiary (or the estate of the participant or 
 beneficiary) or the participant's or beneficiary's 
 treating health care professional when the participant 
 or beneficiary is unable to provide consent.
 ``(2) Claim for benefits.--The term `claim for benefits' 
 means any request by a participant or beneficiary (or 
 authorized representative) for benefits, for eligibility, or 
 for payment in whole or in part, for an item or service under a 
 group health plan or health insurance coverage offered by a 
 health insurance issuer in connection with a group health plan.
 ``(3) Group health plan.--The term `group health plan' 
 shall have the meaning given such term in section 733(a).
 ``(4) Health insurance coverage.--The term `health 
 insurance coverage' has the meaning given such term in section 
 733(b)(1).
 ``(5) Health insurance issuer.--The term `health insurance 
 issuer' has the meaning given such term in section 733(b)(2).
 ``(6) Prior authorization determination.--The term `prior 
 authorization determination' means a determination by the group 
 health plan or health insurance issuer offering health 
 insurance coverage in connection with a group health plan prior 
 to the provision of the items and services as a condition of 
 coverage of the items and services under the terms and 
 conditions of the plan or coverage.
 ``(7) Treating health care professional.--The term 
 `treating health care professional' with respect to a group 
 health plan, health insurance issuer or provider sponsored 
 organization means a physician (medical doctor or doctor of 
 osteopathy) or other health care practitioner who is acting 
 within the scope of his or her State licensure or certification 
 for the delivery of health care services and who is primarily 
 responsible for delivering those services to the participant or 
 beneficiary.
 ``(8) Utilization review.--The term `utilization review' 
 with respect to a group health plan or health insurance 
 coverage means procedures used in the determination of coverage 
 for a participant or beneficiary, such as procedures to 
 evaluate the medical necessity, appropriateness, efficacy, 
 quality, or efficiency of health care services, procedures or 
 settings, and includes prospective review, concurrent review, 
 second opinions, case management, discharge planning, or 
 retrospective review.
 ``(9) Treatment of excepted benefits.--The requirements of 
 this section and section 503A shall not apply to excepted 
 benefits (as defined in section 733(c)), other than benefits 
 described in section 733(c)(2)(A), in the same manner as the 
 provisions of part 7 do not apply to such benefits under 
 subsections (b) and (c) of section 732.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1 of 
the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by 
inserting after the item relating to section 503 the following:

``Sec. 503A. Claims and internal appeals procedures for group health 
 plans.
``Sec. 503B. Independent external appeals procedures for group health 
 plans.''.

SEC. 132. ENFORCEMENT.

 (a) Civil Penalty Authority.--Section 502(c) of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1132(c)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraph (7) as paragraph (8); and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (6) the following new 
 paragraph: in subsection (a)(1)(A), by inserting ``or (n)'' 
 after ``subsection (c)''; and
 ``(7)(A) In the case of--
 ``(i) a failure described in section 503B(f)(2)(A) 
 (relating to failure to comply with timeframe for providing 
 items and services), or
 ``(ii) a failure of a group health plan or health insurance 
 issuer to take such actions as are necessary to refer a denial 
 of a claim for benefit to independent medical review in 
 accordance with section 503B(c)(1) or to provide information 
 required in connection with such a referral under section 
 503B(c)(2),
the Secretary may assess a civil penalty in an amount determined under 
subparagraph (B) against any person who, acting in the capacity of 
authorizing the benefit involved, causes such failure.
 ``(B)(i) Subject to clause (iii), such civil penalty shall not 
exceed the amount specified in clause (ii) for each day from the date 
of commencement of such failure until the date the failure is 
corrected.
 ``(ii) The amount specified in this clause for any day described in 
clause (i) shall be--
 ``(I) $2,000 a day for the 1st through the 7th days,
 ``(II) $5,000 a day for the 8th through the 14th days, and
 ``(III) $10,000 a day for each day after the 14th day.
 ``(iii) The total amount of the penalty under clause (i) may not 
exceed $500,000.
 ``(C) Civil monetary penalties under the preceding provisions of 
this paragraph may be imposed against authorized officials for failure 
to provide referral to a qualified external review entity or access to 
health information, as required under section 503B(c)(1) and (2).
 ``(D)(i) In addition to any penalty imposed under subparagraph (A), 
the Secretary may assess a civil penalty against a person acting in the 
capacity of authorizing a benefit determined by an external review 
entity for one or more group health plans, or health insurance issuers 
offering health insurance coverage, for any pattern or practice of 
repeated violations of the requirements of this section with respect to 
such plan or coverage (including any failure described in subparagraph 
(A)(i) or the refusal to authorize a benefit determined by an external 
appeal entity to be covered).
 ``(ii) Such penalty shall be payable only upon proof by clear and 
convincing evidence of such pattern or practice and shall be in an 
amount not to exceed for such pattern or practice the lesser of--
 ``(I) 25 percent of the aggregate value of benefits shown 
 by the Secretary to have not been provided, or unlawfully 
 delayed, in violation of this section under such pattern or 
 practice; or
 ``(II) $500,000.
 ``(iii) Any person acting in the capacity of authorizing benefits 
who has engaged in any such pattern or practice described in clause (i) 
with respect to a plan or coverage, upon the petition of the Secretary, 
may be removed by the court from such position, and from any other 
involvement, with respect to such a plan or coverage, and may be 
precluded from returning to any such position or involvement for a 
period determined by the court.
 ``(E) In any action under this paragraph to collect a civil penalty 
under subparagraph (A) or (D), the court shall cause to be served on 
the defendant an order requiring the defendant--
 ``(i) to cease and desist from the alleged failure to act; 
 and
 ``(ii) to pay to the Secretary a reasonable attorney's fee 
 and other reasonable costs relating to the prosecution of the 
 action on the charges on which the Secretary prevails.
 ``(F) The preceding provisions of this paragraph shall not apply 
with respect to employee benefit plans that are not group health plans. 
Such provisions also shall not apply to excepted benefits (as defined 
in section 733(c)), other than benefits described in section 
733(c)(2)(A), in the same manner as the provisions of part 7 do not 
apply to such benefits under subsections (b) and (c) of section 732.
 ``(G) The remedies provided under this paragraph are in addition to 
any other available remedies.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 502(a)(6) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 
1132(a)(6)) is amended by striking ``or (6)'' and inserting ``(6), or 
(7)''.

 Subtitle D--Remedies

SEC. 141. AVAILABILITY OF COURT REMEDIES.

 (a) In General.--Section 502 of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1132) is amended by adding at the end 
the following:
 ``(n) Cause of Action Relating to Denial of a Claim for Health 
Benefits.--
 ``(1) In general.--
 ``(A) Failure to comply with external medical 
 review.--With respect to an action commenced by a 
 participant or beneficiary (or the estate of the 
 participant or beneficiary) in connection with a claim 
 for benefits under a group health plan, if--
 ``(i) a designated decisionmaker described 
 in paragraph (2) fails to exercise ordinary 
 care in failing to authorize coverage in 
 compliance with the written determination of an 
 independent medical reviewer under section 
 503B(d)(3)(F) that reverses a denial of the 
 claim for benefits; and
 ``(ii) the failure described in clause (i) 
 is the proximate cause of substantial harm (as 
defined in paragraph (14)(G)) to the participant or beneficiary;
 such designated decisionmaker shall be liable to the 
 participant or beneficiary (or the estate) for economic 
 and noneconomic damages in connection with such failure 
 and such injury or death (subject to paragraph (4)).
 ``(B) Wrongful determination resulting in delay in 
 providing or failure to receive benefits.--With respect 
 to an action commenced by a participant or beneficiary 
 (or the estate of the participant or beneficiary) in 
 connection with a claim for benefits under a group 
 health plan, if--
 ``(i) a designated decisionmaker described 
 in paragraph (2)--
 ``(I) fails to exercise ordinary 
 care in making a determination denying 
 the claim for benefits under section 
 503A(a) (relating to an initial claim 
 for benefits); or
 ``(II) fails to exercise ordinary 
 care in making a determination denying 
 the claim for benefits under section 
 503A(b) (relating to an internal 
 appeal);
 ``(ii) the denial described in clause (i)--
 ``(I) is reversed by an independent 
 medical reviewer under section 503B(d) 
 or 503B(e)(4)(B), or
 ``(II) was determined by a 
 qualified external review entity under 
 section 503B(c)(3) not to be eligible 
 for referral for independent medical 
 review under such section; and
 ``(iii) the delay in receiving, or failure 
 to receive, benefits attributable to the 
 failure described in clause (i) is the 
 proximate cause of substantial harm to, or the 
 wrongful death of, the participant or 
 beneficiary;
 such designated decisionmaker shall be liable to the 
 participant or beneficiary (or the estate) for economic 
 and noneconomic damages in connection with such failure 
 and such injury or death (subject to paragraph (4)).
 ``(C) Limitation on liability based on appointment 
 of designated decisionmaker.--If a plan sponsor or 
 named fiduciary appoints a designated decisionmaker in 
 accordance with paragraph (2), the plan sponsor or 
 named fiduciary, or any other person or group health 
 plan (or their employees) associated with the plan 
 sponsor or named fiduciary, shall not be liable under 
 this paragraph. The appointment of a designated 
decisionmaker in accordance with paragraph (2) shall not affect the 
liability of the appointing plan sponsor or named fiduciary for the 
failure of the plan sponsor or named fiduciary to comply with any other 
requirement of this title.
 ``(2) Designated decisionmaker.--
 ``(A) Appointment.--
 ``(i) In general.--The plan sponsor or 
 named fiduciary of a group health plan shall, 
 in accordance with this paragraph, designate 
 one or more persons to serve as a designated 
 decisionmaker with respect to causes of action 
 described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of 
 paragraph (1), except that--
 ``(I) with respect to health 
 insurance coverage offered in 
 connection with a group health plan, 
 the health insurance issuer shall be 
 the designated decisionmaker unless the 
 plan sponsor and the issuer 
 specifically agree in writing (on a 
 form to be prescribed by the Secretary) 
 to substitute another person as the 
 designated decisionmaker; or
 ``(II) with respect to the 
 designation of a person other than a 
 plan sponsor or health insurance 
 issuer, such person shall satisfy the 
 requirements of subparagraph (D).
 ``(ii) Plan documents.--The designated 
 decisionmaker shall be specifically designated 
 as such in the written instruments of the plan 
 (under section 402(a)) and be identified as 
 required under section 121(b)(14) of the 
 Patients' Bill of Rights Act of 2001.
 ``(B) Authority.--A designated decisionmaker 
 appointed under subparagraph (A) shall have the 
 exclusive authority under the group health plan--
 ``(i) to make determinations with respect 
 to a claim for benefits under section 503A(a) 
 (relating to an initial claim for benefits);
 ``(ii) to make final determinations under 
 section 503A(b) (relating to an internal 
 appeal); or
 ``(iii) to approve coverage pursuant to the 
 written determination of independent medical 
 reviewers under section 503B.
 ``(C) Allocation of responsibility.--Responsibility 
 may be allocated among different designated 
 decisionmakers with respect to--
 ``(i) for purposes of paragraph (1)(A), the 
 approval of coverage under section 503B;
 ``(ii) for purposes of paragraph (1)(B), 
 making determinations on a claim for benefits 
 under section 503A(a) (relating to an initial 
 claim for benefits); and
 ``(iii) for purposes of paragraph (1)(B), 
 making final determinations on claims for 
 benefits under section 503A(b) (relating to 
 internal appeals).
 Where such an allocation is made, liability under a 
 cause of action under paragraph (1) shall be assessed 
 against the appropriate designated decisionmaker.
 ``(D) Qualifications.--
 ``(i) Certification of ability.--To be 
 appointed as a designated decisionmaker under 
 this paragraph, a person shall provide to the 
 plan sponsor or named fiduciary a certification 
 of such person's ability to meet the 
 requirement of clause (ii) and the requirements 
 of clause (iii) (relating to financial 
 obligation for liability under this 
 subsection). Such certification shall be 
 provided upon appointment and not less 
 frequently than annually thereafter, or if the 
 designation is pursuant to a multi-year 
 contract, in conjunction with the renewal of 
 the contract, but in no case less than once 
 every 3 years.
 ``(ii) Treating physician not eligible.--
 The treating physician of a participant or 
 beneficiary is not qualified to be appointed as 
 a designated decisionmaker under this paragraph 
 with respect to claims for benefits of such 
 participant or beneficiary relating to the 
 services of that physician.
 ``(iii) Other requirements relating to 
 financial obligations.--For purposes of clause 
 (i), requirements relating to financial 
 obligation for liability shall include evidence 
 of--
 ``(I) coverage of the person under 
 insurance policies or other 
 arrangements, secured and maintained by 
 the person, to insure the person 
 against losses arising from 
 professional liability claims, 
 including those arising from being 
 designated as a designated 
 decisionmaker under this paragraph; or
 ``(II) minimum capital and surplus 
 levels that are maintained by the 
 person to cover any losses as a result 
 of liability arising from being 
 designated as a designated 
 decisionmaker under this paragraph.
 The appropriate amounts of liability insurance 
 and minimum capital and surplus levels for 
 purposes of subclauses (I) and (II) shall be 
 determined by an actuary using sound actuarial 
 principles and accounting practices pursuant to 
 established guidelines of the American Academy 
 of Actuaries and shall be maintained throughout 
 the course of the contract in which such person 
 is designated as a designated decisionmaker.
 ``(E) Flexibility in administration.--A group 
 health plan, and a health insurance issuer offering 
 health insurance coverage in connection with a group 
 health plan, may provide--
 ``(i) that any person or group of persons 
 may serve in more than one capacity with 
 respect to the plan or coverage (including 
 service as a designated decisionmaker, 
 administrator, and named fiduciary); or
 ``(ii) that a designated decisionmaker may 
 employ one or more persons to provide advice 
 with respect to any responsibility of such 
 decisionmaker under the plan or coverage.
 ``(F) Failure to appoint.--With respect to any 
 cause of action under paragraph (1) relating to a 
 denial of a claim for benefits where a designated 
 decisionmaker has not been appointed in accordance with 
 this paragraph, the plan sponsor or named fiduciary 
 responsible for determinations under section 503 shall 
 be deemed to be the designated decisionmaker.
 ``(3) Requirement of exhaustion of independent medical 
 review.--
 ``(A) In general.--Paragraph (1) shall apply only 
 if--
 ``(i) a final determination denying a claim 
 for benefits under section 503A(b) has been 
 referred for independent medical review under 
 section 503B(d) and a written determination by 
 an independent medical reviewer to reverse such 
 final determination has been issued with 
 respect to such review, or
 ``(ii) the qualified external review entity 
 has determined under section 503B(c)(3) that a 
 referral to an independent medical reviewer is 
 not required.
 ``(B) Injunctive relief for irreparable harm.--A 
 participant or beneficiary may seek relief under 
 subsection 502(a)(1)(B) prior to the exhaustion of 
 administrative remedies under section 503A(b) or 503B 
 (as required under subparagraph (A)) if it is 
 demonstrated to the court, by a preponderance of the 
 evidence, that the exhaustion of such remedies would 
 cause irreparable harm to the health of the participant 
 or beneficiary. Any determinations that already have 
 been made under section 503A or 503B in such case, or 
 that are made in such case while an action under this 
 subparagraph is pending, shall be given due 
 consideration by the court in any action under this 
 subsection in such case. Notwithstanding the awarding 
 of relief under subsection 502(a)(1)(B) pursuant to 
 this subparagraph, no relief shall be available under--
 ``(i) paragraph (1), with respect to a 
 participant or beneficiary, unless the 
 requirements of subparagraph (A) are met; or
 ``(ii) subsection (q) unless the 
 requirements of such subsection are met.
 ``(4) Limitations on recovery of damages.--
 ``(A) Maximum award of noneconomic damages.--The 
 aggregate amount of liability for noneconomic loss in 
 an action under paragraph (1) may not exceed $500,000.
 ``(B) Several liability.--In the case of any action 
 commenced pursuant to paragraph (1), the designated 
 decisionmaker shall be liable only for the amount of 
 damages attributable to such designated decisionmaker 
 in direct proportion to such decisionmaker's share of 
 fault or responsibility for the injury suffered by the 
 participant or beneficiary. In all such cases, the 
 liability of a designated decisionmaker for damages 
 shall be several and not joint.
 ``(C) Prohibition of award of punitive damages.--
 Notwithstanding any other provision of law, in the case 
 of any action commenced pursuant to paragraph (1), the 
 court may not award any punitive, exemplary, or similar 
 damages against a defendant.
 ``(5) Affirmative defenses.--In the case of any cause of 
 action under paragraph (1), it shall be an affirmative defense 
 that--
 ``(A) the designated decisionmaker of a group 
 health plan, or health insurance issuer that offers 
 health insurance coverage in connection with a group 
 health plan, involved did not receive from the 
 participant or beneficiary (or authorized 
 representative) or the treating health care 
 professional (if any), the information requested by the 
 plan or issuer regarding the medical condition of the 
 participant or beneficiary that was necessary to make a 
 determination on a claim for benefits under section 
 503A(a) or a final determination on a claim for 
 benefits under section 503A(b);
 ``(B) the participant or beneficiary (or authorized 
 representative) or treating health care professional--
 ``(i) was in possession of facts that were 
 sufficient to enable the participant or 
 beneficiary (or authorized representative) to 
 know that an expedited review under section 
 503A or 503B would have prevented the harm that 
 is the subject of the action; and
 ``(ii) failed to notify the plan or issuer 
 of the need for such an expedited review; or
 ``(C) the qualified external review entity or an 
 independent medical reviewer failed to meet the 
 timelines applicable under section 503B, or a period of 
 time elapsing after coverage has been authorized.
 Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to limit the 
 application of any other affirmative defense that may be 
 applicable to the cause of action involved.
 ``(6) Waiver of internal review.--In the case of any cause 
 of action under paragraph (1), the waiver or nonwaiver of 
 internal review under section 503A(b)(1)(D) by the group health 
 plan, or health insurance issuer that offers health insurance 
 coverage in connection with a group health plan, shall not be 
 used in determining liability.
 ``(7) Limitations on actions.--Paragraph (1) shall not 
 apply in connection with any action that is commenced more than 
 5 years after the date on which the failure described in such 
 paragraph occurred or, if earlier, not later than 2 years after 
 the first date the participant or beneficiary became aware of 
 the substantial harm referred to in such paragraph.
 ``(8) Exclusion of directed recordkeepers.--
 ``(A) In general.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply 
 with respect to a directed record keeper in connection 
 with a group health plan.
 ``(B) Directed recordkeeper.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the term `directed record keeper' means, in 
 connection with a group health plan, a person engaged 
 in directed record keeping activities pursuant to the 
 instructions of the plan, the employer, or another plan 
 sponsor, including the distribution of enrollment 
 information and distribution of disclosure materials 
 under this Act or the Public Health Service Act and 
 whose duties do not include making determinations on 
 claims for benefits.
 ``(9) Protection of the regulation of quality of medical 
 care under state law.--Nothing in this subsection shall be 
 construed to preclude any action under State law against a 
 person or entity for liability or vicarious liability with 
 respect to the delivery of medical care. A claim that is based 
on or otherwise relates to a group health plan's administration or 
determination of a claim for benefits (as such term is defined in 
section 503B(i)(2) and notwithstanding the definition contained in 
paragraph (14)(B)) shall not be deemed to be the delivery of medical 
care under any State law for purposes of this section. Any such claim 
shall be maintained exclusively under section 502. Nothing in this 
paragraph shall be construed as affecting any action under State law 
that is permitted under section 514(c).
 ``(10) Coordination with fiduciary requirements.--A 
 fiduciary shall not be treated as failing to meet any 
 requirement of part 4 solely by reason of any action taken by a 
 fiduciary which consists of full compliance with the reversal 
 under section 503B (relating to independent external appeals 
 procedures for group health plans) of a denial of claim for 
 benefits (within the meaning of section 503B(i)(2)).
 ``(11) Construction.--Nothing in this subsection shall be 
 construed as authorizing a cause of action under paragraph (1) 
 for the failure of a group health plan or health insurance 
 issuer to provide an item or service that is specifically 
 excluded under the plan or coverage.
 ``(12) Limitation on class action litigation.--A claim or 
 cause of action under this subsection may not be maintained as 
 a class action, as a derivative action, or as an action on 
 behalf of any group of 2 or more claimants.
 ``(13) Prevention of duplication of action with action 
 under state law.--No action may be brought under this 
 subsection based upon facts and circumstances if a cause of 
 action under State law (that is permitted under section 514 
 only because of the application of subsection (c) of such 
 section) is brought based upon the same facts and 
 circumstances.
 ``(14) Definitions and related rules.--For purposes of this 
 subsection:
 ``(A) Authorized representative.--The term 
 `authorized representative' has the meaning given such 
 term in section 503B(i).
 ``(B) Claim for benefits.--Except as provided for 
 in paragraph (8), the term `claim for benefits' shall 
 have the meaning given such term in section 503B(i), 
 except that such term shall only include claims for 
 prior authorization determinations (as such term is 
 defined in section 503B(i)).
 ``(C) Group health plan.--The term `group health 
 plan' shall have the meaning given such term in section 
 733(a).
 ``(D) Health insurance coverage.--The term `health 
 insurance coverage' has the meaning given such term in 
 section 733(b)(1).
 ``(E) Health insurance issuer.--The term `health 
 insurance issuer' has the meaning given such term in 
 section 733(b)(2).
 ``(F) Ordinary care.--The term `ordinary care' 
 means the care, skill, prudence, and diligence under 
 the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent 
 individual acting in a like capacity and familiar with 
 such matters would use in making a determination on a 
 claim for benefits of a similar character.
 ``(G) Substantial harm.--The term `substantial 
 harm' means the loss of life, loss or significant 
 impairment of limb or bodily function, significant 
 mental illness or disease, significant disfigurement, 
 or severe and chronic physical pain.
 ``(H) Treatment of excepted benefits.--The 
 provisions of this subsection shall not apply to 
 excepted benefits (as defined in section 733(c)), other 
 than benefits described in section 733(c)(2)(A), in the 
 same manner as the provisions of part 7 do not apply to 
 such benefits under subsections (b) and (c) of section 
 732.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 502(a)(1)(A) of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1132(a)(1)(A)) is 
amended by inserting ``or (n)'' after ``subsection (c)''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to acts and omissions occurring on or after the effective date 
contained in section 501 of this Act.

SEC. 142. TREATMENT OF STATE CAUSES OF ACTION WITH RESPECT TO CERTAIN 
 CLAIMS DENIALS BY GROUP HEALTH PLANS.

 Section 514 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
(29 U.S.C. 1144) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsections (c) and (d) as subsections 
 (d) and (e), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(c) Treatment of State Causes of Action With Respect to Certain 
Claims Denials by Group Health Plans.--
 ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding the preceding provisions 
 of this section, a cause of action by a participant or 
 beneficiary under a group health plan against the applicable 
 designated decisionmaker (within the meaning of section 502(o)) 
 under State law is not superseded by the provisions of this 
 title if--
 ``(A) the action is one for damages from personal 
 injury or for wrongful death proximately caused by a 
 denial of a claim for benefits, and
 ``(B) the conditions described in paragraph (2) are 
 met with respect to such denial.
 ``(2) Failure to authorize coverage ordered by independent 
 medical reviewer.--The conditions in this paragraph with 
 respect to a denial of a claim for benefits are met if--
 ``(A) the denial is reversed by a written 
 determination by an independent medical reviewer under 
 section 503B(d)(3)(F); and
 ``(B) there has been a failure to authorize 
 coverage in compliance with such written determination.
 ``(3) Prevention of duplication of action with action under 
 federal law.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply, in relation to a 
 cause of action under State law based upon facts and 
 circumstances, if a cause of action is brought under section 
 502(n) based upon the same facts and circumstances.
 ``(4) Definitions and related rules.--For purposes of this 
 subsection--
 ``(A) Claim for benefits.--The term `claim for 
 benefits' has the meaning provided such term under 
 section 503B(i)(2).
 ``(B) Group health plan.--The term `group health 
 plan' has the meaning provided such term under section 
 733(a)(1), except that such term includes a plan, fund, 
 or program treated as a group health plan under section 
 732(d).
 ``(C) Treatment of excepted benefits.--The 
 provisions of this subsection shall not apply to 
 excepted benefits (as defined in section 733(c)), other 
 than benefits described in section 733(c)(2)(A), in the 
 same manner as the provisions of part 7 do not apply to 
 such benefits under subsections (b) and (c) of section 
 732.''.

SEC. 143. LIMITATION ON CERTAIN CLASS ACTION LITIGATION.

 (a) ERISA.--
 (1) In general.--Section 502 of the Employee Retirement 
 Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1132), as amended by 
 section 141, is further amended by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(o) Limitation on Class Action Litigation.--Any claim or cause of 
action that is maintained under this section (other than under 
subsection (n)) or under section 1962 or 1964(c) of title 18, United 
States Code, in connection with a group health plan, or health 
insurance coverage issued in connection with a group health plan, as a 
class action, derivative action, or as an action on behalf of any group 
of 2 or more claimants, may be maintained only if the class, the 
derivative claimant, or the group of claimants is limited to the 
participants or beneficiaries of a group health plan established by 
only 1 plan sponsor. No action maintained by such class, such 
derivative claimant, or such group of claimants may be joined in the 
same proceeding with any action maintained by another class, derivative 
claimant, or group of claimants or consolidated for any purpose with 
any other proceeding. In this paragraph, the terms `group health plan' 
and `health insurance coverage' have the meanings given such terms in 
section 733.''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) 
 shall apply with respect to actions commenced on or after June 
 26, 2001. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, with respect 
 to class actions, the amendment made by paragraph (1) shall 
 apply with respect to civil actions which are pending on such 
 date in which a class action has not been certified as of such 
 date.
 (b) RICO.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1964(c) of title 18, United States 
 Code, is amended--
 (A) by inserting ``(1)'' after the subsection 
 designation; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2) No action may be brought under this subsection, or alleging 
any violation of section 1962, where the action seeks relief concerning 
the manner in which any person has marketed, provided information 
concerning, established, administered, or otherwise operated a group 
health plan, or health insurance coverage in connection with a group 
health plan. Any such action shall only be brought under the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974. In this paragraph, the terms 
`group health plan' and `health insurance issuer' shall have the 
meanings given such terms in section 733 of the Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act of 1974.''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by paragraph (1) 
 shall apply with respect to actions commenced on or after June 
 26, 2001.

 Subtitle E--State Flexibility

SEC. 151. STATE FLEXIBILITY IN APPLYING REQUIREMENTS TO HEALTH 
 INSURANCE ISSUERS AND NON-FEDERAL GOVERNMENTAL GROUP 
 HEALTH PLANS.

 (a) Nonapplication of Certain Federal Requirements in Case of 
Qualified State Regulation.--
 (1) In general.--
 (A) Qualified state patient protections.--A patient 
 protection requirement shall not apply with respect to 
 health insurance coverage (and to a group health plan 
 insofar as it provides benefits in the form of health 
 insurance coverage) if there is a State law (as defined 
 in subsection (c)) that regulates such coverage and 
 that is substantially equivalent (as provided under 
 paragraph (2) or (4)) to such requirement.
 (B) Internal and external appeals.--The 
 requirements of section 503A or 503B of the Employee 
 Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 shall not apply 
 with respect to individual health insurance coverage or 
 to a non-Federal governmental group health plan if 
 there is a State law that regulates such coverage or 
 plan and that is substantially equivalent (as provided 
 under paragraph (2) or (4)) to the section.
 (C) Patient protection requirement defined.--For 
 purposes of this section, the term ``patient protection 
 requirement'' means any one or more requirements under 
 the following:
 (i) Section 101 (relating to access to 
 emergency care).
 (ii) Section 102 (relating to consumer 
 choice option) with respect to non-Federal 
 governmental plans only.
 (iii) Section 103 (relating to patient 
 access to obstetric and gynecological care).
 (iv) Section 104 (relating to access to 
 pediatric care).
 (v) Section 105 (relating to timely access 
 to specialists).
 (vi) Section 106 (relating to continuity of 
 care), but only insofar as a replacement issuer 
 assumes the obligation for continuity of care.
 (vii) Section 108 (relating to access to 
 needed prescription drugs).
 (viii) Section 109 (relating to coverage 
 for individuals participating in approved 
 clinical trials).
 (ix) A prohibition under--
 (I) section 107 (relating to 
 prohibition of interference with 
 certain medical communications); and
 (II) section 110 (relating to 
 prohibition of discrimination against 
 providers based on licensure).
 (x) An informational requirement under 
 section 121.
 (2) State certification of substantial equivalence.--
 (A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (1), a 
 State law that imposes requirements that relate to a 
 section in Federal law referred to in such paragraph is 
 deemed to be substantially equivalent to that section 
 if the chief executive officer of the State, not later 
 than the deadline specified in subparagraph (D), 
 submits to the Secretary of Health and Human Services a 
 certification described in subparagraph (B). Such 
 certification shall be effective under paragraph (1) 
 until otherwise provided under paragraph (3)(C) or 
 (3)(D).
 (B) Description of certification.--A certification 
 described in this subparagraph is, with respect to a 
 State law in relation to a section of Federal law 
 referred to in paragraph (1), a certification that 
 there is a reasonable basis to find that the State law 
 imposes requirements that, taken as a whole and 
 considering the need for flexibility in the application 
 of such section in relation to applicable State law, 
 provide protections that are substantially equivalent 
 to or greater than the protections to participants and 
 beneficiaries provided under such section.
 (C) Procedures.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services shall by regulation establish procedures to 
 carry out this subsection.
 (D) Deadline.--The deadline specified in this 
 subparagraph is 90 days after the date regulations 
 described in subparagraph (C) are first promulgated.
 (3) Opportunity for secretarial review and determination.--
 (A) Notice of receipt of certification.--The 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services shall provide 
 for public notice upon receipt of a certification 
 submitted under paragraph (2). Such Secretary may 
 review such a certification to determine preliminarily 
 whether there is a reasonable basis for the 
 certification,
 (B) Notice of preliminary disapproval.--A 
 certification under paragraph (2) shall be effective 
 unless such Secretary determines, within 90 days of the 
 date of its submittal, that there is not a reasonable 
 basis for the certification. Such Secretary shall 
 provide notice to the State and the public of such 
 determination. Such notice shall include an explanation 
 of the basis for the determination and shall identify 
 specific deficiencies in the State law. The provision 
 of such notice shall not suspend the effectiveness of 
 the State certification.
 (C) Final determination.--If such Secretary has 
 made a determination described in subparagraph (B), 
 such Secretary shall make a final determination 
 regarding whether there is a reasonable basis for the 
certification. Such Secretary shall provide notice of such final 
determination in the same manner as for determinations under 
subparagraph (B). If such Secretary decides that there is not a 
reasonable basis for the certification, such Secretary shall specify a 
time period (of not less than one year) by the end of which the 
certification will no longer be effective. Such determination shall 
take effect (and the effectiveness of the certification suspended) at 
the end of the period for filing judicial review of such determination 
under subparagraph (D) unless the State files for judicial review. If 
the State files for judicial review the certification shall remain in 
effect during the period of judicial review and until such time as 
ordered by the court under subparagraph (D).
 (D) Judicial review.--A final determination of the 
 Secretary under subparagraph (C) is subject to judicial 
 review under chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code, 
 in the Circuit Court of Appeals for the State 
 certification of which is challenged. To find for such 
 Secretary, the court must find that there is not a 
 reasonable basis for the certification. If the court 
 upholds the final determination of such Secretary, the 
 certification shall remain in effect until such date as 
 the court may specify in order to provide for an 
 orderly transition.
 (4) State certifications after federal provisions have 
 taken effect.--After a section of Federal law referred to in 
 paragraph (1) has taken effect, a State may nonetheless submit 
 a certification described in paragraph (2)(B). Such a 
 certification shall only become effective if--
 (A) there is no challenge of the certification by 
 the Secretary of Health and Human Services within 90 
 days after the date of its submittal;
 (B) such Secretary concurs in the certification; or
 (C) such Secretary challenges the certification but 
 such challenge is not upheld in court;
 and not until 1 year after the expiration of such 90-day 
 period, the date of the Secretary's concurrence, or the date a 
 court does not uphold the Secretary's challenge, as the case 
 may be.
 (b) Relationship of Qualified State Patient Protections to Plans 
Under ERISA.--
 (1) In general.--Nothing in this section shall be construed 
 to affect or modify the provisions of section 514 of the 
 Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 
 1144) with respect to group health plans. In any case in which 
 health insurance coverage is provided by a health insurance 
 issuer in connection with a group health plan to which title I 
 of such Act applies and there is a State law described in 
 subsection (a)(1)(A) that regulates such coverage and that is 
 substantially equivalent (as provided under paragraph (2) or 
 (4) of subsection (a)) to requirements of a section of Federal 
 law referred to in subsection (a)(1)(A), to the extent that 
 such State law, as applicable to such plan, is superseded by 
 such title, the provisions of such State law shall be deemed 
 (including for purposes of applying administration and 
 enforcement of part 5 of subtitle B of title I of such Act) to 
 be substituted for (and incorporated as) the corresponding 
 section of Federal law referred to in subsection (a)(1)(A) 
 insofar as the plan provides benefits by means of such 
 coverage.
 (2) Preventing application of state law in cases where 
 federal law is applied.--In any case in which, after applying 
 the provisions of this subsection with respect to a section of 
 Federal law described referred to in subsection (a)(1)(A), the 
 requirements of such section remain applicable with respect to 
 health insurance coverage (and to a group health plan insofar 
 as it provides benefits in the form of health insurance 
 coverage) in a State, any State law that imposes requirements 
 within the scope of the subject matter and protections provided 
 by such section, taken as a whole, is preempted and does not 
 apply.
 (c) Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the terms ``State'' 
and ``State law'' shall have the meanings given such terms in section 
2723(d) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-23(d)).

 Subtitle F--Miscellaneous Provisions

SEC. 161. DEFINITIONS.

 (a) Incorporation of General Definitions.--Except as otherwise 
provided, the provisions of section 2791 of the Public Health Service 
Act shall apply for purposes of this title in the same manner as they 
apply for purposes of title XXVII of such Act.
 (b) Secretary.--Except as otherwise provided, the term 
``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services, in 
consultation with the Secretary of Labor.
 (c) Additional Definitions.--For purposes of this title:
 (1) Enrollee.--The term ``enrollee'' means, with respect to 
 health insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer, 
 an individual enrolled with the issuer to receive such 
 coverage.
 (2) Health care professional.--The term ``health care 
 professional'' means an individual who is licensed, accredited, 
 or certified under State law to provide specified health care 
 services and who is operating within the scope of such 
 licensure, accreditation, or certification.
 (3) Health care provider.--The term ``health care 
 provider'' includes an allopathic or osteopathic physician or 
 other health care professional, as well as an institutional or 
 other facility or agency that provides health care services and 
 that is licensed, accredited, or certified to provide health 
 care items and services under applicable State law.
 (4) Network.--The term ``network'' means, with respect to a 
 group health plan or health insurance issuer offering health 
 insurance coverage, the participating health care professionals 
 and providers through whom the plan or issuer provides health 
 care items and services to participants, beneficiaries, or 
 enrollees.
 (5) Nonparticipating.--The term ``nonparticipating'' means, 
 with respect to a health care provider that provides health 
 care items and services to a participant, beneficiary, or 
 enrollee under group health plan or health insurance coverage, 
 a health care provider that is not a participating health care 
 provider with respect to such items and services.
 (6) Participating.--The term ``participating'' means, with 
 respect to a health care provider that provides health care 
 items and services to a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee 
 under group health plan or health insurance coverage offered by 
 a health insurance issuer, a health care provider that 
 furnishes such items and services under a contract or other 
 arrangement with the plan or issuer.
 (7) Prior authorization.--The term ``prior authorization'' 
 means the process of obtaining prior approval from a health 
 insurance issuer or group health plan for the provision or 
 coverage of medical services.
 (8) Terms and conditions.--The term ``terms and 
 conditions'' includes, with respect to a group health plan or 
 health insurance coverage, requirements imposed under this 
 title (and sections 503A and 503B of the Employee Retirement 
 Income Security Act of 1974) with respect to the plan or 
 coverage.

SEC. 162. EXCLUSIONS.

 (a) No Benefit Requirements.--Nothing in this title (or the 
amendments made by this title) shall be construed to require a group 
health plan or a health insurance issuer offering health insurance 
coverage to provide specific benefits under the terms of such plan or 
coverage, other than those provided under the terms of such plan or 
coverage.
 (b) Exclusion for Fee-for-Service Coverage.--
 (1) In general.--The provisions of subtitle A shall not 
 apply to a group health plan or health insurance coverage if 
 the only coverage offered under such plan or coverage is fee-
 for-service coverage (as defined in paragraph (2)).
 (2) Fee-for-service coverage defined.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term ``fee-for-service coverage'' means 
 coverage under a group health plan or health insurance coverage 
 that--
 (A) reimburses hospitals, health professionals, and 
 other providers on a fee-for-service basis without 
 placing the provider at financial risk;
 (B) does not vary reimbursement for such a provider 
 based on an agreement to contract terms or the 
 utilization of health care items or services relating 
 to such provider;
 (C) allows access to any provider that is lawfully 
 authorized to provide the covered services and agree to 
 accept the terms of payment established under the plan 
 or by the issuer; and
 (D) for which the plan or issuer does not require 
 prior authorization before providing for any health 
 care services.
 Notwithstanding subparagraph (D), coverage that would satisfy 
 the coverage requirements established for an indemnity benefit 
 plan or a service benefit plan under the Federal employees 
 health benefits program under chapter 89 of title 5, United 
 States Code, and any related regulations and rules promulgated 
 by the Office of Personnel Management, shall be considered to 
 meet the definition of fee-for-service coverage under this 
 paragraph.
 (c) Treatment of Excepted Benefits.--The requirements of this title 
shall not apply to excepted benefits (as defined in section 733(c) of 
the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, 29 U.S.C. 
1191b(c)), other than benefits described in section 733(c)(2)(A) of 
such Act, in the same manner as the provisions of part 7 of subtitle B 
of title I of such Act do not apply to such benefits under subsections 
(b) and (c) of section 732 of such Act (29 U.S.C. 1191a).
 (d) Rule With Respect to Certain Plans.--
 (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 law, health insurance issuers may offer, and eligible 
 individuals may purchase, high deductible health plans 
 described in section 220(c)(2)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code 
 of 1986. Effective for the 5-year period beginning on the date 
 of the enactment of this Act, such health plans shall not be 
 required to provide payment for any health care items or 
 services that are exempt from the plan's deductible.
 (2) Existing state laws.--A State law relating to payment 
 for health preempted under paragraph (1), shall not apply to 
 high deductible health plans after the expiration of the 5-year 
 period described in such paragraph unless the State reenacts 
 such law after such period.

 TITLE II--AMENDMENTS TO THE PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT

SEC. 201. APPLICATION TO CERTAIN HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE.

 (a) In General.--Subpart 2 of part A of title XXVII of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-4 et seq.) is amended by adding at 
the end the following:

``SEC. 2707. PATIENT PROTECTION STANDARDS AND ACCOUNTABILITY.

 ``(a) In General.--Each health insurance issuer shall comply with 
the patient protection requirements under title I of the Patients' Bill 
of Rights Act of 2001 with respect to non-Federal governmental group 
health insurance coverage offered by such issuers, and such 
requirements shall be deemed to be incorporated into this section.
 ``(b) Accountability.--The provisions of sections 503 through 503B 
of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (as in effect as 
of the day after the date of enactment of the Patients' Bill of Rights 
Act of 2001) shall apply to non-Federal governmental group health 
insurance coverage offered by health insurance issuers with respect to 
an enrollee in the same manner as they apply to health insurance 
coverage offered by a health insurance issuer for a participant or 
beneficiary in connection with a group health plan and the requirements 
referred to in such sections shall be deemed to be incorporated into 
this section. For purposes of this subsection, references in such 
sections 503 through 503B to the Secretary shall be deemed to be 
references to the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
 ``(c) Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to 
affect section 2721(b)(2).''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 2721(b)(2)(A) of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 300gg-21(b)(2)(A)) is amended by inserting ``(other than section 
2707)'' after ``requirements of such subparts''.

SEC. 202. APPLICATION TO INDIVIDUAL HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE.

 Part B of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
300gg-41 et seq.) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating the first subpart 3 (relating to other 
 requirements) as subpart 2; and
 (2) by inserting after section 2752 the following:

``SEC. 2753. PATIENT PROTECTION STANDARDS AND ACCOUNTABILITY.

 ``(a) In General.--Each health insurance issuer shall comply with 
the patient protection requirements under subtitles A and B of title I 
of the Patients' Bill of Rights Act of 2001 with respect to individual 
health insurance coverage it offers, and such requirements shall be 
deemed to be incorporated into this section.
 ``(b) Accountability.--The provisions of sections 503 through 503B 
of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (as in effect as 
of the day after the date of enactment of the Patients' Bill of Rights 
Act of 2001) shall apply to health insurance coverage offered by a 
health insurance issuer in the individual market with respect to an 
enrollee in the same manner as they apply to health insurance coverage 
offered by a health insurance issuer for a participant or beneficiary 
in connection with a group health plan and the requirements referred to 
in such sections shall be deemed to be incorporated into this section. 
For purposes of this subsection, references in such sections 503 
through 503B to the Secretary shall be deemed to be references to the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services.''.

TITLE III--AMENDMENTS TO THE EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT INCOME SECURITY ACT OF 
 1974

SEC. 301. APPLICATION OF PATIENT PROTECTION STANDARDS TO GROUP HEALTH 
 PLANS AND GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE UNDER THE 
 EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT INCOME SECURITY ACT OF 1974.

 (a) In General.--Subpart B of part 7 of subtitle B of title I of 
the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1185 et 
seq.) is further amended by adding at the end the following new 
section:

``SEC. 714. PATIENT PROTECTION STANDARDS.

 ``(a) In General.--Subject to subsection (b), a group health plan 
(and a health insurance issuer offering health insurance coverage in 
connection with a group health plan) shall comply with the requirements 
of title I of the Patients' Bill of Rights Act of 2001 (as in effect as 
of the date of the enactment of such Act), and such requirements shall 
be deemed to be incorporated into this subsection.
 ``(b) Plan Satisfaction of Certain Requirements.--
 ``(1) Satisfaction of certain requirements through 
 insurance.--For purposes of subsection (a), insofar as a group 
 health plan provides benefits in the form of health insurance 
 coverage through a health insurance issuer, the plan shall be 
 treated as meeting the following requirements of title I of the 
 Patients' Bill of Rights Act of 2001 with respect to such 
 benefits and not be considered as failing to meet such 
 requirements because of a failure of the issuer to meet such 
 requirements so long as the plan sponsor or its representatives 
 did not cause such failure by the issuer:
 ``(A) Section 101 (relating to access to emergency 
 care).
 ``(B) Section 102 (relating to consumer choice 
 option).
 ``(C) Section 103 (relating to patient access to 
 obstetric and gynecological care).
 ``(D) Section 104 (relating to access to pediatric 
 care).
 ``(E) Section 105 (relating to timely access to 
 specialists).
 ``(F) Section 106 (relating to continuity of care), 
 but only insofar as a replacement issuer assumes the 
 obligation for continuity of care.
 ``(G) Section 108 (relating to access to needed 
 prescription drugs).
 ``(H) Section 109 (relating to coverage for 
 individuals participating in approved clinical trials).
 ``(I) Section 121 (relating to the provision of 
 information).
 ``(2) Application to prohibitions.--Pursuant to rules of 
 the Secretary, if a health insurance issuer offering health 
 insurance coverage in connection with a group health plan takes 
 an action in violation of any of the following sections of the 
 Patients' Bill of Rights Act of 2001, the group health plan 
 shall not be liable for such violation unless the plan caused 
 such violation:
 ``(A) Section 107 (relating to prohibition of 
 interference with certain medical communications).
 ``(B) Section 110 (relating to prohibition of 
 discrimination against providers based on licensure).
 ``(3) Construction.--Nothing in this subsection shall be 
 construed to affect or modify the responsibilities of the 
 fiduciaries of a group health plan under part 4 of subtitle B.
 ``(4) Treatment of consistent state laws.--For purposes of 
 applying this subsection, a health insurance issuer offering 
 coverage in connection with a group health plan (and such group 
 health plan) shall be deemed to be in compliance with one or 
 more of the patient protection requirements of the Patients' 
 Bill of Rights Act of 2001 (as defined in section 151(a)(1)(C) 
 of such Act) that are otherwise applicable to such issuer (or 
 plan) under this section where the issuer (or plan) is in 
 compliance with a State law, with respect to the patient 
 protection requirements involved, that has been certified in 
 accordance with section 151 of such Act.
 ``(c) Conforming Regulations.--The Secretary shall issue 
regulations to coordinate the requirements on group health plans and 
health insurance issuers under this section with the requirements 
imposed under the other provisions of this title.''.
 (b) Satisfaction of ERISA Claims Procedure Requirement.--Section 
503 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 
1133) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(a)'' after ``Sec. 503.''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(b) In the case of a group health plan (as defined in section 
733) compliance with the requirements of subtitle A of title I of the 
Patients' Bill of Rights Act of 2001, and compliance with regulations 
promulgated by the Secretary, in the case of a claims denial shall be 
deemed compliance with subsection (a) with respect to such claims 
denial.''.
 (c) Enforcement.--Section 502(b)(3) of the Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1132(b)(3)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``The Secretary'' and inserting ``(A) The 
 Secretary''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(B) A participant, beneficiary, plan fiduciary, or the Secretary 
may not bring an action to enforce the requirements of section 714 
against a health insurance issuer offering coverage in connection with 
a group health plan (or such group health plan) where the patient 
protection requirements of the Patients' Bill of Rights Act of 2001 (as 
defined in section 151(a)(1)(C) of such Act) otherwise applicable to 
such issuer (or plan) under section 714 do not apply because the issuer 
(or plan) is in compliance with a State law, with respect to the 
patient protection requirements involved, that has been certified or a 
determination made in accordance with section 151 of such Act.''.
 (d) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 732(a) of the Employee Retirement Income 
 Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1185(a)) is amended by striking 
 ``section 711'' and inserting ``sections 711 and 714''.
 (2) The table of contents in section 1 of the Employee 
 Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by inserting 
 after the item relating to section 713 the following new item:

``Sec. 714. Patient protection standards.''.
 (3) Section 502(b)(3) of the Employee Retirement Income 
 Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1132(b)(3)) is amended by 
 inserting ``(other than section 135(b))'' after ``part 7''.
 (4) Section 731(a)(1) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 1191(a)(1)) is 
 amended by inserting ``and section 151 of the Patients' Bill of 
 Rights Act of 2001'' after ``Subject to paragraph (2)''.

 TITLE IV--AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1986

SEC. 401. APPLICATION TO GROUP HEALTH PLANS UNDER THE INTERNAL REVENUE 
 CODE OF 1986.

 Subchapter B of chapter 100 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is 
amended--
 (1) in the table of sections, by inserting after the item 
 relating to section 9812 the following new item:

 ``Sec. 9813. Standard relating to 
 patients' bill of rights.'';
 and
 (2) by inserting after section 9812 the following:

``SEC. 9813. STANDARD RELATING TO PATIENTS' BILL OF RIGHTS.

 ``A group health plan shall comply with the requirements of 
subtitles A and B title I of the Patients' Bill of Rights Act of 2001 
(and subtitle F of such title insofar as it applies to such subtitles A 
and B) and of sections 503A and 503B of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974, as such requirements are in effect as of the date 
of the enactment of such Act, and such requirements shall be deemed to 
be incorporated into this section.''.

 TITLE V--EFFECTIVE DATE; SEVERABILITY

SEC. 501. EFFECTIVE DATE AND RELATED RULES.

 (a) In General.--Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the 
provisions of this Act, including the amendments made by title I, shall 
apply--
 (1) to group health plans, and health insurance coverage 
 offered in connection with such plans, on the later of--
 (A) plan years beginning on or after January 1 of 
 the first calendar year that begins more than 1 year 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act; or
 (B) plan years beginning on or after 18 months 
 after the date on which the Secretary of Health and 
 Human Services and the Secretary of Labor issue final 
 regulations, subject to the notice and comment period 
 required under subchapter 2 of chapter 5 of title 5, 
 United States Code, necessary to carry out such 
 provisions and the amendments made by this Act; and
 (2) to individual health insurance coverage beginning on or 
 after the effective date described in paragraph (1)(A).
 (b) Limitation on Enforcement Actions.--No enforcement action 
shall be taken, pursuant to the amendments made by this Act, against a 
group health plan with respect to a violation of a requirement imposed 
by such amendments before the date of issuance of regulations issued in 
connection with such requirement, if the plan has sought to comply in 
good faith with such requirement.
 (c) Treatment of Religious Nonmedical Providers.--
 (1) In general.--Nothing in this Act (or the amendments 
 made thereby) shall be construed to--
 (A) restrict or limit the right of group health 
 plans, and of health insurance issuers offering health 
 insurance coverage, to include as providers religious 
 nonmedical providers;
 (B) require such plans or issuers to--
 (i) utilize medically based eligibility 
 standards or criteria in deciding provider 
 status of religious nonmedical providers;
 (ii) use medical professionals or criteria 
 to decide patient access to religious 
 nonmedical providers;
 (iii) utilize medical professionals or 
 criteria in making determinations in internal 
 or external appeals regarding coverage for care 
 by religious nonmedical providers; or
 (iv) compel a participant or beneficiary to 
 undergo a medical examination or test as a 
 condition of receiving health insurance 
 coverage for treatment by a religious 
 nonmedical provider; or
 (C) require such plans or issuers to exclude 
 religious nonmedical providers because they do not 
 provide medical or other required data, if such data is 
 inconsistent with the religious nonmedical treatment or 
 nursing care provided by the provider.
 (2) Religious nonmedical provider.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term ``religious nonmedical provider'' means a 
 provider who provides no medical care but who provides only 
 religious nonmedical treatment or religious nonmedical nursing 
 care.

SEC. 502. SEVERABILITY.

 (a) In General.--Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), if 
any provision of this Act, an amendment made by this Act, or the 
application of such provision or amendment to any person or 
circumstance is held to be unconstitutional, the remainder of this Act, 
the amendments made by this Act, and the application of the provisions 
of such to any person or circumstance shall not be affected thereby.
 (b) Dependence of Remedies on Appeals.--If any provision of section 
131, or the amendments made by such section, or the application of such 
section or amendments to any person or circumstance is held to be 
unconstitutional, sections 141 and 142 and the amendments made by such 
sections, shall be deemed to be null and void and shall be given no 
force or effect.
 (c) Remedies.--If any provision of section 141 or 142, or the 
amendments made by such section, or the application of such section or 
amendments to any person or circumstance is held to be 
unconstitutional, the remainder of such section, and the amendments 
made by such section shall be deemed to be null and void and shall be 
given no force or effect.

 TITLE VI--INCREASING ACCESS TO AFFORDABLE HEALTH INSURANCE

 Subtitle A--Tax Incentives

SEC. 601. EXPANSION OF AVAILABILITY OF ARCHER MEDICAL SAVINGS ACCOUNTS.

 (a) Repeal of Limitations on Number of Medical Savings Accounts.--
 (1) In general.--Subsections (i) and (j) of section 220 of 
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 are hereby repealed.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Paragraph (1) of section 220(c) of such Code is 
 amended by striking subparagraph (D).
 (B) Section 138 of such Code is amended by striking 
 subsection (f).
 (b) Availability Not Limited to Accounts for Employees of Small 
Employers and Self-employed Individuals.--
 (1) In general.--Subparagraph (A) of section 220(c)(1) of 
 such Code (relating to eligible individual) is amended to read 
 as follows:
 ``(A) In general.--The term `eligible individual' 
 means, with respect to any month, any individual if--
 ``(i) such individual is covered under a 
 high deductible health plan as of the 1st day 
 of such month, and
 ``(ii) such individual is not, while 
 covered under a high deductible health plan, 
 covered under any health plan--
 ``(I) which is not a high 
 deductible health plan, and
 ``(II) which provides coverage for 
 any benefit which is covered under the 
 high deductible health plan.''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Section 220(c)(1) of such Code is amended by 
 striking subparagraph (C).
 (B) Section 220(c) of such Code is amended by 
 striking paragraph (4) (defining small employer) and by 
 redesignating paragraph (5) as paragraph (4).
 (C) Section 220(b) of such Code is amended by 
 striking paragraph (4) (relating to deduction limited 
 by compensation) and by redesignating paragraphs (5), 
 (6), and (7) as paragraphs (4), (5), and (6), 
 respectively.
 (c) Increase in Amount of Deduction Allowed for Contributions to 
Medical Savings Accounts.--
 (1) In general.--Paragraph (2) of section 220(b) of such 
 Code is amended to read as follows:
 ``(2) Monthly limitation.--The monthly limitation for any 
 month is the amount equal to \1/12\ of the annual deductible 
 (as of the first day of such month) of the individual's 
 coverage under the high deductible health plan.''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Clause (ii) of section 
 220(d)(1)(A) of such Code is amended by striking ``75 percent 
 of''.
 (d) Both Employers and Employees May Contribute to Medical Savings 
Accounts.--Paragraph (4) of section 220(b) of such Code (as 
redesignated by subsection (b)(2)(C)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(4) Coordination with exclusion for employer 
 contributions.--The limitation which would (but for this 
 paragraph) apply under this subsection to the taxpayer for any 
 taxable year shall be reduced (but not below zero) by the 
 amount which would (but for section 106(b)) be includible in 
 the taxpayer's gross income for such taxable year.''.
 (e) Reduction of Permitted Deductibles Under High Deductible Health 
Plans.--
 (1) In general.--Subparagraph (A) of section 220(c)(2) of 
 such Code (defining high deductible health plan) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``$1,500'' in clause (i) and 
 inserting ``$1,000''; and
 (B) by striking ``$3,000'' in clause (ii) and 
 inserting ``$2,000''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Subsection (g) of section 220 of 
 such Code is amended to read as follows:
 ``(g) Cost-of-Living Adjustment.--
 ``(1) In general.--In the case of any taxable year 
 beginning in a calendar year after 1998, each dollar amount in 
 subsection (c)(2) shall be increased by an amount equal to--
 ``(A) such dollar amount, multiplied by
 ``(B) the cost-of-living adjustment determined 
 under section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year in which 
 such taxable year begins by substituting `calendar year 
 1997' for `calendar year 1992' in subparagraph (B) 
 thereof.
 ``(2) Special rules.--In the case of the $1,000 amount in 
 subsection (c)(2)(A)(i) and the $2,000 amount in subsection 
 (c)(2)(A)(ii), paragraph (1)(B) shall be applied by 
 substituting `calendar year 2000' for `calendar year 1997'.
 ``(3) Rounding.--If any increase under paragraph (1) or (2) 
 is not a multiple of $50, such increase shall be rounded to the 
 nearest multiple of $50.''.
 (f) Providing Incentives for Preferred Provider Organizations To 
Offer Medical Savings Accounts.--Clause (ii) of section 220(c)(2)(B) of 
such Code is amended by striking ``preventive care if'' and all that 
follows and inserting ``preventive care.''
 (g) Medical Savings Accounts May Be Offered Under Cafeteria 
Plans.--Subsection (f) of section 125 of such Code is amended by 
striking ``106(b),''.
 (h) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.

 Subtitle B--Association Health Plans

SEC. 621. RULES GOVERNING ASSOCIATION HEALTH PLANS.

 (a) In General.--Subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by adding after part 7 the 
following new part:

 ``Part 8--Rules Governing Association Health Plans

``SEC. 801. ASSOCIATION HEALTH PLANS.

 ``(a) In General.--For purposes of this part, the term `association 
health plan' means a group health plan whose sponsor is (or is deemed 
under this part to be) described in subsection (b).
 ``(b) Sponsorship.--The sponsor of a group health plan is described 
in this subsection if such sponsor--
 ``(1) is organized and maintained in good faith, with a 
 constitution and bylaws specifically stating its purpose and 
 providing for periodic meetings on at least an annual basis, as 
 a bona fide trade association, a bona fide industry association 
 (including a rural electric cooperative association or a rural 
 telephone cooperative association), a bona fide professional 
 association, or a bona fide chamber of commerce (or similar 
 bona fide business association, including a corporation or 
 similar organization that operates on a cooperative basis 
 (within the meaning of section 1381 of the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986)), for substantial purposes other than that of 
 obtaining or providing medical care;
 ``(2) is established as a permanent entity which receives 
 the active support of its members and collects from its members 
 on a periodic basis dues or payments necessary to maintain 
 eligibility for membership in the sponsor; and
 ``(3) does not condition membership, such dues or payments, 
 or coverage under the plan on the basis of health status-
 related factors with respect to the employees of its members 
 (or affiliated members), or the dependents of such employees, 
 and does not condition such dues or payments on the basis of 
 group health plan participation.
Any sponsor consisting of an association of entities which meet the 
requirements of paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) shall be deemed to be a 
sponsor described in this subsection.

``SEC. 802. CERTIFICATION OF ASSOCIATION HEALTH PLANS.

 ``(a) In General.--The applicable authority shall prescribe by 
regulation, through negotiated rulemaking, a procedure under which, 
subject to subsection (b), the applicable authority shall certify 
association health plans which apply for certification as meeting the 
requirements of this part.
 ``(b) Standards.--Under the procedure prescribed pursuant to 
subsection (a), in the case of an association health plan that provides 
at least one benefit option which does not consist of health insurance 
coverage, the applicable authority shall certify such plan as meeting 
the requirements of this part only if the applicable authority is 
satisfied that the applicable requirements of this part are met (or, 
upon the date on which the plan is to commence operations, will be met) 
with respect to the plan.
 ``(c) Requirements Applicable to Certified Plans.--An association 
health plan with respect to which certification under this part is in 
effect shall meet the applicable requirements of this part, effective 
on the date of certification (or, if later, on the date on which the 
plan is to commence operations).
 ``(d) Requirements for Continued Certification.--The applicable 
authority may provide by regulation, through negotiated rulemaking, for 
continued certification of association health plans under this part.
 ``(e) Class Certification for Fully Insured Plans.--The applicable 
authority shall establish a class certification procedure for 
association health plans under which all benefits consist of health 
insurance coverage. Under such procedure, the applicable authority 
shall provide for the granting of certification under this part to the 
plans in each class of such association health plans upon appropriate 
filing under such procedure in connection with plans in such class and 
payment of the prescribed fee under section 807(a).
 ``(f) Certification of Self-Insured Association Health Plans.--An 
association health plan which offers one or more benefit options which 
do not consist of health insurance coverage may be certified under this 
part only if such plan consists of any of the following:
 ``(1) a plan which offered such coverage on the date of the 
 enactment of the Patients' Bill of Rights Act of 2001,
 ``(2) a plan under which the sponsor does not restrict 
 membership to one or more trades and businesses or industries 
 and whose eligible participating employers represent a broad 
 cross-section of trades and businesses or industries, or
 ``(3) a plan whose eligible participating employers 
 represent one or more trades or businesses, or one or more 
 industries, which have been indicated as having average or 
 above-average health insurance risk or health claims experience 
 by reason of State rate filings, denials of coverage, proposed 
 premium rate levels, and other means demonstrated by such plan 
 in accordance with regulations which the Secretary shall 
 prescribe through negotiated rulemaking, including (but not 
 limited to) the following: agriculture; equipment and 
 automobile dealerships; barbering and cosmetology; beverage 
 wholesaling/distributing; certified public accounting 
 practices; child care; construction; dance, theatrical, and 
 orchestra productions; disinfecting and pest control; eating 
 and drinking establishments; fishing; hospitals; labor 
 organizations; logging; manufacturing (metals); mining; medical 
 and dental practices; medical laboratories; sanitary services; 
 transportation (local and freight); and warehousing.

``SEC. 803. REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO SPONSORS AND BOARDS OF TRUSTEES.

 ``(a) Sponsor.--The requirements of this subsection are met with 
respect to an association health plan if the sponsor has met (or is 
deemed under this part to have met) the requirements of section 801(b) 
for a continuous period of not less than 3 years ending with the date 
of the application for certification under this part.
 ``(b) Board of Trustees.--The requirements of this subsection are 
met with respect to an association health plan if the following 
requirements are met:
 ``(1) Fiscal control.--The plan is operated, pursuant to a 
 trust agreement, by a board of trustees which has complete 
 fiscal control over the plan and which is responsible for all 
 operations of the plan.
 ``(2) Rules of operation and financial controls.--The board 
 of trustees has in effect rules of operation and financial 
 controls, based on a 3-year plan of operation, adequate to 
 carry out the terms of the plan and to meet all requirements of 
 this title applicable to the plan.
 ``(3) Rules governing relationship to participating 
 employers and to contractors.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraphs (B) and (C), the members of the board of 
 trustees are individuals selected from individuals who 
 are the owners, officers, directors, or employees of 
 the participating employers or who are partners in the 
 participating employers and actively participate in the 
 business.
 ``(B) Limitation.--
 ``(i) General rule.--Except as provided in 
 clauses (ii) and (iii), no such member is an 
 owner, officer, director, or employee of, or 
 partner in, a contract administrator or other 
 service provider to the plan.
 ``(ii) Limited exception for providers of 
 services solely on behalf of the sponsor.--
 Officers or employees of a sponsor which is a 
 service provider (other than a contract 
 administrator) to the plan may be members of 
 the board if they constitute not more than 25 
 percent of the membership of the board and they 
 do not provide services to the plan other than 
 on behalf of the sponsor.
 ``(iii) Treatment of providers of medical 
 care.--In the case of a sponsor which is an 
 association whose membership consists primarily 
 of providers of medical care, clause (i) shall 
 not apply in the case of any service provider 
 described in subparagraph (A) who is a provider 
 of medical care under the plan.
 ``(C) Certain plans excluded.--Subparagraph (A) 
 shall not apply to an association health plan which is 
 in existence on the date of the enactment of the 
 Patients' Bill of Rights Act of 2001.
 ``(D) Sole authority.--The board has sole authority 
 under the plan to approve applications for 
 participation in the plan and to contract with a 
 service provider to administer the day-to-day affairs 
 of the plan.
 ``(c) Treatment of Franchise Networks.--In the case of a group 
health plan which is established and maintained by a franchiser for a 
franchise network consisting of its franchisees--
 ``(1) the requirements of subsection (a) and section 
 801(a)(1) shall be deemed met if such requirements would 
 otherwise be met if the franchiser were deemed to be the 
 sponsor referred to in section 801(b), such network were deemed 
 to be an association described in section 801(b), and each 
 franchisee were deemed to be a member (of the association and 
 the sponsor) referred to in section 801(b); and
 ``(2) the requirements of section 804(a)(1) shall be deemed 
 met.
The Secretary may by regulation, through negotiated rulemaking, define 
for purposes of this subsection the terms `franchiser', `franchise 
network', and `franchisee'.
 ``(d) Certain Collectively Bargained Plans.--
 ``(1) In general.--In the case of a group health plan 
 described in paragraph (2)--
 ``(A) the requirements of subsection (a) and 
 section 801(a)(1) shall be deemed met;
 ``(B) the joint board of trustees shall be deemed a 
 board of trustees with respect to which the 
 requirements of subsection (b) are met; and
 ``(C) the requirements of section 804 shall be 
 deemed met.
 ``(2) Requirements.--A group health plan is described in 
 this paragraph if--
 ``(A) the plan is a multiemployer plan; or
 ``(B) the plan is in existence on April 1, 2001, 
 and would be described in section 3(40)(A)(i) but 
 solely for the failure to meet the requirements of 
 section 3(40)(C)(ii).

``SEC. 804. PARTICIPATION AND COVERAGE REQUIREMENTS.

 ``(a) Covered Employers and Individuals.--The requirements of this 
subsection are met with respect to an association health plan if, under 
the terms of the plan--
 ``(1) each participating employer must be--
 ``(A) a member of the sponsor,
 ``(B) the sponsor, or
 ``(C) an affiliated member of the sponsor with 
 respect to which the requirements of subsection (b) are 
 met,
 except that, in the case of a sponsor which is a professional 
 association or other individual-based association, if at least 
 one of the officers, directors, or employees of an employer, or 
 at least one of the individuals who are partners in an employer 
 and who actively participates in the business, is a member or 
 such an affiliated member of the sponsor, participating 
 employers may also include such employer; and
 ``(2) all individuals commencing coverage under the plan 
 after certification under this part must be--
 ``(A) active or retired owners (including self-
 employed individuals), officers, directors, or 
 employees of, or partners in, participating employers; 
 or
 ``(B) the beneficiaries of individuals described in 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(b) Coverage of Previously Uninsured Employees.--In the case of 
an association health plan in existence on the date of the enactment of 
the Patients' Bill of Rights Act of 2001, an affiliated member of the 
sponsor of the plan may be offered coverage under the plan as a 
participating employer only if--
 ``(1) the affiliated member was an affiliated member on the 
 date of certification under this part; or
 ``(2) during the 12-month period preceding the date of the 
 offering of such coverage, the affiliated member has not 
 maintained or contributed to a group health plan with respect 
 to any of its employees who would otherwise be eligible to 
 participate in such association health plan.
 ``(c) Individual Market Unaffected.--The requirements of this 
subsection are met with respect to an association health plan if, under 
the terms of the plan, no participating employer may provide health 
insurance coverage in the individual market for any employee not 
covered under the plan which is similar to the coverage 
contemporaneously provided to employees of the employer under the plan, 
if such exclusion of the employee from coverage under the plan is based 
on a health status-related factor with respect to the employee and such 
employee would, but for such exclusion on such basis, be eligible for 
coverage under the plan.
 ``(d) Prohibition of Discrimination Against Employers and Employees 
Eligible To Participate.--The requirements of this subsection are met 
with respect to an association health plan if--
 ``(1) under the terms of the plan, all employers meeting 
 the preceding requirements of this section are eligible to 
 qualify as participating employers for all geographically 
 available coverage options, unless, in the case of any such 
 employer, participation or contribution requirements of the 
 type referred to in section 2711 of the Public Health Service 
 Act are not met;
 ``(2) upon request, any employer eligible to participate is 
 furnished information regarding all coverage options available 
 under the plan; and
 ``(3) the applicable requirements of sections 701, 702, and 
 703 are met with respect to the plan.

``SEC. 805. OTHER REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO PLAN DOCUMENTS, CONTRIBUTION 
 RATES, AND BENEFIT OPTIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--The requirements of this section are met with 
respect to an association health plan if the following requirements are 
met:
 ``(1) Contents of governing instruments.--The instruments 
 governing the plan include a written instrument, meeting the 
 requirements of an instrument required under section 402(a)(1), 
 which--
 ``(A) provides that the board of trustees serves as 
 the named fiduciary required for plans under section 
 402(a)(1) and serves in the capacity of a plan 
 administrator (referred to in section 3(16)(A));
 ``(B) provides that the sponsor of the plan is to 
 serve as plan sponsor (referred to in section 
 3(16)(B)); and
 ``(C) incorporates the requirements of section 806.
 ``(2) Contribution rates must be nondiscriminatory.--
 ``(A) The contribution rates for any participating 
 small employer do not vary on the basis of the claims 
 experience of such employer and do not vary on the 
 basis of the type of business or industry in which such 
 employer is engaged.
 ``(B) Nothing in this title or any other provision 
 of law shall be construed to preclude an association 
 health plan, or a health insurance issuer offering 
 health insurance coverage in connection with an 
 association health plan, from--
 ``(i) setting contribution rates based on 
 the claims experience of the plan; or
 ``(ii) varying contribution rates for small 
 employers in a State to the extent that such 
 rates could vary using the same methodology 
 employed in such State for regulating premium 
 rates in the small group market with respect to 
 health insurance coverage offered in connection 
 with bona fide associations (within the meaning 
 of section 2791(d)(3) of the Public Health 
 Service Act),
 subject to the requirements of section 702(b) relating 
 to contribution rates.
 ``(3) Floor for number of covered individuals with respect 
 to certain plans.--If any benefit option under the plan does 
 not consist of health insurance coverage, the plan has as of 
 the beginning of the plan year not fewer than 1,000 
 participants and beneficiaries.
 ``(4) Marketing requirements.--
 ``(A) In general.--If a benefit option which 
 consists of health insurance coverage is offered under 
 the plan, State-licensed insurance agents shall be used 
 to distribute to small employers coverage which does 
not consist of health insurance coverage in a manner comparable to the 
manner in which such agents are used to distribute health insurance 
coverage.
 ``(B) State-licensed insurance agents.--For 
 purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `State-licensed 
 insurance agents' means one or more agents who are 
 licensed in a State and are subject to the laws of such 
 State relating to licensure, qualification, testing, 
 examination, and continuing education of persons 
 authorized to offer, sell, or solicit health insurance 
 coverage in such State.
 ``(5) Regulatory requirements.--Such other requirements as 
 the applicable authority determines are necessary to carry out 
 the purposes of this part, which shall be prescribed by the 
 applicable authority by regulation through negotiated 
 rulemaking.
 ``(b) Ability of Association Health Plans To Design Benefit 
Options.--Subject to section 514(e), nothing in this part or any 
provision of State law (as defined in section 514(c)(1)) shall be 
construed to preclude an association health plan, or a health insurance 
issuer offering health insurance coverage in connection with an 
association health plan, from exercising its sole discretion in 
selecting the specific items and services consisting of medical care to 
be included as benefits under such plan or coverage, except (subject to 
section 514) in the case of any law to the extent that it (1) prohibits 
an exclusion of a specific disease from such coverage, or (2) is not 
preempted under section 731(a)(1) with respect to matters governed by 
section 711 or 712.

``SEC. 806. MAINTENANCE OF RESERVES AND PROVISIONS FOR SOLVENCY FOR 
 PLANS PROVIDING HEALTH BENEFITS IN ADDITION TO HEALTH 
 INSURANCE COVERAGE.

 ``(a) In General.--The requirements of this section are met with 
respect to an association health plan if--
 ``(1) the benefits under the plan consist solely of health 
 insurance coverage; or
 ``(2) if the plan provides any additional benefit options 
 which do not consist of health insurance coverage, the plan--
 ``(A) establishes and maintains reserves with 
 respect to such additional benefit options, in amounts 
 recommended by the qualified actuary, consisting of--
 ``(i) a reserve sufficient for unearned 
 contributions;
 ``(ii) a reserve sufficient for benefit 
 liabilities which have been incurred, which 
 have not been satisfied, and for which risk of 
 loss has not yet been transferred, and for 
 expected administrative costs with respect to 
 such benefit liabilities;
 ``(iii) a reserve sufficient for any other 
 obligations of the plan; and
 ``(iv) a reserve sufficient for a margin of 
 error and other fluctuations, taking into 
 account the specific circumstances of the plan; 
 and
 ``(B) establishes and maintains aggregate and 
 specific excess/stop loss insurance and solvency 
 indemnification, with respect to such additional 
 benefit options for which risk of loss has not yet been 
 transferred, as follows:
 ``(i) The plan shall secure aggregate 
 excess/stop loss insurance for the plan with an 
 attachment point which is not greater than 125 
 percent of expected gross annual claims. The 
 applicable authority may by regulation, through 
 negotiated rulemaking, provide for upward 
 adjustments in the amount of such percentage in 
 specified circumstances in which the plan 
 specifically provides for and maintains 
 reserves in excess of the amounts required 
 under subparagraph (A).
 ``(ii) The plan shall secure specific 
 excess/stop loss insurance for the plan with an 
 attachment point which is at least equal to an 
 amount recommended by the plan's qualified 
 actuary. The applicable authority may by 
 regulation, through negotiated rulemaking, 
 provide for adjustments in the amount of such 
 insurance in specified circumstances in which 
 the plan specifically provides for and 
 maintains reserves in excess of the amounts 
 required under subparagraph (A).
 ``(iii) The plan shall secure 
 indemnification insurance for any claims which 
 the plan is unable to satisfy by reason of a 
 plan termination.
Any regulations prescribed by the applicable authority pursuant to 
clause (i) or (ii) of subparagraph (B) may allow for such adjustments 
in the required levels of excess/stop loss insurance as the qualified 
actuary may recommend, taking into account the specific circumstances 
of the plan.
 ``(b) Minimum Surplus in Addition to Claims Reserves.--In the case 
of any association health plan described in subsection (a)(2), the 
requirements of this subsection are met if the plan establishes and 
maintains surplus in an amount at least equal to--
 ``(1) $500,000, or
 ``(2) such greater amount (but not greater than $2,000,000) 
 as may be set forth in regulations prescribed by the applicable 
 authority through negotiated rulemaking, based on the level of 
 aggregate and specific excess/stop loss insurance provided with 
 respect to such plan.
 ``(c) Additional Requirements.--In the case of any association 
health plan described in subsection (a)(2), the applicable authority 
may provide such additional requirements relating to reserves and 
excess/stop loss insurance as the applicable authority considers 
appropriate. Such requirements may be provided by regulation, through 
negotiated rulemaking, with respect to any such plan or any class of 
such plans.
 ``(d) Adjustments for Excess/Stop Loss Insurance.--The applicable 
authority may provide for adjustments to the levels of reserves 
otherwise required under subsections (a) and (b) with respect to any 
plan or class of plans to take into account excess/stop loss insurance 
provided with respect to such plan or plans.
 ``(e) Alternative Means of Compliance.--The applicable authority 
may permit an association health plan described in subsection (a)(2) to 
substitute, for all or part of the requirements of this section (except 
subsection (a)(2)(B)(iii)), such security, guarantee, hold-harmless 
arrangement, or other financial arrangement as the applicable authority 
determines to be adequate to enable the plan to fully meet all its 
financial obligations on a timely basis and is otherwise no less 
protective of the interests of participants and beneficiaries than the 
requirements for which it is substituted. The applicable authority may 
take into account, for purposes of this subsection, evidence provided 
by the plan or sponsor which demonstrates an assumption of liability 
with respect to the plan. Such evidence may be in the form of a 
contract of indemnification, lien, bonding, insurance, letter of 
credit, recourse under applicable terms of the plan in the form of 
assessments of participating employers, security, or other financial 
arrangement.
 ``(f) Measures To Ensure Continued Payment of Benefits by Certain 
Plans in Distress.--
 ``(1) Payments by certain plans to association health plan 
 fund.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of an association 
 health plan described in subsection (a)(2), the 
 requirements of this subsection are met if the plan 
 makes payments into the Association Health Plan Fund 
 under this subparagraph when they are due. Such 
 payments shall consist of annual payments in the amount 
 of $5,000, and, in addition to such annual payments, 
 such supplemental payments as the Secretary may 
 determine to be necessary under paragraph (2). Payments 
 under this paragraph are payable to the Fund at the 
 time determined by the Secretary. Initial payments are 
 due in advance of certification under this part. 
 Payments shall continue to accrue until a plan's assets 
are distributed pursuant to a termination procedure.
 ``(B) Penalties for failure to make payments.--If 
 any payment is not made by a plan when it is due, a 
 late payment charge of not more than 100 percent of the 
 payment which was not timely paid shall be payable by 
 the plan to the Fund.
 ``(C) Continued duty of the secretary.--The 
 Secretary shall not cease to carry out the provisions 
 of paragraph (2) on account of the failure of a plan to 
 pay any payment when due.
 ``(2) Payments by secretary to continue excess/stop loss 
 insurance coverage and indemnification insurance coverage for 
 certain plans.--In any case in which the applicable authority 
 determines that there is, or that there is reason to believe 
 that there will be: (A) a failure to take necessary corrective 
 actions under section 809(a) with respect to an association 
 health plan described in subsection (a)(2); or (B) a 
 termination of such a plan under section 809(b) or 810(b)(8) 
 (and, if the applicable authority is not the Secretary, 
 certifies such determination to the Secretary), the Secretary 
 shall determine the amounts necessary to make payments to an 
 insurer (designated by the Secretary) to maintain in force 
 excess/stop loss insurance coverage or indemnification 
 insurance coverage for such plan, if the Secretary determines 
 that there is a reasonable expectation that, without such 
 payments, claims would not be satisfied by reason of 
 termination of such coverage. The Secretary shall, to the 
 extent provided in advance in appropriation Acts, pay such 
 amounts so determined to the insurer designated by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(3) Association health plan fund.--
 ``(A) In general.--There is established on the 
 books of the Treasury a fund to be known as the 
 `Association Health Plan Fund'. The Fund shall be 
 available for making payments pursuant to paragraph 
 (2). The Fund shall be credited with payments received 
 pursuant to paragraph (1)(A), penalties received 
 pursuant to paragraph (1)(B); and earnings on 
 investments of amounts of the Fund under subparagraph 
 (B).
 ``(B) Investment.--Whenever the Secretary 
 determines that the moneys of the fund are in excess of 
 current needs, the Secretary may request the investment 
 of such amounts as the Secretary determines advisable 
 by the Secretary of the Treasury in obligations issued 
 or guaranteed by the United States.
 ``(g) Excess/Stop Loss Insurance.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Aggregate excess/stop loss insurance.--The term 
 `aggregate excess/stop loss insurance' means, in connection 
 with an association health plan, a contract--
 ``(A) under which an insurer (meeting such minimum 
 standards as the applicable authority may prescribe by 
 regulation through negotiated rulemaking) provides for 
 payment to the plan with respect to aggregate claims 
 under the plan in excess of an amount or amounts 
 specified in such contract;
 ``(B) which is guaranteed renewable; and
 ``(C) which allows for payment of premiums by any 
 third party on behalf of the insured plan.
 ``(2) Specific excess/stop loss insurance.--The term 
 `specific excess/stop loss insurance' means, in connection with 
 an association health plan, a contract--
 ``(A) under which an insurer (meeting such minimum 
 standards as the applicable authority may prescribe by 
 regulation through negotiated rulemaking) provides for 
 payment to the plan with respect to claims under the 
 plan in connection with a covered individual in excess 
 of an amount or amounts specified in such contract in 
 connection with such covered individual;
 ``(B) which is guaranteed renewable; and
 ``(C) which allows for payment of premiums by any 
 third party on behalf of the insured plan.
 ``(h) Indemnification Insurance.--For purposes of this section, the 
term `indemnification insurance' means, in connection with an 
association health plan, a contract--
 ``(1) under which an insurer (meeting such minimum 
 standards as the applicable authority may prescribe through 
 negotiated rulemaking) provides for payment to the plan with 
 respect to claims under the plan which the plan is unable to 
 satisfy by reason of a termination pursuant to section 809(b) 
 (relating to mandatory termination);
 ``(2) which is guaranteed renewable and noncancellable for 
 any reason (except as the applicable authority may prescribe by 
 regulation through negotiated rulemaking); and
 ``(3) which allows for payment of premiums by any third 
 party on behalf of the insured plan.
 ``(i) Reserves.--For purposes of this section, the term `reserves' 
means, in connection with an association health plan, plan assets which 
meet the fiduciary standards under part 4 and such additional 
requirements regarding liquidity as the applicable authority may 
prescribe through negotiated rulemaking.
 ``(j) Solvency Standards Working Group.--
 ``(1) In general.--Within 90 days after the date of the 
 enactment of the Patients' Bill of Rights Act of 2001, the 
 applicable authority shall establish a Solvency Standards 
 Working Group. In prescribing the initial regulations under 
 this section, the applicable authority shall take into account 
 the recommendations of such Working Group.
 ``(2) Membership.--The Working Group shall consist of not 
 more than 15 members appointed by the applicable authority. The 
 applicable authority shall include among persons invited to 
 membership on the Working Group at least one of each of the 
 following:
 ``(A) a representative of the National Association 
 of Insurance Commissioners;
 ``(B) a representative of the American Academy of 
 Actuaries;
 ``(C) a representative of the State governments, or 
 their interests;
 ``(D) a representative of existing self-insured 
 arrangements, or their interests;
 ``(E) a representative of associations of the type 
 referred to in section 801(b)(1), or their interests; 
 and
 ``(F) a representative of multiemployer plans that 
 are group health plans, or their interests.

``SEC. 807. REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATION AND RELATED REQUIREMENTS.

 ``(a) Filing Fee.--Under the procedure prescribed pursuant to 
section 802(a), an association health plan shall pay to the applicable 
authority at the time of filing an application for certification under 
this part a filing fee in the amount of $5,000, which shall be 
available in the case of the Secretary, to the extent provided in 
appropriation Acts, for the sole purpose of administering the 
certification procedures applicable with respect to association health 
plans.
 ``(b) Information To Be Included in Application for 
Certification.--An application for certification under this part meets 
the requirements of this section only if it includes, in a manner and 
form which shall be prescribed by the applicable authority through 
negotiated rulemaking, at least the following information:
 ``(1) Identifying information.--The names and addresses 
 of--
 ``(A) the sponsor; and
 ``(B) the members of the board of trustees of the 
 plan.
 ``(2) States in which plan intends to do business.--The 
 States in which participants and beneficiaries under the plan 
 are to be located and the number of them expected to be located 
 in each such State.
 ``(3) Bonding requirements.--Evidence provided by the board 
 of trustees that the bonding requirements of section 412 will 
 be met as of the date of the application or (if later) 
 commencement of operations.
 ``(4) Plan documents.--A copy of the documents governing 
 the plan (including any bylaws and trust agreements), the 
 summary plan description, and other material describing the 
 benefits that will be provided to participants and 
 beneficiaries under the plan.
 ``(5) Agreements with service providers.--A copy of any 
 agreements between the plan and contract administrators and 
 other service providers.
 ``(6) Funding report.--In the case of association health 
 plans providing benefits options in addition to health 
 insurance coverage, a report setting forth information with 
 respect to such additional benefit options determined as of a 
 date within the 120-day period ending with the date of the 
 application, including the following:
 ``(A) Reserves.--A statement, certified by the 
 board of trustees of the plan, and a statement of 
 actuarial opinion, signed by a qualified actuary, that 
 all applicable requirements of section 806 are or will 
 be met in accordance with regulations which the 
 applicable authority shall prescribe through negotiated 
 rulemaking.
 ``(B) Adequacy of contribution rates.--A statement 
 of actuarial opinion, signed by a qualified actuary, 
 which sets forth a description of the extent to which 
 contribution rates are adequate to provide for the 
 payment of all obligations and the maintenance of 
 required reserves under the plan for the 12-month 
 period beginning with such date within such 120-day 
 period, taking into account the expected coverage and 
 experience of the plan. If the contribution rates are 
 not fully adequate, the statement of actuarial opinion 
 shall indicate the extent to which the rates are 
 inadequate and the changes needed to ensure adequacy.
 ``(C) Current and projected value of assets and 
 liabilities.--A statement of actuarial opinion signed 
 by a qualified actuary, which sets forth the current 
 value of the assets and liabilities accumulated under 
 the plan and a projection of the assets, liabilities, 
 income, and expenses of the plan for the 12-month 
 period referred to in subparagraph (B). The income 
 statement shall identify separately the plan's 
 administrative expenses and claims.
 ``(D) Costs of coverage to be charged and other 
 expenses.--A statement of the costs of coverage to be 
 charged, including an itemization of amounts for 
 administration, reserves, and other expenses associated 
 with the operation of the plan.
 ``(E) Other information.--Any other information as 
 may be determined by the applicable authority, by 
 regulation through negotiated rulemaking, as necessary 
 to carry out the purposes of this part.
 ``(c) Filing Notice of Certification With States.--A certification 
granted under this part to an association health plan shall not be 
effective unless written notice of such certification is filed with the 
applicable State authority of each State in which at least 25 percent 
of the participants and beneficiaries under the plan are located. For 
purposes of this subsection, an individual shall be considered to be 
located in the State in which a known address of such individual is 
located or in which such individual is employed.
 ``(d) Notice of Material Changes.--In the case of any association 
health plan certified under this part, descriptions of material changes 
in any information which was required to be submitted with the 
application for the certification under this part shall be filed in 
such form and manner as shall be prescribed by the applicable authority 
by regulation through negotiated rulemaking. The applicable authority 
may require by regulation, through negotiated rulemaking, prior notice 
of material changes with respect to specified matters which might serve 
as the basis for suspension or revocation of the certification.
 ``(e) Reporting Requirements for Certain Association Health 
Plans.--An association health plan certified under this part which 
provides benefit options in addition to health insurance coverage for 
such plan year shall meet the requirements of section 103 by filing an 
annual report under such section which shall include information 
described in subsection (b)(6) with respect to the plan year and, 
notwithstanding section 104(a)(1)(A), shall be filed with the 
applicable authority not later than 90 days after the close of the plan 
year (or on such later date as may be prescribed by the applicable 
authority). The applicable authority may require by regulation through 
negotiated rulemaking such interim reports as it considers appropriate.
 ``(f) Engagement of Qualified Actuary.--The board of trustees of 
each association health plan which provides benefits options in 
addition to health insurance coverage and which is applying for 
certification under this part or is certified under this part shall 
engage, on behalf of all participants and beneficiaries, a qualified 
actuary who shall be responsible for the preparation of the materials 
comprising information necessary to be submitted by a qualified actuary 
under this part. The qualified actuary shall utilize such assumptions 
and techniques as are necessary to enable such actuary to form an 
opinion as to whether the contents of the matters reported under this 
part--
 ``(1) are in the aggregate reasonably related to the 
 experience of the plan and to reasonable expectations; and
 ``(2) represent such actuary's best estimate of anticipated 
 experience under the plan.
The opinion by the qualified actuary shall be made with respect to, and 
shall be made a part of, the annual report.

``SEC. 808. NOTICE REQUIREMENTS FOR VOLUNTARY TERMINATION.

 ``Except as provided in section 809(b), an association health plan 
which is or has been certified under this part may terminate (upon or 
at any time after cessation of accruals in benefit liabilities) only if 
the board of trustees--
 ``(1) not less than 60 days before the proposed termination 
 date, provides to the participants and beneficiaries a written 
 notice of intent to terminate stating that such termination is 
 intended and the proposed termination date;
 ``(2) develops a plan for winding up the affairs of the 
 plan in connection with such termination in a manner which will 
 result in timely payment of all benefits for which the plan is 
 obligated; and
 ``(3) submits such plan in writing to the applicable 
 authority.
Actions required under this section shall be taken in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed by the applicable authority by regulation 
through negotiated rulemaking.

``SEC. 809. CORRECTIVE ACTIONS AND MANDATORY TERMINATION.

 ``(a) Actions To Avoid Depletion of Reserves.--An association 
health plan which is certified under this part and which provides 
benefits other than health insurance coverage shall continue to meet 
the requirements of section 806, irrespective of whether such 
certification continues in effect. The board of trustees of such plan 
shall determine quarterly whether the requirements of section 806 are 
met. In any case in which the board determines that there is reason to 
believe that there is or will be a failure to meet such requirements, 
or the applicable authority makes such a determination and so notifies 
the board, the board shall immediately notify the qualified actuary 
engaged by the plan, and such actuary shall, not later than the end of 
the next following month, make such recommendations to the board for 
corrective action as the actuary determines necessary to ensure 
compliance with section 806. Not later than 30 days after receiving 
from the actuary recommendations for corrective actions, the board 
shall notify the applicable authority (in such form and manner as the 
applicable authority may prescribe by regulation through negotiated 
rulemaking) of such recommendations of the actuary for corrective 
action, together with a description of the actions (if any) that the 
board has taken or plans to take in response to such recommendations. 
The board shall thereafter report to the applicable authority, in such 
form and frequency as the applicable authority may specify to the 
board, regarding corrective action taken by the board until the 
requirements of section 806 are met.
 ``(b) Mandatory Termination.--In any case in which--
 ``(1) the applicable authority has been notified under 
 subsection (a) of a failure of an association health plan which 
 is or has been certified under this part and is described in 
 section 806(a)(2) to meet the requirements of section 806 and 
 has not been notified by the board of trustees of the plan that 
 corrective action has restored compliance with such 
 requirements; and
 ``(2) the applicable authority determines that there is a 
 reasonable expectation that the plan will continue to fail to 
 meet the requirements of section 806,
the board of trustees of the plan shall, at the direction of the 
applicable authority, terminate the plan and, in the course of the 
termination, take such actions as the applicable authority may require, 
including satisfying any claims referred to in section 
806(a)(2)(B)(iii) and recovering for the plan any liability under 
subsection (a)(2)(B)(iii) or (e) of section 806, as necessary to ensure 
that the affairs of the plan will be, to the maximum extent possible, 
wound up in a manner which will result in timely provision of all 
benefits for which the plan is obligated.

``SEC. 810. TRUSTEESHIP BY THE SECRETARY OF INSOLVENT ASSOCIATION 
 HEALTH PLANS PROVIDING HEALTH BENEFITS IN ADDITION TO 
 HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE.

 ``(a) Appointment of Secretary as Trustee for Insolvent Plans.--
Whenever the Secretary determines that an association health plan which 
is or has been certified under this part and which is described in 
section 806(a)(2) will be unable to provide benefits when due or is 
otherwise in a financially hazardous condition, as shall be defined by 
the Secretary by regulation through negotiated rulemaking, the 
Secretary shall, upon notice to the plan, apply to the appropriate 
United States district court for appointment of the Secretary as 
trustee to administer the plan for the duration of the insolvency. The 
plan may appear as a party and other interested persons may intervene 
in the proceedings at the discretion of the court. The court shall 
appoint such Secretary trustee if the court determines that the 
trusteeship is necessary to protect the interests of the participants 
and beneficiaries or providers of medical care or to avoid any 
unreasonable deterioration of the financial condition of the plan. The 
trusteeship of such Secretary shall continue until the conditions 
described in the first sentence of this subsection are remedied or the 
plan is terminated.
 ``(b) Powers as Trustee.--The Secretary, upon appointment as 
trustee under subsection (a), shall have the power--
 ``(1) to do any act authorized by the plan, this title, or 
 other applicable provisions of law to be done by the plan 
 administrator or any trustee of the plan;
 ``(2) to require the transfer of all (or any part) of the 
 assets and records of the plan to the Secretary as trustee;
 ``(3) to invest any assets of the plan which the Secretary 
 holds in accordance with the provisions of the plan, 
 regulations prescribed by the Secretary through negotiated 
 rulemaking, and applicable provisions of law;
 ``(4) to require the sponsor, the plan administrator, any 
 participating employer, and any employee organization 
 representing plan participants to furnish any information with 
 respect to the plan which the Secretary as trustee may 
 reasonably need in order to administer the plan;
 ``(5) to collect for the plan any amounts due the plan and 
 to recover reasonable expenses of the trusteeship;
 ``(6) to commence, prosecute, or defend on behalf of the 
 plan any suit or proceeding involving the plan;
 ``(7) to issue, publish, or file such notices, statements, 
 and reports as may be required by the Secretary by regulation 
 through negotiated rulemaking or required by any order of the 
 court;
 ``(8) to terminate the plan (or provide for its termination 
 in accordance with section 809(b)) and liquidate the plan 
 assets, to restore the plan to the responsibility of the 
 sponsor, or to continue the trusteeship;
 ``(9) to provide for the enrollment of plan participants 
 and beneficiaries under appropriate coverage options; and
 ``(10) to do such other acts as may be necessary to comply 
 with this title or any order of the court and to protect the 
 interests of plan participants and beneficiaries and providers 
 of medical care.
 ``(c) Notice of Appointment.--As soon as practicable after the 
Secretary's appointment as trustee, the Secretary shall give notice of 
such appointment to--
 ``(1) the sponsor and plan administrator;
 ``(2) each participant;
 ``(3) each participating employer; and
 ``(4) if applicable, each employee organization which, for 
 purposes of collective bargaining, represents plan 
 participants.
 ``(d) Additional Duties.--Except to the extent inconsistent with 
the provisions of this title, or as may be otherwise ordered by the 
court, the Secretary, upon appointment as trustee under this section, 
shall be subject to the same duties as those of a trustee under section 
704 of title 11, United States Code, and shall have the duties of a 
fiduciary for purposes of this title.
 ``(e) Other Proceedings.--An application by the Secretary under 
this subsection may be filed notwithstanding the pendency in the same 
or any other court of any bankruptcy, mortgage foreclosure, or equity 
receivership proceeding, or any proceeding to reorganize, conserve, or 
liquidate such plan or its property, or any proceeding to enforce a 
lien against property of the plan.
 ``(f) Jurisdiction of Court.--
 ``(1) In general.--Upon the filing of an application for 
 the appointment as trustee or the issuance of a decree under 
 this section, the court to which the application is made shall 
 have exclusive jurisdiction of the plan involved and its 
 property wherever located with the powers, to the extent 
 consistent with the purposes of this section, of a court of the 
 United States having jurisdiction over cases under chapter 11 
 of title 11, United States Code. Pending an adjudication under 
 this section such court shall stay, and upon appointment by it 
 of the Secretary as trustee, such court shall continue the stay 
 of, any pending mortgage foreclosure, equity receivership, or 
 other proceeding to reorganize, conserve, or liquidate the 
 plan, the sponsor, or property of such plan or sponsor, and any 
 other suit against any receiver, conservator, or trustee of the 
 plan, the sponsor, or property of the plan or sponsor. Pending 
 such adjudication and upon the appointment by it of the 
 Secretary as trustee, the court may stay any proceeding to 
 enforce a lien against property of the plan or the sponsor or 
 any other suit against the plan or the sponsor.
 ``(2) Venue.--An action under this section may be brought 
 in the judicial district where the sponsor or the plan 
 administrator resides or does business or where any asset of 
 the plan is situated. A district court in which such action is 
 brought may issue process with respect to such action in any 
 other judicial district.
 ``(g) Personnel.--In accordance with regulations which shall be 
prescribed by the Secretary through negotiated rulemaking, the 
Secretary shall appoint, retain, and compensate accountants, actuaries, 
and other professional service personnel as may be necessary in 
connection with the Secretary's service as trustee under this section.

``SEC. 811. STATE ASSESSMENT AUTHORITY.

 ``(a) In General.--Notwithstanding section 514, a State may impose 
by law a contribution tax on an association health plan described in 
section 806(a)(2), if the plan commenced operations in such State after 
the date of the enactment of the Patients' Bill of Rights Act of 2001.
 ``(b) Contribution Tax.--For purposes of this section, the term 
`contribution tax' imposed by a State on an association health plan 
means any tax imposed by such State if--
 ``(1) such tax is computed by applying a rate to the amount 
 of premiums or contributions, with respect to individuals 
 covered under the plan who are residents of such State, which 
 are received by the plan from participating employers located 
 in such State or from such individuals;
 ``(2) the rate of such tax does not exceed the rate of any 
 tax imposed by such State on premiums or contributions received 
 by insurers or health maintenance organizations for health 
 insurance coverage offered in such State in connection with a 
 group health plan;
 ``(3) such tax is otherwise nondiscriminatory; and
 ``(4) the amount of any such tax assessed on the plan is 
 reduced by the amount of any tax or assessment otherwise 
 imposed by the State on premiums, contributions, or both 
 received by insurers or health maintenance organizations for 
 health insurance coverage, aggregate excess/stop loss insurance 
 (as defined in section 806(g)(1)), specific excess/stop loss 
 insurance (as defined in section 806(g)(2)), other insurance 
 related to the provision of medical care under the plan, or any 
 combination thereof provided by such insurers or health 
 maintenance organizations in such State in connection with such 
 plan.

``SEC. 812. DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.

 ``(a) Definitions.--For purposes of this part--
 ``(1) Group health plan.--The term `group health plan' has 
 the meaning provided in section 733(a)(1) (after applying 
 subsection (b) of this section).
 ``(2) Medical care.--The term `medical care' has the 
 meaning provided in section 733(a)(2).
 ``(3) Health insurance coverage.--The term `health 
 insurance coverage' has the meaning provided in section 
 733(b)(1).
 ``(4) Health insurance issuer.--The term `health insurance 
 issuer' has the meaning provided in section 733(b)(2).
 ``(5) Applicable authority.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B), the term `applicable authority' 
 means, in connection with an association health plan--
 ``(i) the State recognized pursuant to 
 subsection (c) of section 506 as the State to 
 which authority has been delegated in 
 connection with such plan; or
 ``(ii) if there if no State referred to in 
 clause (i), the Secretary.
 ``(B) Exceptions.--
 ``(i) Joint authorities.--Where such term 
 appears in section 808(3), section 807(e) (in 
 the first instance), section 809(a) (in the 
 second instance), section 809(a) (in the fourth 
 instance), and section 809(b)(1), such term 
 means, in connection with an association health 
 plan, the Secretary and the State referred to 
 in subparagraph (A)(i) (if any) in connection 
 with such plan.
 ``(ii) Regulatory authorities.--Where such 
 term appears in section 802(a) (in the first 
 instance), section 802(d), section 802(e), 
 section 803(d), section 805(a)(5), section 
 806(a)(2), section 806(b), section 806(c), 
 section 806(d), paragraphs (1)(A) and (2)(A) of 
 section 806(g), section 806(h), section 806(i), 
 section 806(j), section 807(a) (in the second 
 instance), section 807(b), section 807(d), 
 section 807(e) (in the second instance), 
 section 808 (in the matter after paragraph 
 (3)), and section 809(a) (in the third 
 instance), such term means, in connection with 
 an association health plan, the Secretary.
 ``(6) Health status-related factor.--The term `health 
 status-related factor' has the meaning provided in section 
 733(d)(2).
 ``(7) Individual market.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `individual market' 
 means the market for health insurance coverage offered 
 to individuals other than in connection with a group 
 health plan.
 ``(B) Treatment of very small groups.--
 ``(i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), 
 such term includes coverage offered in 
 connection with a group health plan that has 
 fewer than 2 participants as current employees 
 or participants described in section 732(d)(3) 
 on the first day of the plan year.
 ``(ii) State exception.--Clause (i) shall 
 not apply in the case of health insurance 
 coverage offered in a State if such State 
 regulates the coverage described in such clause 
 in the same manner and to the same extent as 
 coverage in the small group market (as defined 
 in section 2791(e)(5) of the Public Health 
 Service Act) is regulated by such State.
 ``(8) Participating employer.--The term `participating 
 employer' means, in connection with an association health plan, 
 any employer, if any individual who is an employee of such 
 employer, a partner in such employer, or a self-employed 
 individual who is such employer (or any dependent, as defined 
 under the terms of the plan, of such individual) is or was 
 covered under such plan in connection with the status of such 
 individual as such an employee, partner, or self-employed 
 individual in relation to the plan.
 ``(9) Applicable state authority.--The term `applicable 
 State authority' means, with respect to a health insurance 
 issuer in a State, the State insurance commissioner or official 
 or officials designated by the State to enforce the 
 requirements of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act 
 for the State involved with respect to such issuer.
 ``(10) Qualified actuary.--The term `qualified actuary' 
 means an individual who is a member of the American Academy of 
 Actuaries or meets such reasonable standards and qualifications 
 as the Secretary may provide by regulation through negotiated 
 rulemaking.
 ``(11) Affiliated member.--The term `affiliated member' 
 means, in connection with a sponsor--
 ``(A) a person who is otherwise eligible to be a 
 member of the sponsor but who elects an affiliated 
 status with the sponsor,
 ``(B) in the case of a sponsor with members which 
 consist of associations, a person who is a member of 
 any such association and elects an affiliated status 
 with the sponsor, or
 ``(C) in the case of an association health plan in 
 existence on the date of the enactment of the Patients' 
 Bill of Rights Act of 2001, a person eligible to be a 
 member of the sponsor or one of its member 
 associations.
 ``(12) Large employer.--The term `large employer' means, in 
 connection with a group health plan with respect to a plan 
 year, an employer who employed an average of at least 51 
 employees on business days during the preceding calendar year 
 and who employs at least 2 employees on the first day of the 
 plan year.
 ``(13) Small employer.--The term `small employer' means, in 
 connection with a group health plan with respect to a plan 
 year, an employer who is not a large employer.
 ``(b) Rules of Construction.--
 ``(1) Employers and employees.--For purposes of determining 
 whether a plan, fund, or program is an employee welfare benefit 
 plan which is an association health plan, and for purposes of 
 applying this title in connection with such plan, fund, or 
 program so determined to be such an employee welfare benefit 
 plan--
 ``(A) in the case of a partnership, the term 
 `employer' (as defined in section 3(5)) includes the 
 partnership in relation to the partners, and the term 
 `employee' (as defined in section 3(6)) includes any 
 partner in relation to the partnership; and
 ``(B) in the case of a self-employed individual, 
 the term `employer' (as defined in section 3(5)) and 
 the term `employee' (as defined in section 3(6)) shall 
include such individual.
 ``(2) Plans, funds, and programs treated as employee 
 welfare benefit plans.--In the case of any plan, fund, or 
 program which was established or is maintained for the purpose 
 of providing medical care (through the purchase of insurance or 
 otherwise) for employees (or their dependents) covered 
 thereunder and which demonstrates to the Secretary that all 
 requirements for certification under this part would be met 
 with respect to such plan, fund, or program if such plan, fund, 
 or program were a group health plan, such plan, fund, or 
 program shall be treated for purposes of this title as an 
 employee welfare benefit plan on and after the date of such 
 demonstration.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments to Preemption Rules.--
 (1) Section 514(b)(6) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 1144(b)(6)) is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(E) The preceding subparagraphs of this paragraph do not apply 
with respect to any State law in the case of an association health plan 
which is certified under part 8.''.
 (2) Section 514 of such Act (29 U.S.C. 1144), as amended by 
 section 142, is amended--
 (A) in subsection (b)(4), by striking ``Subsection 
 (a)'' and inserting ``Subsections (a) and (e)'';
 (B) in subsection (b)(5), by striking ``subsection 
 (a)'' in subparagraph (A) and inserting ``subsection 
 (a) of this section and subsections (a)(2)(B) and (b) 
 of section 805'', and by striking ``subsection (a)'' in 
 subparagraph (B) and inserting ``subsection (a) of this 
 section or subsection (a)(2)(B) or (b) of section 
 805'';
 (C) by redesignating subsection (e) as subsection 
 (f); and
 (D) by inserting after subsection (d) the following 
 new subsection:
 ``(e)(1) Except as provided in subsection (b)(4), the provisions of 
this title shall supersede any and all State laws insofar as they may 
now or hereafter preclude, or have the effect of precluding, a health 
insurance issuer from offering health insurance coverage in connection 
with an association health plan which is certified under part 8.
 ``(2) Except as provided in paragraphs (4) and (5) of subsection 
(b) of this section--
 ``(A) In any case in which health insurance coverage of any 
 policy type is offered under an association health plan 
 certified under part 8 to a participating employer operating in 
 such State, the provisions of this title shall supersede any 
 and all laws of such State insofar as they may preclude a 
 health insurance issuer from offering health insurance coverage 
 of the same policy type to other employers operating in the 
 State which are eligible for coverage under such association 
 health plan, whether or not such other employers are 
 participating employers in such plan.
 ``(B) In any case in which health insurance coverage of any 
 policy type is offered under an association health plan in a 
 State and the filing, with the applicable State authority, of 
 the policy form in connection with such policy type is approved 
 by such State authority, the provisions of this title shall 
 supersede any and all laws of any other State in which health 
 insurance coverage of such type is offered, insofar as they may 
 preclude, upon the filing in the same form and manner of such 
 policy form with the applicable State authority in such other 
 State, the approval of the filing in such other State.
 ``(3) For additional provisions relating to association health 
plans, see subsections (a)(2)(B) and (b) of section 805.
 ``(4) For purposes of this subsection, the term `association health 
plan' has the meaning provided in section 801(a), and the terms `health 
insurance coverage', `participating employer', and `health insurance 
issuer' have the meanings provided such terms in section 811, 
respectively.''.
 (3) Section 514(b)(6)(A) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 
 1144(b)(6)(A)) is amended--
 (A) in clause (i)(II), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in clause (ii), by inserting ``and which does 
 not provide medical care (within the meaning of section 
 733(a)(2)),'' after ``arrangement,'', and by striking 
 ``title.'' and inserting ``title, and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 ``(iii) subject to subparagraph (E), in the case of any 
 other employee welfare benefit plan which is a multiple 
 employer welfare arrangement and which provides medical care 
 (within the meaning of section 733(a)(2)), any law of any State 
 which regulates insurance may apply.''.
 (4) Section 514(e) of such Act (as redesignated by 
 paragraph (2)(C)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``Nothing'' and inserting ``(1) 
 Except as provided in paragraph (2), nothing''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(2) Nothing in any other provision of law enacted on or after the 
date of the enactment of the Patients' Bill of Rights Act of 2001 shall 
be construed to alter, amend, modify, invalidate, impair, or supersede 
any provision of this title, except by specific cross-reference to the 
affected section.''.
 (c) Plan Sponsor.--Section 3(16)(B) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 
102(16)(B)) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: 
``Such term also includes a person serving as the sponsor of an 
association health plan under part 8.''.
 (d) Disclosure of Solvency Protections Related to Self-Insured and 
Fully Insured Options Under Association Health Plans.--Section 102(b) 
of such Act (29 U.S.C. 102(b)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following: ``An association health plan shall include in its summary 
plan description, in connection with each benefit option, a description 
of the form of solvency or guarantee fund protection secured pursuant 
to this Act or applicable State law, if any.''.
 (e) Savings Clause.--Section 731(c) of such Act is amended by 
inserting ``or part 8'' after ``this part''.
 (f) Report to the Congress Regarding Certification of Self-Insured 
Association Health Plans.--Not later than January 1, 2006, the 
Secretary of Labor shall report to the Committee on Education and the 
Workforce of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Health, 
Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate the effect association 
health plans have had, if any, on reducing the number of uninsured 
individuals.
 (g) Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1 of the 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by inserting 
after the item relating to section 734 the following new items:

 ``Part 8--Rules Governing Association Health Plans

``Sec. 801. Association health plans.
``Sec. 802. Certification of association health plans.
``Sec. 803. Requirements relating to sponsors and boards of trustees.
``Sec. 804. Participation and coverage requirements.
``Sec. 805. Other requirements relating to plan documents, contribution 
 rates, and benefit options.
``Sec. 806. Maintenance of reserves and provisions for solvency for 
 plans providing health benefits in addition 
 to health insurance coverage.
``Sec. 807. Requirements for application and related requirements.
``Sec. 808. Notice requirements for voluntary termination.
``Sec. 809. Corrective actions and mandatory termination.
``Sec. 810. Trusteeship by the Secretary of insolvent association 
 health plans providing health benefits in 
 addition to health insurance coverage.
``Sec. 811. State assessment authority.
``Sec. 812. Definitions and rules of construction.''.

SEC. 622. CLARIFICATION OF TREATMENT OF SINGLE EMPLOYER ARRANGEMENTS.

 Section 3(40)(B) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(40)(B)) is amended--
 (1) in clause (i), by inserting ``for any plan year of any 
 such plan, or any fiscal year of any such other arrangement;'' 
 after ``single employer'', and by inserting ``during such year 
 or at any time during the preceding 1-year period'' after 
 ``control group'';
 (2) in clause (iii)--
 (A) by striking ``common control shall not be based 
 on an interest of less than 25 percent'' and inserting 
 ``an interest of greater than 25 percent may not be 
 required as the minimum interest necessary for common 
 control''; and
 (B) by striking ``similar to'' and inserting 
 ``consistent and coextensive with'';
 (3) by redesignating clauses (iv) and (v) as clauses (v) 
 and (vi), respectively; and
 (4) by inserting after clause (iii) the following new 
 clause:
 ``(iv) in determining, after the application of clause (i), 
 whether benefits are provided to employees of two or more 
 employers, the arrangement shall be treated as having only one 
 participating employer if, after the application of clause (i), 
 the number of individuals who are employees and former 
 employees of any one participating employer and who are covered 
 under the arrangement is greater than 75 percent of the 
 aggregate number of all individuals who are employees or former 
 employees of participating employers and who are covered under 
 the arrangement;''.

SEC. 623. CLARIFICATION OF TREATMENT OF CERTAIN COLLECTIVELY BARGAINED 
 ARRANGEMENTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 3(40)(A)(i) of the Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(40)(A)(i)) is amended to 
read as follows:
 ``(i)(I) under or pursuant to one or more collective 
 bargaining agreements which are reached pursuant to collective 
 bargaining described in section 8(d) of the National Labor 
 Relations Act (29 U.S.C. 158(d)) or paragraph Fourth of section 
 2 of the Railway Labor Act (45 U.S.C. 152, paragraph Fourth) or 
 which are reached pursuant to labor-management negotiations 
 under similar provisions of State public employee relations 
 laws, and (II) in accordance with subparagraphs (C), (D), and 
 (E);''.
 (b) Limitations.--Section 3(40) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 1002(40)) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraphs:
 ``(C) For purposes of subparagraph (A)(i)(II), a plan or other 
arrangement shall be treated as established or maintained in accordance 
with this subparagraph only if the following requirements are met:
 ``(i) The plan or other arrangement, and the employee 
 organization or any other entity sponsoring the plan or other 
 arrangement, do not--
 ``(I) utilize the services of any licensed 
 insurance agent or broker for soliciting or enrolling 
 employers or individuals as participating employers or 
 covered individuals under the plan or other 
 arrangement; or
 ``(II) pay any type of compensation to a person, 
 other than a full time employee of the employee 
 organization (or a member of the organization to the 
 extent provided in regulations prescribed by the 
 Secretary through negotiated rulemaking), that is 
 related either to the volume or number of employers or 
 individuals solicited or enrolled as participating 
 employers or covered individuals under the plan or 
 other arrangement, or to the dollar amount or size of 
 the contributions made by participating employers or 
 covered individuals to the plan or other arrangement;
 except to the extent that the services used by the plan, 
 arrangement, organization, or other entity consist solely of 
 preparation of documents necessary for compliance with the 
 reporting and disclosure requirements of part 1 or 
 administrative, investment, or consulting services unrelated to 
 solicitation or enrollment of covered individuals.
 ``(ii) As of the end of the preceding plan year, the number 
 of covered individuals under the plan or other arrangement who 
 are neither--
 ``(I) employed within a bargaining unit covered by 
 any of the collective bargaining agreements with a 
 participating employer (nor covered on the basis of an 
 individual's employment in such a bargaining unit); nor
 ``(II) present employees (or former employees who 
 were covered while employed) of the sponsoring employee 
 organization, of an employer who is or was a party to 
 any of the collective bargaining agreements, or of the 
 plan or other arrangement or a related plan or 
 arrangement (nor covered on the basis of such present 
 or former employment);
 does not exceed 15 percent of the total number of individuals 
 who are covered under the plan or arrangement and who are 
 present or former employees who are or were covered under the 
 plan or arrangement pursuant to a collective bargaining 
 agreement with a participating employer. The requirements of 
 the preceding provisions of this clause shall be treated as 
 satisfied if, as of the end of the preceding plan year, such 
 covered individuals are comprised solely of individuals who 
 were covered individuals under the plan or other arrangement as 
 of the date of the enactment of the Patients' Bill of Rights 
 Act of 2001 and, as of the end of the preceding plan year, the 
 number of such covered individuals does not exceed 25 percent 
 of the total number of present and former employees enrolled 
 under the plan or other arrangement.
 ``(iii) The employee organization or other entity 
 sponsoring the plan or other arrangement certifies to the 
 Secretary each year, in a form and manner which shall be 
 prescribed by the Secretary through negotiated rulemaking that 
 the plan or other arrangement meets the requirements of clauses 
 (i) and (ii).
 ``(D) For purposes of subparagraph (A)(i)(II), a plan or 
arrangement shall be treated as established or maintained in accordance 
with this subparagraph only if--
 ``(i) all of the benefits provided under the plan or 
 arrangement consist of health insurance coverage; or
 ``(ii)(I) the plan or arrangement is a multiemployer plan; 
 and
 ``(II) the requirements of clause (B) of the proviso to 
 clause (5) of section 302(c) of the Labor Management Relations 
 Act, 1947 (29 U.S.C. 186(c)) are met with respect to such plan 
 or other arrangement.
 ``(E) For purposes of subparagraph (A)(i)(II), a plan or 
arrangement shall be treated as established or maintained in accordance 
with this subparagraph only if--
 ``(i) the plan or arrangement is in effect as of the date 
 of the enactment of the Patients' Bill of Rights Act of 2001; 
 or
 ``(ii) the employee organization or other entity sponsoring 
 the plan or arrangement--
 ``(I) has been in existence for at least 3 years; 
 or
 ``(II) demonstrates to the satisfaction of the 
 Secretary that the requirements of subparagraphs (C) 
 and (D) are met with respect to the plan or other 
 arrangement.''.
 (c) Conforming Amendments to Definitions of Participant and 
Beneficiary.--Section 3(7) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 1002(7)) is amended 
by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``Such term includes 
an individual who is a covered individual described in paragraph 
(40)(C)(ii).''.

SEC. 624. ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS RELATING TO ASSOCIATION HEALTH PLANS.

 (a) Criminal Penalties for Certain Willful Misrepresentations.--
Section 501 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 
U.S.C. 1131) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(a)'' after ``Sec. 501.''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(b) Any person who willfully falsely represents, to any employee, 
any employee's beneficiary, any employer, the Secretary, or any State, 
a plan or other arrangement established or maintained for the purpose 
of offering or providing any benefit described in section 3(1) to 
employees or their beneficiaries as--
 ``(1) being an association health plan which has been 
 certified under part 8;
 ``(2) having been established or maintained under or 
 pursuant to one or more collective bargaining agreements which 
 are reached pursuant to collective bargaining described in 
 section 8(d) of the National Labor Relations Act (29 U.S.C. 
 158(d)) or paragraph Fourth of section 2 of the Railway Labor 
 Act (45 U.S.C. 152, paragraph Fourth) or which are reached 
 pursuant to labor-management negotiations under similar 
 provisions of State public employee relations laws; or
 ``(3) being a plan or arrangement with respect to which the 
 requirements of subparagraph (C), (D), or (E) of section 3(40) 
 are met;
shall, upon conviction, be imprisoned not more than 5 years, be fined 
under title 18, United States Code, or both.''.
 (b) Cease Activities Orders.--Section 502 of such Act (29 U.S.C. 
1132), as amended by sections 141 and 143, is further amended by adding 
at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(p) Association Health Plan Cease and Desist Orders.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), upon 
 application by the Secretary showing the operation, promotion, 
 or marketing of an association health plan (or similar 
 arrangement providing benefits consisting of medical care (as 
 defined in section 733(a)(2))) that--
 ``(A) is not certified under part 8, is subject 
 under section 514(b)(6) to the insurance laws of any 
 State in which the plan or arrangement offers or 
 provides benefits, and is not licensed, registered, or 
 otherwise approved under the insurance laws of such 
 State; or
 ``(B) is an association health plan certified under 
 part 8 and is not operating in accordance with the 
 requirements under part 8 for such certification,
 a district court of the United States shall enter an order 
 requiring that the plan or arrangement cease activities.
 ``(2) Exception.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply in the case 
 of an association health plan or other arrangement if the plan 
 or arrangement shows that--
 ``(A) all benefits under it referred to in 
 paragraph (1) consist of health insurance coverage; and
 ``(B) with respect to each State in which the plan 
 or arrangement offers or provides benefits, the plan or 
 arrangement is operating in accordance with applicable 
 State laws that are not superseded under section 514.
 ``(3) Additional equitable relief.--The court may grant 
 such additional equitable relief, including any relief 
 available under this title, as it deems necessary to protect 
 the interests of the public and of persons having claims for 
 benefits against the plan.''.
 (c) Responsibility for Claims Procedure.--Section 503 of such Act 
(29 U.S.C. 1133), as amended by section 301(b), is amended by adding at 
the end the following new subsection:
 ``(c) Association Health Plans.--The terms of each association 
health plan which is or has been certified under part 8 shall require 
the board of trustees or the named fiduciary (as applicable) to ensure 
that the requirements of this section are met in connection with claims 
filed under the plan.''.

SEC. 625. COOPERATION BETWEEN FEDERAL AND STATE AUTHORITIES.

 Section 506 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
(29 U.S.C. 1136) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection:
 ``(c) Consultation With States With Respect to Association Health 
Plans.--
 ``(1) Agreements with states.--The Secretary shall consult 
 with the State recognized under paragraph (2) with respect to 
 an association health plan regarding the exercise of--
 ``(A) the Secretary's authority under sections 502 
 and 504 to enforce the requirements for certification 
 under part 8; and
 ``(B) the Secretary's authority to certify 
 association health plans under part 8 in accordance 
 with regulations of the Secretary applicable to 
 certification under part 8.
 ``(2) Recognition of primary domicile state.--In carrying 
 out paragraph (1), the Secretary shall ensure that only one 
 State will be recognized, with respect to any particular 
 association health plan, as the State to with which 
 consultation is required. In carrying out this paragraph, the 
 Secretary shall take into account the places of residence of 
 the participants and beneficiaries under the plan and the State 
 in which the trust is maintained.''.

SEC. 626. EFFECTIVE DATE AND TRANSITIONAL AND OTHER RULES.

 (a) Effective Date.--The amendments made by sections 621, 624, and 
625 shall take effect one year from the date of enactment. The 
amendments made by sections 622 and 623 shall take effect on the date 
of the enactment of this Act. The Secretary of Labor shall first issue 
all regulations necessary to carry out the amendments made by this 
subtitle within one year from the date of enactment. Such regulations 
shall be issued through negotiated rulemaking.
 (b) Exception.--Section 801(a)(2) of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974 (added by section 621) does not apply in 
connection with an association health plan (certified under part 8 of 
subtitle B of title I of such Act) existing on the date of the 
enactment of this Act, if no benefits provided thereunder as of the 
date of the enactment of this Act consist of health insurance coverage 
(as defined in section 733(b)(1) of such Act).
 (c) Treatment of Certain Existing Health Benefits Programs.--
 (1) In general.--In any case in which, as of the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, an arrangement is maintained in a 
 State for the purpose of providing benefits consisting of 
 medical care for the employees and beneficiaries of its 
 participating employers, at least 200 participating employers 
 make contributions to such arrangement, such arrangement has 
 been in existence for at least 10 years, and such arrangement 
 is licensed under the laws of one or more States to provide 
 such benefits to its participating employers, upon the filing 
 with the applicable authority (as defined in section 812(a)(5) 
 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (as 
 amended by this subtitle)) by the arrangement of an application 
 for certification of the arrangement under part 8 of subtitle B 
 of title I of such Act--
 (A) such arrangement shall be deemed to be a group 
 health plan for purposes of title I of such Act;
 (B) the requirements of sections 801(a)(1) and 
 803(a)(1) of the Employee Retirement Income Security 
 Act of 1974 shall be deemed met with respect to such 
 arrangement;
 (C) the requirements of section 803(b) of such Act 
 shall be deemed met, if the arrangement is operated by 
 a board of directors which--
 (i) is elected by the participating 
 employers, with each employer having one vote; 
 and
 (ii) has complete fiscal control over the 
 arrangement and which is responsible for all 
 operations of the arrangement;
 (D) the requirements of section 804(a) of such Act 
 shall be deemed met with respect to such arrangement; 
 and
 (E) the arrangement may be certified by any 
 applicable authority with respect to its operations in 
 any State only if it operates in such State on the date 
 of certification.
 The provisions of this subsection shall cease to apply with 
 respect to any such arrangement at such time after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act as the applicable requirements of 
 this subsection are not met with respect to such arrangement.
 (2) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection, the 
 terms ``group health plan'', ``medical care'', and 
 ``participating employer'' shall have the meanings provided in 
 section 812 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
 1974, except that the reference in paragraph (7) of such 
 section to an ``association health plan'' shall be deemed a 
 reference to an arrangement referred to in this subsection.
 <all>