S 346 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 346
To amend the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act and for other
purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
February 2 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. WIRTH (for himself, Mr. LEAHY, Mr. ROTH, Mr. MOYNIHAN, Mr. HARKIN,
Mr. REID, Mr. BURDICK, Mr. LUGAR, Mr. PELL, Mr. JEFFORDS, Mr. FOWLER,
Mr. LIEBERMAN, Mr. KERRY, Mr. SANFORD, and Mr. GORE) introduced the following
bill; which read twice and referred to the Committee on Energy and Natural
Resources
A BILL
To amend the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act and for other
purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Tongass Timber Reform Act'.
SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act--
 (a) The term `the Secretary' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
 (b) Unless otherwise specified, any other term has the same meaning as
 used in the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act as amended
 (Public Law 96-487), hereinafter referred to as ANILCA.
TITLE I--ALASKA NATIONAL INTEREST LANDS CONSERVATION ACT AMENDMENTS
SEC. 101. ANNUAL APPROPRIATIONS FOR TIMBER MANAGEMENT AND RESOURCE CONSERVATION
ON THE TONGASS NATIONAL FOREST.
 Section 705(a) of ANILCA (16 U.S.C. 539d(a)) is hereby repealed effective
 September 30, 1989, and subsections (b) and (c) of section 705 are
 redesignated as subsections (a) and (b), respectively.
SEC. 102. IDENTIFICATION OF LANDS UNSUITABLE FOR TIMBER PRODUCTION.
 Section 705(d) of ANILCA (16 U.S.C. 539d(d)) is hereby repealed.
SEC. 103. REPORTS ON THE TONGASS NATIONAL FOREST.
 (a) MONITORING- Section 706(a) of ANILCA (16 U.S.C. 539e(a)) is hereby
 repealed.
 (b) STATUS- Section 706(b) of ANILCA (16 U.S.C. 539e(b)) is amended
 as follows:
 (1) Strike out `(b)' and insert in lieu thereof `(a)'.
 (2) Strike out `and (4)' and insert in lieu thereof `(4)'.
 (3) Strike out the period at the end of the section and insert in lieu
 thereof `; (5) the impact of timber harvest on subsistence resources,
 wildlife and fisheries resources, commercial fisheries, recreation resources
 and tourism; (6) effects of timber harvest on biological diversity and
 measures to conserve biological diversity; (7) effects of timber harvest on
 the old growth rain forest ecosystem, especially in areas of high volume,
 and measures to conserve the old growth ecosystem; (8) timber supply and
 demand in southeastern Alaska; and (9) costs and revenues of the timber
 sale program.'.
 (c) CONSULTATION- Section 706(c) of ANILCA (16 U.S.C. 539e(c)) is amended
 as follows:
 (1) Strike out `(c)' and insert in lieu thereof `(b)'.
 (2) Strike out `and the Alaska Land Use Council' and insert in lieu thereof
 `the southeast Alaska commercial fishing industry, and the Alaska Land
 Use Council'.
SEC. 104. TERMINATION OF LONG-TERM TIMBER SALE CONTRACTS IN ALASKA.
 Title V of ANILCA is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new section:
`SEC. 508. TERMINATION OF LONG-TERM TIMBER SALE CONTRACTS IN ALASKA.
 `No later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this section, the
 Secretary shall terminate the long-term timber sale contracts numbered
 12-11-010-1545 and A10fs-1042 between the United States and Alaska Pulp
 Corporation, and between the United States and Ketchikan Pulp Company,
 respectively.'.
TITLE II--MANAGEMENT OF THE TONGASS NATIONAL FOREST
SEC. 201. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) natural resources of the Tongass National Forest possess outstanding
 natural characteristics of high value and benefit to the American people,
 and these resources are essential for subsistence activities and for the
 commercial fishing, recreation, and tourism industries which contribute
 significantly to the economy of southeast Alaska;
 (2) the Tongass National Forest contains one of the last largely intact rain
 forests in the world's temperate latitudes, and must serve as an example of
 the type of protection, preservation and management that will be required
 to stop the destruction of rain forest resources in other nations;
 (3) current Forest Service management of the Tongass National Forest,
 in particular the amount of high volume of old growth timber offered
 for sale and harvested, gives priority to timber harvest over other uses
 of the forest and thus is not consistent with the principle of multiple
 use or with requirements of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources
 Planning Act of 1974 and the National Forest Management Act of 1976, and
 cannot be sustained without jeopardizing natural resources that are of
 national significance and upon which the commercial fishing, recreation,
 and tourism industries and subsistence users of southeast Alaska depend; and
 (4) the Tongass National Forest Land Management Plan of 1979, as amended,
 which guides current Forest Service management practices, is predicated on
 sections of ANILCA that are repealed or amended by this Act and therefore
 should be revised consistent with the provisions of this Act and with other
 laws applicable to the National Forest System, to significantly increase
 protection and enhancement of fish, wildlife, watershed, recreation,
 cultural, biological diversity, and old growth forest ecosystem resources,
 and to support the long-term best interest of all natural resource dependent
 industries and subsistence communities in southeast Alaska.
 (b) PURPOSE- The purpose of this title is to require revision of the Tongass
 National Forest Land Management Plan of 1979, as amended, in conformance
 with this Act and other laws applicable to the National Forest System,
 to significantly increase protection of resources that are critical to the
 long-term best interests of the commercial fishing, recreation, and tourism
 industries, and the subsistence users in southeast Alaska, and which are
 of high value and benefit to the people of the United States. These include
 the fish, wildlife, watershed, recreation, cultural, biological diversity,
 and old growth ecosystem resources and subsistence values of the Tongass
 National Forest.
SEC. 202. DIRECTIVE AND REPORTS.
 (a) In furtherance of the purpose of this title, the Secretary is hereby
 authorized and directed to fully revise the Tongass National Forest Land
 Management Plan of 1979, as amended, to conform with provisions of this
 Act and other laws applicable to the National Forest System. This revision
 shall supersede the Forest Plan revision currently underway.
 (b) In revising the Forest Plan, the Secretary shall significantly increase
 the protection of fish, wildlife, watershed, recreation, cultural, biological
 diversity, and old growth ecosystem resources and subsistence values of the
 Tongass National Forest. Planning and management of old growth resources
 shall give specific attention to areas of high volume old growth timber
 (30,000 board feet per acre or greater) and shall consider both individual
 species of plants and animals and the old growth ecosystem as a whole.
 (c) In revising the Forest Plan, the Secretary shall ensure that priority is
 given to the protection of fish, wildlife, watershed, recreation, cultural,
 biological diversity, and old growth ecosystem resources and subsistence
 values of the areas listed in section 302(b) of this Act.
 (d) Within 30 days after this Act takes effect, the Secretary shall provide
 the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee
 on Interior and Insular Affairs of the House of Representatives with a
 report on the schedule for revision of the Tongass Land Management Plan,
 including the expected dates of publication of the draft and final plans.
 (e) Within one year after this Act takes effect, and each year thereafter
 until the revised Tongass National Forest Land Management Plan is complete
 and ready for implementation, the Secretary shall provide the Committee on
 Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Interior
 and Insular Affairs of the House of Representatives with a report describing
 the steps taken in furtherance of section 201(b) of this Act.
TITLE III--MORATORIUM ON TIMBER SALES AND HARVEST
SEC. 301. PURPOSE.
 The purpose of this title is to impose a moratorium on the sale or commercial
 harvest of timber in certain areas having special values for fish and
 wildlife, subsistence, recreation, old growth, and other resources,
 pending revision of the Tongass National Forest Land Management Plan to
 conform with the new management directives provided in this Act.
SEC. 302. MORATORIUM.
 (a) MORATORIUM- During the revision of the Tongass National Forest
 Land Management Plan there shall be no sale or harvest of timber, nor
 any associated development (including timber sale preparation or road
 construction), within any area specified in subsection (b) of this
 section. This moratorium shall remain in effect until 90 days after
 publication of the Record of Decision for the Forest Plan.
 (b) AREAS AFFECTED- The moratorium shall apply to lands administered by
 the Forest Service, as generally depicted on appropriately referenced maps,
 as follows:
--Approximate
Area
--Acreage
Anan Creek
--37,331
Berners Bay
--35,379
Calder-Holbrook
--62,335
Chichagof
--353,540
Chuck River
--125,574
Kadashan
--33,641
Karta River
--38,671
Kegan Lake
--23,858
Naha River
--31,926
Nutkwa
--53,635
Outside Islands
--95,524
Pleasant Island-Lemesurier Islands
--15,527
Port Adolphus-Mud Bay
--72,091
Port Houghton-Sanborn Canal
--59,712
Rockey Pass
--74,423
Sarkar Lakes
--23,500
South Etolin Island
--81,939
South Kuiu
--190,301
Sullivan Island
--3,985
Trap Bay
--6,446
West Duncan Canal
--118,812
Yakutat Forelands
--232,962
Young Lake
--18,173
Copies of maps depicting these areas shall be on file and available for public
inspection in the offices of the Chief of the Forest Service in Washington,
District of Columbia, and the Regional Forester in Juneau, Alaska.