S 154 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 154
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to impose a fee on the importation
of crude oil and refined petroleum products.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
January 14 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1991
Mr. NICKLES introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Finance
A BILL
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to impose a fee on the importation
of crude oil and refined petroleum products.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Domestic Petroleum Security Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. FEE ON IMPORTED CRUDE OIL OR REFINED PETRO- LEUM PRODUCTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subtitle E of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (relating
 to alcohol, tobacco, and certain other excise taxes) is amended by adding
 at the end thereof the following new chapter:
`CHAPTER 54--IMPORTED CRUDE OIL OR REFINED PETROLEUM PRODUCTS
`Sec. 5881. Imposition of tax.
`Sec. 5882. Definitions.
`Sec. 5883. Registration.
`Sec. 5884. Procedures; returns; penalties.
`SEC. 5881. IMPOSITION OF TAX.
 `(a) IMPOSITION OF TAX- In addition to any other tax imposed under this
 title, an excise tax is hereby imposed on--
 `(1) the first sale within the United States of--
 `(A) any crude oil, or
 `(B) any refined petroleum product,
that has been imported into the United States, and
 `(2) the use within the United States of--
 `(A) any crude oil, or
 `(B) any refined petroleum product, that has been imported into the United
 States if no tax has been imposed with respect to such crude oil or refined
 petroleum product prior to such use.
 `(b) Rate of Tax-
 `(1) CRUDE OIL- For purposes of paragraphs (1)(A) and (2)(A) of subsection
 (a) the rate of tax shall be the excess, if any, of--
 `(i) $25, over
 `(ii) the energy policy price per barrel of crude oil.
 `(2) REFINED PETROLEUM PRODUCT- For purposes of paragraphs (1)(B) and
 (2)(B) of subsection (a), the rate of tax shall be equal to--
 `(i) $3.00, plus
 `(ii) the tax determined under paragraph (1) of this subsection.
 `(3) FRACTIONAL PARTS OF BARRELS- In the case of a fraction of a barrel,
 the tax imposed by subsection (a) shall be the same fraction of the amount
 of such tax imposed on the whole barrel.
 `(c) Determination of Energy Policy Price-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this section, the energy policy price with
 respect to any week during which the tax under subsection (a) is imposed
 shall be determined by the Secretary and published in the Federal Register
 on the first day of such week.
 `(2) BASIS OF DETERMINATION- For purposes of paragraph (1), the energy policy
 price for any week is the weighted average international price of a barrel
 of crude oil for the preceding 4 weeks as determined by the Secretary, after
 consultation with the Administrator of the Energy Information Administration
 of the Department of Energy, pursuant to the formula for determining such
 international price as used in publishing the Weekly Petroleum Status
 Report and as in effect on the date of the enactment of this section.
 `(d) Liability for Payment of Tax-
 `(1) SALES- The taxes imposed by subsection (a)(1) shall be paid by the
 first person who sells the crude oil or refined petroleum product within
 the United States.
 `(2) USE- The taxes imposed by subsection (a)(2) shall be paid by the
 person who uses the crude oil or refined petroleum product.
 `(3) Tax-free exports-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary, no tax
 shall be imposed under this chapter on the sale of crude oil or refined
 petroleum products for export or for resale by the purchaser to a second
 purchaser for export.
 `(B) PROOF OF EXPORT- Where any crude oil or refined petroleum product has
 been sold free of tax under subparagraph (A), such subparagraph shall cease
 to apply with respect to the sale of such crude oil or refined petroleum
 product, unless, within the 6-month period which begins on the date of the
 sale, the seller receives proof that the crude oil or refined petroleum
 product, has been exported.
`SEC. 5882. DEFINITIONS.
 `For Purposes of This Chapter-
 `(1) CRUDE OIL- The term `crude oil' means crude oil other than domestic
 crude oil (within the meaning of chapter 45).
 `(2) BARREL- The term `barrel' means 42 United States gallons.
 `(3) REFINED PETROLEUM PRODUCT- The term `refined petroleum product' shall
 have the same meaning given to such term by section 3(5) of the Emergency
 Petroleum Allocation Act of 1973 (15 U.S.C. 752(5)).
 `(4) EXPORT- The term `export' includes shipment to a possession of the
 United States; and the term `exported' includes shipment to a possession
 of the United States.
`SEC. 5883. REGISTRATION.
 `Every person subject to tax under section 5881 shall, before incurring
 any liability for tax under such section, register with the Secretary.
`SEC. 5884. PROCEDURES; RETURNS; PENALTIES.
 `For purposes of this title, any reference (other than in chapter 45 or
 section 6429) to the tax imposed by section 4986 shall be treated, except
 to the extent provided by the Secretary by regulation where such treatment
 would be inappropriate, as a reference to the tax imposed by section 5881.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- The table of chapters for subtitle E is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`Chapter 54. Imported crude oil or refined petroleum products.'.
 (c) DEDUCTIBILITY OF IMPORTED OIL TAX- The first sentence of section 164(a)
 (relating to deductions for taxes) is amended by inserting after paragraph
 (5) the following new paragraph:
 `(6) The imported oil taxes imposed by section 5881.'.
 SEC. 3. EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply
 with respect to sales and use of imported crude oil or imported refined
 petroleum products on or after the date of enactment.