S 874 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 874
To establish national voter registration procedures for Presidential and
Congressional elections, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
May 1 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. FORD introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Rules and Administration
A BILL
To establish national voter registration procedures for Presidential and
Congressional elections, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `National Voter Registration Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. NATIONAL PROCEDURES FOR VOTER REGISTRATION FOR PRESIDENTIAL AND
CONGRESSIONAL ELECTIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b), notwithstanding any
 other provision of Federal law or any provision of State law, in addition
 to any other method of voter registration provided for under State law,
 each State shall establish procedures with respect to Presidential elections
 and Congressional elections to permit voter registration--
 (1) by application in person simultaneous with application for a motor
 vehicle driver's license pursuant to section 3;
 (2) by mail application under section 4; and
 (3) by application in person--
 (A) at the appropriate registration site designated with respect to the
 residence of the applicant in accordance with State law; or
 (B) at a Federal, State, or private sector location designated under
 section 5.
 (b) NONAPPLICABILITY TO CERTAIN STATES- This Act does not apply to any State
 that has no voter registration requirement with respect to Presidential
 elections and Congressional elections.
SEC. 3. SIMULTANEOUS APPLICATION FOR VOTER REGISTRATION AND APPLICATION FOR
MOTOR VEHICLE DRIVER'S LICENSE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b), each State motor
 vehicle driver's license application (including any renewal application)
 submitted to the appropriate State motor vehicle authority under State law
 shall also serve as an application for voter registration with respect to
 Presidential elections and Congressional elections. An application for voter
 registration so submitted supersedes any previously submitted application
 for voter registration and invalidates any previous registration for the
 individual involved.
 (b) EXCEPTION- An individual referred to in subsection (a) may decline in
 writing to be registered by means of the motor vehicle driver's license
 application.
 (c) FORMS AND PROCEDURES- Each State shall include a voter registration
 application for Presidential elections and Congressional elections as part
 of any form used to apply for a State motor vehicle driver's license. The
 voter registration application portion of the form--
 (1) may not require any information that duplicates information required
 in the driver's license portion of the form;
 (2) shall include a box or other device to permit an applicant to decline
 to register, as provided in subsection (b);
 (3) shall require only sufficient information to prevent duplicate voter
 registration and otherwise to enable the appropriate State election official
 to assess the eligibility of the applicant;
 (4) shall include a statement of penalties provided by law for submission
 of a false voter registration application; and
 (5) shall be made available to the appropriate State election official as
 provided by State law.
 (d) CHANGE OF ADDRESS- Any change of address form submitted in accordance
 with State law for purposes of a State motor vehicle driver's license shall
 also serve as notification of change of address for voter registration
 with respect to Presidential elections and Congressional elections for
 the individual involved.
SEC. 4. MAIL REGISTRATION.
 (a) FORM- Each State shall develop a mail voter registration application
 form for Presidential elections and Congressional elections. The form shall--
 (1) require only sufficient identifying information, including the signature
 of the applicant, to enable the appropriate State election official to
 assess the eligibility of the applicant; and
 (2) include a statement of penalties provided by law for submission of a
 false voter registration application.
A form under this section may not include any requirement for notarization
or other formal authentication.
 (b) AVAILABILITY OF FORMS- The chief State election official of each
 State shall make the form available for government and private sector
 distribution, with particular emphasis on availability for organized voter
 registration programs.
SEC. 5. VOTER REGISTRATION LOCATIONS.
 (a) DESIGNATION- Each State shall designate appropriate State offices
 and (upon agreement with the Federal Government and nongovernmental
 entities) Federal and private sector offices as locations, with respect to
 registration for Presidential elections and Congressional elections. At
 each such location, the following services shall be made available:
 (1) distribution of voter registration applications, (2) assistance
 to applicants in completing such applications, and (3) acceptance of
 completed applications for transmittal to the appropriate State election
 official. Offices designated under this subsection shall include offices
 providing public assistance, unemployment compensation, and related services.
 (b) FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE SECTOR COOPERATION- All departments,
 agencies, and other entities of the executive branch of the Federal
 Government shall, to the greatest extent practicable, cooperate with the
 States in carrying out subsection (a), and all nongovernmental entities
 are encouraged to do so.
SEC. 6. REQUIREMENTS WITH RESPECT TO ADMINISTRATION OF VOTER REGISTRATION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- In the administration of voter registration for Presidential
 elections and Congressional elections, each State shall--
 (1) assure that any eligible applicant is registered to vote in the
 election--
 (A) in the case of registration with a motor vehicle application under
 section 3, if the valid voter registration form of the applicant is
 submitted to the appropriate State motor vehicle authority not later than
 25 days before the date of the election;
 (B) in the case of registration by mail under section 4, if the valid
 voter registration form of the applicant is postmarked not later than 25
 days before the date of the election;
 (C) in the case of registration at a location designated under section 5,
 if the valid voter registration form of the applicant is accepted at the
 location not later than 25 days before the date of the election; and
 (D) in any other case, if the valid voter registration form of the applicant
 is received by the appropriate State election official not later than 25
 days before the date of the election;
 (2) require the appropriate State election official to notify each applicant
 for registration of the disposition of the application; and
 (3) provide that the name of a voter may not be removed from the official
 list of eligible voters other than (A) at the request of the voter, (B) by
 reason of the death of the voter, (C) as provided by State law, by reason
 of criminal conviction, mental incapacity, or change in residence of the
 voter, or (D) for failure to vote in each of 2 consecutive Presidential
 general elections and at least one Congressional election or election for
 State office between such 2 consecutive Presidential general elections.
 (b) SPECIAL RULE- A State may not, under subsection (a)(3)(D), provide for
 removal of the name of a voter from the official list of eligible voters
 if the voter registers with a motor vehicle application under section 3
 and continues to hold a valid driver's license.
SEC. 7. FEDERAL COORDINATION AND REGULATIONS.
 The Federal Election Commission--
 (1) shall be responsible for coordination of Federal functions under this
 Act; and
 (2) in consultation with the chief election officers of the States, the
 heads of the departments, agencies, and other entities of the executive
 branch of the Federal Government, and appropriate individuals from the
 private sector, shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to
 carry out the provisions of this Act.
SEC. 8. DESIGNATION OF CHIEF STATE ELECTION OFFICIAL.
 Each State shall designate a State officer or employee as the chief State
 election official, to be responsible for coordination of State functions
 under this Act.
SEC. 9. ENFORCEMENT.
 The Attorney General may bring a civil action in an appropriate district
 court for such declaratory or injunctive relief as may be necessary to
 carry out the provisions of this Act.
SEC. 10. PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION.
 An individual aggrieved by a violation of this Act may file a complaint of
 the violation with the chief election officer of the State involved. If the
 complaint is not resolved within 90 days after the filing, the individual
 may bring a civil action in an appropriate district court for declaratory
 and injunctive relief with respect to the violation.
SEC. 11. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act--
 (1) the term `motor vehicle driver's license' includes any personal
 identification document issued by a State motor vehicle authority;
 (2) the term `Presidential election' means a primary election or general
 election for the office of President or Vice President; and
 (3) the term `Congressional election' means a primary election, special
 election, or general election for the office of Senator or Representative.
SEC. 12. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 The requirements of this Act shall apply with respect to Presidential
 elections and Congressional elections held after date of the Presidential
 general election of 1992.