[Congressional Bills 105th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 3868 Introduced in House (IH)]

105th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 H. R. 3868

 To prevent children from using tobacco products, to reduce the health 
 costs attributable to tobacco products, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 May 14, 1998

 Mr. Hansen (for himself, Mr. Meehan, Mr. Waxman, Mr. Bilbray, Mr. 
 Doggett, Mr. Cook, Mr. Fazio of California, Mr. Cannon, Mr. Pallone, 
Mr. Fox of Pennsylvania, Ms. DeGette, Mr. Gilman, Mr. Lewis of Georgia, 
Mrs. Morella, Mr. Abercrombie, Mrs. Roukema, Mrs. Tauscher, Mr. McKeon, 
 Mr. Blagojevich, Mr. Horn, Mr. Brown of California, Mr. Campbell, Mr. 
 Bonior, Mr. Ford, Mr. Kennedy of Rhode Island, Mr. Oberstar, Mr. 
 Kennedy of Massachusetts, Mr. Schumer, Mr. Olver, Mr. LaFalce, Ms. 
 Norton, Mr. Visclosky, Mr. Ackerman, Mr. McDermott, Mr. Matsui, Mr. 
Lampson, Mr. Delahunt, Mr. McHale, Mr. Yates, Mr. Pomeroy, Mr. Barrett 
 of Wisconsin, Mr. Markey, Ms. Furse, Mr. Blumenauer, Mr. Minge, Mr. 
 Vento, Mr. Nadler, Mr. Stark, Ms. Pelosi, Mr. McGovern, Mr. Sherman, 
 Ms. DeLauro, Mr. Hinchey, Ms. Eshoo, Mr. Gephardt, Mr. Farr of 
 California, Ms. Lofgren, Ms. Woolsey, Mr. Cardin, Ms. Stabenow, Mr. 
 Levin, Ms. Slaughter, Mr. Miller of California, Mr. Johnson of 
 Wisconsin, Mr. Lipinski, Mr. Frost, Mrs. Maloney of New York, Mrs. 
 Capps, Mr. Lantos, Mr. Weygand, Mr. Menendez, Mr. Filner, Ms. 
 Millender-McDonald, Mr. Gutierrez, Mr. Borski, Mrs. Lowey, Mr. 
 Cummings, Ms. Roybal-Allard, Mr. Wexler, Mr. Coyne, Mr. Moran of 
 Virginia, Mr. Gejdenson, Mr. Conyers, Mrs. McCarthy of New York, Mr. 
Dicks, Mr. Rush, Mr. Payne, Mr. Davis of Illinois, Ms. Jackson-Lee, and 
 Mr. Stokes) introduced the following bill; which was referred to the 
 Committee on Commerce, and in addition to the Committee on Ways and 
 Means, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in 
 each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the 
 jurisdiction of the committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To prevent children from using tobacco products, to reduce the health 
 costs attributable to tobacco products, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Bipartisan NO 
Tobacco for Kids Act of 1998''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
 TITLE I--PRICE INCREASE TO DISCOURAGE CHILD TOBACCO USE

Sec. 101. Policy.
Sec. 102. Payments by tobacco manufacturers.
Sec. 103. General provisions.
 TITLE II--FDA JURISDICTION OVER TOBACCO PRODUCTS

Sec. 201. Reference.
Sec. 202. Definitions.
Sec. 203. Amendments to chapter V.
Sec. 204. Validation of the FDA rule.
Sec. 205. Special provisions for tobacco products.
Sec. 206. General provisions.
Sec. 207. Repeal.
 TITLE III--PERFORMANCE OBJECTIVES TO REDUCE CHILD TOBACCO USE

Sec. 301. Annual performance surveys.
Sec. 302. Performance objectives.
Sec. 303. Additional measures to reduce child tobacco use.
Sec. 304. Proceeds of price increases.
Sec. 305. Judicial review.
Sec. 306. General provisions.
Sec. 307. Use of tobacco products among minority populations.
Sec. 308. Definitions.
 TITLE IV--SMOKE-FREE ENVIRONMENTS

Sec. 401. Smoke-free environment policy.
Sec. 402. Citizen actions.
Sec. 403. Regulations.
Sec. 404. Definitions.
Sec. 405. Preemption.
Sec. 406. Effective date.
 TITLE V--TOBACCO PREVENTION INITIATIVES

Sec. 501. National public awareness campaign.
Sec. 502. Federal implementation.
Sec. 503. Tobacco use cessation.
Sec. 504. Research and surveillance.
Sec. 505. Minority populations.
Sec. 506. Inflation adjustment.
 TITLE VI--INTERNATIONAL TOBACCO CONTROL

Sec. 601. Sale, distribution, and advertising of tobacco products in 
 foreign countries.
Sec. 602. Prohibition on Federal efforts to promote tobacco exports.
Sec. 603. International Tobacco Control Trust Fund.
Sec. 604. American Center on Global Health and Tobacco.
Sec. 605. Assessment on tobacco products manufactured in a foreign 
 country.
Sec. 606. Prevention of tobacco smuggling.
Sec. 607. Sense of Congress.
 TITLE VII--TOBACCO ACCOUNTABILITY BOARD

Sec. 701. Tobacco Accountability Board.
Sec. 702. Disclosure of tobacco industry documents.
Sec. 703. Investigation and annual reports.
Sec. 704. Authorities.
Sec. 705. Enforcement.
Sec. 706. Administration.
Sec. 707. Whistleblower protections.
Sec. 708. Definitions.
 TITLE VIII--PAYMENTS TO STATES

 Subtitle A--Resolution of State Actions

Sec. 801. State elections.
Sec. 802. Payments to States.
Sec. 803. Exempt manufacturers.
 Subtitle B--State Grants

Sec. 811. Public awareness and prevention programs.
Sec. 812. Reimbursement of States for medicaid expenses.
 TITLE IX--DEFINITIONS

Sec. 901. Definitions.

 TITLE I--PRICE INCREASE TO DISCOURAGE CHILD TOBACCO USE

SEC. 101. POLICY.

 Funds raised by this title shall be used to reduce the public debt, 
except as provided in title V (relating to tobacco prevention 
initiatives) and VIII (relating to payments to States).

SEC. 102. PAYMENTS BY TOBACCO MANUFACTURERS.

 (a) Initial Payment.--Not later than 60 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall assess each manufacturer 
$10,000,000,000 multiplied by the manufacturer's share of the total 
number of units of tobacco products manufactured or imported in the 
United States in 1997. Each manufacturer shall pay the assessment to 
the United States Treasury not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act.
 (b) Annual Payments.--By March 31 of each year beginning in 1999, 
each manufacturer shall pay to the United States Treasury the following 
amounts:
 (1) 1999.--For tobacco products manufactured or imported in 
 the United States during calendar year 1999, $0.50 per unit.
 (2) 2000.--For tobacco products manufactured or imported in 
 the United States during calendar year 2000, $1.00 per unit.
 (3) 2001 and thereafter.--For tobacco products manufactured 
 or imported in the United States during calendar year 2001 and 
 thereafter, $1.50 per unit.
 (c) Inflation Adjustment.--The amount of any payment under 
subsection (b) shall be increased by the percentage increase in the 
Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers (all items, U.S. city 
average) from 1998 to the year before the year in which the payment is 
due.
 (d) Exports.--This section shall not apply to tobacco products 
manufactured or imported in the United States for export.

SEC. 103. GENERAL PROVISIONS.

 (a) Failure To Pay.--If a manufacturer fails to make a payment 
required under section 102 by the date such payment is due, the 
Attorney General shall recover the amount of the payment (plus interest 
at 1.5 times the prevailing rate) in an action brought in an 
appropriate district court of the United States.
 (b) Regulations.--
 (1) Promulgation.--The Secretary may promulgate regulations 
 to implement the requirements of this title.
 (2) Compliance.--An action may be brought by the Secretary 
 in an appropriate district court of the United States to enjoin 
 any failure to comply with regulations under paragraph (1) or 
 to impose a civil penalty for such failure to comply of not 
 more than $25,000 per day.
 (c) Definition.--For purposes of this title, the term ``Secretary'' 
means the Secretary of the Treasury.

 TITLE II--FDA JURISDICTION OVER TOBACCO PRODUCTS

SEC. 201. REFERENCE.

 Whenever in this title an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms 
of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the 
reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other 
provision of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et 
seq.).

SEC. 202. DEFINITIONS.

 (a) Drug.--Section 201(g)(1) (21 U.S.C. 321(g)(1)) is amended by 
striking ``; and (D)'' and inserting ``; (D) nicotine in tobacco 
products; and (E)''.
 (b) Devices.--Section 201(h) (21 U.S.C. 321(h)) is amended by 
adding at the end the following: ``Such term includes a tobacco 
product.''.
 (c) Other Definitions.--Section 201 (21 U.S.C. 321) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(kk) The term `tobacco product' means any product made or derived 
from tobacco that is intended for human consumption.''.

SEC. 203. AMENDMENTS TO CHAPTER V.

 (a) Misbranding.--Section 502 (21 U.S.C. 360) is amended by adding 
at the end the following:
 ``(u) In the case of a tobacco product, if it does not comply with 
a requirement under subchapter F.''.
 (b) Clarification of Authority.--Section 520(e) (21 U.S.C. 360j(e)) 
is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) In the case of tobacco products, the restrictions on sale and 
distribution authorized by paragraph (1) shall include restrictions on 
advertising and promotion of tobacco products.''.
 (c) Preemption.--Section 521(a) (21 U.S.C. 360k(a)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``Except as provided in subsection (b)'' 
 and inserting ``Except in the case of tobacco products and as 
 provided in subsection (b)''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:

 ``tobacco products

 ``(c) If the package or advertisement of a tobacco product is 
required to bear a warning under this Act, no statement relating to the 
use of the tobacco product and health, other than a statement required 
under this Act, may be required by any State or local statute or 
regulation to be included on any package or in any advertisement of 
such tobacco product.''.

SEC. 204. VALIDATION OF THE FDA RULE.

 (a) In General.--All provisions of the regulations related to 
tobacco products promulgated by the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services on August 28, 1996 (61 Fed. Reg. 44396) shall be considered to 
be lawful, and to have been lawfully promulgated, under the Federal 
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
 (b) Effective Date.--Provisions of such regulations which are not 
in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act shall take effect 
upon the expiration of 9 months after such date.

SEC. 205. SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR TOBACCO PRODUCTS.

 Chapter V is amended by adding at the end the following:

 ``Subchapter F--Special Provisions for Tobacco Products

``SEC. 565. SPECIAL STANDARD FOR TOBACCO PRODUCTS.

 ``In the case of tobacco products, an action that provides 
appropriate protection of public health shall be deemed to provide a 
reasonable assurance of safety and effectiveness.

``SEC. 566. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROPOSED RESOLUTION.

 ``(a) Additional Restrictions on Marketing, Advertising, and 
Access.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of 
this subchapter, the Secretary shall revise the regulations related to 
tobacco products promulgated by the Secretary on August 28, 1996 (61 
Fed. Reg. 44396) to include the additional restrictions on marketing, 
advertising, and access described in Title IA and Title IC of the 
Proposed Resolution entered into by the tobacco manufacturers and the 
State attorneys general on June 20, 1997, except that the Secretary 
shall not include an additional restriction on marketing or advertising 
in such regulations if its inclusion would violate the First Amendment 
to the Constitution.
 ``(b) Warnings.--
 ``(1) Cigarettes and smokeless tobacco.--Not later than 18 
 months after the date of the enactment of this subchapter, the 
 Secretary shall promulgate regulations to require warnings on 
 cigarette and smokeless tobacco labeling and advertisements. 
 The content, format, and rotation of warnings shall conform to 
 the specifications described in Title IB of the Proposed 
 Resolution entered into by the tobacco manufacturers and the 
 State attorneys general on June 20, 1997.
 ``(2) Prohibition.--It shall be unlawful to advertise 
 tobacco products on any medium of electronic communication 
 subject to the jurisdiction of the Federal Communications 
 Commission.
 ``(c) Ingredients.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 18 months after the date 
 of enactment of this subchapter, the Secretary shall promulgate 
 regulations relating to ingredients in tobacco products. Except 
 as provided in paragraph (2), such regulations shall conform to 
 the specifications described in Title IF of the Proposed 
 Resolution entered into by the tobacco manufacturers and the 
 State attorneys general on June 20, 1997.
 ``(2) Failure to act.--If the Secretary fails to approve or 
 disapprove an ingredient's safety within the review period 
 prescribed under the regulations under paragraph (1), such 
 failure shall not be considered an approval of such ingredient.
 ``(d) Reduced-Risk Products.--No manufacturer of a tobacco product 
may state or imply in the labeling or advertisements of the tobacco 
product that the tobacco product presents a reduced risk to health 
unless the Secretary has determined that the tobacco product does 
present a significantly reduced risk to health.
 ``(e) Other Authority.--This section does not limit the authority 
the Secretary has under other provisions of this Act with respect to 
tobacco products.

``SEC. 567. STATE TOBACCO CONTROL PROGRAMS.

 ``(a) In General.--Effective 2 years after the date of the 
enactment of this subchapter, a State may not receive a grant under 
subtitle B of title VIII of the Bipartisan NO Tobacco for Kids Act of 
1998 unless the State has put into law a State tobacco control program 
that conforms to the model State program established by the Secretary 
under subsection (b).
 ``(b) Model State Program.--
 ``(1) General rule.--Within one year of the date of the 
 enactment of this subchapter, the Secretary shall establish a 
 model State tobacco control program.
 ``(2) Program content.--The model State tobacco control 
 program established under paragraph (1) shall--
 ``(A) require persons who sell tobacco products to 
 individuals for personal consumption to obtain a 
 license from the State;
 ``(B) require licensed retailers to comply with the 
 requirements under this Act that are applicable to 
 tobacco product retailers;
 ``(C) prohibit any individual from purchasing 
 tobacco products for resale or distribution to 
 individuals under the age of 18;
 ``(D) include minimum requirements for the conduct 
 and frequency of compliance inspections of licensed 
 retailers;
 ``(E) include State performance objectives, 
 including objectives for reducing the level of 
 violations observed during compliance inspections;
 ``(F) include provisions for appropriate penalties 
 for violations of the program requirements, including 
 provisions for license suspension and revocation; and
 ``(G) include such other provisions as the 
 Secretary determines are appropriate to protect public 
 health.
 ``(c) Failure To Implement.--If a State fails to effectively 
implement a State tobacco control program which conforms to the Model 
State program established under subsection (b) or if a State fails to 
achieve the performance objectives applicable to the State under the 
Model State program, the Secretary shall withhold up to 20 percent of 
the grant to the State under subtitle B of title VIII of the Bipartisan 
NO Tobacco for Kids Act of 1998.
 ``(d) Federal Licensing Program.--Within one year of the date of 
the enactment of this subchapter, the Secretary shall establish Federal 
licensing requirements for--
 ``(1) tobacco product retailers operating on Federal 
 property;
 ``(2) tobacco product retailers operating in a State which 
 does not put into law or effectively implement a State tobacco 
 control program which conforms to the Model State Program; and
 ``(3) such other tobacco product retailers as the Secretary 
 may specify.
The Federal tobacco control requirements shall conform to the licensing 
requirements of the Model State Program.
 ``(e) Federal Authority.--The Secretary may order a retailer 
licensed by a State to suspend or cease selling tobacco products if the 
tobacco product retailer is in violation of a requirement under this 
Act related to tobacco products.
 ``(f) Indian Tribes.--In the case of tobacco product retailers 
operating on Indian reservations, the governing Indian tribe or tribal 
organization shall be treated as a State.''.

SEC. 206. GENERAL PROVISIONS.

 (a) Enforcement.--Section 301 (21 U.S.C. 331) is amended by adding 
at the end the following:
 ``(aa) The violation of any requirement under this Act relating to 
tobacco products.''.
 (b) Access to Information.--Section 701 (21 U.S.C 371) is amended 
by adding at the end the following:
 ``(h) To acquire information related to tobacco products, the 
Secretary may administer oaths and require the testimony of witnesses 
and the production of documents and other materials. The Secretary may 
disclose to the public information acquired under this subsection if 
the Secretary determines that disclosure is appropriate to protect 
public health.''.

SEC. 207. REPEAL.

 The Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act (15 U.S.C. 1331 
et seq.) and the Comprehensive Smokeless Tobacco Health Education Act 
of 1986 (15 U.S.C. 4401 et seq.) are repealed on the date the 
regulations described in section 566(b) of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act take effect.

 TITLE III--PERFORMANCE OBJECTIVES TO REDUCE CHILD TOBACCO USE

SEC. 301. ANNUAL PERFORMANCE SURVEYS.

 Within 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act and 
annually thereafter the Secretary shall conduct a survey to determine 
for each manufacturer the percentage of children who use a tobacco 
product of the manufacturer.

SEC. 302. PERFORMANCE OBJECTIVES.

 (a) Performance Objectives For Existing Manufacturers.--Each 
existing manufacturer shall have as a performance objective the 
reduction of its child tobacco use level below its baseline level by at 
least the following percentage of its baseline level:
 (1) In the third and fourth annual performance surveys, 33 
 percent.
 (2) In the fifth and sixth annual performance surveys, 50 
 percent.
 (3) In the seventh, eighth, and ninth annual performance 
 surveys, 67 percent.
 (4) In the tenth and each succeeding annual performance 
 survey, 80 percent.
However, in no case is the performance objective for a manufacturer to 
reduce its child tobacco use level below the de minimis level.
 (b) Performance Objectives for New Manufacturers.--Beginning with 
the third annual performance survey, a new manufacturer shall have as 
its performance objective maintaining its child tobacco use level at no 
more than the de minimis level.
 (c) Levels.--For purposes of this title:
 (1) Baseline level.--The baseline level of each 
 manufacturer is the manufacturer's child tobacco use level 
 determined in the first annual performance survey.
 (2) De minimis level.--The de minimis level is 0.5 percent 
 of children.

SEC. 303. ADDITIONAL MEASURES TO REDUCE CHILD TOBACCO USE.

 (a) Secretarial Determination.--Before the end of the third year 
after the date of the enactment of this Act and annually thereafter, 
the Secretary shall, based on the annual performance survey conducted 
for such year, determine if each manufacturer has achieved the 
applicable performance objective under section 302. The Secretary shall 
publish in the Federal Register such determination and any additional 
measures required under this section.
 (b) Failure To Achieve.--If the Secretary determines under 
subsection (a) that a manufacturer has failed to achieve the applicable 
performance objective for an annual performance survey, the additional 
measures specified in this section shall be required to further reduce 
the manufacturer's child tobacco use level.
 (c) First Failure.--If the Secretary determines under subsection 
(a) that a manufacturer has failed to achieve the applicable 
performance objective for an annual performance survey and the 
manufacturer did not so fail with respect to the prior survey, the 
manufacturer shall for each unit of its tobacco products increase the 
price it charges by--
 (1) $0.01 for each of the first 10 percentage points by 
 which the manufacturer fails to achieve its performance 
 objective; plus
 (2) $0.02 for each of the second 10 percentage points, if 
 any, by which the manufacturer fails to achieve its performance 
 objective; plus
 (3) $0.03 for each additional percentage point over 21, if 
 any, by which the manufacturer fails to achieve its performance 
 objective.
 (d) Second Failure.--If the Secretary determines under subsection 
(a) that a manufacturer has failed to achieve the applicable 
performance objective for an annual performance survey and such failure 
is the manufacturer's second consecutive failure, the manufacturer 
shall for each unit of its tobacco products increase the price it 
charges by twice the level required under subsection (c).
 (e) Third Failure.--If the Secretary determines under subsection 
(a) that a manufacturer has failed to achieve the applicable 
performance objective for an annual performance survey and such failure 
is the manufacturer's third consecutive failure, the following 
additional measures shall apply:
 (1) The manufacturer shall for each unit of its tobacco 
 products increase the price it charges by the level prescribed 
 by subsection (d).
 (2) No retailer may sell the tobacco products of the 
 manufacturer in quantities smaller than a carton.
 (f) Fourth and Successive Failures.--If the Secretary determines 
under subsection (a) that a manufacturer has failed to achieve the 
applicable performance objective for an annual performance survey and 
such failure is the manufacturer's fourth or more consecutive failure, 
the following additional measures shall apply:
 (1) The manufacturer shall for each unit of its tobacco 
 products increase the price it charges by the level prescribed 
 by subsection (d).
 (2) No retailer may sell the tobacco products of the 
 manufacturer in quantities smaller than a carton.
 (3) The manufacturer may package its tobacco products only 
 in packages that bear only black text on a white background 
 except for warning labels that are required to appear in a 
 different format.
 (g) Effective Dates.--
 (1) Price increases.--If the Secretary determines under 
 subsection (a) that a manufacturer has failed to achieve the 
 applicable performance objective for an annual performance 
 survey, the price increase that is required under this section 
 as a result of such determination shall apply to each unit of 
 its tobacco products manufactured or imported in the United 
 States during the 12-month period beginning 30 days after the 
 determination, except that such price increase shall not apply 
 to tobacco products that are manufactured or imported by the 
 manufacturer for export.
 (2) Non-monetary measures.--The Secretary shall by 
 regulation prescribe an effective date that is as expeditious 
 as practicable for the non-monetary additional measures 
 described in subsections (e) and (f). Such measures shall 
 remain in effect until the Secretary determines under 
 subsection (a) that the manufacturer has achieved the 
 applicable performance objective for an annual performance 
 survey.
 (h) Adjustments.--
 (1) General rule.--The amount of any price increase that is 
 required under this section shall be increased by the 
 percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for all urban 
 consumers (all items, U.S. city average) from 1998 to the year 
 before the year in which the price increase takes effect.
 (2) Limitation.--The maximum price increase that shall be 
 required under this section for a unit of a tobacco product is 
$2 plus an adjustment for inflation under paragraph (1).
 (i) Calculation of Percentage Points.--For purposes of determining 
the level of price increase under this section, the number of 
percentage points by which a manufacturer fails to achieve a 
performance objective shall be calculated as follows:
 (1) Manufacturer with child tobacco use level at or below 
 its baseline level.--If the manufacturer is an existing 
 manufacturer which has a baseline level above the de minimis 
 level and a child tobacco use level equal to or below its 
 baseline level, the number of percentage points shall equal the 
 difference between the percentage reduction in its child 
 tobacco use level required to meet the applicable performance 
 objective and the percentage reduction in its child tobacco use 
 level achieved by the manufacturer.
 (2) Manufacturer with child tobacco use level above its 
 baseline level.--If the manufacturer is an existing 
 manufacturer which has a baseline level above the de minimis 
 level and a child tobacco use level above its baseline level, 
 the number of percentage points shall equal the sum of the 
 percentage reduction in its child tobacco use level required to 
 meet the applicable performance objective and the percentage by 
 which its child tobacco use level exceeds its baseline level.
 (3) Existing manufacturer with a baseline level below the 
 de minimis level or new manufacturer.--If the manufacturer is 
 an existing manufacturer which has a baseline level below the 
 de minimis level or if the manufacturer is a new manufacturer, 
 the number of percentage points shall equal the percentage by 
 which its child tobacco use level exceeds the de minimis level.

SEC. 304. PROCEEDS OF PRICE INCREASES.

 (a) Payment.--A manufacturer that is required to increase prices 
under section 303 shall pay into an account in the United States 
Treasury an amount equal to the amount of the increase multiplied by 
the number of units of the product to which the increase is required to 
be applied under such section. Such amount shall be paid by a 
manufacturer on a quarterly basis within 30 days after the end of each 
quarter in which the price increase is in effect.
 (b) Use of Funds.--Funds in the account referred to in subsection 
(a) shall be available to the Secretary, without fiscal year 
limitation, to enforce this title and other laws relating to tobacco 
use by children and for public awareness campaigns and other 
initiatives designed to discourage children from using tobacco products 
and products described in section 306(b)(2).

SEC. 305. JUDICIAL REVIEW.

 (a) In General.--An action of the Secretary under this title is not 
subject to judicial review until the Secretary has made or failed to 
make a compliance determination under section 303(a) that has adversely 
affected the person seeking the review. An action for review may only 
be brought in the United States District Court for the District of 
Columbia. In an action seeking review of such determination the person 
seeking review--
 (1) shall have the burden of demonstrating the actual 
 reduction of the manufacturer's child tobacco use level; and
 (2) may prevail only to the extent that the person 
 demonstrates that such reduction is different than the 
 reduction the Secretary used in making such determination.
 (b) No Stay.--Section 705 of title 5, United States Code, shall not 
apply with respect to any action under subsection (a).
 (c) Interest.--If the judgment of a court in an action under 
subsection (a) results in the reduction of a payment paid by a 
manufacturer under section 304, the manufacturer shall be paid from the 
account referred to in such section an amount equal to the amount of 
such reduction and interest on such amount. If the judgment of a court 
in an action under subsection (a) results in the increase in the amount 
to be paid by a manufacturer under section 304, the manufacturer shall 
pay to such account an amount equal to the amount of such increase and 
interest on such amount.

SEC. 306. GENERAL PROVISIONS.

 (a) Enforcement.--Section 301 of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 331) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:
 ``(bb) The failure to comply with a requirement under section 303, 
304, 305, or 306 of Bipartisan NO Tobacco for Kids Act of 1998.''.
 (b) Regulations.--
 (1) General rule.--The Secretary may promulgate regulations 
 for the implementation of this title.
 (2) Additional authority.--For products (other than 
 cigarettes and smokeless tobacco) made or derived from tobacco 
 that are intended for human consumption the Secretary may by 
 regulation establish performance objectives under section 302 
 relating to the use of such products by children and 
may require additional measures under section 303 for failure to 
achieve the objectives.
 (c) Administration of Surveys.--
 (1) Statistical accuracy of surveys.--The annual 
 performance surveys conducted by the Secretary under section 
 301(a) shall be designed so that if a manufacturer had a child 
 tobacco use level that is equal to 50 percent, the 95 percent 
 confidence interval would be no greater than plus or minus 1 
 percentage point.
 (2) Survey conditions.--The annual performance surveys 
 shall--
 (A) be household-based surveys; and
 (B) not be subject to State or local regulation or 
 chapter 35 of title 44, United States Code.
 (3) Confidentiality.--The Secretary shall not disclose 
 information that may identify a child surveyed in an annual 
 performance survey unless the child (or the child's parent or 
 guardian) has consented to such disclosure.
 (4) Technical adjustments.--The Secretary may make 
 technical adjustments in the manner in which annual performance 
 surveys are conducted if adjustments are made to insure that 
 the results of the surveys are comparable from year to year.

SEC. 307. USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS AMONG MINORITY POPULATIONS.

 As part of each annual survey, the Secretary shall determine the 
child tobacco use level for children of different racial and ethnic 
backgrounds. If the Secretary determines that the child tobacco use 
level is increasing, or is not decreasing at a proportionate rate, 
among children of a racial or ethnic background, the Secretary shall 
report such determination to Congress along with recommendations for 
reducing such level for children of such racial or ethnic background.

SEC. 308. DEFINITIONS.

 For purposes of this title:
 (1) Annual performance survey.--The term ``annual 
 performance survey'' means a survey conducted by the Secretary 
 annually under section 301.
 (2) Children.--The term ``children'' means individuals 
 under the age of 18 and above the age of 11 who are residents 
 of the United States.
 (3) Child tobacco use level.--The term ``child tobacco use 
 level'' means, with respect to a manufacturer and an annual 
 performance survey, the percentage of children who use the 
 manufacturer's tobacco products as determined in an annual 
 performance survey or under section 305(a)
 (4) Existing manufacturer.--The term ``existing 
 manufacturer'' means a manufacturer which manufactured or 
 imported a tobacco product on or before the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.
 (5) New manufacturer.--The term ``new manufacturer'' means 
 any manufacturer other than an existing manufacturer.
 (6) Tobacco product.--The term ``tobacco product'' means a 
 cigarette or smokeless tobacco.
 (7) Use.--A child shall be considered to use a 
 manufacturer's tobacco product if the manufacturer's tobacco 
 product is the usual brand of tobacco product used by the child 
 in the last 30 days.

 TITLE IV--SMOKE-FREE ENVIRONMENTS

SEC. 401. SMOKE-FREE ENVIRONMENT POLICY.

 (a) Policy Required.--In order to protect children and adults from 
cancer, respiratory disease, heart disease, and other adverse health 
effects from breathing environmental tobacco smoke, the responsible 
entity for each public facility shall adopt and implement at such 
facility a smoke-free environment policy which meets the requirements 
of subsection (b).
 (b) Elements of Policy.--Each smoke-free environment policy for a 
public facility shall--
 (1) prohibit the smoking of cigarettes, cigars, and pipes, 
 and any other combustion of tobacco, within the facility and on 
 facility property within the immediate vicinity of the entrance 
 to the facility; and
 (2) post a clear and prominent notice of the smoking 
 prohibition in appropriate and visible locations at the public 
 facility.
The policy may provide an exception to the prohibition specified in 
paragraph (1) for one or more specially designated smoking areas within 
a public facility if such area or areas meet the requirements of 
subsection (c).
 (c) Specially Designated Smoking Areas.--A specially designated 
smoking area meets the requirements of this subsection if it satisfies 
each of the following conditions:
 (1) The area is ventilated in accordance with 
 specifications promulgated by the Administrator that insure 
 that air from the area is directly exhausted to the outside and 
 does not recirculate or drift to other areas within the public 
 facility.
 (2) Nonsmoking individuals do not have to enter the area 
 for any purpose while smoking is occurring.
 (3) Children are prohibited from entering the area.

SEC. 402. CITIZEN ACTIONS.

 (a) In General.--An action may be brought to enforce the 
requirements of this title by any aggrieved person, any State or local 
government agency, or the Administrator.
 (b) Venue.--Any action to enforce this title may be brought in any 
district court of the United States for the district in which the 
defendant resides or is doing business to enjoin any violation of this 
title or to impose a civil penalty for any such violation in the amount 
of not more than $5,000 per day of violation. The district courts shall 
have jurisdiction, without regard to the amount in controversy or the 
citizenship of the parties, to enforce this title and to impose civil 
penalties under this title.
 (c) Notice.--An aggrieved person shall give any alleged violator 
notice of at least 60 days prior to commencing an action under this 
section. No action may be commenced by an aggrieved person under this 
section if such alleged violator complies with the requirements of this 
title within such 60-day period and thereafter.
 (d) Costs.--The court, in issuing any final order in any action 
brought pursuant to this section, may award costs of litigation 
(including reasonable attorney and expert witness fees) to any 
prevailing party, whenever the court determines such award is 
appropriate.
 (e) Penalties.--The court in any action under this section to apply 
civil penalties shall have discretion to order that such civil 
penalties be used for projects which further the policies of this 
title. The court shall obtain the view of the Administrator in 
exercising such discretion and selecting any such projects.
 (f) Damages.--No damages of any kind, whether compensatory or 
punitive, shall be awarded in actions brought pursuant to this title.
 (g) Isolated Incidents.--Violations of the prohibition specified in 
section 401(b)(1) by an individual within a facility or on facility 
property shall not be considered violations of this title on the part 
of the responsible entity if such violations--
 (1) are isolated incidents that are not part of a pattern 
 of violations of such prohibition; and
 (2) are not authorized by the responsible entity.

SEC. 403. REGULATIONS.

 (a) In General.--The Administrator is authorized to promulgate such 
regulations as the Administrator deems necessary to carry out this 
title.
 (b) Other Facilities.--The Administrator may by regulation extend 
the requirement of section 401 to adopt and implement a smoke-free 
environment policy to the facilities described in subparagraphs (B) 
through (E) of section 404(2) if the Administrator determines that such 
an action is appropriate to protect the public health.

SEC. 404. DEFINITIONS.

 As used in this title:
 (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the 
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
 (2) Public facility.--The term ``public facility'' means 
 any building in which activities substantially affecting 
 interstate commerce occur, including any such building owned by 
 or leased to a Federal, State, or local government entity. Such 
 term shall not include--
 (A) any portion of a building regularly used for 
 residential purposes;
 (B) any commercial establishment engaged primarily 
 in the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on 
 the premises;
 (C) any private club while in use for social or 
 fraternal activities that are not open to the public;
 (D) any jail or other prison facility; and
 (E) any commercial establishment primarily engaged 
 in the sale of tobacco and tobacco related products.
 (3) Responsible entity.--The term ``responsible entity'' 
 means, with respect to any facility, the owner of such 
 facility, except that in the case of any such facility or 
 portion thereof which is leased, such term means the lessee.

SEC. 405. PREEMPTION.

 Nothing in this title shall preempt or otherwise affect any other 
Federal, State or local law which provides protection from health 
hazards from environmental tobacco smoke.

SEC. 406. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 The requirements of this title shall take effect on the date one 
year after the date of the enactment of this Act.

 TITLE V--TOBACCO PREVENTION INITIATIVES

SEC. 501. NATIONAL PUBLIC AWARENESS CAMPAIGN.

 From funds paid to the United States Treasury under section 102(b) 
in each year there shall be made available to the Secretary, without 
fiscal year limitation, $500,000,000 for a national public awareness 
campaign to discourage the use of tobacco products.

SEC. 502. FEDERAL IMPLEMENTATION.

 From funds paid to the United States Treasury under section 102(b) 
in each year there shall be made available to the Secretary, without 
fiscal year limitation, $300,000,000 for the implementation and 
enforcement of--
 (1) the provisions of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
 Act relating to tobacco products;
 (2) the requirements of title III;
 (3) the provisions of this Act relating to the Tobacco 
 Accountability Board.

SEC. 503. TOBACCO USE CESSATION.

 (a) Programs and Activities.--From funds paid to the United States 
Treasury under section 102(b) in each year there shall be made 
available to the Secretary, without fiscal year limitation, 
$200,000,000 for tobacco use cessation programs. Such programs shall be 
programs which the Secretary finds either are consistent with the most 
recent tobacco use cessation guidelines issued by the Agency for Health 
Care Policy and Research or are approved as safe and effective for 
tobacco use cessation by the Secretary acting through the Food and Drug 
Administration.
 (b) Grants.--The Secretary shall use funds made available under 
subsection (a) to make grants for tobacco use cessation programs to--
 (1) Federally-qualified health centers as defined in 
 section 1905(l)(2)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1396d(l)(2)(B));
 (2) rural health clinics as defined in section 1905(l)(1) 
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396(l)(1)); and
 (3) other public and nonprofit entities that deliver 
 primary care funded under the Public Health Service Act.

SEC. 504. RESEARCH AND SURVEILLANCE.

 From funds paid to the United States Treasury under section 102(b) 
in each year there shall be made available to the Secretary, without 
fiscal year limitation, $1,000,000,000 to fund--
 (1) research related to nicotine addiction, tobacco use 
 cessation, prevention of the use of tobacco products, and other 
 tobacco related matters; and
 (2) surveillance and epidemiology research related to 
 tobacco.

SEC. 505. MINORITY POPULATIONS.

 The Secretary shall ensure that--
 (1) the national public awareness campaign funded under 
 section 501,
 (2) the tobacco use cessation programs funded under section 
 503, and
 (3) the research and surveillance funded under section 504,
take into account the needs of minority populations and are age 
appropriate, culturally appropriate, and linguistically appropriate for 
such populations.

SEC. 506. INFLATION ADJUSTMENT.

 Each of the amounts made available to the Secretary under sections 
501, 502, 503, and 504 shall be increased by the percentage increase in 
the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers (all items, U.S. city 
average) from 1998 to the year before the year in which such amount is 
made available.

 TITLE VI--INTERNATIONAL TOBACCO CONTROL

SEC. 601. SALE, DISTRIBUTION, AND ADVERTISING OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS IN 
 FOREIGN COUNTRIES.

 (a) Amendment to Chapter VIII.--Chapter VIII of the Federal Food, 
Drug, and Cosmetic Act is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 804. SALE, DISTRIBUTION, AND ADVERTISING OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS IN 
 FOREIGN COUNTRIES.

 ``(a) Regulations.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the 
enactment of this section, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations 
to--
 ``(1) prohibit domestic concerns from selling or 
 distributing tobacco products in a foreign country without 
 warning labels that are appropriate to protect public health in 
 such country;
 ``(2) prohibit domestic concerns from--
 ``(A) selling or distributing tobacco products in a 
 foreign country to children; or
 ``(B) advertising or promoting tobacco products in 
 a foreign country in a manner that appeals to children;
 ``(3) require domestic concerns to ensure that any person 
 under the control of a domestic concern does not engage in 
 conduct that would be prohibited under this section if engaged 
 in by the domestic concern; and
 ``(4) require domestic concerns to take all feasible 
 measures to ensure that tobacco products bearing a brand name 
 controlled or used by a domestic concern are not sold, 
 distributed, advertised, or promoted in a manner that would be 
 prohibited under this section if engaged in by a domestic 
 concern.
 ``(b) Interpretation.--For purposes of this section, advertising or 
promoting tobacco products in a manner that would not be lawful under 
this Act if it occurred in the United States shall be deemed to be 
advertising or promotion that appeals to children.
 ``(c) Definition.--The term `domestic concern' means--
 ``(1) any individual who is a citizen, national, or 
 resident of the United States; and
 ``(2) any corporation, partnership, association, joint-
 stock company, business trust, unincorporated organization, or 
 sole proprietorship which has its principal place of business 
 in the United States or which is organized under the laws of a 
 State of the United States or a territory, possession, or 
 commonwealth of the United States.''.
 (b) Enforcement.--Section 301 of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C 331), as amended by section 306) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(cc) The violation of any requirement under section 804.''.

SEC. 602. PROHIBITION ON FEDERAL EFFORTS TO PROMOTE TOBACCO EXPORTS.

 (a) In General.--No officer, employee, department, or agency of the 
United States may--
 (1) promote or encourage the export, re-export, sale, 
 manufacture, advertising, promotion, distribution, or use of 
 tobacco or tobacco products to or in a foreign country; or
 (2) seek, through negotiation or otherwise, the removal or 
 reduction by any foreign country of any restriction or proposed 
 restriction in that country on the importation, export, re-
 export, sale, manufacture, advertising, promotion, 
 distribution, packaging, labeling, use, content, imposition of 
 tariffs, or taxation, of tobacco or tobacco products.
 (b) Exception.--Subsection (a)(2) shall not apply to any 
restriction or proposed restriction by a foreign country if--
 (1) the restriction is applied in a manner which 
 constitutes a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable 
 discrimination between countries;
 (2) the Secretary of Commerce certifies in writing to 
 Congress that the restriction is being applied in a manner that 
 constitutes a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable 
 discrimination between countries; and
 (3) the Secretary of Health and Human Services certifies to 
 Congress in writing that the restriction is not a reasonable 
 means of protecting the public health.
 (c) Definition.--In this section, the term ``arbitrary or 
unjustifiable discrimination'' means a restriction or proposed 
restriction by a foreign country that--
 (1) is arbitrary or unjustifiable; and
 (2) does not adhere to the principle of national treatment 
 and applies less favorable treatment to goods that are imported 
 into that country than the country applies to like goods that 
 are the product, growth, or manufacture of that country.

SEC. 603. INTERNATIONAL TOBACCO CONTROL TRUST FUND.

 (a) Establishment.--There is established in the United States 
Treasury an International Tobacco Control Trust Fund which shall be 
funded by payments collected under section 605.
 (b) Use of Trust Fund.--Funds from the International Tobacco 
Control Trust Fund shall be available for use as follows:
 (1) American center on global health and tobacco.--
 $150,000,000 shall be available, without fiscal year 
 limitation, each year for the American Center on Global Health 
 and Tobacco.
 (2) Health and human services.--The Secretary may, without 
 fiscal year limitation, use funds from the International 
 Tobacco Control Trust Fund to fund grants and other forms of 
 assistance to foreign governments, nongovernment organizations, 
 and international organizations to support tobacco control 
 activities in foreign countries.
 (3) Enforcement.--The Secretary may, without fiscal year 
 limitation, use funds from the International Tobacco Control 
 Trust Fund for enforcement of any requirement related to the 
 sale, distribution, marketing, or promotion of tobacco products 
 in foreign countries.

SEC. 604. AMERICAN CENTER ON GLOBAL HEALTH AND TOBACCO.

 (a) Establishment.--
 (1) In general.--There is established in the District of 
 Columbia a private, nonprofit corporation to be known as the 
 American Center on Global Health and Tobacco (in this section 
 referred to as ``ACT''). ACT shall assist organizations in 
 foreign countries to reduce and prevent the use of tobacco 
 products. Activities that ACT shall support shall include--
 (A) public awareness campaigns to discourage the 
 use of tobacco products;
 (B) youth oriented and community-based programs to 
 discourage the use of tobacco products; and
 (C) other public health activities related to 
 tobacco products.
 (2) Legal status.--ACT shall
 (A) not be an agency or establishment of the United 
 States; and
 (B) except as otherwise provided in this section, 
 be subject to, and have all the powers conferred upon a 
 nonprofit corporation by, the District of Columbia 
 Nonprofit Corporation Act (D.C. Code section 29-501 et 
 seq.).
 (b) Governing Board.--
 (1) Appointments.--ACT shall be governed by a board of 
 trustees. The Secretary shall appoint the initial members of 
 the board within 90 days of the date of the enactment of this 
 Act. Such initial members shall be appointed on the basis of 
 expertise in tobacco control, public awareness campaigns, 
 international affairs, and other relevant fields.
 (2) Terms.--The term of office of a member of the board 
 shall be 6 years, except that (as designated by the Secretary) 
 of the members appointed by the Secretary one-third of the 
 members shall have a term of 2 years and another one-third of 
 the members shall have a term of 4 years.
 (c) Audits.--The accounts of ACT shall be audited annually in 
accordance with generally accepted auditing standards by independent 
certified public accountants.
 (d) Report.--Not later than December 31 of each year, ACT shall 
submit an annual report to Congress. The report shall include a report 
of ACT's operations, activities, financial condition, and 
accomplishments under this section and may include such recommendations 
as ACT deems appropriate.

SEC. 605. ASSESSMENT ON TOBACCO PRODUCTS MANUFACTURED IN A FOREIGN 
 COUNTRY.

 (a) Assessment.--By March 31 of each year beginning in 1999, each 
domestic concern that manufactures tobacco products in a foreign 
country or that controls a person that manufactures tobacco products in 
a foreign country shall pay to the International Tobacco Control Trust 
Fund $0.05 per unit of tobacco product manufactured by the domestic 
concern (or a person controlled by the domestic concern) in a foreign 
country in the prior year.
 (b) Failure To Pay.--If a manufacturer fails to make a payment 
required under subsection (a) by the date such payment is due, the 
Attorney General shall recover the amount of the payment (plus interest 
at 1.5 times the prevailing rate) in an action brought in an 
appropriate district court of the United States.
 (c) Regulations.--
 (1) Promulgation.--The Secretary of the Treasury may 
 promulgate regulations to implement the requirements of this 
 section.
 (2) Compliance.--An action may be brought by the Secretary 
 of the Treasury in an appropriate district court of the United 
 States to enjoin any failure to comply with regulations under 
 paragraph (1) or to impose a civil penalty for such failure to 
 comply of not more than $25,000 per day.
 (d) Definition.--The term ``domestic concern'' means--
 (1) any individual who is a citizen, national, or resident 
 of the United States; and
 (2) any corporation, partnership, association, joint-stock 
 company, business trust, unincorporated organization, or sole 
 proprietorship which has its principal place of business in the 
 United States or which is organized under the laws of a State 
 of the United States or a territory, possession, or 
 commonwealth of the United States.

SEC. 606. PREVENTION OF TOBACCO SMUGGLING.

 Chapter VIII of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (as 
amended by section 601) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 805. PREVENTION OF TOBACCO SMUGGLING.

 ``Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary 
of Health and Human Services, shall promulgate regulations to reduce, 
to the maximum extent feasible, the smuggling of tobacco products in 
interstate and foreign commerce. Such regulations may include 
licensing, labeling, bonding, and other appropriate requirements.''.

SEC. 607. SENSE OF CONGRESS.

 It is the sense of Congress that the United States government 
should support the development, adoption, and implementation of the 
International Framework Convention on Tobacco Control through all 
available resources, including direct financial support, technical 
assistance, and any other appropriate measure.

 TITLE VII--TOBACCO ACCOUNTABILITY BOARD

SEC. 701. TOBACCO ACCOUNTABILITY BOARD.

 (a) Establishment.--There is established an independent board to be 
known as the Tobacco Accountability Board.
 (b) Membership.--The Board shall consist of 5 members with 
expertise relating to tobacco and public health. The members, including 
the chair, shall be appointed by the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services. The initial members of the Board shall be appointed by the 
Secretary within 30 days of the date of the enactment of this Act. A 
member of the Board may be removed by the Secretary only for neglect of 
duty or malfeasance in office.
 (c) Terms.--The term of office of a member of the Board shall be 6 
years, except that the members first appointed shall have terms of 2, 
3, 4, and 5 years, respectively, as determined by the Secretary.

SEC. 702. DISCLOSURE OF TOBACCO INDUSTRY DOCUMENTS.

 (a) Submission by Manufacturers.--Not later than 3 months after the 
date of the enactment of this Act and thereafter as required by the 
Board, each tobacco manufacturer shall submit to the Board a copy of 
all documents in the manufacturer's possession--
 (1) relating to--
 (A) any health effects, including addiction, caused 
 by the use of tobacco products;
 (B) the manipulation or control of nicotine in 
 tobacco products; or
 (C) the sale or marketing of tobacco products to 
 children; or
 (2) produced, or ordered to be produced, by the tobacco 
 manufacturer in the case entitled State of Minnesota v. Philip 
 Morris, Inc, Civ. Action No. C1-94-8565 (Ramsey County, Minn.).
 (b) Disclosure by the Board.--Not later than 9 months after the 
date of the enactment of this Act and thereafter as required by the 
Board, the Board shall, subject to subsection (c), make available to 
the public the documents submitted under subsection (a). Documents made 
public by the Board shall be considered authenticated with the same 
legal status as the original in any court action related to tobacco 
products.
 (c) Protection of Trade Secrets.--The Board shall not disclose 
information that is entitled to protection as a trade secret unless the 
Board determines that disclosure of such information is appropriate to 
protect the public health. This subsection shall not prevent the 
disclosure of relevant information to Federal agencies or to the 
Congress.

SEC. 703. INVESTIGATION AND ANNUAL REPORTS.

 The Board shall investigate all matters relating to tobacco 
products and public health and report annually on the results of the 
investigation to Congress. Each annual report to Congress shall, at a 
minimum, disclose--
 (1) any efforts by tobacco manufacturers to conceal 
 research relating to the adverse health effects or addiction 
 caused by the use of tobacco products;
 (2) any efforts by tobacco manufacturers to mislead the 
 public or any Federal, State, or local elected body, agency, or 
 court about the adverse health effects or addiction caused by 
 the use of tobacco products;
 (3) any efforts by tobacco manufacturers to sell or market 
 tobacco products to children; and
 (4) any efforts by tobacco manufacturers to circumvent, 
 repeal, modify, impede the implementation of, or prevent the 
 adoption of, any Federal, State, or local law or regulation 
 related to tobacco products.

SEC. 704. AUTHORITIES.

 The Board, any member of the Board, or staff designated by the 
Board may hold hearings, administer oaths, require the testimony or 
deposition of witnesses, the production of documents, or the answering 
of interrogatories, or, upon presentation of the proper credentials, 
enter and inspect facilities.

SEC. 705. ENFORCEMENT.

 Any action may be brought by the Board in an appropriate district 
court of the United States to enjoin any failure to comply with an 
requirement under this title or to impose a civil penalty for such 
failure to comply of not more than $25,000 per day.

SEC. 706. ADMINISTRATION.

 (a) Staff.--The Chair shall exercise the executive and 
administrative functions of the Board and shall have the authority to 
hire such staff as may be necessary for the operation of the Board.
 (b) Salaries.--The members of the Board shall receive such salary 
and benefits as the Secretary deems necessary, except that the salary 
of the Chair shall not be less than level III of the Executive Schedule 
(5 U.S.C. 5314).

SEC. 707. WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTIONS.

 (a) Prohibition of Reprisals.--An individual may not be discharged, 
demoted, or otherwise discriminated against as a reprisal for 
disclosing to the Board, the Food and Drug Administration, the 
Department of Health and Human Services, the Department of Justice, the 
Congress, or any State or local authority information relating to a 
violation of law related to tobacco products.
 (b) Enforcement.--Any individual who believes that such individual 
has been discharged, demoted, or otherwise discriminated against in 
violation of subsection (a) may file a civil action in an appropriate 
district court of the United States before the end of the 2-year period 
beginning on the date of such discharge, demotion, or discrimination.
 (c) Remedies.--If the district court determines that a violation of 
subsection (a) has occurred, the court may order--
 (1) the reinstatement of the individual to the individual's 
 former position;
 (2) payment of compensatory damages; or
 (3) any other appropriate action.
 (d) Limitation.--The protections of this section shall not apply to 
any individual who--
 (1) deliberately causes or participates in the alleged 
 violation of law; or
 (2) knowingly or recklessly provides substantially false 
 information to the Board, the Food and Drug Administration, the 
 Department of Health and Human Services, the Department of 
 Justice, or any State or local authority.
 (e) Application of False Claims Act.--Section 3730(d) of title 31, 
United States Code, shall apply with respect to any individual to which 
this section applies if the disclosure of such individual results in a 
payment of any fee or fine to the Federal Government, regardless of 
whether such individual ever commenced an action concerning the 
disclosure.

SEC. 708. DEFINITIONS.

 For purposes of this title:
 (1) Board.--The term ``Board'' means the Tobacco 
 Accountability Board.
 (2) Tobacco manufacturer.--The term ``tobacco 
 manufacturer'' means--
 (A) any manufacturer as defined in section 901; or
 (B) the Tobacco Institute, the Council for Tobacco 
 Research, the Smokeless Tobacco Council, the Center for 
 Indoor Air Research, or any other trade association or 
 entity that is primarily funded by persons who 
 manufacture or import a tobacco product.

 TITLE VIII--PAYMENTS TO STATES

 Subtitle A--Resolution of State Actions

SEC. 801. STATE ELECTIONS.

 (a) In General.--Any State may elect to receive payments under 
section 802 in lieu of seeking recovery from manufacturers for health 
care costs attributable to the use of tobacco products. Any such 
election must be submitted by the State to the Secretary of the 
Treasury within one year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) Effect of Election.--
 (1) Limitation.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), if a 
 State elects to receive payments under section 802, the State 
 may not seek recovery from manufacturers for health care costs 
 attributable to the use of tobacco products.
 (2) Future and criminal conduct.--The limitation in 
 paragraph (1) shall not apply to civil actions based on conduct 
 by a manufacturer that occurs after the date of the enactment 
 of this Act or to criminal prosecutions.

SEC. 802. PAYMENTS TO STATES.

 (a) Amount.--If a State elects to receive payments under this 
section, the Secretary of the Treasury shall, within 90 days of such 
election and annually thereafter, pay from the United States Treasury 
to the State the amount that the State would have received under the 
Proposed Resolution entered in by the manufacturers and the State 
attorneys general on June 20, 1997.
 (b) Local Governments.--A State that receives a payment under 
subsection (a) shall pass through to local governments within the State 
a portion of the payments if the local governments incurred health care 
costs attributable to the use of tobacco products. The portion of the 
payments passed through to a local government shall be proportionate to 
the portion of the health care costs attributable to the use of tobacco 
products in the State incurred by the local government. A State that 
fails to pass through payments to local governments as required by this 
subsection shall not be eligible to receive future payments under 
subsection (a).

SEC. 803. EXEMPT MANUFACTURERS.

 (a) Exemption.--A manufacturer described in subsection (b) shall 
not be required to pay--
 (1) that portion of an annual payment under section 102(b) 
 that is attributable to the manufacture of cigarettes and that 
 will be provided to States under this title; or
 (2) an initial payment under section 102(a).
 (b) Manufacturer.--A manufacturer described in this subsection is a 
manufacturer that has--
 (1) resolved tobacco-related civil actions with more than 
 25 States before January 1, 1998, through written settlement 
 agreements; and
 (2) provided to all other States by not later than December 
 31, 1998, the opportunity to enter into written settlement 
 agreements that are substantially similar to such agreements 
 and that provide such other States with the most favorable 
 annual payment terms in such agreements.
 (c) Limitation.--Subsection (a)(1) shall apply only to the extent 
that the cigarettes manufactured by the manufacturer constitute less 
than 3 percent of all cigarettes manufactured or imported in the United 
States in the applicable calendar year.

 Subtitle B--State Grants

SEC. 811. PUBLIC AWARENESS AND PREVENTION PROGRAMS.

 (a) Funds.--
 (1) Child-oriented programs.--From funds paid to the United 
 States Treasury under section 102(b) in each year there shall 
 be made available to the Secretary, without fiscal year 
 limitation, $200,000,000 to make grants to States with approved 
 plans to carry out child-oriented programs to discourage the 
 use of tobacco products.
 (2) Community-based programs.--From funds paid to the 
 United States Treasury under section 102(b) in each year there 
 shall be made available to the Secretary, without fiscal year 
 limitation, $400,000,000 to make grants to States with approved 
 plans to carry out community-based programs to discourage the 
 use of tobacco products.
 (b) Eligibility.--
 (1) Applications.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
 subsection (a), a State shall prepare and submit to the 
 Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and 
 containing such information as the Secretary may require.
 (2) State plans.--To be approved by the Secretary, an 
 application under paragraph (1) shall include a State plan for 
 carrying out the grant applied for. A State plan shall 
 include--
 (A) a description of the types of programs the 
 State will fund with its grant;
 (B) the manner in which the State will ensure that 
 the plan includes programs directed toward low-income 
 communities and programs directed toward individuals 
 who are members of racial and ethnic minority groups;
 (C) the manner in which the State will ensure that 
 programs funded by a grant will be age appropriate, 
 culturally appropriate, and linguistically appropriate 
 for the target population;
 (D) the manner in which the State will monitor the 
 effectiveness of programs under its grant; and
 (E) the manner in which the State will ensure that 
 local entities and public health officials are involved 
 in the planning and implementation of programs under 
 its grant.
 (3) Additional requirements.--To be eligible to receive a 
 grant under subsection (a) a State shall also--
 (A) annually report to the Secretary on the 
 effectiveness of the programs implemented by the State 
 under its grant;
 (B) provide for independent periodic peer review to 
 evaluate and assess the effectiveness of the programs 
 under its grant; and
 (C) submit to the Secretary the results of reviews 
 under subparagraph (B) and annual reports containing 
 such information as the Secretary may require in order 
 to enable the Secretary to monitor the activities of 
 the State under its grant and its plan submitted with 
 its application.
 (c) Noncompliance by State With Respect to Evaluations and 
Reports.--Beginning with the 3d year for which a State has in effect an 
approved plan under subsection (b)(2), the Secretary shall, before 
making or renewing a grant based on such plan, make a determination as 
to whether the State has satisfactorily met the requirements for data, 
evaluations, and other conditions agreed to by the State in its plan. 
If, after providing notice and opportunity for a hearing, the Secretary 
determines the State is not in compliance with such requirements, the 
Secretary may either withhold or reduce the amount of grants under this 
section until the State is deemed to come into compliance with such 
requirements.
 (d) Administrative Expenses.--Not more than 10 percent of a grant 
under subsection (a) for a year may be expended by a State for 
administrative expenses for the grant.

SEC. 812. REIMBURSEMENT OF STATES FOR MEDICAID EXPENSES.

 (a) Amendment.--Section 1903 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396b) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(7), by striking the period and 
 inserting ``; plus'';
 (2) in subsection (a), by adding after paragraph (7) the 
 following:
 ``(8) an amount equal to 90 percent of the sums expended 
 during the quarter which are attributable to the costs of 
 offering, arranging, and furnishing (directly or on a contract 
 basis) items or services provided to individuals eligible for 
 services under this title of approved tobacco use cessation 
 programs.''; and
 (3) in subsection (b), by adding at the end the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(6) For purposes of subsection (a)(8), the term `approved tobacco 
use cessation programs' means those programs which the Secretary finds 
either are consistent with the most recent tobacco use cessation 
guidelines issued by the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research or 
approved as safe and effective for tobacco use cessation by the 
Secretary acting through the Food and Drug Administration.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to expenditures for items and services furnished under an 
approved tobacco use cessation program beginning April 1, 1999.

 TITLE IX--DEFINITIONS

SEC. 901. DEFINITIONS.

 Except as otherwise provided, in this Act:
 (1) Manufacturer.--The term ``manufacturer'' means any 
 person who manufactures or imports a tobacco product.
 (2) Person.--The term ``person'' means an individual, 
 partnership, corporation, parent corporation, or any other 
 business or legal entity or successor in interest of any such 
 person.
 (3) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (4) State.--The term ``State'' includes the several States, 
 the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, 
 Guam, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, the Northern Mariana 
 Islands, and any other territory or possession of the United 
 States. Such term includes any political subdivision of any 
 State.
 (5) Tobacco product.--The term ``tobacco product'' means 
 any product made of or derived from tobacco that is intended 
 for human consumption.
 (6) Unit.--The term ``unit'' means 20 cigarettes in the 
 case of cigarettes and a comparable amount, as determined by 
 the Secretary or the Secretary of the Treasury, in the case of 
 other tobacco products.
 <all>