HR 5499 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5499
To provide direct funding support for the Resolution Trust Corporation which
is fair for all taxpayers and additional tools to attack fraud in the savings
and loan industry.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
August 3, 1990
Mr. KENNEDY (for himself, Mr. EDWARDS of California, Mrs. SCHROEDER,
Mr. MORRISON of Connecticut, Mr. ACKERMAN, Mr. GEJDENSON, Mr. FAZIO, Mr. LEWIS
of Georgia, Mr. TORRICELLI, Mr. WHEAT, Mr. HAYES of Illinois, Mr. MFUME,
Ms. OAKAR, Mr. DIXON, Mr. CLAY, Mrs. UNSOELD, Mr. FORD of Tennessee,
Mr. NEAL of Massachusetts, Mr. STOKES, Mr. DEFAZIO, Mr. MARKEY, Mr. EVANS,
and Mr. GAYDOS) introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly
to the Committees on Ways and Means, Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs,
and the Judiciary
A BILL
To provide direct funding support for the Resolution Trust Corporation which
is fair for all taxpayers and additional tools to attack fraud in the savings
and loan industry.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Savings and Loan Fair Financing and Antifraud
 Enforcement Act of 1990'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress hereby finds the following:
 (1) Official estimates of the cost of the savings and loan bailout have risen
 dramatically in recent months; in August 1989, the Administration estimated
 that $50,000,000,000 would be required to resolve all insolvent thrifts
 by August 9, 1992, and in May 1990, the Administration raised its estimate
 of the amount required to between $90,000,000,000 and $132,000,000,000 by
 mid-August 1992.
 (2) Financing resolutions by borrowing, whether through the Treasury or
 otherwise, substantially increases the costs to taxpayers; data based on
 reports by the Office of Management and Budget, the General Accounting
 Office, and the United States League of Savings Institutions indicate that,
 by the end of 1999, the thrift rescue will cost an estimated $456,300,000,000
 and, further, that, by the year 2029, when all interest on Treasury and
 non-Treasury debt has been paid, the cost of the rescue will have total
 $1,369,000,000,000.
 (3) Financing the raising of working capital by borrowing significantly
 increases the costs of the bailout to taxpayers; data from the reports
 referred to in paragraph (2) indicate that interest on working capital
 debt will amount to $28,000,000,000 by 1999 alone.
 (4) Current losses on amounts raised as working capital are approximately
 40 cents on the dollar.
 (5) Only a minute percentage of bailout costs attributed to criminal activity
 have been recovered; the estimated cost of resolving the 440 institutions
 thus far targeted for resolution is $54,000,000,000 of which $16,000,000,000
 is estimated by the Government to be attributable to criminal activity and
 of that $16,000,000, the amount so far recovered by enforcement officers
 is less than $100,000,000.
 (6) The Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989
 authorized an appropriation to the Attorney General of $75,000,000 for each
 of fiscal years 1990, 1991, and 1992 to fund civil and criminal enforcement
 activity under such Act and other Federal banking and claim statutes.
 (7) Despite the enormous backlog of fraud and embezzlement referrals and
 cases, the Attorney General sought an appropriation of only $50,000,000
 of the amount authorized by such Act.
 (8) The Attorney General has approved only 47 percent of the number
 of additional agents requested by the Federal Bureau of Investigation
 for investigating cases of savings and loan fraud, and 51 percent of
 the assistant United States attorneys requested for investigating and
 prosecuting such cases.
 (9) A number of United States attorneys' offices have receive no new
 personnel since the enactment of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery,
 and Enforcement Act of 1989 to assist in the prosecution of numerous cases
 involving losses of $100,000 or more.
 (10) As of February 1990, the Federal Bureau of Investigation had received
 over 21,000 referrals and complaints relating to savings and loan misconduct
 on which the Bureau had taken no action.
 (11) Of the referrals referred to in paragraph (10), 234 involve potential
 losses of $1,000,000 or more.
TITLE I--FAIR FINANCING
Subtitle A--Direct Funding of Thrift Resolutions
SEC. 101. INCOME SURTAX TO FUND SAVINGS AND LOAN RESOLUTION COSTS.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986 (relating to determination of tax liability) is amended by adding
 at the end thereof the following new part:
`PART IX--SURTAX TO FUND SAVINGS AND LOAN RESOLUTION COSTS
`Sec. 60. Surtax.
`SEC. 60. SURTAX.
 `(a) IMPOSITION OF SURTAX- In addition to the other taxes imposed by
 this chapter--
 `(1) INDIVIDUALS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- There is hereby imposed on the income of every taxpayer
 (other than a corporation) for each taxable year beginning during the
 surtax period a tax equal to 7.5 percent of so much of the adjusted tax
 of the taxpayer for the taxable year as is attributable to the excess
 of the portion of the income of the taxpayer which is not earned income
 (as defined in section 911(d)(2)) over $7,500.
 `(B) SURTAX TO APPLY TO INDIVIDUALS WITH INCOMES OVER $100,000-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Subparagraph (A) shall not apply if the adjusted gross
 income of the taxpayer for the taxable year is less than $100,000.
 `(ii) PHASE-IN- If the adjusted gross income of the taxpayer equals or
 exceeds $100,000, but does not exceed $25,000, the amount of the tax
 imposed by subparagraph (A) shall be equal to the amount of such tax
 (determined without regard to this clause) multiplied by a fraction--
 `(I) the numerator of which is the amount by which the adjusted gross
 income of the taxpayer exceeds $100,000, and
 `(II) the denominator of which is $25,000.
 `(2) CORPORATIONS- There is hereby imposed on the income of every corporation
 for each taxable year beginning during the surtax period a tax equal to 5
 percent of so much of the adjusted tax of the corporation for the taxable
 year as exceeds $13,750.
 `(b) SURTAX PERIOD- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), the term `surtax
 period' means the period beginning on January 1, 1990, and ending on
 December 31, 1995.
 `(2) EXTENSION BY PRESIDENT- If during calendar year 1995, the President
 determines that an extension of the taxes imposed by this section is required
 to provide sufficient financing for the Resolution Trust Corporation to
 carry out the purposes of sections 21 and 21A of the Federal Home Loan Bank
 Act, the President may extend the surtax period by an additional year. The
 President may make similar extensions during calendar years 1996, 1997,
 and 1998; except that no such extension may be made during any calendar
 year unless the surtax period has been previously extended to the close
 of such year.
 `(c) ADJUSTED TAX- For purposes of this section, the term `adjusted tax'
 means--
 `(1) the sum of the regular tax liability (as defined in section 26(b))
 and the tax imposed by section 55, reduced by
 `(2) the credits allowable under subparts A, B, D, and G of part IV of
 this subchapter.
 `(d) SPECIAL RULES-
 `(1) NO CREDITS ALLOWED AGAINST TAX; COORDINATION WITH MINIMUM TAX- The
 tax imposed by this section shall not be treated as a tax imposed by this
 chapter for purposes of determining--
 `(A) the amount of any credit allowable under this chapter, or
 `(B) the amount of the regular tax under section 55(c).
 `(2) SECTION 15 TO APPLY- For purposes of section 15, the enactment of
 this part (and the termination of the surtax period) shall be treated as
 changes in a rate of tax.
 `(3) CONTROLLED GROUPS- The component members of a controlled group of
 corporations (as defined in section 1563) shall be limited to one $13,750
 amount for purposes of subsection (a)(2), and such amount shall be allocated
 among such members in the same manner as the amounts specified in section
 1563(a) are allocated.
 `(4) ADJUSTMENT TO APPLICATION OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS-
 `(A) DIVIDENDS PAID ON CERTAIN PREFERRED STOCK- In computing for a taxable
 year of a corporation the fractions described in sections 244(a)(2)
 and 247(a)(2) the denominator shall, under regulations prescribed by the
 Secretary, be increased to reflect the rate of the tax imposed by this
 section for such year.
 `(B) SHAREHOLDERS OF REGULATED INVESTMENT COMPANIES- In computing the
 adjustment to basis described in section 852(b)(3)(D)(iii), the percentage
 set forth therein shall be adjusted, under regulations prescribed by the
 Secretary, to reflect the rate of the tax imposed by this section.
 `(5) ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS- For purposes of this title, to the extent the
 tax imposed by this section is attributable (under regulations prescribed
 by the Secretary) to a tax imposed by another section of this chapter,
 such tax shall be deemed to be imposed by such other section.'
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of parts for subchapter A of chapter 1
 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`Part IX. Surtax to fund savings and loan resolution costs.'
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1989.
SEC. 102. CARRYOVER BASIS FOR CERTAIN PROPERTY ACQUIRED FROM A DECEDENT.
 (a) GENERAL RULE-
 (1) AMENDMENT OF SECTION 1014- Subsection (d) of section 1014 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to basis of property acquired from a decedent)
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(d) DECEDENTS DYING DURING SURTAX PERIOD- In the case of a decedent
 dying during the surtax period (as defined in section 60(b), this section
 shall not apply to any property for which a carryover basis is provided
 by section 1023.'
 (2) CARRYOVER BASIS- Part II of subchapter O of chapter 1 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to basis rules of general application)
 is amended--
 (A) by redesignating section 1023 as section 1024, and
 (B) by inserting after section 1022 the following new section:
`SEC. 1023. CARRYOVER BASIS FOR CERTAIN PROPERTY ACQUIRED FROM A DECEDENT
DYING DURING SURTAX PERIOD.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE-
 `(1) CARRYOVER BASIS- Except as otherwise provided in this section, the
 basis of carryover basis property acquired from a decedent dying during the
 surtax period (as defined in section 60(b), in the hands of the person so
 acquiring it shall be the adjusted basis of the property immediately before
 the death of the decedent, further adjusted as provided in this section.
 `(2) LOSS ON PERSONAL AND HOUSEHOLD EFFECTS- In the case of any carryover
 basis property that, in the hands of the decedent, was a personal or
 household effect, for purposes of determining loss, the basis of such
 property in the hands of the person acquiring such property from the
 decedent shall not exceed its fair market value.
 `(b) CARRYOVER BASIS PROPERTY DEFINED-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this section, the term `carryover basis
 property' means any property that is acquired from or passed from a decedent
 (within the meaning of section 1014(b)) and that is not excluded pursuant
 to paragraph (2) or (3).
 `(2) CERTAIN PROPERTY NOT CARRYOVER BASIS PROPERTY- The term `carryover
 basis property' does not include--
 `(A) any residence which, during the 5-year period ending on the date of
 the decedent's death, was owned and used by the decedent as his principal
 residence for periods aggregating 3 years or more,
 `(B) any real property used in the trade or business of farming if the
 requirement of section 2032A(b)(1)(C) is met,
 `(C) any item of gross income in respect of a decedent described in
 section 691,
 `(D) property described in section 2042 (relating to proceeds of life
 insurance),
 `(E) a joint and survivor annuity under which the surviving annuitant is
 taxable under section 72, and payments and distributions under a deferred
 compensation plan described in part I of subchapter D of chapter 1 to
 the extent such payments and distributions are taxable to the decedent's
 beneficiary under chapter 1,
 `(F) property included in the decedent's gross estate by reason of section
 2035, 2038, or 2041 that has been disposed of before the decedent's death
 in a transaction in which gain or loss is recognizable for purposes of
 chapter 1,
 `(G) stock or a stock option passing from the decedent to the extent
 income in respect of such stock or stock option is includible in gross
 income under section 422(c)(1), 423(c), or 424(c)(1), and
 `(H) property described in section 1014(b)(5).
 `(3) $10,000 EXCLUSION FOR CERTAIN ASSETS-
 `(A) EXCLUSION- The term `carryover basis property' does not include
 any asset--
 `(i) that, in the hands of the decedent, was a personal or household
 effect, and
 `(ii) with respect to which the executor has made an election under this
 paragraph.
 `(B) LIMITATION- The fair market value of all assets designated under this
 subsection with respect to any decedent shall not exceed $10,000.
 `(C) ELECTION- An election under this paragraph with respect to any asset
 shall be made by the executor not later than the date prescribed by section
 6075(a) for filing the return of the tax imposed by section 2001 or 2101
 (including extensions thereof), and shall be made in such manner as the
 Secretary shall by regulations prescribe.
 `(c) INCREASE IN BASIS FOR FEDERAL AND STATE ESTATE TAXES ATTRIBUTABLE
 TO APPRECIATION-
 `(1) FEDERAL ESTATE TAXES- The basis of appreciated carryover basis property
 (determined after any adjustment under subsection (h)) that is subject
 to the tax imposed by section 2001 or 2101 in the hands of the person
 acquiring it from the decedent shall be increased by an amount that bears
 the same ratio to the Federal estate taxes as--
 `(A) the net appreciation in value of such property, bears to
 `(B) the fair market value of all property that is subject to the tax
 imposed by section 2001 or 2101.
 `(2) STATE ESTATE TAXES- The basis of appreciated carryover basis property
 (determined after any adjustment under subsection (h)) that is subject
 to State estate taxes in the hands of the person acquiring it from the
 decedent shall be increased by an amount that bears the same ratio to the
 State estate taxes as--
 `(A) the net appreciation in value of such property, bears to
 `(B) the fair market value of all property that is subject to the State
 estate taxes.
 `(d) $60,000 MINIMUM FOR BASES OF CARRYOVER BASIS PROPERTIES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- If $60,000 exceeds the aggregate bases (as determined
 after any adjustment under subsection (h) or (c)) of all carryover basis
 property, the basis of each appreciated carryover basis property (after
 any adjustment under subsection (h) or (c)) shall be increased by an amount
 that bears the same ratio to the amount of such excess as--
 `(A) the net appreciation in value of such property, bears to
 `(B) the net appreciation in value of all such property.
 `(2) SPECIAL RULE FOR PERSONAL OR HOUSEHOLD EFFECT- For purposes of paragraph
 (1), the basis of any property that is a personal or household effect
 shall be treated as not greater than the fair market value of such property.
 `(3) NONRESIDENT NOT CITIZEN- This subsection shall not apply to any
 carryover basis property acquired from any decedent who was (at the time
 of death) a nonresident not a citizen of the United States.
 `(e) FURTHER INCREASE IN BASIS FOR CERTAIN STATE SUCCESSION TAX PAID BY
 TRANSFEREE OF PROPERTY- If--
 `(1) any person acquires appreciated carryover basis property from a
 decedent, and
 `(2) such person actually pays an amount of estate, inheritance, legacy,
 or succession taxes with respect to such property to any State or the
 District of Columbia,
then the basis of such property (after any adjustment under subsection (h),
(c), or (d)) shall be increased by an amount that bears the same ratio to
the aggregate amount of all such taxes paid by such person as--
 `(A) the net appreciation in value of such property, bears to
 `(B) the fair market value of all property acquired by such person that
 is subject to such taxes.
 `(f) SPECIAL RULES AND DEFINITIONS FOR APPLICATION OF SUBSECTIONS (c),
 (d), AND (e)-
 `(1) FAIR MARKET VALUE LIMITATION- The adjustments under subsections (c),
 (d), and (e) shall not increase the basis of property above its fair
 market value.
 `(2) NET APPRECIATION- For purposes of this section, the net appreciation in
 value of any property is the amount by which the fair market value of such
 property exceeds the adjusted basis of such property immediately before the
 death of the decedent (as determined after any adjustment under subsection
 (h)). For purposes of paragraph (2) of subsection (c), such adjusted basis
 shall be increased by the amount of any adjustment under paragraph (1)
 of subsection (c), for purposes of subsection (d), such adjusted basis
 shall be increased by the amount of any adjustment under subsection (c),
 and, for purposes of subsection (e), such adjusted basis shall be increased
 by the amount of any adjustment under subsection (c) or (d).
 `(3) FEDERAL AND STATE ESTATE TAXES- For purposes of subsection (c):
 `(A) FEDERAL ESTATE TAXES- The term `Federal estate taxes' means the tax
 imposed by section 2001 or 2101, reduced by the credits against such tax.
 `(B) STATE ESTATE TAXES- The term `State estate taxes' means any estate,
 inheritance, legacy, or succession taxes, for which the estate is liable,
 actually paid by the estate to any State or the District of Columbia.
 `(4) CERTAIN MARITAL AND CHARITABLE DEDUCTION PROPERTY TREATED AS NOT
 SUBJECT TO TAX- For purposes of subsections (c) and (e), property shall
 be treated as not subject to a tax--
 `(A) with respect to the tax imposed by section 2001 or 2101, to the extent
 that a deduction is allowable with respect to such property under section
 2055 or 2056 or under section 2106(a)(2), and
 `(B) with respect to State estate taxes and with respect to the State taxes
 referred to in subsection (e)(2), to the extent that such property is not
 subject to such taxes.
 `(5) APPRECIATED CARRYOVER BASIS PROPERTY- For purposes of this section,
 the term `appreciated carryover basis property' means any carryover basis
 property if the fair market value of such property exceeds the adjusted
 basis of such property immediately before the death of the decedent.
 `(g) OTHER SPECIAL RULES AND DEFINITIONS-
 `(1) FAIR MARKET VALUE- For purposes of this section, when not otherwise
 distinctly expressed, the term `fair market value' means value as determined
 under chapter 11 (without regard to whether there is a mortgage on, or
 indebtedness in respect of, the property).
 `(2) PROPERTY PASSING FROM THE DECEDENT- For purposes of this section,
 property passing from the decedent shall be treated as property acquired
 from the decedent.
 `(3) DECEDENT'S BASIS UNKNOWN- If the facts necessary to determine the basis
 (unadjusted) of carryover basis property immediately before the death of the
 decedent are unknown and cannot be reasonably ascertained, such basis shall
 be treated as being the fair market value of such property as of the date
 (or approximate date) at which such property was acquired by the decedent or
 by the last preceding owner in whose hands it did not have a basis determined
 in whole or in part by reference to its basis in the hands of a prior holder.
 `(h) ADJUSTMENT TO BASIS FOR DECEMBER 31, 1990, FAIR MARKET VALUE-
 `(1) MARKETABLE BONDS AND SECURITIES- If the adjusted basis immediately
 before the death of the decedent of any property that is carryover basis
 property reflects the adjusted basis of any marketable bond or security on
 December 31, 1990, and if the fair market value of such bond or security
 on December 31, 1990, exceeded its adjusted basis on such date, then,
 for purposes of determining gain and applying this section, the adjusted
 basis of such property shall be increased by the amount of such excess.
 `(2) PROPERTY OTHER THAN MARKETABLE BONDS AND SECURITIES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- If--
 `(i) the adjusted basis immediately before the death of the decedent of
 any property that is carryover basis property reflects the adjusted basis
 on December 31, 1990, of any property other than a marketable bond or
 security, and
 `(ii) the value of such carryover basis property (as determined with
 respect to the estate of the decedent without regard to section 2032)
 exceeds the adjusted basis of such property immediately before the death
 of the decedent (determined without regard to this subsection),
then, for purposes of determining gain and applying this section, the
adjusted basis of such property immediately before the death of the decedent
(determined without regard to this subsection) shall be increased by the
amount determined under subparagraph (B).
 `(B) AMOUNT OF INCREASE- The amount of the increase under this subparagraph
 for any property is the sum of--
 `(i) the excess referred to in subparagraph (A)(ii), reduced by an amount
 equal to all adjustments for depreciation, amortization, or depletion for
 the holding period of such property, and then multiplied by the applicable
 fraction determined under subparagraph (C), and
 `(ii) the adjustments to basis for depreciation, amortization, or depletion
 that are attributable to that portion of the holding period for such
 property that occurs before January 1, 1991.
 `(C) APPLICABLE FRACTION- For purposes of subparagraph (B)(i), the term
 `applicable fraction' means, with respect to any property, a fraction--
 `(i) the numerator of which is the number of days in the holding period
 with respect to such property that occurs before January 1, 1991, and
 `(ii) the denominator of which is the total number of days in such holding
 period.
 `(D) SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS- Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary,
 if there is a substantial improvement of any property, such substantial
 improvement shall be treated as a separate property for purposes of this
 paragraph.
 `(E) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this paragraph:
 `(i) MARKETABLE BOND OR SECURITY- The term `marketable bond or security'
 means any security for which, as of December 1990, there was a market on
 a stock exchange, in an over-the-counter market, or otherwise.
 `(ii) HOLDING PERIOD- The term `holding period' means, with respect to
 any carryover basis property, the period during which the decedent (or,
 if any other person held such property immediately before the death of the
 decedent, such other person) held such property as determined under section
 1223, except that such period shall end on the date of the decedent's death.
 `(3) MINIMUM BASIS FOR TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- If the holding period for any carryover basis property
 that is tangible personal property includes December 31, 1990, then, for
 purposes of determining gain and applying this section, the adjusted basis
 of such property immediately before the death of the decedent shall be
 treated as being not less than the amount determined under subparagraph (B).
 `(B) AMOUNT- The amount determined under this subparagraph for any
 property is--
 `(i) the value of such property (as determined with respect to the estate
 of the decedent without regard to section 2032), divided by
 `(ii) 1.0066 to the nth power where n equals the number of full calendar
 months that have elapsed between December 31, 1990, and the date of the
 decedent's death.
 `(4) ONLY ONE FRESH START- There shall be no increase in basis under this
 subsection by reason of the death of any decedent if the adjusted basis of
 the property in the hands of such decedent reflects the adjusted basis of
 property that was carryover basis property with respect to a prior decedent.
 `(i) REGULATIONS- The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may
 be necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.'
 (3) AMENDMENT OF SECTION 1016- Subsection (a) of section 1016 of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to adjustments to basis) is amended--
 (A) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (23),
 (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (24) and inserting `;
 and', and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(25) to the extent provided in section 1023, relating to carryover basis
 for certain property acquired from a decedent dying after during the surtax
 period (as defined in section 60(b)).'
 (4) AMENDMENTS OF SECTION 691-
 (A) DEFINITION OF ESTATE TAX- Subparagraph (A) of section 691(c)(2) of
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to deduction for estate tax
 in case of income in respect of decedents) is amended to read as follows:
 `(A) The term `estate tax' means Federal and State estate taxes (within
 the meaning of section 1023(f)(3)).'
 (B) ESTATE TAX ATTRIBUTABLE TO NET VALUE- Subparagraph (C) of section
 691(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to deduction for
 estate tax in case of income in respect of decedents) is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(C) The estate tax attributable to such net value shall be an amount
 that bears the same ratio to the estate tax as such net value bears to
 the value of the gross estate.'
 (5) REPEAL OF SECTION 1246(e)- Section 1246 of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986 (relating to gain on foreign investment company stock) is amended--
 (A) by striking subsection (e) (relating to stock acquired from a decedent),
 and
 (B) by redesignating subsections (f) through (h) as subsections (e) through
 (g), respectively.
 (b) NONRECOGNITION OF GAIN WHERE CERTAIN APPRECIATED CARRYOVER BASIS
 PROPERTY IS USED IN SATISFACTION OF A PECUNIARY REQUEST- Section 1040 of
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to satisfaction of a pecuniary
 request) is amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 1040. USE OF CERTAIN APPRECIATED CARRYOVER BASIS PROPERTY TO SATISFY
PECUNIARY REQUEST.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- If the executor of the estate of any decedent satisfies
 the right of any person to receive a pecuniary bequest with appreciated
 carryover basis property (as defined in section 1023(f)(5)), then gain on
 such exchange shall be recognized to the estate only to the extent that,
 on the date of such exchange, the fair market value of such property
 exceeds the value of such property for purposes of chapter 11.
 `(b) SIMILAR RULE FOR CERTAIN TRUSTS- To the extent provided in regulations
 prescribed by the Secretary, a rule similar to the rule provided in
 subsection (a) shall apply where--
 `(1) by reason of the death of the decedent, a person has a right to
 receive from a trust a specific dollar amount that is the equivalent of
 a pecuniary bequest, and
 `(2) the trustee of the trust satisfies such right with carryover basis
 property to which section 1023 applies.
 `(c) BASIS OF PROPERTY ACQUIRED IN EXCHANGE DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (a) OR
 (b)- The basis of property acquired in an exchange with respect to which
 gain realized is not recognized by reason of subsection (a) or (b) shall
 be the basis of such property immediately before the exchange, increased
 by the amount of the gain recognized to the estate or trust on the exchange.'
 (c) INFORMATION REQUIREMENT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subpart A of part III of subchapter A of chapter 61 of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to information concerning persons
 subject to special provisions) is amended by inserting after section 6039
 the following new section:
`SEC. 6039A. INFORMATION REGARDING CARRYOVER BASIS PROPERTY ACQUIRED FROM
A DECEDENT.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Every executor (as defined in section 2203) shall furnish
 the Secretary such information with respect to carryover basis property
 to which section 1023 applies as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe.
 `(b) STATEMENTS TO BE FURNISHED TO PERSONS WHO ACQUIRE PROPERTY FROM A
 DECEDENT- Every executor who is required to furnish information under
 subsection (a) shall furnish in writing to each person acquiring an item
 of such property from the decedent (or to whom the item passes from the
 decedent) the adjusted basis of such item.'
 (2) PENALTIES- Part I of subchapter B of chapter 68 of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (relating to assessable penalties) is amended by inserting
 after section 6698 the following new section:
`SEC. 6698A. FAILURE TO FILE INFORMATION WITH RESPECT TO CARRYOVER BASIS
PROPERTY.
 `(a) INFORMATION REQUIRED TO BE FURNISHED TO THE SECRETARY- Any executor
 who fails to furnish information required under subsection (a) of section
 6039A on the date prescribed therefor (determined with regard to any
 extension of time for filing), unless it is shown that such failure is
 due to reasonable cause and not to willful neglect, shall pay a penalty
 of $100 for each such failure, but the total amount imposed for all such
 failures shall not exceed $5,000.
 `(b) INFORMATION REQUIRED TO BE FURNISHED TO BENEFICIARIES- Any executor
 who fails to furnish in writing to each person described in subsection
 (b) of section 6039A the information required under such subsection,
 unless it is shown that such failure is due to reasonable cause and not
 to willful neglect, shall pay a penalty of $50 for each such failure,
 but the total amount imposed for all such failures shall not exceed $2,500.'
 (d) CLERICAL AMENDMENTS-
 (1) The table of sections for part II of subchapter O of chapter 1 of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking the item relating to
 section 1023 and inserting the following:
`Sec. 1023. Carryover basis for certain property acquired from a decedent
dying during surtax period.
`Sec. 1024. Cross references.'
 (2) The table of sections for part III of subchapter O of chapter 1 of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking the item relating to
 section 1040 and inserting the following:
`Sec. 1040. Use of certain appreciated carryover basis property to satisfy
pecuniary bequest.'
 (3) The table of sections for subpart A of part III of subchapter A of
 chapter 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting
 after the item relating to section 6039 the following:
`Sec. 6039A. Information regarding carryover basis property acquired from
a decedent.'
 (4) The table of sections for part I of subchapter B of chapter 68 of
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after the item
 relating to section 6698 the following:
`Sec. 6698A. Failure to file information with respect to carryover basis
property.'
 (e) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply in
 respect of decedents dying after December 31, 1990.
SEC. 105. ESTABLISHMENT OF SAVINGS AND LOAN RESOLUTION TRUST FUND.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Subchapter A of chapter 98 of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986 (relating to establishment of trust fund) is amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 9511. SAVINGS AND LOAN RESOLUTION TRUST FUND.
 `(a) CREATION OF TRUST FUND- There is established in the Treasury of the
 United States a trust fund to be known as the `Savings and Loan Resolution
 Trust Fund', consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited
 to such trust fund as provided in this section or section 9602.
 `(b) TRANSFERS TO TRUST FUND- There are hereby appropriated to the Savings
 and Loan Resolution Trust Fund amounts equivalent to the amounts received
 in the Treasury by reason of--
 `(1) the taxes imposed by section 60, and
 `(2) sections 1014(d) and 1023.
 `(c) EXPENDITURES- Amounts in the Savings and Loan Resolution Trust Fund
 shall be available, as provided in appropriation Acts, to the Resolution
 Trust Corporation for purposes of making expenditures under sections 21
 and 21A of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act.'
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for subchapter A of chapter
 98 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item:
`Sec. 9511. Savings and Loan Resolution Trust Fund.'
Subtitle B--Working Capital and Funding Mechanisms
SEC. 111. AMENDMENTS RELATING TO FINANCING ACTIVITIES OF RESOLUTION TRUST
CORPORATION.
 (a) PROHIBITION ON GENERAL BORROWING BY RTC-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 21A(b)(7) of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act (12
 U.S.C. 1441a(b)(7)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(7) OBLIGATIONS AND GUARANTEES- No provision of this Act, and no provision
 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act which is applicable with respect to
 the Corporation under paragraph (4) of this subsection, shall be construed
 as authorizing the Corporation to borrow any amount, issue any obligation,
 or extend any guarantee except--
 `(A) any obligation issued or guarantee extended in accordance with the
 provisions of section 13(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (as
 applicable to the Corporation under paragraph (4) of this subsection) in
 connection with assistance provided under such section for any institution
 described in paragraph (3)(A); or
 `(B) any amount borrowed by the Corporation (and any obligation issued in
 connection with any amount borrowed) in accordance with paragraph (10)(M)
 of this subsection or pursuant to subsection (i).'.
 (b) QUARTERLY VALUATION OF ASSETS REQUIRED IN DETERMINING MAXIMUM AMOUNT
 LIMITATION ON BORROWING- Section 21A(j)(1)(B)(ii) of the Federal Home
 Loan Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 1441a(j)(1)(B)(ii)) is amended by inserting
 `(determined at the end of each quarter on the basis of returns realized
 by the Corporation on assets during such quarter)' after `fair market value'.
 (c) BORROWING WORKING CAPITAL FROM TREASURY ONLY- Section 21(A)(b)(10)(M)
 of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 1441a(b)(10)(M)) is amended
 to read as follows:
 `(M) To borrow from the Secretary of the Treasury, issue bonds or other
 obligations to the Secretary, give security for amounts borrowed from
 the Secretary, and pay interest on such amounts, to the extent any such
 borrowing--
 `(i) has been approved by the Oversight Board (with the concurrence of
 the Chairperson of the Oversight Board);
 `(ii) has been provided for in advance in an appropriations Act; and
 `(ii) is secured by property acquired in accordance with the provisions
 of section 11 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (as applicable to the
 Corporation under paragraph (4)) in the Corporation's capacity as receiver
 for any institution described in paragraph (3)(A).'.
SEC. 112. INDUSTRY FINANCING OF THRIFT RESOLUTIONS; DESIGNATIONS OF SUCCESSOR
TO FICO AND REFCORP; SAVINGS PROVISIONS.
 (a) INDUSTRY FINANCING AND FINANCING MECHANISMS REESTABLISHED- Section
 21 of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 1441) is amended to read
 as follows:
`SEC. 21. THRIFT RESOLUTION FINANCING.
 `(a) THRIFT RESOLUTION ACCOUNT ESTABLISHED-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- There is hereby established in the Resolution Trust
 Corporation (hereafter in this section referred to as the `Corporation')
 an account to be known as the Thrift Resolution Account.
 `(2) AVAILABILITY OF AMOUNTS IN ACCOUNT- Amounts in the Thrift Resolution
 Account shall be available to the Corporation to carry out the purposes
 of this section and section 21A.
 `(3) DEPOSITS OF RECEIPTS IN ACCOUNT- Subject to subsection (c)(3), any
 funds received by the Corporation under this section or section 21A of this
 Act or section 9511 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, other than any
 portion of the proceeds of any receivership property required to repay any
 amount described in section 21A(b)(7)(B), shall be deposited in the account.
 `(b) PAYMENTS BY FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANKS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each Federal home loan bank shall make payments to the
 Corporation for purposes of providing funding for the Corporation in
 accordance with this section at the times and in the amounts prescribed
 by the Corporation.
 `(2) MAXIMUM PAYMENT LIMITATION FOR EACH FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK- The
 cumulative amount of funds paid to the Corporation by each Federal home
 loan bank under paragraph (1) shall not exceed the aggregate amount of--
 `(A) the sum, as of December 31, 1988, of--
 `(i) the reserves maintained by the bank pursuant to the reserve requirements
 contained in section 16 (as in effect on such date); and
 `(ii) the undivided profits of the bank, minus the total amount invested
 in the capital stock of the Financing Corporation pursuant to section 21
 (as in effect on such date); and
 `(B) for the period beginning on January 1, 1989, an aggregate amount
 equal to--
 `(i) the sum of--
 `(I) the amounts added to reserves after December 31, 1988, pursuant to
 the reserve requirements contained in section 16; and
 `(II) the undivided profits of the bank accruing after December 31,
 1988; minus
 `(ii) the amounts used to invest in the capital stock of the Financing
 Corporation after December 31, 1988, and before the date of the enactment
 of the Savings and Loan Fair Financing and Antifraud Enforcement Act of
 1990, pursuant to the requirement contained in section 21 (as in effect
 before such date of enactment).
 `(3) PRO RATA DISTRIBUTION OF FIRST $1,000,000,000 PAID TO CORPORATION-
 Of the first $1,000,000,000 of the aggregate amount which the Federal home
 loan banks were required to invest in the capital stock of the Financing
 Corporation and the Funding Corporation before the date of the enactment
 of the Savings and Loan Fair Financing and Antifraud Enforcement Act of
 1990 and may be required to pay to the Corporation under this subsection,
 the amount which each Federal home loan bank (or any successor to such
 bank) shall invest shall be determined by the Corporation by multiplying
 the total amount of such investment by all such banks by the percentage
 appearing in the following table for each such bank:
Bank
--Percentage
Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston
--1.8629
Federal Home Loan Bank of New York
--9.1006
Federal Home Loan Bank of Pittsburgh
--4.2702
Federal Home Loan Bank of Atlanta
--14.4007
Federal Home Loan Bank of Cincinnati
--8.2653
Federal Home Loan Bank of Indianapolis
--5.2863
Federal Home Loan Bank of Chicago
--9.6886
Federal Home Loan Bank of Des Moines
--6.9301
Federal Home Loan Bank of Dallas
--8.8181
Federal Home Loan Bank of Topeka
--5.2706
Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco
--19.9644
Federal Home Loan Bank of Seattle
--6.1422
 `(4) PRO RATA DISTRIBUTION OF AMOUNTS REQUIRED TO BE PAID IN EXCESS OF
 $1,000,000,000- With respect to any amount in excess of the $1,000,000,000
 amount referred to in paragraph (3) which the Corporation may require the
 Federal home loan banks to pay under this subsection, the amount which
 each Federal home loan bank (or any successor to the bank) shall pay shall
 be determined by the Corporation by multiplying the excess amount by the
 percentage arrived at by dividing--
 `(A) the sum of the total assets (as of the most recent December 31) held by
 all Savings Association Insurance Fund members (as defined in section 7(l)(5)
 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act) which are members of the bank; by
 `(B) the sum of the total assets (as of such date) held by all Savings
 Association Insurance Fund members (as defined in section 7(l)(5) of
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Act) which are members of any Federal home
 loan bank.
 `(5) SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO MAXIMUM AMOUNT LIMITATIONS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- If the amount any Federal home loan bank is required to
 pay pursuant to a determination by the Corporation under paragraph (4)
 (or under subparagraph (B) of this paragraph) exceeds the maximum amount
 applicable with respect to the bank under paragraph (2) at the time
 of such determination (hereafter in this paragraph referred to as the
 `excess amount')--
 `(i) the Corporation shall require each remaining Federal home loan bank
 to pay (in addition to the amount determined under paragraph (4) for the
 remaining bank and subject to the maximum amount applicable with respect to
 the remaining bank under paragraph (2) at the time of such determination)
 on behalf of the bank the amount determined under subparagraph (B);
 `(ii) the Corporation shall require the bank to subsequently reimburse
 the remaining banks in the manner described in subparagraph (C); and
 `(iii) the requirements contained in subparagraphs (D) and (E) relating to
 the use of net earnings available for dividends shall apply to the bank until
 the bank has reimbursed the remaining banks for all of the excess amount.
 `(B) ALLOCATION OF EXCESS AMOUNT AMONG REMAINING FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANKS-
 The amount each remaining Federal home loan bank shall be required to pay
 under subparagraph (A)(i) is the amount determined by the Corporation by
 multiplying the excess amount by the percentage arrived at by dividing--
 `(i) the amount paid to the Corporation by the remaining bank at the time
 of such determination; by
 `(ii) the aggregate amount of such payments made by remaining banks at
 such time.
 `(C) REIMBURSEMENT PROCEDURE- The bank on whose behalf a payment is made
 under subparagraph (A)(i) shall annually pay to each remaining bank an
 amount determined by the Corporation by multiplying the amount available
 for such payments (at the time of such determination) by the percentage
 determined under subparagraph (B) with respect to the remaining bank until
 the aggregate amount of the excess amount has been reimbursed by the bank.
 `(D) LIMITATION ON DIVIDENDS- The amount of dividends which may be paid
 for any year by a bank on whose behalf a payment is made under subparagraph
 (A)(i) shall not exceed an amount equal to one-fourth of the net earnings
 available for dividends of the bank for the year.
 `(E) TRANSFER TO ACCOUNT FOR REIMBURSEMENTS REQUIRED- Of the net earnings
 available for dividends for any year of a bank on whose behalf a payment
 is made under subparagraph (A)(i), the amount necessary to make the
 reimbursements required under subparagraph (A)(ii) shall be placed in a
 reserve account (established in the manner prescribed by the Corporation)
 the balance in which shall be available only for such reimbursements.
 `(6) AGGREGATE ANNUAL CONTRIBUTION OF FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANKS-
 `(A) AMOUNT REQUIRED- The sum of the amounts subject to paragraph (2)(B)
 that are paid by the Federal home loan banks under paragraph (1) shall,
 for each calendar year, equal--
 `(i) $300,000,000, in the case of a calendar year before 1993; or
 `(ii) the adjusted dollar amount determined under subparagraph (B), in
 the case of a calendar year after 1992.
 `(B) ADJUSTED DOLLAR AMOUNT FOR YEARS AFTER 1992-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- The adjusted dollar amount under subparagraph (A) for any
 calendar year shall be calculated by multiplying the dollar amount which
 applied under subparagraph (A) for the preceding calendar year by the sum
 of 1 and whichever of the following is lower:
 `(I) CPI ADJUSTMENT- The CPI adjustment under subparagraph (C).
 `(II) NET EARNINGS ADJUSTMENT- The net earnings adjustment under subparagraph
 (D).
 `(ii) MAXIMUM AMOUNT- The adjusted dollar amount for any calendar year
 shall not exceed $600,000,000.
 `(C) CPI ADJUSTMENT-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- For purposes of subparagraph (B)(i), the CPI adjustment
 for any calendar year is the percentage (if any) by which--
 `(I) the consumer price index for the preceding calendar year; exceeds
 `(II) the consumer price index for the second preceding calendar year.
 `(ii) CONSUMER PRICE INDEX- For purposes of clause (i), the consumer price
 index for any calendar year is the average, as of the close of such year,
 of the last consumer price index for all-urban consumers published by the
 Department of Labor.
 `(D) NET EARNINGS ADJUSTMENT-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- For purposes of subparagraph (B)(i), the net earnings
 adjustment for any calendar year is the percentage (if any) by which--
 `(I) the net earnings for the preceding calendar year; exceeds
 `(II) the net earnings for the second preceding calendar year.
 `(ii) NET EARNINGS- For purposes of clause (i), the net earnings for any
 calendar year is the aggregate net earnings of the Federal home loan banks
 for such year.
 `(c) ASSESSMENTS ON SAIF MEMBERS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of paying interest on obligations issued by
 the Financing Corporation and the Resolution Funding Corporation (before
 the date of the enactment of the Savings and Loan Fair Financing and
 Antifraud Enforcement Act of 1990) and providing any additional funding
 which the Corporation determines is required to carry out the purposes of
 section 21A, the Corporation shall assess against each Savings Association
 Insurance Fund member an assessment (in the same manner as assessments
 are assessed against such members by the Federal Deposit Insurance Agency
 pursuant to section 7 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act).
 `(2) MAXIMUM AMOUNT LIMITATION- The aggregate amount assessed against any
 Savings Association Insurance Fund member under paragraph (1) for any year
 may not exceed the amount authorized to be assessed against such Savings
 Association Insurance Fund member pursuant to section 7 of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Act for such year.
 `(3) PRIORITY FOR FICO INTEREST PAYMENTS- Notwithstanding subsection (a)(3),
 interest on obligations issued by the Financing Corporation before the
 date of the enactment of the Savings and Loan Fair Financing and Antifraud
 Enforcement Act of 1990--
 `(A) may only be paid from amounts received by the Corporation from
 assessments under this subsection; and
 `(B) shall be paid from such assessments before any portion of such amount
 may be spent for any other purpose.
 `(d) OBLIGATIONS OF THE FINANCING CORPORATION AND RESOLUTION FUNDING
 CORPORATION- Subject to subsection (c)(3), the Corporation shall pay any
 interest and principal due on obligations issued--
 `(1) by the Financing Corporation under this section (as in effect before
 the date of the enactment of the Savings and Loan Fair Financing and
 Antifraud Enforcement Act of 1990); and
 `(2) by the Resolution Funding Corporation under section 21B (as in effect
 before the date of the enactment of the Savings and Loan Fair Financing
 and Antifraud Enforcement Act of 1990),
in accordance with the terms of such obligations.
 `(e) MAINTENANCE OF SEGREGATED ACCOUNTS-
 `(1) FINANCING CORPORATION ACCOUNT- The Corporation shall maintain the
 segregated account established and maintained by the Financing Corporation
 under subsection (g)(2) of this section (as in effect before the date of the
 enactment of the Savings and Loan Fair Financing and Antifraud Enforcement
 Act of 1990) in accordance with the requirements of such subsection (as
 in effect before such date).
 `(2) RESOLUTION FUNDING CORPORATION ACCOUNT- The Corporation shall maintain
 the segregated account established and maintained by the Resolution
 Funding Corporation under subsection (g)(2) of section 21B (as in effect
 before the date of the enactment of the Savings and Loan Fair Financing
 and Antifraud Enforcement Act of 1990) in accordance with the requirements
 of such subsection (as in effect before such date).'.
 (b) RTC AS SUCCESSOR AGENCY-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Resolution Trust Corporation shall succeed to all
 liabilities of the Financing Corporation and the Resolution Funding
 Corporation.
 (2) TRANSFER DIRECTED BY SECRETARY- The Oversight Board shall take
 such action as may be necessary to wind up the affairs of the Financing
 Corporation and the Resolution Funding Corporation and transfer all remaining
 functions, activities, and funds of such corporations to the Corporation.
 (c) REPEAL OF SECTION 21B- Section 21B of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act
 is hereby repealed.
 (d) SAVINGS PROVISIONS RELATING TO FICO AND RFC-
 (1) EXISTING RIGHTS, DUTIES, AND OBLIGATIONS NOT AFFECTED- No amendment made
 by this Act shall affect the validity of any right, duty, or obligation
 of the United States, the Financing Corporation, the Resolution Funding
 Corporation, or any other person, which--
 (A) arises under or pursuant to section 21 or section 21B of the Federal
 Home Loan Bank Act (as in effect before the date of the enactment of
 this Act), or any other provision of law applicable with respect to the
 Financing Corporation or the Resolution Funding Corporation; and
 (B) existed on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) CONTINUATION OF SUITS- No action or other proceeding commenced by or
 against the Financing Corporation or the Resolution Funding Corporation,
 shall abate by reason of the enactment of this Act, except that the
 Resolution Trust Corporation shall be substituted for the appropriate
 corporation as a party to any such action or proceeding.
SEC. 113. FINANCING CORPORATION AND RESOLUTION FUNDING CORPORATION ABOLISHED.
 The Financing Corporation established under section 21 of the Federal Home
 Loan Bank Act (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment
 of section 112(a) of this subtitle) and the Resolution Funding Corporation
 established under section 21B of such Act are hereby abolished.
TITLE II--FULL ENFORCEMENT
SEC. 201. AMENDMENTS RELATING TO PROHIBITED RACKETEERING ACTIVITIES.
 (a) BANKING CRIMES AS ADDITIONAL PREDICATE OFFENSES- Section 1961(l)
 of title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by inserting `sections 656 and 657 (relating to theft, embezzlement,
 or misapplication by officers or employees of certain depository, credit,
 and lending institutions)' after `(relating to counterfeiting)';
 (2) by inserting `section 215 (relating to receipt of commissions or gifts
 for procuring loans)' after `201 (relating to bribery)'; and
 (3) by inserting `sections 1004, 1005, 1006, 1007, and 1014 (relating
 to fraud and false statements' after `(relating to extortionate credit
 transactions)'.
 (b) PREJUDGMENT ATTACHMENT OF ASSETS IN CIVIL RICO CASES INVOLVING BANK
 FRAUD- Section 1964 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding
 at the end the following new subsection:
 `(e)(1) In any action under subsection (c) relating to any racketeering
 activity involving any act indictable under section 215, 656, 657, 1004,
 1005, 1006, 1007, 1014, or 1344, injunctive relief may be granted in
 conformity with the principles that govern the granting of such relief from
 threatened loss or damage in other cases, including the possibility that
 any judgment for money damages might be difficult to execute (including
 secreting and dissipating assets or other similar conduct that might defeat
 a judgment for money damages), but no showing of special or irreparable
 injury shall have to be made.
 `(2) Upon the execution, in the discretion of the court, of a proper
 bond against damages for an injunction improvidently granted, a temporary
 restraining order or a preliminary injunction may be issued in any proceeding
 under this subsection before a final determination of it upon its merits.
 `(3) If the person who institutes a proceeding under this subsection for
 injunctive relief substantially prevails, his recovery shall include the
 costs of the action, including a reasonable attorney's fee in the trial
 and appellate courts.'.
SEC. 202. AMENDMENT RELATING TO CIVIL FORFEITURE.
 Section 981(b) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting
 `the Attorney General or' after `property subject to forfeiture under
 subsection (a)(1)(C) of this section may be seized by'.
SEC. 203. INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
 Section 951 of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement
 Act of 1989 (12 U.S.C. 1833a) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new subsection:
 `(g) INJUNCTIVE RELIEF- (1) In any action brought by the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation, the Resolution Trust Corporation, or the National
 Credit Union Administration, in their receivership, conservatorship, or
 corporate capacities, involving a scheme to defraud affecting a financial
 institution, injunctive relief may be granted in conformity with the
 principles that govern the granting of such relief from threatened loss
 or damage in other cases, including the possibility that any judgment
 for money damages might be difficult to execute (including secreting or
 dissipating assets or other similar conduct that might defeat a judgment
 for money damages), but no showing of special or irreparable injury shall
 have to be made.
 `(2) Upon a showing of immediate danger of significant loss or damage,
 a temporary restraining order and a preliminary injunction may be issued
 in any action described in paragraph (1) before a final determination on
 the merits.'.
SEC. 204. ACTION BY PRIVATE PERSONS.
 Section 951 of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement
 Act of 1989 (12 U.S.C 1833a) is amended inserting after subsection (g)
 (as added by section 203 of this title) the following new subsection:
 `(h) ACTIONS BY PRIVATE PERSONS- A person may bring a civil action under
 this section pursuant to the procedures provided by section 3730 of title
 31, United States Code, except that where--
 `(1) provisions relating to section 3730 refer to a violation of section 3729
 of title 31, United States Code, such provisions shall be deemed to refer
 to a violation of an offense described in subsection (c) of this section; and
 `(2) provisions relating to section 3730 refer to a `false claims law'
 and a `false claims law investigator' such provisions shall be deemed to
 refer to a `financial institution fraud law' and a `financial institution
 fraud investigator', respectively.'.
SEC. 205. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 Section 966(a)(1) of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and
 Enforcement Act of 1989 is amended by striking `fiscal years 1990 through
 1992,' and inserting `fiscal years 1990 and 1991 and $500,000,000 for each
 fiscal year beginning after fiscal year 1991,'.