S 1387 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 S. 1378
To amend the Clean Water Act relating to the discharge of oil and hazardous
substances.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
July 21 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. GORTON introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Environment and Public Works
A BILL
To amend the Clean Water Act relating to the discharge of oil and hazardous
substances.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
 SECTION 1. (a) This Act may be cited as the `Corporate Environmental
 Responsibility Act of 1989'.
 (b) Paragraph (6) of subsection (b) of section 311 of the Clean Water Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1321(b)(6)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(6)(A)(i) Any owner, operator, or person in charge of any vessel, onshore
 facility, or offshore facility from which oil or a hazardous substance
 is discharged in violation of paragraph (3) of this subsection shall, if
 such discharge did not result from the negligence of such owner, operator,
 or person, be assessed a civil penalty by the Secretary of the department
 in which the Coast Guard is operating in an amount determined by the
 Secretary to be equal to, in the aggregate, the costs, as determined
 by the Secretary, of the removal of oil or a hazardous substance for
 which such owner, operator, or person is liable under subsection (f) of
 this section, and the costs and expenses which would be required in the
 restoration or replacement of natural resources damaged or destroyed as
 a result of a discharge of oil or a hazardous substance in violation of
 subsection (b) of this section. Any amount assessed as a civil penalty
 under this subparagraph (i) shall be deposited in the fund established
 pursuant to subsection (k). No penalty shall be assessed unless the owner,
 operator, or person charged shall have been given notice and opportunity
 for a hearing on such charge. Each violation is a separate offense. Any
 such civil penalty may be compromised by the Secretary. In determining the
 amount of the penalty, the Secretary shall consider the appropriateness of
 such penalty to the size of the business of the owner or operator charged,
 the effect on the owner or operator's ability to continue in business, and
 the gravity of the violation. In addition, the Secretary shall consider
 any and all amounts expended by such owner, operator, or person in the
 removal and cleanup of such discharge. The Secretary of the Treasury shall
 withhold at the request of the Secretary of the department in which the
 Coast Guard is operating the clearance required by section 4197 of the
 Revised Statutes of the United States (46 U.S.C. 91), of any vessel the
 owner, operator, or person in charge of which is subject to the foregoing
 penalty. Clearance may be granted in such cases upon the filing of a bond
 or other surety satisfactory to such Secretary.
 `(ii) In the administration of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, the
 Secretary of the department in which the Coast Guard is operating, shall,
 in the case of any such discharge referred to in such subparagraph caused
 by the negligence of such owner, operator, or person, as determined by
 the Secretary, assess a civil penalty against such owner, operator, or
 person in an amount equal to, in the aggregate, twice the amount that
 would have been assessed under subparagraph (i), if there had been no
 negligence. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (k), one-half
 of all amounts assessed as civil penalties under this subparagraph (ii)
 shall be deposited in the fund established pursuant to subparagraph (D)
 of this paragraph.
 `(iii) In addition to other penalties imposed by this section, the Secretary
 of the department in which the Coast Guard is operating shall, in the case
 of any such discharge referred to in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph
 which is determined by the Secretary to be both a catastrophic discharge
 and caused by the willful negligence or willful misconduct of the owner,
 operator, or person in charge, assess a civil penalty against such owner,
 operator, or person in charge in an amount equal to 25 percent of the
 profits made by such owner, operator, or person in connection with the
 extraction, purchasing, selling, shipping, or otherwise transporting of oil
 or hazardous substances during the fiscal year immediately preceding the
 fiscal year in which such discharge occurred, or in an amount equal to 25
 percent of the average of such profits so made during the 5 fiscal years
 immediately preceding the fiscal year in which such discharge occurred,
 whichever is greater. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (k),
 the proceeds resulting from any such civil penalty so imposed shall be
 deposited in the fund established by subparagraph (D) of this paragraph (6).
 `(B)(i) In addition to any civil penalty authorized by this paragraph (6),
 the Administrator may act to mitigate the damage to the public health or
 welfare caused by such discharge. The cost of such mitigation shall be
 deemed a cost under subsection (c) of this section for the removal of such
 substance by the United States Government.
 `(ii) For purposes of this paragraph (6), the term `catastrophic discharge'
 means a discharge of oil or hazardous substance which results in irreparable
 and substantial damage to the environment.
 `(C) Any costs of removal incurred in connection with a discharge excluded
 by subsection (a)(2)(C) of this section shall be recoverable from the
 owner or operator of the source of the discharge in an action brought
 under section 309(b) of this Act.
 `(D) There is established in the Treasury a Resources Restoration and
 Environmental Fund. Moneys in the fund shall be available in such amounts
 as are hereafter provided for in appropriation Acts for the restoration
 and replacement of natural resources damaged or destroyed as a result of
 a discharge of oil or a hazardous substance in violation of subsection (b)
 of this section, and for such other environmental purposes as the Secretary
 of Commerce, Secretary of Interior, Secretary of the department in which
 the Coast Guard is operating, and the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency shall determine.
 `(E) Any person who is damaged as a result of the discharge of oil or a
 hazardous substance by an owner, operator, or person in charge as referred
 to in this paragraph (6) may, in a civil action in any appropriate United
 States district court, recover, jointly or severally, and on the basis
 of strict liability, from the owner, operator, or person, or from an
 importer under subsection (s), an amount equal to the actual damages
 directly sustained by that person. Such suit must be commenced not later
 than 2 years after the date upon which the claimant first has a reasonable
 opportunity to discover the violation.'.
 SEC. 2. Paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (f) of section 311 of
 the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1321(f)) are amended to read as follows:
 `(1) Any owner, operator, or person in charge of a vessel or an onshore or
 offshore facility from which oil or a hazardous substance is discharged
 in violation of subsection (b)(3) of this section shall, notwithstanding
 any other provision of law, be jointly and severally and strictly liable to
 the United States Government for the actual costs incurred under subsection
 (c) of this section for the removal of such oil or substance by the United
 States Government. Such costs shall constitute a maritime lien on such vessel
 which may be recovered in an action in rem in the district court of the
 United States for any district within which any vessel may be found. The
 United States may also bring an action against the owner or operator of
 such vessel in any court of competent jurisdiction to recover such costs.'.
SEC. 3. IMPORTERS OF OIL AND HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES.
 (a) Section 311 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1321) is amended by
 adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(s) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, or any other
 law, any person who, pursuant to a contract or other agreement, imports
 oil or a hazardous substance into the United States shall, if such oil or
 substance is discharged in violation of paragraph (3) of subsection (b)
 of this section, be jointly and severally liable to the United States for
 all costs, damages, and penalties for which any owner, operator, or person
 in charge of any vessel, onshore facility, or offshore facility is liable
 to the United States under this section for such discharge.'.
 (b) Subsections (g) and (i) of section 311 of the Clean Water Act (33
 U.S.C. 1321 (g) and (i)) are repealed.