B37 6-13-89 [update]
S 1161 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1161
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to allow a deduction for dividends
paid by corporations.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
June 13 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. SHELBY introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Finance
A BILL
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to allow a deduction for dividends
paid by corporations.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. DIVIDEND PAID DEDUCTION.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Part VIII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to special deductions for corporations)
 is amended by striking out the table of sections and section 241 and
 inserting in lieu thereof the following:
`Subpart A. Dividend paid deduction.
`Subpart B. Dividend received deduction.
`Subpart C. Miscellaneous corporate deductions.
`SEC. 230. ALLOWANCE OF SPECIAL DEDUCTIONS.
 `In addition to the deductions provided in part VI (section 161 and
 following), there shall be allowed as deductions in computing taxable
 income the items specified in this part.
`Subpart A--Dividend Paid Deduction
`Sec. 231. Dividend paid deduction.
`Sec. 232. Qualified dividend account.
`Sec. 233. Ineligible corporations.
`Sec. 234. Special rules.
`SEC. 231. DIVIDEND PAID DEDUCTION.
 `(a) ALLOWANCE OF DEDUCTION- In the case of a corporation, there shall
 be allowed as a deduction an amount equal to the dividends paid by such
 corporation during the taxable year.
 `(b) LIMITATION BASED ON AMOUNT IN QUALIFIED DIVIDEND ACCOUNT- The amount of
 the dividends paid during any taxable year which may be taken into account
 under subsection (a) shall not exceed the amount in the corporation's
 qualified dividend account as of the close of such taxable year determined
 after the application of section 232(b)(1) for the taxable year but before
 the application of section 232(b)(2) for such taxable year.
`SEC. 232. QUALIFIED DIVIDEND ACCOUNT.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT OF ACCOUNT- Each corporation shall establish a qualified
 dividend account. The opening balance of such account shall be zero.
 `(b) ADJUSTMENTS TO ACCOUNTS- As of the close of each taxable year beginning
 after December 31, 1989, the qualified dividend account--
 `(1) shall be increased by the adjusted taxable income of the corporation
 for the taxable year, and
 `(2) shall be reduced by the amount of the dividends paid by the corporation
 during the taxable year to the extent the amount so paid does not exceed
 the limitation of section 231(c).
 `(c) ADJUSTED TAXABLE INCOME- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The term `adjusted taxable income' means taxable income
 adjusted as provided in this subsection.
 `(2) ADJUSTMENT FOR CERTAIN QUALIFYING DIVIDENDS- Taxable income shall be
 increased by the deduction allowed under section 243 with respect to that
 portion of any qualifying dividend (as defined in section 243(b)(1))
 for which such deduction is determined at a rate of less than 100
 percent. Similar rules shall apply in the case of dividends for which
 deductions are allowable under section 245(b).
 `(3) Adjustment for tax credits-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Taxable income shall be reduced by the deduction equivalent
 of the tentative nonrefundable credits for the taxable year.
 `(B) DEDUCTION EQUIVALENT- For purposes of subparagraph (A), the deduction
 equivalent of the tentative nonrefundable credits for any taxable year is
 the amount which (if allowed as a deduction for the taxable year) would
 reduce the tax liability (as defined in section 26(b)) for the taxable
 year by an amount equal to the tentative nonrefundable credits.
 `(C) TENTATIVE NONREFUNDABLE CREDITS- For purposes of this paragraph, the
 term `tentative nonrefundable credits' means the amount of the credits which
 would have been allowable under part IV of subchapter A of this chapter
 for the taxable year (other than the credit allowable under section 34)
 if no deduction were allowable under section 231.
 `(4) ADJUSTMENT FOR CORPORATE MINIMUM TAX- If tax is imposed by section 55
 on the corporation for any taxable year, taxable income for the succeeding
 taxable year shall be increased by an amount equal to 34/100 of the
 amount of tax so imposed.
 `(5) DIVIDEND PAID DEDUCTION NOT TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT- Taxable income shall
 be determined without regard to the deduction allowed under section 231.
`SEC. 233. INELIGIBLE CORPORATIONS.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- No deduction shall be allowed under section 231 with
 respect to any dividend paid by--
 `(1) a regulated investment company,
 `(2) a real estate investment trust,
 `(3) an S corporation,
 `(4) any organization taxable under subchapter T of this chapter (relating
 to cooperative organizations), or
 `(5) a FSC or DISC.
 `(b) FOREIGN CORPORATIONS- In the case of a foreign corporation--
 `(1) no deduction shall be allowed under section 231 for dividends paid
 by such corporation during any taxable year unless the corporation meets
 the requirements of section 245(a) for such taxable year,
 `(2) only adjusted taxable income effectively connected with the conduct
 of a trade or business in the United States and attributable to the
 uninterrupted period referred to in section 245(a) shall be added to the
 qualified dividend account, and
 `(3) any distribution shall be treated as made ratably out of income
 effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or business in the United
 States and other income.
`SEC. 234. SPECIAL RULES.
 `(a) CERTAIN DISTRIBUTIONS NOT TREATED AS DIVIDENDS- For purposes of this
 subpart, the term `dividend' does not include--
 `(1) any distribution in redemption of stock, in liquidation, or in
 a reorganization (whether or not such distribution is treated as a
 distribution to which section 301 applies), and
 `(2) any dividend described in section 244 (relating to dividends received
 on certain preferred stock).
 `(b) DEDUCTION NOT TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT FOR PURPOSES OF CERTAIN LIMITATIONS
 BASED ON TAXABLE INCOME- For purposes of sections 246(c), 613, 613A, and
 593, taxable income shall be determined without regard to the deduction
 allowed under section 231.
 `(c) TREATMENT OF DIVIDENDS RECEIVED BY 5-Percent Tax-Exempt Shareholders-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of part III of subchapter F (relating to
 taxation of unrelated business income of certain exempt organizations),
 any dividend received by a tax-exempt organization from a corporation
 in which such organization is a 5-percent shareholder shall be treated
 as unrelated business taxable income to the extent of the amount of the
 deduction allowable under section 231 to such corporation with respect
 to such dividend. Except as provided in regulations, the amount of such
 deduction shall be determined on the basis of the return filed by the
 corporation for the taxable year.
 `(2) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this subsection--
 `(A) 5-PERCENT SHAREHOLDER- The term `5-percent shareholder' means any
 tax-exempt organization which owns (or is considered as owning within the
 meaning of section 318)--
 `(i) 5 percent or more (by value) of the outstanding stock of the
 corporation, or
 `(ii) stock possessing 5 percent or more of the total combined voting
 power of all stock of the corporation.
 `(B) TAX-EXEMPT ORGANIZATION- The term `tax-exempt organization' means
 any organization which is exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter.
 `(C) RELATED ENTITIES- A tax-exempt organization and 1 or more other
 tax-exempt organizations which have--
 `(i) significant common purposes and substantial common membership, or
 `(ii) directly or indirectly substantial common direction or control,
 shall be treated as 1 tax-exempt organization for purposes of this paragraph.
 `(d) TREATMENT OF SUBSEQUENT ADJUSTMENTS- If there is any adjustment which
 affects the amount of the adjusted taxable income of a corporation for any
 taxable year (whether by reason of any carryback to such taxable year or
 otherwise) for purposes of this subpart and subpart B, the amount of such
 adjustment shall be treated as made of the close of such taxable year.
 `(e) ALLOCATION OF QUALIFIED DIVIDEND ACCOUNT IN CORPORATE SEPARATIONS,
 REORGANIZATIONS, AND REDEMPTIONS- Adjustments similar to the adjustments
 provided in subsection (h) or (n)(7) of section 312 shall be made to the
 qualified dividend account in the case of a transaction described in either
 of such subsections.
 `(f) Mutual Life Insurance Companies-
 `(1) GENERAL RULE- In the case of a mutual life insurance company, for
 purposes of this subpart, 80 percent of the differential earnings amount
 (as defined in section 809(a)(3)) shall be treated as a dividend paid to
 a shareholder.
 `(2) REGULATIONS- The Secretary may prescribe regulations applying rules
 consistent with this subpart to mutual life insurance companies. Such
 regulations may include rules treating an appropriate portion of the
 recomputed differential earnings amount (as defined in section 809(f)(3))
 as an adjustment to the amount described in paragraph (1).
`Subpart B--Dividend Received Deduction
`Sec. 243. Dividends received by corporations.
`Sec. 244. Dividends received on certain preferred stock.
`Sec. 245. Dividends received from certain foreign corporations.
`Sec. 246. Rules applying to deductions for dividends received.
`Sec. 246A. Dividends received deduction reduced where portfolio stock is
debt financed.
`Sec. 247. Dividends paid on certain preferred stock of public utilities.'
 (b) Compensatory Withholding Tax on Dividends Paid to Nonresident Aliens
 or Foreign Corporations-
 (1) GENERAL RULE- Subpart C of part II of subchapter N of chapter 1
 (relating to miscellaneous provisions) is amended by adding at the end
 thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 898. ADDITIONAL TAX ON DIVIDENDS TO REFLECT DIVIDEND PAID DEDUCTION.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- In addition to any tax imposed by section 871 or 881,
 there is hereby imposed a tax equal to the applicable percentage of the
 dividends received from sources within the United States by a nonresident
 alien individual or foreign corporation.
 `(b) APPLICABLE PERCENTAGE- For purposes of subsection (a), the applicable
 percentage is 30.4.
 `(c) TAX NOT TO APPLY TO SHAREHOLDER'S EFFECTIVELY CONNECTED ITEMS- The tax
 imposed by this section shall not apply to any dividend to the extent such
 dividend is effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or business
 by the shareholder within the United States.
 `(d) CORRESPONDING INCREASE IN WITHHOLDING TAX- In the case of any dividend
 subject to tax under subsection (a), the tax imposed by section 1441 or
 1442 (as the case may be) shall be increased by an amount equal to the
 applicable percentage of such dividend.
 `(e) EXCEPTION FOR CERTAIN TREATY COUNTRIES- The tax imposed by subsection
 (a) shall not apply to any dividend paid to a resident or corporation of
 a foreign country during any period--
 `(1) in which an income tax treaty between such country and the United
 States is in effect, and
 `(2) during which there is in effect a certification by the Secretary that--
 `(A) such income tax treaty has adequate provisions to prevent treaty
 shopping, and
 `(B) if such foreign country imposes an income tax comparable to the tax
 imposed by this subtitle and grants relief from such tax to its residents,
 such country grants relief equivalent to that provided in section 231 with
 respect to dividends paid to United States persons.
The requirements of paragraph (2) shall not apply to dividends paid before
January 1, 1992.'
 (2) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for subpart C of part II
 of subchapter N of chapter 1 is amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new item:
`Sec. 898. Additional tax on dividends to reflect dividend paid deduction.'
 (c) SECTION 381 TO APPLY TO QUALIFIED DIVIDEND ACCOUNT- Subsection (c) of
 section 381 (relating to items of the distributor or transferor corporation)
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(27) QUALIFIED DIVIDEND ACCOUNT- Under regulations prescribed by the
 Secretary, the acquiring corporation shall take into account (to the
 extent proper to carry out the purposes of this section and subpart A of
 part VIII of subchapter B of this chapter) the qualified dividend account
 of the distributor or transferor corporation.'
 (d) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- Part VIII of subchapter B of chapter 1 is amended
 by inserting after section 247 the following:
`Subpart C--Miscellaneous Provisions
`Sec. 248. Organizational expenditures.
`Sec. 249. Limitation on deduction of bond premium on repurchase.
`Sec. 250. Certain payments to the National Railroad Passenger Corporation.'
 (e) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 dividends paid during taxable years of payor corporations beginning after
 December 31, 1989.