S 1983 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1983
To expand the inspection by the Secretary of Agriculture of the Nation's food
supply to ensure the safety and wholesomeness of the Nation's supply of fish,
shellfish, and other marine food.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
November 21 (legislative day, NOVEMBER 6), 1989
Mr. LEAHY introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry
A BILL
To expand the inspection by the Secretary of Agriculture of the Nation's food
supply to ensure the safety and wholesomeness of the Nation's supply of fish,
shellfish, and other marine food.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Consumer Seafood Safety Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds and declares the following:
 (1) Fish are an important component of the meat supply of the United States
 and are harvested, processed and marketed by a large and diverse industry.
 (2) the wholesomeness and safety of fish and fish products is important
 to the health and well-being of the people of the United States.
 (3) The Department of Agriculture currently conducts inspection programs
 for all meat products other than fish and has the technical expertise and
 work force capacity necessary to rapidly expand meat inspection programs
 to cover fish and fish products.
 (4) Heightened public awareness of the health benefits associated with
 eating fish and fish products, and greater diversity of products, have
 raised consumption rates and the demand for wholesome products.
 (5) Current Federal health inspection and monitoring programs are
 insufficient to ensure public confidence in the wholesomeness and safety
 of fish and fish products.
 (6) The sale of unwholesome, adulterated, mis- labeled, or deceptively
 packaged products is hazardous to the consumer and detrimental to the
 commercial fishing industry and interstate and foreign commerce.
 (7) Existing Federal standards are inadequate to maintain good fish and
 fish products handling and manufacturing practices, to ensure consistent
 fish and fish products packaging and labeling procedures, or to detect
 hazardous levels of contaminants in fish and fish products.
 (8) The Federal Government has the responsibility of ensuring the
 wholesomeness and safety of all fish and fish products sold in interstate
 commerce for consumption in the United States.
 (9) A public health-based inspection program is particularly important for
 fish and fish products because of several unique factors: their habitat
 is often an uncontrolled environment, certain species tend to concentrate
 contaminants, deterioration tends to occur more rapidly, and substantial
 amounts are consumed raw.
 (10) In the past decade, various State and local agencies have been forced
 to issue warnings about the documented dangers of consuming certain types
 of fish, but the absence of Federal standards has made it difficult to
 assure that adequate standards are being applied nationwide.
 (b) PURPOSES- It is declared to be the purposes of the Congress in this Act--
 (1) to expand current Department of Agriculture flesh food inspection
 programs to include fish and fish products;
 (2) to ensure the wholesomeness and safety of all fish and fish products
 in the United States;
 (3) to maximize the health benefits of consuming fish and fish products,
 enhance public confidence in the wholesomeness and safety of fish and fish
 products and protect the fish and fish products market by requiring the
 development of a comprehensive safety program, including--
 (A) a mandatory program for the inspection of fish and fish products;
 (B) the establishment and enforcement of safety standards for fish and
 fish products;
 (C) the evaluation and monitoring of fish and fish product safety and
 consumer health risks;
 (D) the design of consumer education programs; and
 (E) the proper labeling and packaging of fish and fish products.
SEC. 3. AMENDMENTS TO THE FOOD SECURITY ACT OF 1985.
 The Food Security Act of 1985 (7 U.S.C. 1281 note) is amended by adding
 at the end thereof the following new title:
`TITLE IXX--FISH INSPECTION PROGRAM
`DEFINITIONS
 `SEC. 1901. As used in this title:
 `(a) The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Agriculture of the United
 States or his delegate within the agency of the Food Safety Inspection
 Service.
 `(b) The term `State' means any State of the United States and the
 Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
 `(c) The term `Territory' means Guam, the Virgin Islands of the United
 States, American Samoa, and any other territory or possession of the
 United States.
 `(d) The term `commerce' means commerce between any State, any Territory,
 or the District of Columbia, and any place outside thereof; or within any
 Territory not organized with a legislative body, or the District of Columbia.
 `(e) The term `fish' includes all meat from freshwater or marine fin fish,
 mollusks, crustaceans, and other forms of aquatic animal life, whether
 from wild or cultured sources, including amphibians.
 `(f) The term `fish product' means any product intended for human consumption
 derived in whole or in substantial part from fish, including unprocessed
 fish.
 `(g) The term `capable of use as human food' applies to any fish or part of
 product thereof, unless it is denatured or otherwise identified as required
 by regultions prescribed by the Secretary to deter its use as human food,
 or unless it is naturally inedible by humans.
 `(h) The terms `process', `processed', and `processing', with respect to
 fish or fish products, mean to harvest, handle, store, prepare, produce,
 manufacture, preserve, pack, transport, or hold such products.
 `(i) The term `official stamp' means any symbol prescribed by regulations of
 the Secretary to identify any fish or fish product processed for interstate
 commerce in an establishment(s) or vessel(s) holding an unsuspended official
 certificate and placed or packed in any container or wrapper.
 `(j) The term `official certificate' means a certificate prescribed by
 regulations of the Secretary for issuance by an inspector for the purpose
 of regulating the processing of fish or fish products on any establishment
 or vessel.
 `(k) The term `inspector' means an individual appointed or authorized by
 the Secretary to make inspections under any authority of this title.
 `(l) The term `owner or operator' means any person who owns, operates,
 leases, charters, or otherwise controls in whole or in part any establishment
 or vessel.
 (m) The term `vessel' means a vessel which is engaged in the harvesting or
 processing, or both of fish for landing and human consumption in any State.
 `(n) The term `establishment' means the premises, buildings, structures,
 facilities, and equipment (including vehicles) used in the processing of
 fish or fish products.
`PROHIBITED ACTS
 `SEC. 1902. The following Acts are strictly prohibited--
 `(a) The processing or sale of any fish or fish product that is adulterated
 within the meaning of section 1904 of this Act.
 `(b) The refusal to permit entry or inspection to or on any vessel or
 establishment or to otherwise interfere with any person in carrying out
 the duties required under this Act.
 `(c) The reproduction, alteration, or destruction of any official stamp
 or certificate without the authorization by the Secretary.
 `(d) The creation or maintenance of records that are false either by
 content or omission, or destruction or records containing information
 required under this Act.
 `(e) The processing in or for interstate commerce fish or fish products in
 any establishment or vessel unless there is in effect for such establishment
 or vessel an official certificate issued by the Secretary.
 `(f) The importation into the United States of fish or fish products which
 are capable of use as human food if such articles are adulterated, labeled
 or packaged in a false or misleading way, or misbranded or otherwise fail
 to comply with all the inspection, good processing practice, and other
 provisions of this Act and regulations issued thereunder applicable to
 such articles in interstate commerce within the United States.
`PENALTIES
 `SEC. 1903. (a) For the commission of any act prohibited by section 1902--
 `(1) a fine of $10,000 shall be imposed by the Secretary; except that the
 fine shall increase by 5 per centum with the commission of each subsequent
 prohibited act, and
 `(2) the identity of the establishment or vessel involved in the commission
 of a prohibited act shall be published in the Federal Register on the last
 business day of the quarter in which the act was committed along with the
 aggregate amount of the fines and the basis for each fine.
 `(b) The Secretary may refuse to provide inspection services for any period
 deemed necessary in order to protect the public health, curb persistent
 violations or enforce other provisions of this Act.
 `(c) Any individual who engages in the intentional adulteration of fish
 or fish products within the meaning of section 1904 shall be guilty of a
 felony and imprisoned for not more than 2 years.
`ADULTERATION
 `SEC. 1904. (a) Fish or fish products shall be deemed adulterated if--
 `(1) the Secretary determines that--
 `(A) such fish or fish products contain any substance which is hazardous to
 human health including, but not limited to chemicals, parasitic organisms
 such as bacteria or viruses, and natural microbiological toxins such as
 ciguatoxin and scrombrotoxin, or
 `(B) such fish or fish products have not been processed in accordance with
 section 1905;
 `(2) made or derived in whole or in part from shellfish harvested in a
 growing area that is determined to contain substances that will cause each
 shellfish to be injurious to health; or
 `(3) imported from a country that does not utilize a fish and fish products
 safety program that is approved by the Secretary.
 `(b)(1) For purposes of subparagraph (1) of paragraph (A), within 30 days
 of the date of enactment of this Act the Secretary shall contract with
 the National Academy of Sciences to identify chemical and microbiological
 contaminants, parasites, and toxins which are most likely to be found in
 fish and fish products and which are most likely to cause fish or fish
 products to be unsafe for human consumption.
 `(2) The National Academy of Sciences shall prepare the report described
 in subparagraph (1) within 6 months of the date of the execution of the
 contract with the Secretary under subparagraph (1). The National Academy
 of Sciences shall provide the report to the Secretary of Agriculture, the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, the House Committee on Agriculture
 and the Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry.
 `(3) The Secretary shall issue proposed regulations within 6 months of the
 date of receiving the report of the National Academy of Sciences. These
 regulations shall include standards established by the Secretary of Health
 and Human Services for those chemical and microbiological contaminants,
 parasites, and toxins which are found in fish and fish products and which
 are most likely to cause fish and fish products to be unsafe for human
 consumption. Not later than 6 months after the date the Secretary issues
 proposed regulations the Secretary shall issue final regulation to implement
 the requirements of this Act.
 `(c) For purposes of subparagraph (2) of paragraph (A), the Secretary of
 Commerce, coordinating with various state programs, shall identify within 1
 year from the date of enactment of this Act the growing areas that contain
 substances that will cause shellfish harvested in such areas to be injurious
 to be health. The Secretary of Commerce, in coordination with appropriate
 state authorities, shall continue to update and monitor growing areas for
 substances that will cause shellfish to be injurious to health.
`REGULATIONS OF PRODUCTS, ESTABLISHMENT, AND VESSELS
 `SEC. 1905. (a) PROCESSING- The Secretary shall by regulation prescribe
 standards of sanitation and other good processing, storage, and handling
 for each stage of the processing of fish and fish products.
 `(b) CERTIFICATION- The Secretary shall issue an official certificate upon
 application on a form prescribed by the Secretary which shall require,
 but not be limited to, proof of sanitation and storage facilities on an
 establishment of vessel and implementation of a quality assurance program
 approved by the Secretary.
 `(c) STAMP- The Secretary shall by regulation prescribe standards for
 identifying and marking fish or fish products with an official stamp which
 regulation shall ensure that the official stamp is available only for fish
 and fish products that are processed at all stages by and at establishments
 of vessels for which an official certificate was in effect at the time
 such fish and fish product was processed.
 `(d) SUSPENSION OF CERTIFICATES-
 `(1) The official certificate of any establishment or vessel may be
 suspended for failure to comply with the requirements of this section.
 `(2) The official certificate shall be suspended summarily by the Secretary--
 `(i) for the failure to permit access for inspection; or
 `(ii) where an inspection or investigation discloses a violation of any
 provision of this chapter or any regulation issued thereunder which the
 Secretary determines would involve an undue risk of imminent harm to
 consumers, except that suspension pursuant to such determination shall
 not prevent the continued processing by the establishment or vessel of
 any fish or fish product if such fish or fish product is not distributed,
 sold, or consumed by humans.
 `(3) The holder of a suspended certificate may submit a new application
 for certification at any time.
 `(e) INSPECTION- For the purpose of preventing the processing in interstate
 commerce of adulterated or mislabeled fish or fish products, the Secretary
 shall appoint (or delegate or contract through appropriate state agencies)
 inspectors to inspect each establishment or vessel where fish or fish
 products are processed for interstate commerce. Such inspection shall be
 pursuant to a program established by the Secretary to detect adulterated
 fish and fish products, to ensure that standards for sanitation and
 other good processing, storage, and handling practices are met by all
 establishments and vessels, and to identify the stage of processing in
 which the adulterated fish and fish products became adulterated or were not
 removed from the human food process. The program shall include intensive
 sampling for microbiological and chemical contaminants consistent with
 professional methodology:
 `(1) Such inspection shall be conducted with such frequency and manner
 as provided in rules and regulations issued by the Secretary, taking into
 account such factors as the Secretary considers to be appropriate including--
 `(A) the degree of probability of fish products being susceptible to
 contamination or otherwise having potential to impact on public health;
 `(B) the history of compliance with inspection requirements under this
 Act; and
 `(C) the production volume and complexity of the operations of the
 establishment or vessel.
 `(2) The Secretary shall review the standards on a regular and continuous
 basis and shall submit to Congress every 3 years a report describing the
 standards and criteria for inspection and its operation.
 `(3) For the purpose of inspection, inspectors shall have access to every
 part of an establishment or vessel as well as fish and fish products
 contained within at all times, by day or night, without regard to whether
 such establishment is operated. Inspectors shall be able to make inspections
 unannounced and at random.
 `(4) The Secretary, whenever processing operations are being conducted,
 may, at his discretion, provide for the sampling, detention, or reinspection
 of fish or fish products at each such establishment or vessel. Any fish or
 fish products found to be adulterated by the Secretary shall be immediately
 segregated and, if objection is not made within 24 hours, condemned. If
 objection is made, such fish or fish products that are in perishable form
 may be processed to the extent necessary to prevent spoilage, but after
 such processing such fish or fish products shall be segregated pending
 hearing and judicial review. Any fish or fish products condemned under
 this subsection by the inspector without objection or after hearing and
 judicial review under section 8 shall be destroyed for human food purposes
 under the supervision of an inspector.
 `(f) LABELING AND PACKAGING- If the Secretary has reason to believe that
 any labeling or packaging in use or proposed for use with respect to any
 article subject to this section is false or misleading, he may direct that
 such use be withheld, and that any otherwise authorized official mark not
 be used, unless the labeling and packaging is modified in such manner as
 he may prescribe to comply fully with this Act. Any such determination by
 the Secretary shall be subject to the opportunity for hearing and judicial
 review provided by section 1906, but the use of such labeling or packaging
 shall, if the Secretary so directs, be withheld pending such hearing and
 judicial review if necessary to protect the public health. If the use of such
 labeling or packaging is withheld pending hearing and judicial review, the
 person using or proposing to use such labeling or packaging may at any time
 seek injunctive relief in the United States district court of the district
 in which such labeling or packaging takes place. In the event an injunctive
 relief proceeding is initiated, the court shall have jurisdiction only to
 determine if the Secretary's determination to withhold such labeling or
 packaging was warranted by all of the circumstances of the case.
 `(g) STORAGE OR HANDLING REGULATIONS- Regulations issued pursuant to
 subsection (A) shall include standards prescribing conditions under
 which fish or fish products capable of use as human food shall be stored
 or otherwise handled by any person engaged in the business of buying,
 selling, freezing, storing, or transporting, in or for interstate commerce,
 or importing, such articles.
 `(h) RECORDKEEPING- The Secretary shall publish regulations providing
 for the preparation and maintenance of records specifically describing
 all activities relevant to food safety and sanitation, which records
 shall be available for public inspection as provided under section 552
 of title 5 of the United States Code. Any duly authorized representative
 of the Secretary shall, at all reasonable times, upon notice, be given
 opportunity to examine and to copy all such records.
 `(i) IMPORTATION OF FISH OR FISH PRODUCTS- Whenever, in the case of any
 foreign country, it shall be determined by the Secretary, after inspection
 pursuant to regulations promulgated by the Secretary of the establishments or
 vessels in which fish or fish products thereof are prepared for importation
 into the United States, such other investigation and evaluation, conducted
 at least annually, as he considers necessary or appropriate, that its
 system of establishment and vessel inspection of fish and fish products is
 at least equal to all the inspection, good processing practice, and other
 provisions of this Act and regulations issued thereunder, and that reliance
 can be placed on certificates required by regulation of the Secretary as
 to compliance with that country's inspection, food processing practice,
 and other requirements, the Secretary may accept such certificates as
 compliance with the comparable requirements of this Act for such period
 and on such terms and conditions as he may prescribe. Any fish or fish
 products covered by such certificates shall be labeled and packaged as
 may be required by regulations for such imported products.
`OPPORTUNITY FOR HEARING
 `SEC. 1906. (a) Any person (i) denied an official certificate, (ii) whose
 certificate is proposed to be suspended or has been summarily suspended,
 (iii) whose fish or fish products are segregated, (iv) from whom the
 use of any labeling or packaging has been withheld or is proposed to be
 withheld, or (v) any other person adversely affected by the Secretary's
 action or inaction on such matters, may file objections thereto with
 the Secretary specifying with particularity reasonable grounds for his
 objection, and request a hearing upon such objections. The Secretary
 shall afford an opportunity for a hearing on such objections, and shall
 expedite such hearing upon request. As soon as possible after the hearing,
 the Secretary shall act upon the objections. The Secretary shall issue an
 order based upon a fair evaluation of the entire record at such hearing,
 and shall include in such findings of fact and conclusions on which the
 Secretary's action is based. The Secretary shall grant interim relief from
 any order denying or withdrawing a certificate as he finds justified upon
 considering the interests of the person holding the certificate and the
 necessary protection of the public health.
 `(b) Any person adversely affected by the Secretary's action on such person's
 objections may obtain judicial review by filing in the United States court
 of appeals for the circuit in which he resides or in his principal place
 of business, within 60 days after the entry of the Secretary's order, a
 petition for judicial review. A copy of the petition shall be transmitted
 by the clerk of the office of the Secretary, and the Secretary shall file
 in the court the record of the proceeding. The finding of the Secretary with
 respect to questions of fact shall be sustained if supported by substantial
 evidence when considered on the record as a whole. The judgment of the
 court affirming or setting aside, in whole or in part, any order under
 this section shall be final subject to review by the Supreme Court of the
 United States upon certiorari or certification as provided in section 1254
 of title 28 of the United States Code.
`EMPLOYEE PROTECTION
 `SEC. 1907. (a) No employer may discharge any employee or otherwise
 discriminate against any employee with respect to the employee's
 compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because the
 employee has assisted or in any way participated in the carrying out of the
 provisions of this Act or who is about to carry out any activity protected
 by this provision.
 `(b) The process and procedures with respect to discharge or discrimination
 under paragraph (A) are described in subsections through (e) of section
 2622 of title 15, United States Code.
`RESEARCH AND EDUCATION
 `SEC. 1908. (a) RESEARCH- The Secretary shall, consultation with other
 Federal agencies and with the States, establish priorities for fish and fish
 products safety research, such as test methodology for microbiological and
 chemical contaminants, and the appropriate Federal agencies shall conduct
 research regarding those priorities.
 `(b) EDUCATION- The Secretary shall, in consultation with other Federal
 agencies and with the States, design and implement a national program for
 fish and fish products safety education, including designation of regional
 and national fish and fish products safety centers which shall conduct,
 support, and foster research, investigation, experimentation, education,
 and training in fish and fish products safety-related areas.
`STATE PROGRAMS
 `SEC. 1909. (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall encourage States to
 establish fish and fish products inspection programs to ensure public
 health that are at least equal to the program established under this title.
 `(b) ASSISTANCE- The Secretary may provide to a State, in planning and
 developing such fish and fish products inspection program--
 `(1) advisory assistance;
 `(2) technical and laboratory assistance and training (including necessary
 materials and equipment); and
 `(3) financial and other aid.
 `(c) DESIGNATION OF STATES- (1) Upon request, the Secretary shall review
 the fish and fish products inspection program of a State to determine if
 the State fish and fish products inspection program is at least equal to
 the program established under this title in ensuring public health.
 `(2) If the Secretary determines that a State fish and fish products
 inspection program is at least equal to the program established under this
 title in ensuring public health, the Secretary shall--
 `(A) designate such State as one in which the Federal fish and fish products
 inspection program established under this title shall not apply to shipments
 of fish and fish product in commerce within that State; and
 `(B) annually grant to each such State 50 percent of the cost of operating
 such State fish and fish product inspection program.
 `(3) If the Secretary determines that a State fish and fish product
 inspection program is not at least equal to the program established under
 this title or that a designated State has failed to maintain or is not
 enforcing a fish and fish product inspection program at least equal to the
 program established under this title, the Secretary shall promptly notify
 the Governor of the State of such determination.
 `(4) After the notification required by paragraph (3), consultation with
 the State, and providing any assistance described in subsection (b), if
 the Secretary determines that a State fish and fish product inspection
 program does not have standards that are at least equal to those under
 this title or that a designated State has failed to maintain or is not
 enforcing a program having standards at least equal to those under this
 title, the Secretary shall--
 `(A) promptly notify the Governor of the State of such determination;
 `(B) designate such State as one in which the Federal inspection program
 established under this title shall apply to the processing of fish or fish
 products within such State for shipment in commerce within that State; and
 `(C) cease providing any financial assistance to such State under paragraph
 (2).
`AUTHORIZATION AND APPROPRIATION
 `SEC. 1910. There are authorized to be appropriated $75,000,000 to carry
 out this Act for each of the fiscal years 1990, 1991, 1992, and 1993.'.