HR 1660 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1660
To provide for a mandatory background check and a waiting period before the
transfer of a handgun by a dealer.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
April 3, 1989
Mr. PORTER (for himself, Mr. BATES, Mr. FAUNTROY, Mr. ACKERMAN, Mr. DWYER
of New Jersey, Mr. PAYNE of New Jersey, Mr. OWENS of New York, Mr. GREEN,
Mr. GUARINI, Mr. LIPINSKI, Mr. LEWIS of Georgia, Mrs. COLLINS, and
Mrs. BENTLEY) introduced the following bill; which was referred to the
Committee on the Judiciary
A BILL
To provide for a mandatory background check and a waiting period before the
transfer of a handgun by a dealer.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Armed Felon Prohibition Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. BACKGROUND CHECK AND WAITING PERIOD REQUIRED BEFORE TRANSFER OF
HANDGUN BY DEALER.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 922 of title 18, United States Code, is amended
 by adding at the end the following:
 `(q)(1)(A) It shall be unlawful for any licensed dealer to transfer a
 handgun to an individual who is not licensed under section 923 unless the
 individual presents to the dealer--
 `(i) an unexpired permit issued by the chief law enforcement officer of
 the place of residence of the individual allowing the individual to obtain
 a handgun; and
 `(ii) the valid item of personal identification used to obtain the permit.
 `(B) The prohibition and requirements imposed by subparagraph (A) shall
 be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the prohibitions and requirements
 imposed by the other subsections of this section.
 `(2)(A) The chief law enforcement officer of the place of residence of the
 individual shall issue to the individual a permit allowing the individual
 to obtain a handgun if--
 `(i) the individual--
 `(I) applies for such a permit;
 `(II) presents to the officer a valid item of personal identification
 containing a photograph of the individual;
 `(III) provides the officer with any information required by the officer
 that would enable the officer or the Federal Bureau of Investigation to
 determine whether a handgun may be lawfully possessed by the individual; and
 `(IV) pays to the officer a fee equal to the administrative costs incurred
 in producing the permit;
 `(ii) the officer--
 `(I) provides the Federal Bureau of Investigation with any information
 required by the Bureau to determine whether or not the individual is
 described by any paragraph of subsection (d); and
 `(II) requests the Bureau to notify the officer if the Bureau determines that
 the individual is or is not described by any paragraph of subsection (d); and
 `(iii)(I) 7 days have elapsed from the date the application for such a
 permit was submitted and the Federal Bureau of Investigation has notified the
 officer that the individual is not described by any paragraph of subsection
 (d); or
 `(II) 30 days have elapsed from the date the application for such a permit
 was submitted and the Bureau has not notified the officer that the individual
 is described by any paragraph of subsection (d).
 `(B)(i) On request of the chief law enforcement officer of the place
 of residence of any individual who has applied for a permit to obtain a
 handgun, the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall use the most reliable
 means available to determine whether the individual is or is not described
 by any paragraph of subsection (d).
 `(ii) To the extent possible, the Bureau shall make the determination
 described in clause (i) within 30 days after the date the application for
 the permit was submitted to the officer.
 `(C) If the chief law enforcement officer obtains information that an
 individual who has applied for the permit is described by any paragraph
 of subsection (d), the officer shall--
 `(i) notify the individual of the information and that the application is
 denied; and
 `(ii) deny the application.
 `(3) Any permit issued pursuant to paragraph (2)(A) shall--
 `(A) contain a description of the item of personal identification used in
 the application therefor; and
 `(B) expire 30 days after the issue date.
 `(4) Any chief law enforcement officer who obtains information under
 paragraph (2)(A)(i) from an individual applying for a permit to obtain a
 handgun shall destroy all records containing such information at the close
 of the 60-day period beginning on the date the application was submitted
 if, within such 60-day period, the officer has not obtained information
 that the transfer of a handgun to the individual would violate Federal,
 State, or local law.'.
 (b) HANDGUN DEFINED- Section 921(a) of title 18, United States Code,
 is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(25) The term `handgun' means a firearm which has a short stock and is
 designed to be held and fired by the use of a single hand or any combination
 of parts from which a handgun can be assembled.'.
 (c) SUBORDINATION TO MORE RESTRICTIVE STATE LAW- Section 927 of title 18,
 United States Code, is amended by--
 (1) inserting `(a)' before `No'; and
 (2) adding at the end the following:
 `(b)(1) Notwithstanding subsection (a), in the event of any conflict between
 section 922(q) and any provision of the law of any State or any political
 subdivision thereof which requires the performance of a more comprehensive
 background check or a longer waiting period before the purchase of a
 handgun than is provided for in section 922(q), such provision of State
 law shall prevail.'.
 (d) PENALTY- Section 924(a)(2) of title 18, United States Code, is amended
 by striking `or (o)' and inserting `(o), or (q)(1)'.
 (e) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 transfers first proposed on a date occurring 90 or more days after the
 date of the enactment of this Act.