HR 4850 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 4850
To amend the Communications Act of 1934 to provide increased consumer
protection and to promote increased competition in the cable television and
related markets, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
April 9, 1992
Mr. MARKEY introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Communications Act of 1934 to provide increased consumer
protection and to promote increased competition in the cable television and
related markets, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Cable Television Consumer Protection and
 Competition Act of 1992'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS; DEFINITION.
 (a) FINDINGS- Section 601 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 521)
 is amended--
 (1) by striking the heading of such section and inserting the following:
`PURPOSES; FINDINGS';
 (2) by inserting `(a) PURPOSES- ' after `SEC. 601.'; and
 (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(b) FINDINGS- The Congress finds and declares the following:
 `(1) Fair competition in the delivery of television programming should
 foster the greatest possible choice of programming and should result in
 lower prices for consumers.
 `(2) Passage of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 resulted in
 deregulation of rates for cable television services in approximately 97
 percent of all franchises. A minority of cable operators have abused
 their deregulated status and their market power and have unreasonably
 raised cable subscriber rates. The Federal Communications Commission's
 rules governing local rate regulation will not provide any protection
 for more than two-thirds of the nation's cable subscribers, and will not
 protect subscribers from unreasonable rates in those communities where
 the rules apply.
 `(3) In order to protect consumers, it is necessary for the Congress
 to establish a means for local franchising authorities and the Federal
 Communications Commission to prevent cable operators from imposing rates
 upon consumers that are unreasonable.
 `(4) There is a substantial governmental and first amendment interest in
 promoting a diversity of views provided through multiple technology media.
 `(5) The Federal Government has a compelling interest in making all
 nonduplicative local public television services available on cable systems
 because--
 `(A) public television provides educational and informational programming
 to the Nation's citizens, thereby advancing the Government's compelling
 interest in educating its citizens;
 `(B) public television is a local community institution, supported
 through local tax dollars and voluntary citizen contributions in excess
 of $10,800,000,000 between 1972 and 1990 that provides public service
 programming that is responsive to the needs and interests of the local
 community;
 `(C) the Federal Government, in recognition of public television's integral
 role in serving the educational and informational needs of local communities,
 has invested more than $3,000,000,000 in public broadcasting between 1969
 and 1992; and
 `(D) absent carriage requirements there is a substantial likelihood that
 citizens, who have supported local public television services, will be
 deprived of those services.
 `(6) The Federal Government also has a compelling interest in having cable
 systems carry the signals of local commercial television stations because
 the carriage of such signals--
 `(A) promotes localism and provides a significant source of news, public
 affairs, and educational programming;
 `(B) is necessary to serve the goals contained in section 307(b) of this
 Act of providing a fair, efficient, and equitable distribution of broadcast
 services; and
 `(C) will enhance the access to such signals by Americans living in areas
 where the quality of reception of broadcast stations is poor.
 `(7) Broadcast television programming is supported by revenues generated
 from advertising. Such programming is otherwise free to those who own
 television sets and do not require cable transmission to receive broadcast
 signals. There is a substantial governmental interest in promoting the
 continued availability of such free television programming, especially
 for viewers who are unable to afford other means of receiving programming.
 `(8) Because television broadcasters and cable television operators compete
 directly for the television viewing audience, for programming material,
 and for advertising revenue, in order to ensure that such competition
 is fair and operates to the benefit of consumers, the Federal interest
 requires that local broadcast stations be made available on cable systems
 as a separate and distinct purchase option for subscribers.
 `(9) Cable systems should be encouraged to carry low power television
 stations licensed to the communities served by those systems where the
 low power station creates and broadcasts, as a substantial part of its
 programming day, local programming.
 `(10) Secure carriage and channel positioning on cable television systems
 are the most effective means through which off-air broadcast television
 can access cable subscribers. In the absence of rules mandating carriage
 and channel positioning of broadcast television stations, some cable
 system operators have denied carriage or repositioned the carriage of some
 television stations.
 `(11) Cable television systems and broadcast television stations increasingly
 compete for television advertising revenues and audience. A cable system
 has a direct financial interest in promoting those channels on which it
 sells advertising or owns programming. As a result, there is an economic
 incentive for cable systems to deny carriage to local broadcast signals,
 or to reposition broadcast signals to disadvantageous channel positions,
 or both. Absent reimposition of must carry and channel positioning
 requirements, such activity could occur, thereby threatening diversity,
 economic competition, and the Federal television broadcast allocation
 structure in local markets across the country.
 `(12) Cable systems provide the most effective access to television
 households that subscribe to cable. As a result of the cable operators
 provision of this access and the operator's economic incentives described
 in paragraph (11), negotiations between cable operators and local broadcast
 stations have not been an effective mechanism for securing carriage and
 channel positioning.
 `(13) Most subscribers to cable television systems do not or cannot maintain
 antennas to receive broadcast television services, do not have input
 selector switches to convert from a cable to antenna reception system,
 or cannot otherwise receive broadcast television services. A Government
 mandate for a substantial societal investment in alternative distribution
 systems for cable subscribers, such as the `A/B' input selector antenna
 system, is not an enduring or feasible method of distribution and is not
 in the public interest.
 `(14) At the same time, broadcast programming has proven to be the most
 popular programming on cable systems, and a substantial portion of the
 benefits for which consumers pay cable systems is derived from carriage
 of local broadcast signals. Also, cable programming placed on channels
 adjacent to popular off-the-air signals obtains a larger audience than on
 other channel positions. Cable systems, therefore, obtain great benefits
 from carriage of local broadcast signals which, until now, they have been
 able to obtain without the consent of the broadcaster or any copyright
 liability. This has resulted in an effective subsidy of the development of
 cable systems by local broadcasters. While at one time, when cable systems
 did not attempt to compete with local broadcasters, this subsidy may have
 been appropriate, it is no longer and results in a competitive imbalance
 between the two industries.
 `(15) The public interest will be served by the development of competition in
 the marketplace for video programming and by encouraging new multichannel
 video programming distribution technologies. Prohibiting video program
 vendors in which a multichannel video programming distributor has an
 attributable interest from unreasonably refusing to deal with other
 multichannel video programming distributors with respect to provision of
 video programming is necessary to help establish a competitive marketplace.
 `(16) It is necessary and appropriate to promote competition between
 cable operators and other multichannel video programming distributors
 by facilitating access of such other multichannel video programming
 distributors to video programming.'.
 (b) DEFINITION- Section 602 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 522)
 is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (11) through (16) as paragraphs (12)
 through (17); and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (10) the following new paragraph:
 `(11) the term `multichannel video programming distributor' means a person
 such as, but not limited to, a cable operator, a multichannel multipoint
 distribution service, a direct broadcast satellite service, or a television
 receive-only satellite program distributor, who makes available for purchase,
 by subscribers or customers, multiple channels of video programming;'.
SEC. 3. REQUIREMENTS FOR THE PROVISION AND REGULATION OF BASIC SERVICE TIER.
 (a) AMENDMENT- Section 623 of the Communications Act of 1934 is amended
 to read as follows:
`REGULATION OF RATES
 `SEC. 623. (a) COMPETITION PREFERENCE; LOCAL AND FEDERAL REGULATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- No Federal agency or State may regulate the rates for
 the provision of cable service except to the extent provided under this
 section and section 612. Any franchising authority may regulate the rates
 for the provision of cable service, or any other communications service
 provided over a cable system to cable subscribers, but only to the extent
 provided under this section.
 `(2) PREFERENCE FOR COMPETITION- If the Commission finds that a cable system
 is subject to effective competition, the rates for the provision of cable
 service by such system shall not be subject to regulation by the Commission
 or by a State or franchising authority under this section. If the Commission
 finds that a cable system is not subject to effective competition--
 `(A) the rates for the provision of basic cable service shall be subject
 to regulation by a franchising authority, or by the Commission if the
 Commission exercises jurisdiction pursuant to paragraph (6), in accordance
 with the regulations prescribed by the Commission under subsection (b)
 of this section; and
 `(B) the rates for cable programming services shall be subject to regulation
 by the Commission under subsection (c) of this section.
 `(3) QUALIFICATION OF FRANCHISING AUTHORITY- A franchising authority that
 seeks to exercise the regulatory jurisdiction permitted under paragraph
 (2)(A) shall file with the Commission a written certification that--
 `(A) the franchising authority will adopt and administer regulations
 with respect to the rates subject to regulation under this section that
 are consistent with the regulations prescribed by the Commission under
 subsection (b);
 `(B) the franchising authority has the legal authority to adopt, and the
 personnel to administer, such regulations;
 `(C) procedural laws and regulations applicable to rate regulation
 proceedings by such authority provide a reasonable opportunity for
 consideration of the views of interested parties.
 `(4) APPROVAL BY COMMISSION- A certification filed by a franchising authority
 under paragraph (3) shall be effective 30 days after the date on which it
 is filed unless the Commission finds, after notice to the authority and
 a reasonable opportunity for the authority to comment, that--
 `(A) the franchising authority has adopted or is administering regulations
 with respect to the rates subject to regulation under this section that
 are not consistent with the regulations prescribed by the Commission under
 subsection (b);
 `(B) the franchising authority does not have the legal authority to adopt,
 or the personnel to administer, such regulations;
 `(C) procedural laws and regulations applicable to rate regulation
 proceedings by such authority do not provide a reasonable opportunity for
 consideration of the views of interested parties.
If the Commission disapproves a franchising authority's certification,
the Commission shall notify the franchising authority of any revisions or
modifications necessary to obtain approval.
 `(5) REVOCATION OF JURISDICTION- Upon petition by a cable operator or
 other interested party, the Commission shall review the regulation of
 cable system rates by a franchising authority under this subsection. A
 copy of the petition shall be provided to the franchising authority by the
 person filing the petition. If the Commission finds that the franchising
 authority has acted inconsistently with the requirements of this subsection,
 the Commission shall grant appropriate relief. If the Commission, after the
 franchising authority has had a reasonable opportunity to comment, determines
 that the State and local laws and regulations are not in conformance
 with the regulations prescribed by the Commission under subsection (b),
 the Commission shall revoke the jurisdiction of such authority.
 `(6) EXERCISE OF JURISDICTION BY COMMISSION- If the Commission disapproves
 a franchising authority's certification under paragraph (4), or revokes
 such authority's jurisdiction under paragraph (5), the Commission shall
 exercise the franchising authority's regulatory jurisdiction under paragraph
 (2)(A) until the franchising authority has qualified to exercise that
 jurisdiction by filing a new certification that meets the requirements of
 paragraph (3). Such new certification shall be effective upon approval by
 the Commission. The Commission shall act to approve or disapprove any such
 new certification within 90 days after the date it is filed.
 `(b) ESTABLISHMENT OF BASIC SERVICE TIER RATE LIMITATIONS-
 `(1) COMMISSION REGULATIONS- Within 120 days after the date of enactment
 of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992,
 the Commission shall, by regulation, establish the following:
 `(A) BASIC SERVICE TIER RATES- A formula to establish the maximum price
 of the basic service tier, which formula shall take into account--
 `(i) the number of signals carried on the basic service tier;
 `(ii) the direct costs (if any) of obtaining, transmitting, and otherwise
 providing such signals, including signals and services carried on the
 basic service tier pursuant to paragraph (2)(B), and changes in such costs;
 `(iii) such portion of the joint and common costs of the cable operator as
 is determined, in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Commission,
 to be properly allocable to obtaining, transmitting, and otherwise providing
 such signals, and changes in such costs;
 `(iv) a reasonable profit (as defined by the Commission) on the provision
 of the basic service tier;
 `(v) rates for comparable cable systems, if any, that are subject to
 effective competition and that offer comparable services, taking into
 account, among other factors, similarities in facilities, the number of
 cable channels, the number of cable subscribers, and local conditions;
 `(vi) any amount assessed as a franchise fee, tax, or charge of any kind
 imposed by any State or local authority on the transactions between cable
 operators and cable subscribers or any other fee, tax, or assessment of
 general applicability imposed by a governmental entity applied against
 cable operators or cable subscribers; and
 `(vii) any amount required, in accordance with subparagraph (C), to satisfy
 franchise requirements to support public, educational, or governmental
 channels or the use of such channels.
 `(B) EQUIPMENT- A formula to establish, on the basis of actual cost,
 the price or rate for--
 `(i) installation and lease of the equipment necessary for subscribers
 to receive the basic service tier, including a converter box and a remote
 control unit and, if requested by the subscriber, such addressable converter
 box or other equipment as is required to access programming described in
 paragraph (3); and
 `(ii) installation and monthly use of connections for additional television
 receivers.
 `(C) COSTS OF FRANCHISE REQUIREMENTS- A formula to identify and allocate
 costs attributable to satisfying franchise requirements to support public,
 educational, and governmental channels or the use of such channels or any
 other services required under the franchise.
 `(D) IMPLEMENTATION AND ENFORCEMENT- Additional standards, guidelines, and
 procedures concerning the implementation and enforcement of the regulations
 prescribed by the Commission under this subsection, which shall include--
 `(i) procedures by which cable operators may implement and franchising
 authorities may enforce the administration of the formulas, standards,
 guidelines, and procedures established by the Commission under this
 subsection;
 `(ii) procedures for the resolution of disputes between cable operators
 and franchising authorities concerning the administration of such formulas,
 standards, guidelines, and procedures;
 `(iii) standards and procedures to prevent unreasonable charges for changes
 in the subscriber's selection of services or equipment subject to regulation
 under this section, which standards shall require that charges for changing
 the service tier selected shall be based on the cost of such change and
 shall not exceed nominal amounts when the system's configuration permits
 changes in service tier selection to be effected solely by coded entry on
 a computer terminal or by other similarly simple method; and
 `(iv) standards and procedures to assure that subscribers receive notice
 of the availability of the basic service tier required under this section.
 `(E) EFFECTIVE DATES- An effective date or dates for compliance with the
 formulas, standards, guidelines, and procedures established under this
 subsection.
 `(2) COMPONENTS OF BASIC TIER SUBJECT TO RATE REGULATION-
 `(A) MINIMUM CONTENTS- Each cable operator of a cable system shall provide
 its subscribers a separately available basic service tier to which the
 rates prescribed under paragraph (1) shall apply and to which subscription
 is required for access to any other tier of service. Such basic service
 tier shall, at a minimum, consist of the following:
 `(i) All signals carried in fulfillment of the requirements of sections
 614 and 615.
 `(ii) Any public, educational, and governmental access programming required
 by the franchise of the cable system to be provided to subscribers.
 `(iii) Any signal of any broadcast station that is provided by the cable
 operator to any subscriber.
 `(B) PERMITTED ADDITIONS TO BASIC TIER- A cable operator may add additional
 video programming signals or services to the basic service tier. Any such
 additional signals or services provided on the basic service tier shall
 be provided to subscribers at rates determined under paragraph (1)(A).
 `(3) BUY-THROUGH OF OTHER TIERS PROHIBITED-
 `(A) PROHIBITION- A cable operator may not require the subscription to
 any tier other than the basic service tier required by paragraph (2) as a
 condition of access to cable programming offered on a per channel or per
 program basis. A cable operator may not discriminate between subscribers to
 the basic service tier and other subscribers with regard to the rates charged
 for cable programming service offered on a per channel or per program basis.
 `(B) EXCEPTION; LIMITATION- The prohibition in subparagraph (A) shall
 not apply to a cable system that, by reason of the lack of addressable
 converter boxes or other technological limitations, does not permit the
 operator to offer programming on a per channel or per program basis in the
 same manner required by subparagraph (A). This subparagraph shall not be
 available to any cable operator after--
 `(i) the technology utilized by cable system is modified or improved in
 a way that eliminates such technological limitation; or
 `(ii) 5 years after the date of enactment of the Cable Television Consumer
 Protection and Competition Act of 1992.
 `(4) SMALL SYSTEM BURDENS- In developing and prescribing regulations pursuant
 to this subsection, the Commission shall design such regulations to reduce
 the administrative burdens and cost of compliance for cable systems that
 have 500 or fewer subscribers.
 `(c) REGULATION OF UNREASONABLE RATES-
 `(1) COMMISSION REGULATIONS- Within 180 days after the date of enactment
 of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992,
 the Commission shall, by regulation, establish the following:
 `(A) criteria prescribed in accordance with paragraph (2) for identifying, in
 individual cases, rates for cable programming services that are unreasonable;
 `(B) fair and expeditious procedures for the receipt, consideration, and
 resolution of complaints from any franchising authority or other relevant
 State or local government entity alleging that a rate for cable programming
 services charged by a cable operator violates the criteria prescribed under
 subparagraph (A), which procedures shall set forth the minimum showing
 that shall be required for a complaint to establish a prima facie case
 that the rate in question is unreasonable; and
 `(C) the procedures to be used to reduce rates for cable programming
 services that are determined by the Commission to be unreasonable.
 `(2) FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED- In establishing the criteria for determining
 in individual cases whether rates for cable programming services are
 unreasonable under paragraph (1)(A), the Commission shall consider, among
 other factors--
 `(A) the rates for similarly situated cable systems offering comparable
 cable programming services, taking into account similarities in facilities,
 regulatory and governmental costs, the number of subscribers, and other
 relevant factors;
 `(B) the rates for comparable cable systems, if any, that are subject
 to effective competition and that offer comparable services, taking into
 account, among other factors, similarities in facilities, the number of
 cable channels, the number of cable subscribers, and local conditions;
 `(C) the history of the rates for cable programming services of the system,
 including the relationship of such rates to changes in general consumer
 prices;
 `(D) the rates, as a whole, for all the cable programming, equipment,
 and services provided by the system;
 `(E) capital and operating costs of the cable system, including costs of
 obtaining video signals and services;
 `(F) the quality and costs of the customer service provided by the cable
 system; and
 `(G) the revenues (if any) received by a cable operator from advertising
 from programming that is carried as part of the service for which a rate
 is being established, and changes in such revenues.
 `(3) LIMITATION ON COMPLAINTS CONCERNING EXISTING RATES- On and after 180
 days after the effective date of the regulations prescribed by the Commission
 under paragraph (1), the procedures established under subparagraph (B) of
 such paragraph shall be available only with respect to complaints filed
 within a reasonable period of time following a change in rates that is
 initiated after that effective date.
 `(d) DISCRIMINATION; SERVICES FOR THE HEARING IMPAIRED- Nothing in this
 title shall be construed as prohibiting any Federal agency, State, or a
 franchising authority from--
 `(1) prohibiting discrimination among subscribers or potential subscribers
 with regard to the services offered or the rates charged for such
 services, or
 `(2) requiring and regulating the installation or rental of equipment
 which facilitates the reception of basic cable service by hearing impaired
 individuals.
 `(e) NEGATIVE OPTION BILLING PROHIBITED- A cable operator shall not charge
 a subscriber for any individually-priced channel of video programming or for
 any pay-per-view video programming that the subscriber has not affirmatively
 requested. For purposes of this subsection, a subscriber's failure to
 refuse a cable operator's proposal to provide such channel or programming
 shall not be deemed to be an affirmative request for such programming.
 `(f) REVIEW OF FINANCIAL INFORMATION-
 `(1) COLLECTION OF INFORMATION- The Commission shall, by regulation, require
 cable operators to file, within 60 days after the effective date of the
 regulations prescribed under subsection (c)(1) and annually thereafter,
 such financial information as may be needed for purposes of administering
 and enforcing this section.
 `(2) CONGRESSIONAL REPORT- The Commission shall submit to each House of
 the Congress, by January 1, 1994, a report on the financial condition,
 profitability, rates, and performance of the cable industry and making
 such recommendations as the Commission considers appropriate in light of
 such information.
 `(g) PREVENTION OF EVASIONS- Within 120 days after the date of enactment
 of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992,
 the Commission shall, by regulation, establish standards, guidelines, and
 procedures to prevent evasions of the rates, services, and other requirements
 of subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), and (f) of this section and shall,
 thereafter, periodically review and revise such standards, guidelines,
 and procedures.
 `(h) REPORTS ON AVERAGE PRICES- The Commission shall publish quarterly
 statistical reports on the average rates for basic service and other
 cable programming, and for converter boxes, remote control units, and
 other equipment, of--
 `(1) cable systems that the Commission has found are subject to effective
 competition under subsection (a)(2), compared with
 `(2) cable systems that the Commission has found are not subject to such
 effective competition.
 `(i) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section--
 `(1) The term `effective competition' means that--
 `(A) fewer than 30 percent of the households in the franchise area subscribe
 to the cable service of a cable system;
 `(B) the franchise area is--
 `(i) served by at least two unaffiliated multichannel video programming
 distributors each of which offers comparable video programming to at least
 50 percent of the households in the franchise area; and
 `(ii) the number of households subscribing to programming services offered
 by multichannel video programming distributors other than the largest
 multichannel video programming distributor exceeds 15 percent of the
 households in the franchise area; or
 `(C) a multichannel video programming distributor operated by the franchising
 authority for that franchise area offers video programming to at least 50
 percent of the households in that franchise area.
 `(2) The term `cable programming service' means any video programming
 provided over a cable system, regardless of service tier, other than video
 programming carried on the basic service tier and video programming offered
 on a per channel or per program basis.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) of this section
 shall take effect 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 4. MULTIPLE FRANCHISES.
 (a) UNREASONABLE REFUSALS TO FRANCHISE PROHIBITED- Section 621(a) of the
 Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 541(a)) is amended by adding at the
 end thereof the following:
 `(4) A franchising authority shall not, in awarding of franchises within
 its jurisdiction, grant an exclusive franchise, or unreasonably refuse to
 award additional franchises because of the previous award of a franchise to
 another cable operator. For purposes of this paragraph, refusal to award
 a franchise shall not be unreasonable if, for example, such refusal is on
 the ground--
 `(A) of technical infeasibility;
 `(B) of inadequate assurance that the cable operator will provide adequate
 public, educational and governmental access channel capacity, facilities,
 or financial support;
 `(C) of inadequate assurance that the cable operator will, within a
 reasonable period of time, provide universal service throughout the entire
 franchise area under the jurisdiction of the franchising authority;
 `(D) that such award would interfere with the right of the franchising
 authority to deny renewal; or
 `(E) of inadequate assurance that the cable operator has the financial,
 technical, or legal qualifications to provide cable service.
 `(5) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as limiting the authority
 of local governments to assess fees or taxes for access to public rights
 of way.'.
 (b) MUNICIPAL AUTHORITIES PERMITTED TO OPERATE SYSTEMS- Section 621 of
 the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 541) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `and subsection (f)' before the comma in subsection
 (b)(1); and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(f) No provision of this Act shall be construed to--
 `(1) prohibit a local or municipal authority that is also, or is affiliated
 with, a franchising authority from operating as a multichannel video
 programming distributor in the geographic areas within the jurisdiction
 of such franchising authority, notwithstanding the granting of one or more
 franchises by such franchising authority, or
 `(2) require such local or municipal authority to secure a franchise to
 operate as a multichannel video programming distributor.'.
SEC. 5. RETRANSMISSION CONSENT.
 Section 325 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 325) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsections (b) and (c) as subsections (c) and (d),
 respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (a) the following new subsection:
 `(b)(1) Following the date that is one year after the date of enactment
 of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992,
 no cable system or other multichannel video programming distributor shall
 retransmit the signal of a commercial broadcasting station, or any part
 thereof, without the express authority of the originating station, except
 as permitted by section 614.
 `(2) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to retransmission of
 the signal of a broadcasting station to a home satellite antenna or to the
 retransmission by a cable operator or other multichannel video programming
 distributor of the signal of a superstation if the originating station was
 a superstation on May 1, 1991, and the cable system or other multichannel
 video programming distributor does not obtain the signal directly from
 the originating station.
 `(3)(A) Within 45 days after the enactment of the Cable Television Consumer
 Protection and Competition Act of 1992 the Commission shall commence a
 rulemaking proceeding to establish regulations to govern the exercise
 by television stations of the rights to grant retransmission authority
 under this subsection and the right to signal carriage under section
 614. Such rulemaking proceeding shall be completed within 6 months after
 its commencement and such other regulations as are necessary to administer
 the limitations contained in paragraph (2). The Commission shall consider
 in such proceeding the impact that the grant of retransmission consent by
 television stations may have on the rates for basic cable service and shall
 ensure that rates for basic cable service are reasonable. Such rulemaking
 proceeding shall be completed within 6 months after its commencement.
 `(B) The regulations required by subparagraph (A) shall require that
 television stations, within 1 year after the date of enactment of this
 subsection and every 3 years thereafter, make an election between the right
 to grant retransmission authority under this subsection and the right to
 signal carriage under section 614.
 `(4) If an originating television station elects under paragraph (3)(B) to
 exercise its right to grant retransmission authority under this subsection,
 the provisions of section 614 shall not require the carriage of the signal
 of such station by such cable system.
 `(5) The election by a television station to exercise its right to grant
 retransmission authority under this subsection shall not interfere with
 or supersede the rights under section 614 or 615 of any station electing
 to assert the right of signal carriage under those sections.
 `(6) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as affecting program
 video licensing agreements between broadcasters and program suppliers that
 are in effect on, or entered into on or after, the date of enactment of
 this paragraph.
 `(7)(A) No commercial broadcasting station may--
 `(i) enter into or abide by a contract for the exclusive carriage of that
 station's signal in any community, except that if there is only a single
 multichannel video programming distributor in a community, a contract
 with that distributor shall not be considered an exclusive contract for
 purposes of this paragraph; or
 `(ii) unreasonably refuse to deal with or unreasonably discriminate against
 any cable system or other multichannel video programming distributor
 in exercising its right to grant retransmission authority under this
 subsection, except that a commercial broadcasting station shall not be
 required to negotiate for retransmission authority with a cable system or
 other multichannel video programming distributor in a community within the
 broadcasting market (as defined in section 614(f)(3)) of another station
 providing substantially similar programming or which is affiliated with
 the same broadcast network.
 `(B) Any cable system or other multichannel video programming distributor
 may file a complaint with the Commission setting forth the manner in which
 a commercial broadcasting station has failed to meet its obligations under
 subparagraph (A) and the basis for such allegations. The Commission shall
 afford the commercial broadcasting station an opportunity to present data
 and arguments that there has been no failure to meet such obligations. The
 Commission shall order such proceedings as are necessary to resolve
 the allegations in the complaint. In determining whether a commercial
 broadcasting station has failed to meet its obligations under subparagraph
 (A), the Commission may consider the provisions of the contract at issue,
 the terms of other contracts for carriage to which the broadcasting
 station is a party, the location and size of the community in which the
 complainant is located, the relative value of the broadcast signal in
 that community, and any other factors the Commission deems relevant. The
 Commission shall determine whether the value of the compensation being
 sought by the commercial broadcasting station, taken as a whole in light
 of these factors, constitutes an unreasonable refusal to deal with or
 unreasonable discrimination against the cable system or other multichannel
 video programming distributor which filed the complaint. Upon completion
 of such proceeding, if the Commission finds that a commercial broadcasting
 station has failed to meet its obligations under subparagraph (A), the
 Commission shall have the power to order appropriate remedies.'.
 `(8) The requirements of this subsection shall not apply to any cable
 system that has 500 or fewer subscribers.
 `(9) As used in this section, the term `multichannel video programming
 distributor' has the meaning provided in section 602 of this Act.'.
SEC. 6. CARRIAGE OF LOCAL COMMERCIAL TELEVISION SIGNALS.
 Part II of title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 531 et
 seq.) is amended by inserting after section 613 the following new section:
`SEC. 614. CARRIAGE OF LOCAL COMMERCIAL TELEVISION SIGNALS.
 `(a) CARRIAGE OBLIGATIONS- Each cable operator shall carry, on the
 cable system of that operator, the signals of local commercial television
 stations as provided by the following provisions of this section. Carriage
 of additional broadcast television signals on such system shall be at the
 discretion of such operator, subject to section 325(b).
 `(b) Signals Required-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- (A) A cable operator of a cable system with 12 or fewer
 usable activated channels shall carry the signals of at least three local
 commercial television stations, except that if such a system has 300 or
 fewer subscribers, it shall not be subject to any requirements under this
 section so long as such system does not delete from carriage by that system
 any signal of a broadcast television station.
 `(B) A cable operator of a cable system with more than 12 usable activated
 channels shall carry the signals of local commercial television stations
 up to one third of the aggregate number of usable activated channels of
 such system.
 `(2) SELECTION OF SIGNALS- Whenever the number of local commercial television
 stations exceeds the maximum number of signals a cable system is required
 to carry under paragraph (1), the cable operator shall have discretion in
 selecting which such signals shall be carried on its cable system, except
 that if the cable operator elects to carry an affiliate of a broadcast
 network (as such term is defined by the Commission by regulation), such
 cable operator shall carry the affiliate of such broadcast network whose
 city of license reference point, as defined in section 76.53 of title 47,
 Code of Federal Regulations (in effect on January 1, 1991), or any successor
 regulation thereto, is closest to the principal headend of the cable system.
 `(3) CONTENT TO BE CARRIED- (A) A cable operator shall carry in its
 entirety, on the cable system of that operator, the primary video,
 accompanying audio, and line 21 closed caption transmission of each of
 the local commercial television stations carried on the cable system and,
 to the extent technically feasible, program-related material carried in
 the vertical blanking interval or on subcarriers. Retransmission of other
 material in the vertical blanking internal or other nonprogram-related
 material (including teletext and other subscription and advertiser-supported
 information services) shall be at the discretion of the cable operator. Where
 appropriate and feasible, operators may delete signal enhancements, such
 as ghost-canceling, from the broadcast signal and employ such enhancements
 at the system headend or headends.
 `(B) The cable operator shall carry the entirety of the program schedule
 of any television station carried on the cable system unless carriage of
 specific programming is prohibited, and other programming authorized to
 be substituted, under section 76.67 or subpart F of part 76 of title 46,
 Code of Federal Regulations (as in effect on January 1, 1991), or any
 successor regulations thereto.
 `(4) SIGNAL QUALITY-
 `(A) NONDEGRADATION; TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS- The signals of local
 commercial television stations that a cable operator carries shall be
 carried without material degradation. The Commission shall adopt carriage
 standards to ensure that, to the extent technically feasible, the quality of
 signal processing and carriage provided by a cable system for the carriage
 of local commercial television stations will be no less than that provided
 by the system for carriage of any other type of signal.
 `(B) ADVANCED TELEVISION- At such time as the Commission prescribes
 modifications of the standards for television broadcast signals, the
 Commission shall initiate a proceeding to establish any changes in the
 signal carriage requirements of cable television systems necessary to ensure
 cable carriage of such broadcast signals of local commercial television
 stations which have been changed to conform with such modified standards.
 `(5) DUPLICATION NOT REQUIRED- Notwithstanding paragraph (1), a cable
 operator shall not be required to carry the signal of any local commercial
 television station that substantially duplicates the signal of another local
 commercial television station which is carried on its cable system, or to
 carry the signals of more than one local commercial television station
 affiliated with a particular broadcast network (as such term is defined
 by regulation). If a cable operator elects to carry on its cable system a
 signal which substantially duplicates the signal of another local commercial
 television station carried on the cable system, or to carry on its system
 the signals of more than one local commercial television station affiliated
 with a particular broadcast network, all such signals shall be counted toward
 the number of signals the operator is required to carry under paragraph (1).
 `(6) CHANNEL POSITIONING- Each signal carried in fulfillment of the
 carriage obligations of a cable operator under this section shall be
 carried on the cable system channel number on which the local commercial
 television station is broadcast over the air, or on the channel on which
 it was carried on July 19, 1985, at the election of the station, or on
 such other channel number as is mutually agreed upon by the station and the
 cable operator. Any dispute regarding the positioning of a local commercial
 television station shall be resolved by the Commission.
 `(7) SIGNAL AVAILABILITY- Signals carried in fulfillment of the
 requirements of this section shall be provided to every subscriber of a
 cable system. Such signals shall be viewable via cable on all television
 receivers of a subscriber which are connected to a cable system by a
 cable operator or for which a cable operator provides a connection. If
 a cable operator authorizes subscribers to install additional receiver
 connections, but does not provide the subscriber with such connections,
 or with the equipment and materials for such connections, the operator
 shall notify such subscribers of all broadcast stations carried on the
 cable system which cannot be viewed via cable without a converter box and
 shall offer to sell or lease such a converter box to such subscribers at
 rates in accordance with section 623(b)(1)(B).
 `(8) IDENTIFICATION OF SIGNALS CARRIED- A cable operator shall identify,
 upon request by any person, the signals carried on its system in fulfillment
 of the requirements of this section.
 `(9) NOTIFICATION- A cable operator shall provide written notice to a local
 commercial television station at least 30 days prior to either deleting
 from carriage or repositioning that station. No deletion or repositioning
 of a local commercial television station shall occur during a period in
 which major television ratings services measure the size of audiences of
 local television stations. The notifications provisions of this paragraph
 shall not be used to undermine or evade the channel positioning or carriage
 requirements imposed upon cable operators under this section.
 `(10) COMPENSATION FOR CARRIAGE- A cable operator shall not accept or
 request monetary payment or other valuable consideration in exchange either
 for carriage of local commercial television stations in fulfillment of
 the requirements of this section or for the channel positioning rights
 provided to such stations under this section, except that--
 `(A) any such station may be required to bear the costs associated with
 delivering a good quality signal to the headend of the cable system;
 `(B) a cable operator may accept payments from stations which would be
 considered distant signals under section 111 of title 17, United States Code,
 as reimbursement for the incremental copyright costs assessed against such
 cable operator for carriage of such signal; and
 `(C) a cable operator may continue to accept monetary payment or other
 valuable consideration in exchange for carriage or channel positioning of
 the signal of any local commercial television station carried in fulfillment
 of the requirements of this section, through, but not beyond, the date of
 expiration of an agreement thereon between a cable operator and a local
 commercial television station entered into prior to June 26, 1990.
 `(c) REMEDIES-
 `(1) COMPLAINTS BY BROADCAST STATIONS- Whenever a local commercial television
 station believes that a cable operator has failed to meet its obligations
 under this section, such station shall notify the operator, in writing, of
 the alleged failure and identify its reasons for believing that the cable
 operator is obligated to carry the signal of such station or has otherwise
 failed to comply with the channel positioning or repositioning or other
 requirements of this section. The cable operator shall, within 30 days
 of such written notification, respond in writing to such notification and
 either commence to carry the signal of such station in accordance with the
 terms requested or state its reasons for believing that it is not obligated
 to carry such signal or is in compliance with the channel positioning and
 repositioning requirements of this section. A local commercial television
 station that is denied carriage or channel positioning or repositioning
 in accordance with this section by a cable operator may obtain review
 of such denial by filing a complaint with the Commission. Such complaint
 shall allege the manner in which such cable operator has failed to meet
 its obligations and the basis for such allegations.
 `(2) OPPORTUNITY TO RESPOND- The Commission shall afford such cable operator
 an opportunity to present data and arguments to establish that there has
 been no failure to meet its obligations under this section.
 `(3) REMEDIAL ACTIONS; DISMISSAL- Within 120 days after the date a complaint
 is filed, the Commission shall determine whether the cable operator has
 met its obligations under this section. If the Commission determines that
 the cable operator has failed to meet such obligations, the Commission
 shall order the cable operator to reposition the complaining station or,
 in the case of an obligation to carry a station, to commence carriage of
 the station and to continue such carriage for at least 12 months. If the
 Commission determines that the cable operator has fully met the requirements
 of this section, it shall dismiss the complaint.
 `(d) INPUT SELECTOR SWITCH RULES ABOLISHED- No cable operator shall be
 required--
 `(1) to provide or make available any input selector switch as defined in
 section 76.5(mm) of title 47, Code of Federal Regulations, or any comparable
 device, or
 `(2) to provide information to subscribers about input selector switches
 or comparable devices.
 `(e) REGULATIONS BY COMMISSION- Within 180 days after the date of enactment
 of this section, the Commission shall, following a rulemaking proceeding,
 issue regulations implementing the requirements imposed by this section.
 `(f) SALES PRESENTATIONS AND PROGRAM LENGTH COMMERCIALS- Nothing in this
 Act shall require a cable operator to carry on any tier, or prohibit a cable
 operator from carrying on any tier, the signal of any commercial television
 station or video programming service that is predominantly utilized for
 the transmission of sales presentations or program length commercials.
 `(g) DEFINITION- (1) For purposes of this section, the term `local commercial
 television station' means any television broadcast station, determined
 by the Commission to be a commercial station, licensed and operating on
 a channel regularly assigned to its community by the Commission that,
 with respect to a particular cable system, is within the same television
 market as the cable system. If such a television broadcast station--
 `(A) would be considered a distant signal under section 111 of title 17,
 United States Code, it shall be deemed to be a local commercial television
 station upon agreement to reimburse the cable operator for the incremental
 copyright costs assessed against such operator as a result of being carried
 on the cable system; or
 `(B) does not deliver to the principal headend of a cable system either
 a signal level of -45dBm for UHF signals or -49dBm for VHF signals at the
 input terminals of the signal processing equipment, it shall be responsible
 for the costs of delivering to the cable system a signal of good quality
 or a baseband video signal.
 `(2) The term `local commercial television station' shall not include low
 power television stations, television translator stations, and passive
 repeaters which operate pursuant to part 74 of title 47, Code of Federal
 Regulations, or any successor regulations thereto.
 `(3) For purposes of this section, a broadcasting station's market shall
 be defined as specified in section 73.3555 of title 47, Code of Federal
 Regulations as in effect on May 1, 1991, except that, following a written
 request, the Commission may, with respect to a particular television
 broadcast station, include or exclude communities from such station's
 television market to better effectuate the purposes of this section.'.
SEC. 7. CARRIAGE OF NONCOMMERCIAL STATIONS.
 Part II of title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 531
 et seq.) is further amended by inserting after section 614, as added by
 section 4, the following new section:
`SEC. 615. CARRIAGE OF NONCOMMERCIAL EDUCATIONAL TELEVISION
 `(a) CARRIAGE OBLIGATIONS- In addition to the carriage requirements set
 forth in section 614, each cable operator of a cable system shall carry
 the signals of qualified noncommercial educational television stations in
 accordance with the provisions of this section.
 `(b) REQUIREMENTS TO CARRY QUALIFIED STATIONS-
 `(1) GENERAL REQUIREMENT TO CARRY EACH QUALIFIED STATION- Subject to
 paragraphs (2) and (3) and subsection (e), each cable operator shall carry,
 on the cable system of that cable operator, qualified local noncommercial
 educational television station requesting carriage.
 `(2)(A) SYSTEMS WITH 12 OR FEWER CHANNELS- Notwithstanding paragraph (1), a
 cable operator of a cable system with 12 or fewer usable activated channels
 shall be required to carry the signal of one qualified local noncommercial
 educational television station; except that a cable operator of such a
 system shall comply with subsection (c) and may, in its discretion, carry
 the signals of other qualified noncommercial educational television stations.
 `(B) In the case of a cable system described in subparagraph (A) which
 operates beyond the presence of any qualified local noncommercial educational
 television station--
 `(i) the cable operator shall carry on that system the signal of one
 qualified noncommercial educational television station;
 `(ii) the selection for carriage of such a signal shall be at the election
 of the cable operator; and
 `(iii) in order to satisfy the requirements for carriage specified in
 this subsection, the cable operator of the system shall not be required
 to remove any other programming service actually provided to subscribers
 on March 29, 1990; except that such cable operator shall use the first
 channel available to satisfy the requirements of this subparagraph.
 `(3) SYSTEMS WITH 13 TO 36 CHANNELS- (A) Subject to subsection (c),
 a cable operator of a cable system with 13 to 36 usable activated channels--
 `(i) shall carry the signal of at least one qualified local noncommercial
 educational television station but shall not be required to carry the
 signals of more than three such stations, and
 `(ii) may, in its discretion, carry additional such stations.
 `(B) In the case of a cable system described in this paragraph which
 operates beyond the presence of any qualified local noncommercial educational
 television station, the cable operator shall import the signal of at least
 one qualified noncommercial educational television station to comply with
 subparagraph (A)(i).
 `(C) The cable operator of a cable system described in this paragraph which
 carries the signal of a qualified local noncommercial educational station
 affiliated with a State public television network shall not be required to
 carry the signal of any additional qualified local noncommercial educational
 television stations affiliated with the same network if the programming of
 such additional stations is substantially duplicated by the programming of
 the qualified local noncommercial educational television station receiving
 carriage.
 `(D) A cable operator of a system described in subparagraph (A) which
 increases the usable activated channel capacity of the system to more
 than 36 channels on or after March 29, 1990, shall, in accordance with
 the other provisions of this section, carry the signal of each qualified
 local noncommercial educational television station requesting carriage,
 subject to subsection (e).
 `(c) CONTINUED CARRIAGE OF EXISTING STATIONS- Notwithstanding any other
 provision of this section, all cable operators shall continue to provide
 carriage to all qualified local noncommercial educational television
 stations whose signals were carried on their systems as of March 29,
 1990. The requirements of this subsection may be waived with respect to a
 particular cable operator and a particular such station, upon the written
 consent of the cable operator and the station.
 `(d) PLACEMENT OF ADDITIONAL SIGNALS- A cable operator required to add the
 signals of qualified local noncommercial educational television stations
 to a cable system under this section may do so, subject to approval by
 franchising authority pursuant to section 611 of this title, by placing
 such additional stations on public, educational, or governmental channels
 not in use for their designated purposes.
 `(e) SYSTEMS WITH MORE THAN 36 CHANNELS- A cable operator of a cable system
 with a capacity of more than 36 usable activated channels which is required
 to carry the signals of three qualified local noncommercial educational
 television stations shall not be required to carry the signals of additional
 such stations the programming of which substantially duplicates the
 programming broadcast by another qualified local noncommercial educational
 television station requesting carriage. Substantial duplication shall be
 defined by the Commission in a manner that promotes access to distinctive
 noncommercial educational television services.
 `(f) WAIVER OF NONDUPLICATION RIGHTS- A qualified local noncommercial
 educational television station whose signal is carried by a cable operator
 shall not assert any network nonduplication rights it may have pursuant
 to section 76.92 of title 47, Code of Federal Regulations, to require the
 deletion of programs aired on other qualified local noncommercial educational
 television stations whose signals are carried by that cable operator.
 `(g) CONDITIONS OF CARRIAGE-
 `(1) CONTENT TO BE CARRIED- A cable operator shall retransmit in its
 entirety the primary video, accompanying audio, and line 21 closed caption
 transmission of each qualified local noncommercial educational television
 station whose signal is carried on the cable system, and, to the extent
 technically feasible, program-related material carried in the vertical
 blanking interval, or on subcarriers, that may be necessary for receipt
 of programming by handicapped persons or for educational or language
 purposes. Retransmission of other material in the vertical blanking interval
 or on subcarriers shall be within the discretion of the cable operator.
 `(2) BAND-WIDTH AND TECHNICAL QUALITY- A cable operator shall provide each
 qualified local noncommercial educational television station whose signal
 is carried in accordance with this section with band-width and technical
 capacity equivalent to that provided to commercial television broadcast
 stations carried on the cable system and shall carry the signal of each
 qualified local noncommercial educational television station without
 material degradation.
 `(3) CHANGES IN CARRIAGE- The signal of a qualified local noncommercial
 educational television station shall not be repositioned by a cable operator
 unless the cable operator, at least 30 days in advance of such repositioning,
 has provided written notice to the station and all subscribers of the
 cable system. For purposes of this paragraph, repositioning includes
 (A) assignment of a qualified local noncommercial educational television
 station to a cable system channel number different from the cable system
 channel number to which the station was assigned as of March 29, 1990,
 and (B) deletion of the station from the cable system.
 `(4) GOOD QUALITY SIGNAL REQUIRED- Notwithstanding the other provisions of
 this section, a cable operator shall not be required to carry the signal
 of any qualified local noncommercial educational television station which
 does not deliver to the cable system's principal headend a signal of good
 quality, as may be defined by the Commission.
 `(5) CHANNEL POSITIONING- Each signal carried in fulfillment of the
 carriage obligations of a cable operator under this section shall be
 carried on the cable system channel number on which the local commercial
 television station is broadcast over the air, or on the channel on which
 it was carried on July 19, 1985, at the election of the station, or on
 such other channel number as is mutually agreed upon by the station and the
 cable operator. Any dispute regarding the positioning of a local commercial
 television station shall be resolved by the Commission.
 `(h) AVAILABILITY OF SIGNALS- Signals carried in fulfillment of the carriage
 obligations of a cable operator under this section shall be available to
 every subscriber as part of the cable system's lowest priced service tier
 that includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.
 `(i) PAYMENT FOR CARRIAGE PROHIBITED-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A cable operator shall not accept monetary payment or
 other valuable consideration in exchange for carriage of the signal of
 any qualified local noncommercial educational television station carried
 in fulfillment of the requirements of this section, except that such a
 station may be required to bear the cost associated with delivering a good
 quality signal to the principal headend of the cable system.
 `(2) DISTANT SIGNAL EXCEPTION- Notwithstanding the provisions of this
 section, a cable operator shall not be required to add the signal of a
 qualified local noncommercial educational television station not already
 carried under the provision of subsection (c), where such signal would
 be considered a distant signal for copyright purposes unless such station
 reimburses the cable operator for the incremental copyright costs assessed
 against such cable operator as a result of such carriage.
 `(j) REMEDIES-
 `(1) COMPLAINT- Whenever a qualified local noncommercial educational
 television station believes that a cable operator of a cable system has
 failed to comply with the signal carriage requirements of this section,
 the station may file a complaint with the Commission. Such complaint shall
 allege the manner in which such cable operator has failed to comply with
 such requirements and state the basis for such allegations.
 `(2) OPPORTUNITY TO RESPOND- The Commission shall afford such cable operator
 an opportunity to present data, views, and arguments to establish that
 the cable operator has complied with the signal carriage requirements of
 this section.
 `(3) REMEDIAL ACTIONS; DISMISSAL- Within 120 days after the date a complaint
 is filed under this subsection, the Commission shall determine whether the
 cable operator has complied with the requirements of this section. If the
 Commission determines that the cable operator has failed to comply with such
 requirements, the Commission shall state with particularity the basis for
 such findings and order the cable operator to take such remedial action
 as is necessary to meet such requirements. If the Commission determines
 that the cable operator has fully complied with such requirements, the
 Commission shall dismiss the complaint.
 `(k) IDENTIFICATION OF SIGNALS- A cable operator shall identify, upon request
 by any person, those signals carried in fulfillment of the requirements
 of this section.
 `(l) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) QUALIFIED NONCOMMERCIAL EDUCATIONAL TELEVISION STATION- The term
 `qualified noncommercial educational television station' means any television
 broadcast station which--
 `(A)(i) under the rules and regulations of the Commission in effect on March
 29, 1990, is licensed by the Commission as a noncommercial educational
 television broadcast station and which is owned and operated by a public
 agency, nonprofit foundation, corporation, or association; or
 `(ii) is owned and operated by a municipality and transmits only
 noncommercial programs for educational purposes; and
 `(B) has as its licensee an entity which is eligible to receive a community
 service grant, or any successor grant thereto, from the Corporation for
 Public Broadcasting, or any successor organization thereto, on the basis
 of the formula set forth in section 396(k)(6)(B) (47 U.S.C. 396(k)(6)(B)).
Such term includes (I) the translator of any noncommercial educational
television station with five watts or higher power serving the franchise area,
(II) a full-service station or translator if such station or translator is
licensed to a channel reserved for noncommercial educational use pursuant to
section 73.606 of title 47, Code of Federal Regulations, or any successor
regulations thereto, and (III) such stations and translators operating
on channels not so reserved as the Commission determines are qualified as
noncommercial educational stations.
 `(2) QUALIFIED LOCAL NONCOMMERCIAL EDUCATIONAL TELEVISION STATION- The
 term `qualified local noncommercial educational television station' means
 a qualified noncommercial educational television station--
 `(A) which is licensed to a principal community whose reference point,
 as defined in section 76.53 of title 47, Code of Federal Regulations
 (as in effect on March 29, 1990), or any successor regulations thereto,
 is within 50 miles of the principal headend of the cable system; or
 `(B) whose Grade B service contour, as defined in section 73.683(a) of
 such title (as in effect on March 29, 1990), or any successor regulations
 thereto, encompasses the principal headend of the cable system.'.
SEC. 8. CONSUMER PROTECTION AND CUSTOMER SERVICE.
 Section 632 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 552) is amended
 to read as follows:
`SEC. 632. CONSUMER PROTECTION AND CUSTOMER SERVICE
 `(a) FRANCHISING AUTHORITY ENFORCEMENT- A franchising authority may enforce--
 `(1) customer service requirements of the cable operator; and
 `(2) construction schedules and other construction-related requirements,
 including construction-related performance requirements, of the cable
 operator.
 `(b) COMMISSION STANDARDS- The Commission shall, within 180 days of
 enactment of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act
 of 1992, establish standards by which cable operators may fulfill their
 customer service requirements. Such standards shall include, at a minimum,
 requirements governing--
 `(1) cable system office hours and telephone availability;
 `(2) installations, outages, and service calls; and
 `(3) communications between the cable operator and the subscriber (including
 standards governing bills and refunds).
 `(c) AVAILABILITY OF TECHNOLOGY; PROCEEDING REQUIRED- The Federal
 Communications Commission shall--
 `(1) within 180 days after the date of enactment of the Cable Television
 Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, initiate a proceeding--
 `(A) to develop equipment standards necessary to permit the commercial
 availability, from cable operators and retail vendors that are not
 affiliated with cable systems, of remote control units compatible with
 cable systems; and
 `(B) to determine the feasibility of including converter and addressability
 technology for cable systems and other multichannel video systems in
 television receivers shipped in interstate commerce or imported from any
 foreign country into the United States for sale or resale to the public,
 taking into account (i) the impact on domestic manufacturers of including
 such technology in such television receivers, and (ii) the need for cable
 operators and other multichannel video programming distributors to protect
 their signals against unauthorized reception; and
 `(2) prescribe any standards determined to be necessary under paragraph
 (1)(B).
 `(d) CONSUMER PROTECTION LAWS AND CUSTOMER SERVICE AGREEMENTS-
 `(1) CONSUMER PROTECTION LAWS- Nothing in this title shall be construed to
 prohibit any State or any franchising authority from enacting or enforcing
 any consumer protection law, to the extent not specifically preempted by
 this title.
 `(2) CUSTOMER SERVICE REQUIREMENT AGREEMENTS- Nothing in this section
 shall be construed to preclude a franchising authority and a cable
 operator from agreeing to customer service requirements that exceed the
 standards established by the Commission under subsection (b). Nothing in
 this title shall be construed to prevent the enforcement of any municipal
 law or regulation, or any State law, concerning customer service that
 imposes customer service requirements that exceed the standards set by the
 Commission under this section, or that addresses matters not addressed by
 the standards set by the Commission under this section.'.
SEC. 9. CONSUMER ELECTRONICS EQUIPMENT COMPATIBILITY.
 The Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 151 et seq.) is amended by adding
 after section 624 the following new section:
SEC. 624A. CONSUMER ELECTRONICS EQUIPMENT COMPATIBILITY.
 `(a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 `(1) new and recent models of television receivers and video cassette
 recorders often contain premium features and functions that are disabled or
 inhibited because of cable scrambling, encoding, or encryption technologies
 and devices, including converter boxes and remote control devices required
 by cable operators to receive programming;
 `(2) if these problems are allowed to persist, consumers will be less
 likely to purchase, and electronics equipment manufacturers will be less
 likely to develop, manufacture, or offer for sale, television receivers and
 video cassette recorders with new and innovative features and functions; and
 `(3) cable system operators should use technologies that will prevent
 signal thefts while permitting consumers to benefit from premium features
 and functions in such receivers and recorders.
 `(b) RULEMAKING REQUIRED- Within 270 days after the date of enactment of this
 section, the Commission shall prescribe such regulations as are necessary--
 `(1) to ensure that the signals a cable system transmits to subscribers
 are compatible with all operational functions of cable-ready television
 receivers and video cassette recorders, taking into account the need for
 cable operators to protect their signals against unauthorized reception;
 `(2) to prohibit cable operators from scrambling or otherwise encrypting
 any video programming in any manner that interferes with or nullifies the
 special functions of subscribers' televisions or video cassette recorders,
 including functions that permit the subscriber--
 `(A) to watch a program on one channel while simultaneously using a video
 cassette recorder to tape a different program on another channel;
 `(B) to use a video cassette recorder to tape two consecutive programs
 that appear on different channels; or
 `(C) to use advanced television picture generation and display feature;
 `(3) to promote the commercial availability, from cable operators and
 retail vendors that are not affiliated with cable systems, of converters
 and of remote control devices compatible with converters;
 `(4) to require a cable operator who offers subscribers the option of
 renting a remote control unit--
 `(A) to notify subscribers that they may purchase a commercially available
 remote control device from any source that sells such devices rather than
 renting it from the cable operator; and
 `(B) to specify the types of remote control units that are compatible with
 the converter box supplied by the cable operator; and
 `(5) to prohibit a cable operator from taking any action that prevents or
 in any way disables the converter box supplied by the cable operator from
 operating compatibly with commercially available remote control units.
 `(c) EXCEPTION- The regulations required by subsection (b)(1) may, if
 necessary to protect against the theft of cable service, permit a cable
 operator to scramble or otherwise encrypt video programming in accordance
 with such standards as the Commission shall prescribe consistent with the
 findings contained in subsection (a) of this section.
 `(d) REVIEW OF REGULATIONS- The Commission shall periodically review and,
 if necessary, modify the regulations issued pursuant to this section
 in light of any actions taken in response to regulations issued under
 subsection (e) and to reflect improvements and changes in cable systems,
 television receivers, video cassette recorders, and similar technology.
 `(e) COMPATIBLE INTERFACES- Within one year after the date of enactment
 of this section, the Commission, in consultation with representatives of
 the cable industry and the consumer electronics industry, shall report
 to the Congress on means of assuring compatibility between televisions
 and video cassette recorders and cable systems, consistent with the need
 to prevent theft of cable service, so that cable subscribers will be
 able to enjoy the full benefit of both the programming available on cable
 systems and the functions available on their televisions and video cassette
 recorders. Within 2 years after the date of enactment of this section,
 the Commission shall issue regulations as may be necessary to require the
 use of interfaces that assure such compatibility.
 `(f) FEASIBILITY AND COST- The Commission shall adopt standards under this
 section that are technologically and economically feasible. In determining
 the feasibility of such standards, the Commission shall take into account
 the cost and benefit to cable subscribers of such standards.'.
SEC. 10. TECHNICAL STANDARDS; EMERGENCY ANNOUNCEMENTS.
 (a) TECHNICAL STANDARDS- Section 624(e) of the Communications Act of 1934
 (47 U.S.C. 544(e)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(e) Within one year after the date of enactment of the Cable Television
 Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Commission shall
 prescribe regulations which establish minimum technical standards relating
 to cable systems' technical operation and signal quality. The Commission
 periodically shall update such standards to reflect improvements in
 technology. A franchising authority may require as part of a franchise
 (including a modification, renewal, or transfer thereof) provisions for
 the enforcement of the standards prescribed under this subsection. A
 franchising authority may apply to the Commission for a waiver to impose
 standards that are more stringent than the standards prescribed by the
 Commission under this subsection.'.
 (b) EMERGENCY ANNOUNCEMENTS- Section 624 of such Act is further amended
 by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(g) Notwithstanding any such rule, regulation, or order, each cable operator
 shall comply with such standards as the Commission shall prescribe to ensure
 that viewers of video programming on cable systems are afforded the same
 emergency information as is afforded by the emergency broadcasting system
 pursuant to Commission regulations in subpart G of part 73, title 47,
 Code of Federal Regulations.'.
SEC. 11. COMPETITION, TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT AND MARKETING OF CERTAIN
SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS.
 (a) PROHIBITION ON UNREASONABLE REFUSAL TO DEAL AND DISCRIMINATION IN PRICE,
 TERMS, AND CONDITIONS- Title VII of the Communications Act of 1934 is amended
 by inserting after section 705 (47 U.S.C. 605) the following new section:
`SEC. 705A. UNREASONABLE REFUSALS TO DEAL AND PRICE DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.
 `(a) PROHIBITION- (1) A video programming vendor in which a cable operator
 has an attributable interest and that engages in the national or regional
 distribution of satellite cable programming--
 `(A) shall not unreasonably refuse to deal with any multichannel video
 programming distributor for such programming; and
 `(B) shall not discriminate in the price, terms, and conditions in the
 sale or delivery of such programming among or between cable systems, cable
 operators, or their agents or buying groups, or other multichannel video
 programming distributors; except that such a video programming vendor
 shall not be prohibited from--
 `(i) imposing reasonable requirements for creditworthiness, offering of
 service, and financial stability and standards regarding character and
 technical quality;
 `(ii) establishing different price, terms, and conditions to take into
 account actual and reasonable differences in the cost of creation, sale,
 delivery, or transmission of video programming; and
 `(iii) establishing different price, terms and conditions which take into
 account reasonable volume discounts based on the number of subscribers
 served by the distributor.
 `(2) Nothing in this subsection shall require any person who is engaged
 in the national or regional distribution of video programming to make such
 programming available in any geographic area beyond which such programming
 has been authorized or licensed for distribution. Nothing in this subsection
 shall apply to the signal of any affiliate of a national television network
 or other television broadcast signal that is retransmitted by satellite,
 and shall not apply to any internal satellite communication of any broadcast
 network, or cable network.
 `(3) An exclusive contract for satellite cable programming shall be
 considered to be an unreasonable refusal to deal if the effect of such
 contract is to deny access to such programming to distributors seeking
 to provide such programming to persons in rural areas not served by a
 cable operator.
 `(b) NONDISCRIMINATION WITH RESPECT TO SATELLITE CARRIERS- A fixed service
 satellite carrier that provides or has provided service pursuant to section
 119 of title 17, United States Code--
 `(1) shall not unreasonably refuse to deal with any distributor of video
 programming in the provision of such service to home satellite earth
 stations qualified to receive such service under section 119 of title 17,
 United States Code; and
 `(2) shall not discriminate in the price, terms, and conditions of the
 sale of such service among distributors to home satellite earth stations
 qualified to receive such signals under section 119 of title 17, United
 States Code, or between such distributors and other multichannel video
 programming distributors; except that such a satellite carrier shall not
 be prohibited from--
 `(A) imposing reasonable requirements for creditworthiness, offering of
 service, and financial stability and standards regarding character and
 technical quality;
 `(B) establishing different price, terms, and conditions to take into
 account actual and reasonable differences in the cost of creation, sale,
 delivery, or transmission of video programming; and
 `(C) establishing different price, terms and conditions which take into
 account reasonable volume discounts based on the number of subscribers
 served by the carrier.
 `(c) REMEDIES FOR VIOLATION- Any multichannel video programming distributor
 aggrieved by conduct that it alleges constitutes a violation of this section
 may commence an adjudicatory proceeding at the Commission. Upon completion
 of such proceeding, the Commission shall have the power to order appropriate
 remedies, including, if necessary, the power to establish price, terms,
 and conditions of sale of programming to the aggrieved multichannel video
 programming distributor.
 `(d) PROCEDURES- The Commission shall, within 180 days of the date
 of enactment of this section, prescribe regulations to implement this
 section. The Commission's regulations shall--
 `(1) provide for an expedited review of any complaints made pursuant to
 this section;
 `(2) establish procedures for the Commission to collect such data as the
 Commission requires to carry out this section; and
 `(3) provide for penalties to be assessed against any person filing a
 frivolous complaint pursuant to this section.
 `(e) REPORTS- The Commission shall, beginning not later than 18 months after
 promulgation of the regulations required by subsection (c), annually report
 to Congress on the status of competition in the market for the delivery
 of video programming.
 `(f) EXEMPTIONS FOR PRIOR CONTRACTS- Nothing in this section shall affect any
 contract that grants exclusive distribution rights to any person with respect
 to video programming and that was entered into on or before June 1, 1990.
 `(g) DEFINITIONS-
 `(1) The term `video programming vendor' means a person engaged in the
 production, creation, or wholesale distribution of a video programming
 service for sale.
 `(2) The terms `cable system', `multichannel video programming distributor',
 and `video programming' have the meanings provided under section 602 of
 this Act.
 `(3) The term `satellite cable programming' has the meaning provided under
 section 705 of this Act.'.
 (b) REGULATION OF CARRIAGE AGREEMENTS- Part II of title VI of the
 Communications Act of 1934 is amended by inserting after section 613 the
 following new section:
`SEC. 616. REGULATION OF CARRIAGE AGREEMENTS.
 `(a) REGULATIONS- Within one year after the date of enactment of this
 section, the Commission shall establish regulations governing program
 carriage agreements and related practices between cable operators or
 other multichannel video programming distributors and video programming
 vendors. Such regulations shall--
 `(1) include provisions designed to prevent a cable operator or other
 multichannel video programming distributor from requiring a financial
 interest in a program service as a condition for carriage on one or more
 of such operator's systems;
 `(2) include provisions designed to prohibit a cable operator or other
 multichannel video programming distributor from coercing a video programming
 vendor to provide, and from retaliating against such a vendor for failing
 to provide, exclusive rights against other multichannel video programming
 distributors as a condition of carriage on a system;
 `(3) contain provisions designed to prevent a multichannel video programming
 distributor from engaging in conduct the effect of which is to unreasonably
 restrain the ability of an unaffiliated video programming vendor to compete
 fairly by discriminating in video programming distribution on the basis
 of affiliation or nonaffiliation in the selection, terms, or conditions
 for carriage of video programming vendors;
 `(4) contain provisions designed to prevent a multichannel video programming
 distributor from engaging in conduct the effect of which is to obtain
 from a vendor price, terms, or conditions that prevent the vendor from
 recovering its costs if it complies with section 705A(b)(1)(B);
 `(5) provide for expedited review of any complaints made by a video
 programming vendor pursuant to this section;
 `(6) provide for appropriate penalties and remedies for violations of this
 subsection, including carriage; and
 `(7) provide penalties to be assessed against any person filing a frivolous
 complaint pursuant to this section.
 `(b) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section, the term `video programming
 vendor' has the meanings provided by section 705A(g) of this Act.'.
SEC. 12. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds and declares that--
 (1) despite the existence of regulations governing equal employment
 opportunity, females and minorities are not employed in significant numbers
 in positions of management authority in the cable television and broadcast
 industries;
 (2) increased numbers of females and minorities in positions of management
 authority in the cable television and broadcast industries advances the
 Nation's policy favoring diversity in the expression of views in the
 electronic media; and
 (3) rigorous enforcement of equal employment opportunity rules and
 regulations is required in order to effectively deter racial and gender
 discrimination.
 (b) STANDARDS- Section 634(d)(1) of the Communication Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 554(d)(1)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(d)(1) Not later than 270 days after the date of enactment of the
 Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, of this
 section, and after notice and opportunity for hearing, the Commission shall
 prescribe revisions in the rules under this section in order to implement
 the amendments made to this section by such Act. Such revisions shall
 be designed to promote equality of employment opportunities for females
 and minorities in each of the job categories itemized in paragraph (3)
 of this subsection.'.
 (c) CONTENTS OF ANNUAL STATISTICAL REPORTS- Section 634(d)(3) of the
 Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 554(d)(3)) is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(3)(A) Such rules also shall require an entity specified in subsection (a)
 with more than 5 full-time employees to file with the Commission an annual
 statistical report identifying by race, sex, and job title the number of
 employees in each of the following full-time and part-time job categories:
 `(i) Corporate officers.
 `(ii) General Manager.
 `(iii) Chief Technician.
 `(iv) Comptroller.
 `(v) General Sales Manager.
 `(vi) Production Manager.
 `(vii) Managers.
 `(viii) Professionals.
 `(ix) Technicians.
 `(x) Sales.
 `(xi) Office and Clerical.
 `(xii) Skilled Craftspersons.
 `(xiii) Semiskilled Operatives.
 `(xiv) Unskilled Laborers.
 `(xv) Service Workers.
 `(B) The report required by subparagraph (A) shall be made on separate
 forms, provided by the Commission, for full-time and part-time employees. The
 Commission's rules shall sufficiently define job categories (i) through (vi)
 of such subparagraph so as to ensure that only employees who are principal
 decisionmakers and that have supervisory authority are reported for such
 categories. The Commission shall adopt rules that define job categories
 (vii) through (xv) in a manner that is consistent with the Commission
 policies in effect on June 1, 1990. The Commission shall prescribe the
 method by which entities shall be required to compute and report the number
 of minorities and women in job categories (i) through (x) and the number
 of minorities and women in job categories (i) through (xv) in proportion
 to the total number of qualified minorities and women in the relevant
 labor market. The report shall include information on hiring, promotion,
 and recruitment practices necessary for the Commission to evaluate the
 efforts of entities to comply with the provisions of paragraph (2) of this
 subsection. The report shall be available for public inspection at the
 entity's central location and at every location where 5 or more full-time
 employees are regularly assigned to work. Nothing in this subsection shall
 be construed as prohibiting the Commission from collecting or continuing
 to collect statistical or other employment information in a manner that
 it deems appropriate to carry out this section.'.
 (d) PENALTIES- Section 634(f)(2) of such Act is amended by striking `$200'
 and inserting `$500'.
 (e) APPLICATION OF REQUIREMENTS- Section 634(h)(1) of such Act is further
 amended by inserting before the period the following: `and any multichannel
 video programming distributor'.
 (f) STUDY AND REPORT REQUIRED- Not later than 240 days after the date of
 enactment of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act
 of 1992, the Commission shall submit to the Congress a report pursuant to a
 proceeding to review and obtain public comment on the effect and operation
 of its procedures, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines
 concerning equal employment opportunity in the broadcasting industry. In
 conducting such review, the Commission shall consider the effectiveness
 of such procedures, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines in
 promoting equality of employment opportunity and promotion opportunity, and
 particularly the effectiveness of such procedures, regulations, policies,
 standards, and guidelines in promoting the congressional policy favoring
 increased employment opportunity for women and minorities in positions of
 management authority. In conducting such proceeding the Commission also
 shall review the effectiveness of penalties and remedies for violation
 of existing regulations and policies concerning equality of employment
 opportunity in the broadcasting industry. The Commission shall forward to
 the Congress such legislative recommendations to improve equal employment
 opportunity in the broadcasting industry as it deems necessary.
SEC. 13. HOME WIRING.
 Section 624 of the Communications Act of 1934 (17 U.S.C. 544) is amended
 by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(g) Within 120 days after the date of enactment of this subsection, the
 Commission shall prescribe rules and regulations concerning the disposition,
 after a subscriber to a cable system terminates service, of any cable
 installed by the cable operator within the premises of such subscriber.'.
SEC. 14. SALES OF CABLE SYSTEMS.
 Part II of title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 is further amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 617. SALES OF CABLE SYSTEMS.
 `(a) 3-YEAR HOLDING PERIOD REQUIRED- Except as provided in this section,
 no cable operator may sell or otherwise transfer ownership in a cable
 system within a 36-month period following either the acquisition or initial
 construction of such system by such operator.
 `(b) TREATMENT OF MULTIPLE TRANSFERS- In the case of a sale of multiple
 systems, if the terms of the sale require the buyer to subsequently transfer
 ownership of one or more such systems to one or more third parties, such
 transfers shall be considered a part of the initial transaction.
 `(c) EXCEPTIONS- Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to--
 `(1) any transfer of ownership interest in any cable system which is not
 subject to Federal income tax liability,
 `(2) any sale required by operation of any law or any act of any Federal
 agency, any State or political subdivision thereof, or any franchising
 authority, or
 `(3) any sale, assignment, or transfer, to one or more purchasers, assignees,
 or tranferees controlled by, controlling, or under common control with,
 the seller, assignor, or transferor.
 `(d) WAIVER AUTHORITY- The Commission may, consistent with the public
 interest, waive the requirement of subsection (a), except that, if
 the franchise requires franchise authority approval of a transfer, the
 Commission shall not waive such requirements unless the franchise authority
 has approved the transfer.
 `(e) LIMITATION ON DURATION OF FRANCHISING AUTHORITY POWER TO DISAPPROVE
 TRANSFERS- In the case of any sale or transfer of ownership of any cable
 system after the 36-month period following acquisition of such system, a
 franchising authority shall, if the franchise requires franchising authority
 approval of a sale or transfer, have 120 days to act upon any request for
 approval of such sale or transfer that contains or is accompanied by such
 information as is required in accordance with Commission regulations and
 by the franchising authority. If the franchising authority fails to render
 a final decision on the request within 120 days, such request shall be
 deemed granted unless the requesting party and the franchising authority
 agree to an extension of time.'.
SEC. 15. CABLE CHANNELS FOR COMMERCIAL USE.
 (a) RATES, TERMS, AND CONDITIONS- Section 612(c) of the Communications
 Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 532(c)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `consistent with the purpose of this section' in paragraph
 (1) and inserting `consistent with regulations prescribed by the Commission
 under paragraph (4)'; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(4) The Commission shall, not later than 180 days after the date of
 enactment of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act
 of 1992, by regulation establish--
 `(A) a formula to determine the maximum rates which a cable operator may
 establish under paragraph (1) of this subsection;
 `(B) standards concerning the terms and conditions which may be so
 established;
 `(C) standards concerning methods for collection and billing for commercial
 use of channel capacity made available under this section; and
 `(D) procedures for the expedited resolution of disputes concerning rates
 or carriage under this section.'.
 (b) ACCESS FOR MINORITY PROGRAMMING SOURCES- Section 612 of such Act is
 further amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(i)(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (b) and (c), a
 cable operator required by this section to designate channel capacity
 for commercial use may use any such channel capacity for the provision of
 programming from a qualified minority programming source, whether or not
 such source is affiliated with the cable operator. The channel capacity
 used to provide programming from a qualified minority programming source
 pursuant to this subsection may not exceed 33 percent of the channel
 capacity designated pursuant to this section. No programming provided
 over a cable system on July 1, 1990, may qualify as minority programming
 on that cable system under this subsection.
 `(2) For purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified minority
 programming source' means a programming source which devotes significantly
 all of its programming to coverage of minority viewpoints, or to
 programming directed at members of minority groups, and which is over
 50 percent minority-owned, as the term `minority' is defined in section
 309(i)(3)(C)(ii) of this Act.'.
SEC. 16. CABLE FOREIGN OWNERSHIP RESTRICTIONS.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) restrictions on alien or foreign ownership of broadcasting and common
 carriers first were enacted by Congress in the Radio Act of 1912;
 (2) cable television service currently is available to more than 80 percent
 of American households, more than 62 percent of American households subscribe
 to such services, and the majority of viewers rely on cable as the conduit
 through which they receive terrestrial broadcast signals;
 (3) many Americans receive a significant portion of their daily news,
 information, and entertainment programming from cable television systems,
 and such systems should not be controlled by foreign entities; and
 (4) the policy justifications underlying restrictions on alien ownership
 of broadcast or common carrier licenses have equal application to alien
 ownership of cable television systems, direct broadcast satellite systems,
 and multipoint distribution services.
 (b) AMENDMENT TO COMMUNICATIONS ACT- Section 310(b) of the Communications
 Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 310(b)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (1) through (4) as subparagraphs (A)
 through (D);
 (2) by inserting `(1)' after `(b)'; and
 (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraphs:
 `(2)(A) No cable system (as such term is defined in section 602) in
 the United States shall be owned or otherwise controlled by any alien,
 representative, or corporation described in subparagraph (A), (B), (C),
 or (D) of paragraph (1) of this subsection.
 `(B) Subparagraph (A) of this paragraph shall not be applied--
 `(i) to require any such alien, representative, or corporation to sell or
 dispose of any ownership interest held or contracted for on or before June
 1, 1990, or acquired in accordance with clause (ii); or
 `(ii) to prohibit any such alien, representative, or corporation that
 owns, has contracted on or before June 1, 1990, to acquire ownership, or
 otherwise control, any cable system from acquiring ownership or control of
 additional cable systems if the total number of households passed by all
 the cable systems that such alien, representative, or corporation would,
 as a result of such acquisition, own or control does not exceed 2,000,000.
 `(3)(A) For purposes of paragraph (1) of this subsection, a license or
 authorization for any of the following services shall be deemed to be a
 broadcast station license:
 `(i) cable auxiliary relay services;
 `(ii) multipoint distribution services;
 `(iii) direct broadcast satellite services; and
 `(iv) other services the licensed facilities of which may be substantially
 devoted toward providing programming or other information services within
 the editorial control of the licensee.
 `(B) Subparagraph (A) of this paragraph shall not be applied to any cable
 operator to the extent that such operator is eligible for the exemptions
 contained in subparagraph (B) of paragraph (2).'.
SEC. 17. THEFT OF CABLE SERVICE.
 Section 633(b) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 533(b))
 is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) by striking `$25,000' and inserting `$50,000';
 (B) by striking `1 year' and inserting `2 years';
 (C) by striking `$50,000' and inserting `$100,000'; and
 (D) by striking `2 years' and inserting `5 years'; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(3) For purposes of all penalties and remedies established for violations
 of subsection (a)(1), the prohibited activity established herein as it
 applies to each such device shall be deemed a separate violation.'.
SEC. 18. STUDIES.
 (a) STUDY OF VIDEO PROGRAMMING DIVERSITY AND COMPETITION-
 (1) COMMISSION STUDY AND RULEMAKING- The Commission shall conduct a
 rulemaking proceeding to review and study to determine whether it is
 necessary or appropriate in the public interest to prohibit or constrain acts
 and practices that may unreasonably restrict diversity and competition in the
 market for video programming. In conducting such proceeding, the Commission--
 (A) shall consider the necessity and appropriateness of imposing limitations
 on the degree to which multichannel video programming distributors may
 engage in the creation or production of such programming; and
 (B) shall impose limitations on the proportion of the market, at any stage
 in the distribution of video programming, which may be controlled by any
 multichannel video programming distributor or other person engaged in
 such distribution.
 (2) REPORT- Within one year after the date of enactment of this Act,
 the Commission shall submit a report on the review and study required
 by paragraph (1) to the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of
 Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
 of the Senate. Thereafter, the Commission shall continue to monitor (and
 summarize in the Commission's annual reports) the status of diversity and
 competition in the marketplace for video programming.
 (3) PROCEEDING REQUIRED TO REVIEW DBS RESPONSIBILITIES- The Federal
 Communications Commission shall, within 180 days after the date of enactment
 of this Act, initiate a rulemaking proceeding to impose, with respect to
 any direct broadcast satellite system that is not regulated as a common
 carrier under title II of the Communications Act of 1934, public interest
 or other requirements on direct broadcast satellite systems providing video
 programming. Any regulations prescribed pursuant to such rulemaking shall,
 at a minimum, apply the access to broadcast time requirement of section
 312(a)(7) of the Communications Act of 1934 and the use of facilities
 requirements of section 315 of such Act to direct broadcast satellite
 systems providing video programming. Such proceeding also shall examine
 the opportunities that the establishment of such systems provide for
 the principle of localism under such Act, and the methods by which such
 principle may be served through technological and other developments in,
 or regulation of, such systems.
 (4) PUBLIC SERVICE USE REQUIREMENTS- (A) The Federal Communications
 Commission shall require, as a condition of any initial authorization,
 or renewal thereof, for a direct broadcast satellite service providing
 video programming, that the provider of such service reserve not less than
 4 percent or more than 7 percent of the channel capacity of such service
 exclusively for noncommercial public service uses. A provider of such
 service may use any unused channel capacity designated pursuant to this
 paragraph until the use of such channel capacity is obtained, pursuant to
 a written agreement, for public service use. As used in this paragraph,
 the term `public service uses' includes--
 (i) programming produced by public telecommunications entities, including
 programming furnished to such entities by independent production services;
 (ii) programming produced by public or private educational institutions
 or entities for educational, instructional, or cultural purposes; and
 (iii) programming produced by any entity to serve the disparate needs of
 specific communities of interest, including linguistically distinct groups,
 minority and ethnic groups, and other groups.
 (B) There is established a study panel which shall be comprised of a
 representative of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, the National
 Telecommunications and Information Administration, and the Office of
 Technology Assessment selected by the head of each such entity. Such study
 panel shall within 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, submit
 a report to the Congress containing recommendations on--
 (i) methods and strategies for promoting the development of programming for
 transmission over the public use channels reserved pursuant to subparagraph
 (A);
 (ii) methods and criteria for selecting programming for such channels that
 avoids conflicts of interest and the exercise of editorial control by the
 direct broadcast satellite service provider; and
 (iii) identifying existing and potential sources of funding for
 administrative and production costs for such public use programming.
 (5) DEFINITION- As used herein, the term `direct broadcast satellite
 systems' includes (A) satellite systems licensed under Part 100 of the
 Federal Communications Commission's rules, and (B) high power Ku-band fixed
 service satellite systems providing video service directly to the home
 and licensed under Part 25 of the Federal Communications Commission's rules.
 (b) PROCEEDING WITH RESPECT TO AREAS RECEIVING POOR OVER-THE-AIR SIGNALS- The
 Federal Communications Commission shall initiate an inquiry and rulemaking
 to examine the feasibility of providing access to network and independent
 broadcasting station signals to persons who subscribe to direct broadcast
 satellite service and are unable to receive such signals (of grade B quality)
 over the air from a local licensee, or from a cable system. In undertaking
 such rulemaking, the Commission shall take into consideration pertinent
 economic and technological factors, including the following:
 (1) the extent to which individuals in rural, underserved areas are unable
 to receive broadcast television transmission; and
 (2) potential ways in which operators of satellite-delivered programming
 services or the manufacturers or distributors of receiving equipment might
 enhance the ability of such persons to receive and readily access additional
 video distribution, including without limitation, an electronic switching
 capability as a minimum feature on satellite television receiving equipment.
SEC. 19. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 Except where otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this Act and
 the amendments made thereby shall take effect 60 days after the enactment
 of this Act.