S 835 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 835
To amend title IV of the Social Security Act to establish AFDC minimum
payment standards.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
April 17 (legislative day, APRIL 9), 1991
Mr. MOYNIHAN introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Finance
A BILL
To amend title IV of the Social Security Act to establish AFDC minimum
payment standards.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Minimum Benefit for Families Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. AFDC MINIMUM PAYMENT STANDARDS.
 (a) STATE PLAN REQUIREMENT- (1) Section 402(a) of the Social Security Act
 (42 U.S.C. 602(a)) is amended--
 (A) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (44);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (45) and inserting `;
 and'; and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (45) and before the matter following such
 paragraph the following new paragraph:
 `(46) provide for payment standards under the plan that meet the requirements
 of section 411.'.
 (2) Part A of title IV of such Act is amended by inserting after section
 410 the following new section:
`MINIMUM PAYMENT STANDARDS
 `SEC. 411. (a)(1) In order to be approved under section 402, subject
 to paragraph (2), a State plan shall provide that the payment standard
 in effect under the plan for a family of a given size is such that the
 amount of aid payable under the plan to a family of such size with no
 income other than income under this part (and reducing such income only by
 the applicable standard deduction as specified in section 5(e) of the Food
 Stamp Act of 1977), when added to the value of any food stamp allotment to
 which such family or the household of such family is entitled, equals or
 exceeds an amount equal to 50 percent of the income official poverty line
 established by the Office of Management and Budget (and revised annually
 in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
 Act of 1981) applicable to a family of the size involved.
 `(2) For the purposes of paragraph (1)--
 `(A) the total value of any food stamp allotment in the case of any family
 shall be considered to be the total value of the allotment which such family
 would receive if it were considered a household with no income (except
 under this part) for purposes of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (whether it
 is actually living alone or with one or more other persons or families); and
 `(B) in the case of a family which includes one or more dependent children
 but in which there is no adult whose needs are taken into account in
 determining the amount of aid payable (unless the application of this
 clause would result in a larger amount of aid for such family than the
 amount of aid which would be paid to a family of the same size and income
 which includes one or more such adults), the payment standard established
 by the State shall be such that the standard (without taking into account
 the value of any food stamp allotment) will equal an amount that is not
 less than 50 percent of the difference between the income official poverty
 line described in paragraph (1) applicable to a family with 3 members and
 the income official poverty line applicable to a family with a number of
 members equal to 3 plus the number of such dependent children.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATES- (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments
 made by this section shall become effective on October 1, 1992.
 (2) In the case of a State plan under section 402 of the Social Security Act
 which the Secretary of Health and Human Services determines requires State
 legislation (other than legislation authorizing or appropriating funds)
 in order for the plan to meet the additional requirements imposed by the
 amendments made by this section, the State plan shall not be regarded as
 failing to comply with the requirements of such title solely on the basis
 of its failure to meet these additional requirements before the first
 day of the first calendar quarter beginning after the close of the first
 regular session of the State legislature that begins after the date of the
 enactment of this Act. For purposes of the previous sentence, in the case
 of a State that has a 2-year legislative session, each year of such session
 shall be deemed to be a separate regular session of the State legislature.