[Congressional Bills 110th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]
[H.R. 620 Introduced in House (IH)]

110th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 620

 To accelerate the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in the United 
 States by establishing a market-driven system of greenhouse gas 
 tradeable allowances that will limit greenhouse gas emissions in the 
United States, reduce dependence upon foreign oil, and ensure benefits 
 to consumers from the trading in such allowances, and for other 
 purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 January 22, 2007

 Mr. Olver (for himself, Mr. Gilchrest, Mr. Inslee, Mr. Walsh of New 
 York, Mr. Cummings, Mr. Kirk, Ms. Solis, Mr. Castle, Mr. Hinchey, Mr. 
 Shays, Ms. Harman, Mr. Saxton, Mr. Dicks, Ms. McCollum of Minnesota, 
 Ms. DeGette, Mr. Thompson of California, Mr. Cardoza, and Mr. Hare) 
 introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on 
 Energy and Commerce, and in addition to the Committees on Science and 
 Technology and Natural Resources, for a period to be subsequently 
 determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such 
 provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To accelerate the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in the United 
 States by establishing a market-driven system of greenhouse gas 
 tradeable allowances that will limit greenhouse gas emissions in the 
United States, reduce dependence upon foreign oil, and ensure benefits 
 to consumers from the trading in such allowances, and for other 
 purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Climate Stewardship Act of 2007''.

SEC. 2. TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 The table of contents for this Act is as follows:

Sec. 1. Short title.
Sec. 2. Table of contents.
Sec. 3. Definitions.
 TITLE I--MARKET TO REDUCE GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS

 Subtitle A--Tracking Emissions

Sec. 101. National Greenhouse Gas Database and registry established.
Sec. 102. Inventory of greenhouse gas emissions for covered entities.
Sec. 103. Greenhouse gas reduction registration.
Sec. 104. Measurement and verification.
 Subtitle B--Mandating Emission Reductions

Sec. 121. Covered entities must submit allowances for emissions.
Sec. 122. Compliance.
Sec. 123. Exemption of source categories.
Sec. 124. Establishment of tradeable allowances.
Sec. 125. Penalties.
 Subtitle C--Controlling Compliance Costs

Sec. 141. Trading.
Sec. 142. Banking.
Sec. 143. Borrowing against future reductions.
Sec. 144. Domestic offsets.
Sec. 145. International credits plan.
 Subtitle D--Establishment and Allocation of Tradeable Allowances

Sec. 161. Determination of tradeable allowance allocations.
Sec. 162. Provision of tradeable allowances.
Sec. 163. Ensuring target adequacy.
Sec. 164. Initial allocations for early participation and accelerated 
 participation.
Sec. 165. Bonus for accelerated participation.
 TITLE II--CLIMATE CHANGE CREDIT CORPORATION

Sec. 201. Establishment.
Sec. 202. Purposes and functions.
 TITLE III--MISCELLANEOUS

Sec. 301. NOAA report on climate change effects; preparation 
 assistance.
Sec. 302. Adaptation technologies.
Sec. 303. Mitigating climate change's impacts on the poor.
Sec. 304. Wildlife conservation.

SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act:
 (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the 
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
 (2) Baseline.--The term ``baseline'' means the historic 
 greenhouse gas emission levels of an entity, as adjusted upward 
 by the Administrator to reflect actual reductions that are 
 verified in accordance with--
 (A) regulations promulgated under section 
 101(c)(1); and
 (B) relevant standards and methods developed under 
 this Act.
 (3) Carbon dioxide equivalents.--The term ``carbon dioxide 
 equivalents'' means, for each greenhouse gas, the amount of 
 each such greenhouse gas that makes the same contribution to 
 global warming as one metric ton of carbon dioxide, as 
 determined by the Administrator.
 (4) Covered sectors.--The term ``covered sectors'' means 
 the electric power, transportation, industrial, and commercial 
 sectors, as such terms are used in the Inventory.
 (5) Covered entity.--The term ``covered entity'' means an 
 entity (including a branch, department, agency, or 
 instrumentality of Federal, State, or local government) that--
 (A) owns or controls a source of greenhouse gas 
 emissions in the electric power, industrial, or 
 commercial sector of the United States economy (as 
 defined in the Inventory), refines or imports refined 
 petroleum products for use in transportation, or 
 produces or imports hydrofluorocarbons, 
 perfluorocarbons, or sulfur hexafluoride; and
 (B) emits, from any single facility owned by the 
 entity, over 10,000 metric tons of greenhouse gas per 
 year, measured in units of carbon dioxide equivalents, 
 or--
 (i) refines or imports refined petroleum 
 products that, when combusted, will emit;
 (ii) produces or imports 
 hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, or sulfur 
 hexafluoride that, when used, will emit; or
 (iii) produces or imports other greenhouse 
 gases that, when used, will emit,
 over 10,000 metric tons of greenhouse gas per year, 
 measured in units of carbon dioxide equivalents.
 (6) Database.--The term ``database'' means the National 
 Greenhouse Gas Database established under section 101.
 (7) Direct emissions.--The term ``direct emissions'' means 
 greenhouse gas emissions by an entity from a facility that is 
 owned or controlled by that entity.
 (8) Facility.--The term ``facility'' means a building, 
 structure, or installation located on any 1 or more contiguous 
 or adjacent properties of an entity in the United States.
 (9) Greenhouse gas.--The term ``greenhouse gas'' means--
 (A) carbon dioxide;
 (B) methane;
 (C) nitrous oxide;
 (D) hydrofluorocarbons;
 (E) perfluorocarbons; or
 (F) sulfur hexafluoride.
 (10) Indirect emissions.--The term ``indirect emissions'' 
 means greenhouse gas emissions that are--
 (A) a result of the activities of an entity; but
 (B) emitted from a facility owned or controlled by 
 another entity.
 (11) Inventory.--The term ``Inventory'' means the Inventory 
 of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks, prepared in 
 compliance with the United Nations Framework Convention on 
 Climate Change Decision 3/CP.5.
 (12) Leakage.--The term ``leakage'' means--
 (A) an increase in greenhouse gas emissions by one 
 facility or entity caused by a reduction in greenhouse 
 gas emissions by another facility or entity; or
 (B) a decrease in sequestration that is caused by 
 an increase in sequestration at another location.
 (13) Permanence.--The term ``permanence'' means the extent 
 to which greenhouse gases that are sequestered will not later 
 be returned to the atmosphere.
 (14) Registry.--The term ``registry'' means the registry of 
 greenhouse gas emission reductions and increases in 
 sequestration established under section 101(b)(2).
 (15) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Commerce.
 (16) Sequestration.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``sequestration'' means 
 the long-term capture, separation, isolation, or 
 removal of greenhouse gases from the atmosphere.
 (B) Inclusions.--The term ``sequestration'' 
 includes, as the Administrator determines appropriate 
 for carrying out this Act--
 (i) agricultural and conservation 
 practices;
 (ii) reforestation;
 (iii) forest preservation;
 (iv) production of cellulosic biomass 
 crops; and
 (v) any other method of long-term capture, 
 separation, isolation, or removal of greenhouse 
 gases from the atmosphere.
 (C) Exclusions.--The term ``sequestration'' does 
 not include--
 (i) any conversion of, or negative impact 
 on, a native ecosystem; or
 (ii) any introduction of non-native 
 species.
 (17) Source category.--The term ``source category'' means a 
 process or activity that leads to direct emissions of 
 greenhouse gases, as listed in the Inventory.
 (18) Stationary source.--The term ``stationary source'' 
 means any source of greenhouse gas emissions except those 
 emissions resulting directly from an engine for transportation 
 purposes.

 TITLE I--MARKET TO REDUCE GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS

 Subtitle A--Tracking Emissions

SEC. 101. NATIONAL GREENHOUSE GAS DATABASE AND REGISTRY ESTABLISHED.

 (a) Establishment.--As soon as practicable after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Administrator, in coordination with the 
Secretary, the Secretary of Energy, the Secretary of Agriculture, State 
governments, and private sector and nongovernmental organizations, 
shall establish, operate, and maintain a database, to be known as the 
``National Greenhouse Gas Database'', to collect, verify, and analyze 
data on greenhouse gas emissions by entities.
 (b) National Greenhouse Gas Database Components.--The database 
shall consist of--
 (1) an inventory of greenhouse gas emissions; and
 (2) a registry of greenhouse gas emission reductions and 
 increases in sequestrations.
 (c) Comprehensive System.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall promulgate 
 regulations to implement a comprehensive system for greenhouse 
 gas emissions reporting, inventorying, and reduction and 
 sequestration registration.
 (2) Requirements.--The Administrator shall ensure, to the 
 maximum extent practicable, that--
 (A) the comprehensive system described in paragraph 
 (1) is designed to--
 (i) maximize completeness, transparency, 
 and accuracy of data reported; and
 (ii) minimize costs incurred by entities in 
 measuring and reporting greenhouse gas 
 emissions, emission reductions, and 
 sequestrations; and
 (B) the regulations promulgated under paragraph (1) 
 establish procedures and protocols necessary--
 (i) to prevent the double-counting of 
 greenhouse gas emissions, emission reductions, 
 or sequestrations reported by more than 1 
 reporting entity;
 (ii) to provide for corrections to errors 
 in data submitted to the database;
 (iii) to provide for adjustment to data by 
 reporting entities that have had a significant 
 organizational change (including mergers, 
 acquisitions, and divestiture), in order to 
 maintain comparability among data in the 
 database over time;
 (iv) to provide for adjustments to reflect 
 new technologies or methods for measuring or 
 calculating greenhouse gas emissions, emission 
 reductions, or sequestrations;
 (v) to account for changes in registration 
 of ownership of emission reductions or 
 increases in sequestration resulting from a 
 voluntary private transaction between reporting 
 entities;
 (vi) to prevent a covered entity from 
 avoiding the requirements of this Act by 
 reorganization into multiple entities that are 
 under common control; and
 (vii) to clarify the responsibility for 
 reporting in the case of any facility owned or 
 controlled by more than 1 entity.
 (3) Serial numbers.--Through regulations promulgated under 
 paragraph (1), the Administrator shall develop and implement a 
 system that provides--
 (A) for the provision of unique serial numbers to 
 identify the registered emission reductions or 
 increases in sequestration made by an entity;
 (B) for the tracking of the registered reductions 
 or sequestrations associated with the serial numbers; 
 and
 (C) for such action as may be necessary to prevent 
 counterfeiting of the registered reductions or 
 sequestrations.

SEC. 102. INVENTORY OF GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS FOR COVERED ENTITIES.

 (a) In General.--Not later than July 1st of each calendar year 
after 2011, each covered entity shall submit to the Administrator a 
report that states, for the preceding calendar year, the entity-wide 
greenhouse gas emissions in the United States (as reported at the 
facility level), including--
 (1) the total quantity of direct emissions from stationary 
 sources, including process and fugitive emissions, expressed in 
 units of carbon dioxide equivalents, except those reported 
 under paragraph (3);
 (2) the amount of petroleum products refined or refined 
 petroleum products imported by the entity for use in 
 transportation and the amount of greenhouse gases, expressed in 
 units of carbon dioxide equivalents, that would be emitted when 
 these products are used for transportation, as determined by 
 the Administrator under section 121(b);
 (3) the amount of hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, or 
 sulfur hexafluoride, expressed in units of carbon dioxide 
 equivalents, that are produced or imported by the entity and 
 will ultimately be emitted in the United States, as determined 
 by the Administrator under section 121(d); and
 (4) such other categories of greenhouse gas emissions in 
 the United States as the Administrator determines in the 
 regulations promulgated under section 101(c)(1) may be 
 practicable and useful for the purposes of this Act, such as 
 indirect emissions.
 (b) Collection and Analysis of Data.--The Administrator shall 
collect and analyze data reported under subsection (a) for use under 
this title.

SEC. 103. GREENHOUSE GAS REDUCTION REGISTRATION.

 (a) In General.--Subject to the requirements described in 
subsection (b)--
 (1) a covered entity may register greenhouse gas emission 
 reductions and increases in sequestration achieved after 1990 
 and before 2012 under this section; and
 (2) an entity that is not a covered entity may register 
 greenhouse gas emission reductions and increases in 
 sequestration achieved at any time since 1990 under this 
 section.
 (b) Requirements.--
 (1) In general.--The requirements referred to in subsection 
 (a) are that an entity (other than an entity described in 
 paragraph (2)) shall--
 (A) establish a baseline; and
 (B) submit the report described in section 
 102(a)(1).
 (2) Requirements not applicable to entities entering into 
 certain agreements.--An entity that enters into an agreement 
 with a participant in the registry for the purpose of a carbon 
 sequestration project may register greenhouse gas emission 
 reductions or sequestrations without being required to comply 
 with the requirements specified in paragraph (1), unless that 
 entity is required to comply with those requirements by reason 
 of an activity other than the agreement.
 (c) Procedure.--
 (1) Voluntary reporting.--An entity described in subsection 
 (a) may submit to the Administrator for inclusion in the 
 registry--
 (A) before January 1, 2012, data that relates to 
 any activity that resulted in the net reduction of the 
 greenhouse gas emissions of the entity or an increase 
 in sequestration by the entity that were carried out 
 during or after 1990 and before the establishment of 
 the database; and
 (B) with respect to the calendar year preceding the 
 calendar year in which the data is submitted, data that 
 relates to any project or activity that resulted in the 
 net reduction of the greenhouse gas emissions of the 
 entity or a net increase in net sequestration by the 
 entity.
 (2) Provision of verification information by reporting 
 entities.--Each entity that submits a report under section 
 102(a) or this subsection shall provide information sufficient 
 for the Administrator to verify, in accordance with measurement 
 and verification methods and standards developed under section 
 104, that the report--
 (A) has been accurately reported; and
 (B) in the case of each voluntary report under 
 paragraph (1), represents--
 (i) actual reductions in greenhouse gas 
 emissions relative to historic emission levels 
 of the entity; or
 (ii) actual increases in net sequestration.
 (3) Failure to submit report.--An entity that submits data 
 for registration of emission reductions or increases in 
 sequestration in the registry and that fails to submit a report 
 required under this subsection shall be prohibited from using, 
 or allowing another entity to use, its registered emissions 
 reductions or increases in sequestration to satisfy the 
 requirements of section 121.
 (4) Independent third-party verification.--To meet the 
 requirements of this section and section 104, an entity that 
 submits a report under this section may--
 (A) obtain independent third-party verification; 
 and
 (B) present the results of the third-party 
 verification to the Administrator.
 (5) Availability of data.--
 (A) In general.--The Administrator shall ensure 
 that information in the database is--
 (i) published; and
 (ii) accessible to the public, including in 
 electronic format on the Internet.
 (B) Exception.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply in 
 any case in which the Administrator determines that 
 publishing or otherwise making available information 
 described in that subparagraph--
 (i) poses a risk to national security; or
 (ii) discloses confidential business 
 information that can not be derived from 
 information that is otherwise publicly 
 available and that would cause competitive harm 
 if published.
 (6) Data infrastructure.--The Administrator shall ensure, 
 to the maximum extent practicable, that the database uses, and 
 is integrated with, Federal, State, and regional greenhouse gas 
 data collection and reporting systems.
 (7) Additional issues to be considered.--In promulgating 
 the regulations under section 101(c)(1) and implementing the 
 database, the Administrator shall take into consideration a 
 broad range of issues involved in establishing an effective 
 database, including--
 (A) the data and information systems and measures 
 necessary to identify, track, and verify greenhouse gas 
 emissions in a manner that will encourage private 
 sector trading and exchanges;
 (B) the greenhouse gas reduction and sequestration 
 measurement and estimation methods and standards 
 applied in other countries, as applicable or relevant;
 (C) the extent to which available data on fossil 
 fuels, greenhouse gas emissions, and greenhouse gas 
 production, refining, and importation are adequate to 
 implement the database; and
 (D) the differences in, and potential uniqueness 
 of, the facilities, operations, and business and other 
 relevant practices of persons and entities in the 
 private and public sectors that may be expected to 
 participate in the database.
 (d) Annual Report.--The Administrator shall publish an annual 
report that--
 (1) describes the total greenhouse gas emissions, emission 
 reductions, and increases in sequestration reported to the 
 database during the year covered by the report;
 (2) provides entity-by-entity and sector-by-sector analyses 
 of the emissions, emission reductions, and increases in 
 sequestration reported;
 (3) describes the atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse 
 gases;
 (4) provides a comparison of current and past atmospheric 
 concentrations of greenhouse gases; and
 (5) describes the activity during the year covered by the 
 report in the trading of greenhouse gas emission allowances.

SEC. 104. MEASUREMENT AND VERIFICATION.

 (a) Methods and Standards.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall establish by 
 rule, in coordination with the Secretary, the Secretary of 
 Energy, and the Secretary of Agriculture, comprehensive 
 measurement and verification methods and standards to ensure a 
 consistent and technically accurate record of greenhouse gas 
 emissions, emission reductions, sequestration, and atmospheric 
 concentrations for use in the registry.
 (2) Requirements.--The methods and standards established 
 under paragraph (1) shall include--
 (A) a requirement that an entity submitting data 
 for the database use a continuous emissions monitoring 
 system, or another system of measuring emissions, 
 emission reductions, or increases in sequestration that 
 is determined by the Administrator to provide 
 information with precision, reliability, accessibility, 
 and timeliness similar to that provided by a continuous 
 emissions monitoring system where technologically 
 feasible;
 (B) establishment of standardized measurement and 
 verification practices for reports made by all entities 
 participating in the registry, taking into account--
 (i) protocols and standards in use by 
 entities requiring or desiring to participate 
 in the registry as of the date of development 
 of the methods and standards under paragraph 
 (1);
 (ii) boundary issues, such as leakage;
 (iii) avoidance of double counting of 
 greenhouse gas emissions, emission reductions, 
 and increases in sequestration; and
 (iv) such other factors as the 
 Administrator, in consultation with the 
 Secretary, the Secretary of Energy, and the 
 Secretary of Agriculture, determines to be 
 appropriate;
 (C) establishment of methods of--
 (i) estimating greenhouse gas emissions, 
 for those cases in which the Administrator 
 determines that methods of monitoring or 
 measuring such emissions with precision, 
 reliability, accessibility, and timeliness 
 similar to that provided by a continuous 
 emissions monitoring system are not 
 technologically feasible at present; and
 (ii) reporting the accuracy of such 
 estimations;
 (D) establishment of measurement and verification 
 standards applicable to actions taken to reduce or 
 sequester greenhouse gas emissions;
 (E) in coordination with the Secretary of 
 Agriculture, standards to measure the results of the 
 use of carbon sequestration, including--
 (i) soil carbon sequestration practices;
 (ii) forest preservation and reforestation 
 activities that adequately address the issues 
 of permanence, leakage, and verification; and
 (iii) production of cellulosic biomass 
 crops;
 (F) establishment of standards for obtaining the 
 Administrator's approval of the suitability of 
 geological storage sites that include evaluation of 
 both the geology of the site and the entity's capacity 
 to manage the site;
 (G) establishment of other features that, as 
 determined by the Administrator, will allow entities to 
 adequately establish a fair and reliable measurement 
 and reporting system; and
 (H) establishment of such other measurement and 
 verification standards as the Administrator, in 
 consultation with the Secretary of Agriculture, the 
 Secretary, and the Secretary of Energy, determines to 
 be appropriate.
 (b) Public Participation.--The Administrator shall make available 
to the public for comment, in draft form and for a period of at least 
90 days, the methods and standards developed under subsection (a) 
before issuing final regulations under this section.
 (c) Experts and Consultants.--
 (1) In general.--The Administrator may obtain the services 
 of experts and consultants in the private and nonprofit sectors 
 for the purpose of carrying out this section in accordance with 
 section 3109 of title 5, United States Code, in the areas of 
 greenhouse gas measurement, certification, and emission 
 trading.
 (2) Available arrangements.--In obtaining any service 
 described in paragraph (1), the Administrator may use any 
 available grant, contract, cooperative agreement, or other 
 arrangement authorized by law.
 (d) Review and Revision.--The Administrator shall periodically 
review, and revise as necessary, the methods and standards developed 
under subsection (a).

 Subtitle B--Mandating Emission Reductions

SEC. 121. COVERED ENTITIES MUST SUBMIT ALLOWANCES FOR EMISSIONS.

 (a) In General.--Beginning with calendar year 2012--
 (1) each covered entity in the electric power, industrial, 
 and commercial sectors shall submit to the Administrator one 
 tradeable allowance for every metric ton of greenhouse gases, 
 measured in units of carbon dioxide equivalents, that it emits 
 from stationary sources, except those described in paragraph 
 (2);
 (2) each producer or importer of hydrofluorocarbons, 
 perfluorocarbons, or sulfur hexafluoride that is a covered 
 entity shall submit to the Administrator one tradeable 
 allowance for every metric ton of hydrofluorocarbons, 
 perfluorocarbons, or sulfur hexafluoride, measured in units of 
 carbon dioxide equivalents, that it produces or imports and 
 that are deemed under subsection (d) to be emitted in the 
 United States; and
 (3) each petroleum product refiner or importer that is a 
 covered entity shall submit one tradeable allowance for every 
 unit of petroleum product it sells that will produce one metric 
 ton of greenhouse gases when used for transportation, measured 
 in units of carbon dioxide equivalents, as determined by the 
 Administrator under subsection (b).
 (b) Determination of Transportation Sector Amount.--For the 
transportation sector, the Administrator shall determine the amount of 
greenhouse gases, measured in units of carbon dioxide equivalents, that 
will be deemed to be emitted when petroleum products are used for 
transportation.
 (c) Exception for Certain Deposited Emissions.--Notwithstanding 
subsection (a), a covered entity is not required to submit a tradeable 
allowance for any amount of greenhouse gas that would otherwise have 
been emitted from a facility under the ownership or control of that 
entity if--
 (1) the emission is deposited in a geological storage 
 facility approved by the Administrator described in section 
 104(a)(2)(F); and
 (2) the entity agrees to submit tradeable allowances for 
 any portion of the deposited emission that is subsequently 
 emitted from that facility.
 (d) Determination of Hydrofluorocarbon, Perfluorocarbon, and Sulfur 
Hexafluoride Amount.--The Administrator shall determine the amounts of 
hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, or sulfur hexafluoride, measured 
in units of carbon dioxide equivalents, that will be deemed to be 
emitted for purposes of this Act.
 (e) Allowances Retired.--Upon receiving a tradeable allowance 
pursuant to a requirement under this subtitle, the Administrator shall 
retire the serial number assigned to that allowance.

SEC. 122. COMPLIANCE.

 (a) Source of Tradeable Allowances Used.--A covered entity may use 
a tradeable allowance to meet the requirements of this subtitle without 
regard to whether the tradeable allowance was allocated to it under 
subtitle D or acquired from another entity or the Climate Change Credit 
Corporation established under section 201.
 (b) Verification by Administrator.--At various times during each 
year, the Administrator shall determine whether each covered entity has 
met the requirements of this subtitle. In making that determination, 
the Administrator shall take into account the tradeable allowances 
submitted by the covered entity to the Administrator.

SEC. 123. EXEMPTION OF SOURCE CATEGORIES.

 (a) In General.--The Administrator may grant an exemption from the 
requirements of this subtitle to a source category if the Administrator 
determines, after public notice and comment, that it is not feasible to 
measure or estimate emissions from that source category, until such 
time as measurement or estimation becomes feasible.
 (b) Reduction of Limitations.--If the Administrator exempts a 
source category under subsection (a), the Administrator shall also 
reduce the total tradeable allowances under section 124(a)(1), (2), 
(3), or (4), as applicable, by the amount of greenhouse gas emissions 
that the exempted source category emitted in calendar year 2000, as 
identified in the 2000 Inventory.
 (c) Limitation on Exemption.--The Administrator may not grant an 
exemption under subsection (a) to carbon dioxide produced from fossil 
fuel.

SEC. 124. ESTABLISHMENT OF TRADEABLE ALLOWANCES.

 (a) In General.--The Administrator shall promulgate regulations to 
establish tradeable allowances, denominated in units of carbon dioxide 
equivalents, as follows:
 (1) For the first 8 calendar years beginning after 2011, 
 the number of tradeable allowances shall be equal to 6,150 
 million metric tons, measured in units of carbon dioxide 
 equivalents, reduced by the amount of emissions of greenhouse 
 gases in calendar year 2012 from non-covered entities, as 
 calculated by the Administrator.
 (2) For the first 10 calendar years beginning after 2019, 
 the number of tradeable allowances shall be equal to 5,232 
 million metric tons, measured in units of carbon dioxide 
 equivalents, reduced by the amount of emissions of greenhouse 
 gases in calendar year 2020 from non-covered entities, as 
 calculated by the Administrator.
 (3) For the first 10 calendar years beginning after 2029, 
 the number of tradeable allowances shall be equal to 3,858 
 million metric tons, measured in units of carbon dioxide 
 equivalents, reduced by the amount of emissions of greenhouse 
 gases in calendar year 2030 from non-covered entities, as 
 calculated by the Administrator.
 (4) For calendar years beginning after 2049, the number of 
 tradeable allowances shall be equal to 1,504 million metric 
 tons, measured in units of carbon dioxide equivalents, reduced 
 by the amount of emissions of greenhouse gases in each such 
 calendar year from non-covered entities, as calculated by the 
 Administrator.
 (b) Serial Numbers.--The Administrator shall assign a unique serial 
number to each tradeable allowance established under subsection (a), 
and shall take such action as may be necessary to prevent 
counterfeiting of tradeable allowances.
 (c) Nature of Tradeable Allowances.--A tradeable allowance is not a 
property right, and nothing in this title or any other provision of law 
limits the authority of the United States to terminate or limit a 
tradeable allowance.
 (d) Non-Covered Entity.--For purposes of this section only, the 
term ``non-covered entity'' means an entity that--
 (1) owns or controls a source of greenhouse gas emissions 
 in the electric power, industrial, or commercial sector of the 
 United States economy (as defined in the Inventory), refines or 
 imports refined petroleum products for use in transportation, 
 or produces or imports hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, or 
 sulfur hexafluoride; and
 (2) is not a covered entity.

SEC. 125. PENALTIES.

 Any covered entity that fails to meet the requirements of this 
subtitle for a year shall be liable for a civil penalty, payable to the 
Administrator, equal to thrice the market value (determined as of the 
last day of the year at issue) of the tradeable allowances that would 
be necessary for that covered entity to meet those requirements on the 
date that the tradeable allowances were due.

 Subtitle C--Controlling Compliance Costs

SEC. 141. TRADING.

 (a) In General.--Tradeable allowances may be sold, exchanged, 
purchased, retired, or used as provided in this Act.
 (b) Intersector Trading.--Covered entities may purchase or 
otherwise acquire tradeable allowances from other covered sectors to 
satisfy the requirements of this title, in addition to those from 
within their own sector.

SEC. 142. BANKING.

 Tradeable allowances not used to satisfy the requirements of this 
title in a year may be used to satisfy the requirements in a later 
year.

SEC. 143. BORROWING AGAINST FUTURE REDUCTIONS.

 (a) In General.--The Administrator shall establish a program under 
which a covered entity may--
 (1) receive a credit in the current calendar year for 
 anticipated reductions in emissions in a future calendar year; 
 and
 (2) use the credit in lieu of a tradeable allowance to meet 
 the requirements of this title for the current calendar year, 
 subject to the limitation imposed by subsection (b).
 (b) Determination of Tradeable Allowance Credits.--The 
Administrator may make credits available under subsection (a) only for 
anticipated reductions in emissions that--
 (1) are attributable to the realization of capital 
 investments in equipment, the construction, reconstruction, or 
 acquisition of facilities, or the deployment of new 
 technologies--
 (A) for which the covered entity has executed a 
 binding contract and secured, or applied for, all 
 necessary permits and operating or implementation 
 authority;
 (B) that will not become operational within the 
 current calendar year; and
 (C) that will become operational and begin to 
 reduce emissions from the covered entity within 5 years 
 after the year in which the credit is used; and
 (2) will be realized within 5 years after the year in which 
 the credit is used.
 (c) Carrying Cost.--If a covered entity uses a credit under this 
section to meet the requirements of this title for a calendar year (in 
this subsection referred to as the use year), the tradeable allowance 
requirement for the year from which the credit was taken (in this 
subsection referred to as the source year) shall be increased by an 
amount equal to--
 (1) 10 percent for each credit borrowed from the source 
 year; multiplied by
 (2) the number of years after the use year that the source 
 year occurs.
 (d) Maximum Borrowing Period.--A credit from a year beginning more 
than 5 years after the current year may not be used to meet the 
requirements of this title for the current year.
 (e) Failure To Achieve Reductions Generating Credit.--If a covered 
entity that uses a credit under this section fails to achieve the 
anticipated reduction for which the credit was granted for the year 
from which the credit was taken, then--
 (1) the covered entity's requirements under this Act for 
 that year shall be increased by the amount of the credit, plus 
 the amount determined under subsection (c);
 (2) any tradeable allowances submitted by the covered 
 entity for that year shall be counted first against the 
 increase in those requirements; and
 (3) the covered entity may not use credits under this 
 section to meet the increased requirements.

SEC. 144. DOMESTIC OFFSETS.

 (a) Alternative Means of Compliance.--A covered entity may satisfy 
up to 15 percent of its total allowance submission requirement under 
section 121 by any combination of the following:
 (1) Submitting tradeable allowances from another nation's 
 market in greenhouse gas emissions if--
 (A) the Administrator determines that the other 
 nation's system for trading in greenhouse gas emissions 
 is complete, accurate, and transparent and reviews that 
 determination at least once every 5 years;
 (B) the other nation has adopted enforceable limits 
 on its greenhouse gas emissions which the tradeable 
 allowances were issued to implement; and
 (C) the covered entity certifies that the tradeable 
 allowance has been retired unused in the other nation's 
 market.
 (2) Submitting a registered net increase in sequestration, 
 as registered in the database, adjusted, if necessary, to 
 comply with the accounting standards and methods described in 
 subsection (c). An increase in sequestration submitted under 
 this paragraph need not have been registered by the covered 
 entity submitting it.
 (3) Submitting a greenhouse gas emissions reduction (other 
 than a registered net increase in sequestration) that was 
 registered in the database by a person that is not a covered 
 entity.
 (4) Submitting credits obtained by the submitting covered 
 entity from the Administrator under section 143 or section 145.
 (b) Dedicated Program for Sequestration in Agricultural Soils.--If 
a covered entity satisfies a full 15 percent of its total allowance 
submission requirements pursuant to subsection (a), it shall satisfy up 
to 1.5 percent of its total allowance submission requirement by 
submitting registered net increases in sequestration in agricultural 
soils, as registered in the database, adjusted, if necessary, to comply 
with the accounting standards and methods described in subsection (c).
 (c) Sequestration Accounting.--
 (1) Sequestration accounting.--If a covered entity uses a 
 registered net increase in sequestration to satisfy the 
 requirements of section 121 for any year, that covered entity 
 shall submit information to the Administrator every 5 years 
 thereafter sufficient to allow the Administrator to determine, 
 using the methods and standards created under section 104, 
 whether that net increase in sequestration still exists. The 
 covered entity shall offset any loss of sequestration by 
 submitting additional tradeable allowances of equivalent amount 
 in the calender year following that determination.
 (2) Regulations required.--The Administrator, in 
 coordination with the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary 
 of Energy, and the Secretary, shall issue regulations 
 establishing the sequestration accounting rules for all classes 
 of sequestration projects.
 (3) Criteria for regulations.--In issuing regulations under 
 this subsection, the Administrator shall use the following 
 criteria:
 (A) If the range of possible amounts of net 
 increase in sequestration for a particular class of 
 sequestration project is not more than 10 percent of 
 the median of that range, the amount of sequestration 
 credited shall be equal to the median value of that 
 range.
 (B) If the range of possible amounts of net 
 increase in sequestration for a particular class of 
 sequestration project is more than 10 percent of the 
 median of that range, the amount of sequestration 
 awarded shall be equal to the fifth percentile of that 
 range.
 (C) The regulations shall include procedures for 
 accounting for potential leakage from sequestration 
 projects and for ensuring that any registered increase 
 in sequestration is in addition that which would have 
 occurred if this Act had not been enacted.
 (4) Updates.--The Administrator shall update the 
 sequestration accounting rules for every class of sequestration 
 project at least once every 5 years.

SEC. 145. INTERNATIONAL CREDITS PLAN.

 (a) Establishment.--The Administrator shall establish a program the 
purposes of which are--
 (1) to assist developing countries in achieving sustainable 
 development and in contributing to the objective of reducing 
 the greenhouse gas emissions; and
 (2) to assist covered entities in achieving compliance with 
 the requirements of section 121.
 (b) Program Components.--
 (1) In general.--The program shall provide for the earning 
 of tradable allowances by covered entities from project 
 activities in developing countries resulting in certified 
 emission reductions. The Administrator shall ensure tradability 
 of emission reductions earned under this program with 
 reductions earned under other similar international programs.
 (2) Approval criteria and review process.--By no later than 
 2011, the Administrator shall--
 (A) develop criteria for the approval of projects 
 submitted for review; and
 (B) establish a review process for submitted 
 projects that includes a procedure for providing the 
 results of the review, together with an explanation of 
 the reasons for approving or denying approval of a 
 submitted project, to the entity that submitted the 
 project.
 (3) Fees.--The Administrator may charge an application fee 
 for the review of project proposals to cover the administrative 
 costs of the program.
 (4) Certification of results required.--The Administrator 
 shall require entities participating in this program to obtain 
 independent third-party verification that--
 (A) participation by all parties involved in the 
 project is voluntary; and
 (B) the project produces--
 (i) real, measurable, and long-term 
 benefits related to the mitigation of climate 
 change; and
 (ii) reductions in emissions that are 
 additional to any that would occur in the 
 absence of the certified project activity.
 (c) Use of Allowances.--Subject to the limitation in section 
144(a), tradable allowances earned under the program may be used to 
meet the requirements of section 121.
 (d) Study.--Within 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, 
the Administrator, in coordination with the Secretary, shall conduct a 
study of the impacts of the compliance cost reduction measures of this 
section and section 144 on achieving the purposes of this Act. The 
Administrator shall submit the results of the study to the Congress 
along with any recommendations the Administrator considers appropriate.

 Subtitle D--Establishment and Allocation of Tradeable Allowances

SEC. 161. DETERMINATION OF TRADEABLE ALLOWANCE ALLOCATIONS.

 (a) In General.--The Administrator shall annually determine--
 (1) the amount of tradeable allowances to be allocated to 
 each covered sector; and
 (2) the amount of tradeable allowances to be allocated to 
 the Climate Change Credit Corporation established under section 
 201.
 (b) Allocation Factors.--In making the determination required by 
subsection (a), the Administrator shall consider--
 (1) the distributive effect of the allocations on household 
 income and net worth of individuals;
 (2) the impact of the allocations on corporate income, 
 taxes, and asset value;
 (3) the impact of the allocations on income levels of 
 consumers and on their energy consumption;
 (4) the effects of the allocations in terms of economic 
 efficiency;
 (5) the ability of covered entities to pass through 
 compliance costs to their customers;
 (6) the degree to which the amount of allocations to the 
 covered sectors should decrease over time;
 (7) the need to maintain the international competitiveness 
 of United States manufacturing and avoid the additional loss of 
 United States manufacturing jobs; and
 (8) the necessary funding levels for the initiatives and 
 programs described in section 202.
 (c) Allocation Recommendations and Implementation.--Not later than 
24 months after the date of enactment of this Act, and annually 
thereafter, the Administrator shall submit the determinations under 
subsection (a) to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation and the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the 
Senate, and to the Committee on Science and Technology and the 
Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives. The 
Administrator's determinations under subsection (a)(1), and the 
allocations and provision of tradeable allowances pursuant to that 
determination, are deemed to be a major rule (as defined in section 
804(2) of title 5, United States Code), and subject to the provisions 
of chapter 8 of that title.

SEC. 162. PROVISION OF TRADEABLE ALLOWANCES.

 (a) In General.--The Administrator shall, by regulation, establish 
a process for providing tradeable allowances without cost to covered 
entities described in subparagraphs (A) and (B)(i) and (ii) of section 
3(5) that will--
 (1) encourage investments that increase the efficiency of 
 the processes that produce greenhouse gas emissions;
 (2) minimize the costs to the Government of providing the 
 tradeable allowances;
 (3) give credit to covered entities for emissions 
 reductions made before 2012 and registered with the database; 
 and
 (4) provide sufficient tradeable allowances for new 
 entrants into the sector.
 (b) Allocation to Covered Entities in States Adopting Mandatory 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Programs.--For a covered entity 
operating in any State that has adopted a legally binding and 
enforceable program to achieve and maintain greenhouse gas emission 
reductions that are consistent with, or more stringent than, reductions 
mandated by this Act, and which requirements are effective prior to 
2012, the Administrator shall consider such binding State actions in 
making the final determination of allocation to such covered entities.

SEC. 163. ENSURING TARGET ADEQUACY.

 (a) In General.--Beginning 2 years after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere 
shall review the amount of allowances established under section 124 no 
less frequently than biennially--
 (1) to re-evaluate the levels established by that section, 
 after taking into account the best available science and the 
 most currently available data; and
 (2) to re-evaluate the environmental and public health 
 impacts of specific concentration levels of greenhouse gases,
to determine whether the amount of those allowances continues to be 
consistent with the objective of the United Nations' Framework 
Convention on Climate Change of stabilizing levels of greenhouse gas 
emissions at a level that will prevent dangerous anthropogenic 
interference with the climate system.
 (b) Review of 2012 Levels.--The Under Secretary shall specifically 
review in 2010 the level established under section 124(a)(1), and 
transmit a report on his reviews, together with any recommendations, 
including legislative recommendations, for modification of the levels, 
to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the 
Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate, and to the 
Committee on Science and Technology and the Committee on Energy and 
Commerce of the House of Representatives.

SEC. 164. INITIAL ALLOCATIONS FOR EARLY PARTICIPATION AND ACCELERATED 
 PARTICIPATION.

 Before providing any tradeable allowances under section 162, the 
Administrator shall allocate--
 (1) to any covered entity an amount of tradeable allowances 
 equivalent to the amount of greenhouse gas emission reductions 
 registered by that covered entity in the database if--
 (A) the covered entity has requested to use the 
 registered reduction in the year of allocation;
 (B) the reduction was registered prior to 2012; and
 (C) the Administrator retires the unique serial 
 number assigned to the reduction under section 
 101(c)(3); and
 (2) to any covered entity that has entered into an 
 accelerated participation agreement under section 165, such 
 tradeable allowances as the Administrator has determined to be 
 appropriate under that section.

SEC. 165. BONUS FOR ACCELERATED PARTICIPATION.

 (a) In General.--If a covered entity executes an agreement with the 
Administrator under which it agrees to reduce its level of greenhouse 
gas emissions to a level no greater than the level of its greenhouse 
gas emissions for calendar year 1990 by the year 2012, then, for the 6-
year period beginning with calendar year 2012, the Administrator 
shall--
 (1) provide additional tradeable allowances to that entity 
 when allocating allowances under section 164 in order to 
 recognize the additional emission reductions that will be 
 required of the covered entity;
 (2) allow that entity to satisfy 20 percent (in addition to 
 the amount authorized under section 144(a)) of its requirements 
 under section 121 by any combination of--
 (A) submitting tradeable allowances from another 
 nation's market in greenhouse gas emissions under the 
 conditions described in section 144(a)(1);
 (B) submitting a registered net increase in 
 sequestration, as registered in the database, adjusted, 
 if necessary, to comply with the accounting standards 
 and methods described in section 144(c); and
 (C) submitting a greenhouse gas emission reduction 
 (other than a registered net increase in sequestration) 
 that was registered in the database by a person that is 
 not a covered entity.
 (b) Termination.--An entity that executes an agreement described in 
subsection (a) may terminate the agreement at any time.
 (c) Failure To Meet Commitment.--If an entity that executes an 
agreement described in subsection (a) fails to achieve the level of 
emissions to which it committed by calendar year 2012, including 
through termination under subsection (b)--
 (1) its requirements under section 121 shall be increased 
 by the amount of any tradeable allowances provided to it under 
 subsection (a)(1) of this section; and
 (2) any tradeable allowances submitted thereafter shall be 
 counted first against the increase in those requirements.

 TITLE II--CLIMATE CHANGE CREDIT CORPORATION

SEC. 201. ESTABLISHMENT.

 (a) In General.--The Climate Change Credit Corporation (in this 
title referred to as the ``Corporation'') is established as a nonprofit 
corporation without stock. The Corporation shall not be considered to 
be an agency or establishment of the United States Government.
 (b) Applicable Laws.--The Corporation shall be subject to the 
provisions of this Act and, to the extent consistent with this Act, to 
the District of Columbia Business Corporation Act.
 (c) Board of Directors.--The Corporation shall have a board of 
directors of 5 individuals who are citizens of the United States, of 
whom 1 shall be elected annually by the board to serve as chairman. No 
more than 3 members of the board serving at any time may be affiliated 
with the same political party. The members of the board shall be 
appointed by the President of the United States, by and with the advice 
and consent of the Senate, and shall serve for terms of 5 years.

SEC. 202. PURPOSES AND FUNCTIONS.

 (a) Trading.--The Corporation--
 (1) shall receive and manage tradeable allowances allocated 
 to it under section 161(a)(2);
 (2) shall buy and sell tradeable allowances, whether 
 allocated to it under that section or obtained by purchase, 
 trade, or donation from other entities; and
 (3) may not retire tradeable allowances unused.
 (b) Use of Tradeable Allowances and Proceeds.--
 (1) In general.--The Corporation shall use the tradeable 
 allowances, and proceeds derived from its trading activities in 
 tradeable allowances, to reduce costs borne by consumers as a 
 result of the greenhouse gas reduction requirements of this 
 Act. The reductions--
 (A) may be obtained by buy-down, subsidy, 
 negotiation of discounts, consumer rebates, or 
 otherwise;
 (B) shall be, as nearly as possible, equitably 
 distributed across all regions of the United States; 
 and
 (C) may include arrangements for preferential 
 treatment to consumers who can least afford any such 
 increased costs.
 (2) Transition assistance to dislocated workers and 
 communities.--The Corporation shall allocate a percentage of 
 the proceeds derived from its trading activities in tradeable 
 allowances to provide transition assistance to dislocated 
 workers and communities. Transition assistance may take the 
 form of--
 (A) grants to employers, employer associations, and 
 representatives of employees--
 (i) to provide training, adjustment 
 assistance, and employment services to 
 dislocated workers; and
 (ii) to make income-maintenance and needs-
 related payments to dislocated workers; and
 (B) grants to State and local governments to assist 
 communities in attracting new employers or providing 
 essential local government services.
 (3) Phase-out of transition assistance.--The percentage 
 allocated by the Corporation under paragraph (2)--
 (A) shall be 20 percent for 2012; and
 (B) shall be reduced by 2 percentage points each of 
 the next 10 years thereafter.
 (4) Technology deployment programs.--The Corporation shall 
 establish and carry out a program, through direct grants, 
 revolving loan programs, or other financial measures, to 
 provide support for the deployment of technology to assist in 
 compliance with this Act by distributing the proceeds from no 
 less than 10 percent of the total allowances allocated to it 
 for each year. The support shall include the following:
 (A) Coal gasification combined-cycle and geological 
 carbon storage program.--The Corporation shall 
 establish and carry out a program, through direct 
 grants, to provide incentives for the repowering of 
 existing facilities or construction of new facilities 
 producing electricity or other products from coal 
 gasification combined-cycle plants that capture and 
 geologically store at least 90 percent of the carbon 
 dioxide produced at the facility in accordance with 
 requirements established by the Administrator to ensure 
 the permanence of the storage and that such storage 
 will not cause or contribute to significant adverse 
 effects on public health or the environment. The 
 Corporation shall ensure that no less than 20 percent 
 of the funding under this program is distributed to 
 rural electric cooperatives.
 (B) Agricultural programs.--The Corporation shall 
 establish and carry out a program, through direct 
 grants, revolving loan programs, or other financial 
 measures, to provide incentives for greenhouse gas 
 emissions reductions or net increases in sequestration 
 on agricultural lands. The program shall include 
 incentives for--
 (i) production of wind energy on 
 agricultural lands;
 (ii) agricultural management practices that 
 achieve verified, incremental increases in net 
 carbon sequestration, in accordance with the 
 requirements established by the Administrator 
 under section 144(c); and
 (iii) production of renewable fuels that, 
 after consideration of the energy needed to 
 produce such fuels, result in a net reduction 
 in greenhouse gas emissions.
 (5) Adaptation assistance for fish and wildlife habitat.--
 The Corporation shall fund efforts to strengthen and restore 
 habitat that improve the ability of fish and wildlife to adapt 
 successfully to climate change. The Corporation shall deposit 
 the proceeds from no less than 10 percent of the total 
 allowances allocated to it in the wildlife restoration fund 
 subaccount known as the Wildlife Conservation and Restoration 
 Account established under section 3 of the Pittman-Robertson 
 Wildlife Restoration Act (16 U.S.C. 669b). Amounts deposited in 
 the subaccount under this paragraph shall be available without 
 further appropriation for obligation and expenditure under that 
 Act.

 TITLE III--MISCELLANEOUS

SEC. 301. NOAA REPORT ON CLIMATE CHANGE EFFECTS; PREPARATION 
 ASSISTANCE.

 The Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972 (16 U.S.C. 1451 et seq.) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:

 ``report on effects of climate change

 ``Sec. 320. (a) In General.--The Secretary shall report to the 
Congress not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this 
section, and every 5 years thereafter, on the possible and projected 
impacts of climate change on--
 ``(1) oceanic and coastal ecosystems, including marine fish 
 and wildlife and their habitat, and the commercial and 
 recreational fisheries and tourism industries associated with 
 them; and
 ``(2) coastal communities, including private residential 
 and commercial development and public infrastructure in the 
 coastal zone.
 ``(b) Contents.--Each report under this section shall include 
information regarding--
 ``(1) the impacts that may be due to climate change that 
 have occurred as of the date of the submission of the report; 
 and
 ``(2) the projected future impacts of climate change.
 ``(c) Impacts.--The impacts reported on under subsection (b) shall 
include any--
 ``(1) increases in sea level;
 ``(2) increases in storm activity and intensity;
 ``(3) increases in floods, droughts, and other extremes of 
 weather;
 ``(4) increases in the temperature of the air and the water 
 on oceanic and coastal ecosystems, with a particular focus on 
 vulnerable fisheries and ecosystems; and
 ``(5) changes in the acidity of the ocean surface 
 associated with an increase in concentration of carbon dioxide 
 in the atmosphere.

 ``climate change preparation assistance

 ``Sec. 321. (a) In General.--The Secretary shall provide technical 
assistance to each coastal State that has an approved coastal zone 
management plan under this title, to assist such States in preparing 
persons living within their coastal zones to adapt to climate change.
 ``(b) Identification of Affected Areas and Adaptations.--In 
carrying out this section, the Secretary shall--
 ``(1) identify the projected impacts of climate change to 
 which persons located in coastal zones may need to adapt, 
 including--
 ``(A) increases in sea level;
 ``(B) increases in storm activity and intensity; 
 and
 ``(C) increases in floods, droughts, and other 
 extremes of weather;
 ``(2) identify the specific coastal areas of the United 
 States, and the public and private development in coastal 
 communities and the natural resources of the coastal zone, that 
 are vulnerable to the impacts identified under paragraph (1);
 ``(3) identify the various adaptation measures that may be 
 used to protect the areas and resources identified under 
 paragraph (2) from the impacts identified under paragraph (1); 
 and
 ``(4) estimate the costs of the adaptation measures 
 identified under paragraph (3).''.

SEC. 302. ADAPTATION TECHNOLOGIES.

 (a) In General.--The Director of the Office of Science and 
Technology Policy shall establish a program on adaptation technologies 
as part of the Climate Technology Challenge Program. The Director shall 
perform an assessment of the climate change technological needs of 
various regions of the country. This assessment shall be provided to 
the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate 
and the Committee on Science and Technology of the House of 
Representatives within 6 months after the date of enactment of this 
Act.
 (b) Regional Estimates.--The Director of the Office of Science and 
Technology Policy, in consultation with the Secretaries of 
Transportation, Homeland Security, Agriculture, Housing and Urban 
Development, Health and Human Services, Defense, Interior, Energy, and 
Commerce, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, the 
Director of United States Geological Survey, and other such Federal 
offices as the Director considers necessary, along with relevant State 
agencies, shall perform 6 regional infrastructure cost assessments 
covering the United States, and a national cost assessment, to provide 
estimates of the range of costs that should be anticipated for 
adaptation to the impacts of climate change. The Director shall develop 
those estimates for low, medium, and high probabilities of climate 
change and its potential impacts. The assessments shall be provided to 
the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate 
and the Committee on Science and Technology of the House of 
Representatives within 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (c) Adaptation Plan.--
 (1) In general.--Within 6 months after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Commerce shall submit a 
 climate change adaptation plan for the United States to the 
 Congress. The adaptation plan shall be based upon assessments 
 performed by the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on 
 Climate Change, those as required by the 1990 Global Change 
 Research Act, and any other scientific peer-reviewed regional 
 assessments.
 (2) Required components.--The adaptation plan shall 
 include--
 (A) a prioritized list of vulnerable systems and 
 regions;
 (B) coordination requirements between Federal, 
 State, and local governments to ensure that key public 
 infrastructure, safety, health, and land use planning 
 and control issues are addressed;
 (C) coordination requirements among the Federal 
 Government, industry, and communities;
 (D) an assessment of climate change science 
 research needs including probabilistic assessments as 
 an aid to planning;
 (E) an assessment of climate change technology 
 needs; and
 (F) regional and national costs assessments for the 
 range of costs that should be anticipated for adapting 
 to the impacts of climate change.

SEC. 303. MITIGATING CLIMATE CHANGE'S IMPACTS ON THE POOR.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall conduct research on the impact 
of climate change on low-income populations everywhere in the world. 
The research shall--
 (1) include an assessment of the adverse impact of climate 
 change on low-income populations in the United States and on 
 developing countries;
 (2) identify appropriate climate change adaptation measures 
 and programs for developing countries and low-income 
 populations and assess the impact of those measures and 
 programs on low-income populations;
 (3) identify appropriate climate change mitigation 
 strategies and programs for developing countries and low-income 
 populations and assess the impact of those strategies and 
 programs on developing countries and on low-income populations 
 in the United States; and
 (4) include an estimate of the costs of developing and 
 implementing those climate change adaptation and mitigation 
 programs.
 (b) Report.--Within 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, 
the Secretary shall transmit a report on the research conducted under 
subsection (a) to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation and the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the 
Senate, and to the Committee on Science and Technology and the 
Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives.
 (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to the Secretary $2,000,000 to carry out the research 
required by subsection (a).

SEC. 304. WILDLIFE CONSERVATION.

 (a) Funding for Climate Change Impact Mitigation Planning.--Section 
3(c) of the Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act (16 U.S.C. 
669b(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4) Climate change impact mitigation plans.--Amounts 
 deposited in the Wildlife Conservation and Restoration Account 
 under section 202(b)(5) of the Climate Stewardship Act of 
 2007--
 ``(A) may be used by States to provide relevant 
 information, training, monitoring, and other assistance 
 to develop climate change impact mitigation plans and 
 integrate them into State Comprehensive Wildlife 
 Conservation Strategies; and
 ``(B) shall be used by States to implement climate 
 change impact mitigation plans integrated into 
 Comprehensive Wildlife Conservation Strategies.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 3(a)(2) of the Pittman-Robertson 
Wildlife Restoration Act (16 U.S.C. 669b(a)(2)) is amended in the 
second sentence by inserting ``(in addition to amounts deposited under 
section 202(b)(5) of the Climate Stewardship Act of 2007)'' after 
``Wildlife Conservation and Restoration Account''.
 <all>