HR 2966 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2966
To amend the Petroleum Marketing Practices Act.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
July 22, 1991
Mr. SYNAR (for himself, Mr. LENT, Mr. BLILEY, and Mr. COOPER) introduced
the following bill; which was referred jointly to the Committees on Energy
and Commerce and the Judiciary
A BILL
To amend the Petroleum Marketing Practices Act.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Petroleum Marketing Competition Enhancement
 Act'.
SEC. 2. PROHIBITED MARKETING PRACTICES.
 The Petroleum Marketing Practices Act (15 U.S.C. 2801 et seq.) is amended
 by adding at the end the following new title:
`TITLE IV--MOTOR FUEL
`SEC. 401. PROHIBITED MARKETING PRACTICES.
 `(a) It shall be unlawful for a refiner to sell motor fuel, to any customer
 for resale, at a price which is higher than the refiner's adjusted retail
 price for the same or similar grade or quality of motor fuel sold from a
 direct operated outlet in the same geographic area.
 `(b) It shall be unlawful for a refiner to enter into any scheme or
 agreement to set, change, or maintain maximum retail prices of motor fuel,
 except that this subsection shall not apply to a refiner's retail sales
 at its direct operated outlets.
`SEC. 402. DEFINITIONS.
 `As used in this title:
 `(1) The term `agreement' means any oral or written contract, combination,
 conspiracy, arrangement, or other similar understanding.
 `(2) The term `adjusted retail price' means the consumer retail price per
 gallon of motor fuel sold from a direct operated outlet less the refiner's
 average retail operating expenses per gallon of motor fuel sold from such
 direct operated outlet, and in the event of a sale by the refiner to a
 branded wholesaler, also less the refiner's average wholesale operating
 expenses attributable to the wholesale sale of a gallon of motor fuel to
 its branded dealers in the same geographic area. In comparing a refiner's
 adjusted retail price to a refiner's price to other customers for resale,
 adjustments shall be made to account for differences in freight, taxes,
 and inspection fees, whether or not such items are separately listed as
 part of the price. If a refiner includes consumer credit as part of its
 price, then an adjustment for the cost of consumer credit shall be made
 in comparing these prices.
 `(3) The term `affiliate' means any person who (by means of direct or
 indirect authority of a person to vote more than 50 percent of the voting
 stock or partnership interest in any other person) controls, is controlled
 by, or is under common control with any other person.
 `(4) The term `branded dealer' means any retailer who purchases motor
 fuel from a refiner under an arrangement whereby the refiner permits the
 retailer to market such motor fuel under a trademark owned or controlled
 by the refiner.
 `(5) The term `branded wholesaler' means any person who purchases motor
 fuel from a refiner for resale to a retailer under an arrangement whereby
 the refiner permits such person or retailer to market the motor fuel under
 a trademark owned or controlled by the refiner.
 `(6) The term `consumer retail price' means the price per gallon at which
 motor fuel is sold to the public at a direct operated outlet. If motor fuel
 is sold or offered to the public at one price for cash transactions and
 at another price for credit transactions, the consumer retail price shall
 mean the lower of such prices, adjusted for the cost of consumer credit. If
 motor fuel is sold with another item or service at a combined price, then
 the consumer retail price shall be adjusted to include the price per gallon
 of any such item or service less the cost per gallon of such item or service.
 `(7) The term `cost' of any item or service sold at a combined price
 with motor fuel means all direct and indirect expenses attributable to
 the acquisition and retail sale of such item or service by the direct
 operated outlet.
 `(8) The term `cost of consumer credit' with respect to motor fuel or
 other items and services sold by credit means the lesser of--
 `(A) 4 percent of the sales price of such goods sold by credit; or
 `(B) all direct and indirect expenses of the direct operated outlet
 attributable to the use of credit with respect to such sale.
 `(9) The term `cost of wholesale credit' with respect to motor fuel sold
 by credit to a branded dealer means the lesser of--
 `(A) 2 percent of the sales price of such motor fuel; or
 `(B) the average of all direct and indirect expenses of the refiner
 attributable to the use of credit with respect to a sale by the refiner
 to all of its branded dealers.
 `(10) The term `customer for resale' means any person who purchases motor
 fuel for the purpose of reselling such motor fuel to another person.
 `(11) The term `direct and indirect expenses' means, without limitation,
 labor costs, fair market rental value, repair and maintenance, utilities,
 supplies, property taxes, other third-party payments, sales and promotional
 costs, advertising, inventory shrinkage, and accounts servicing.
 `(12) The term `direct operated outlet' means any service facility at
 which the employees are subject to the Federal Insurance Contributions Act
 (26 U.S.C. 3101 et seq.) paid by the refiner or an affiliate of the refiner.
 `(13) The term `fair market rental value' means the amount of rent which
 would be paid in a transaction negotiated by unrelated parties for the use
 of the specific direct operated outlet utilized for the sale of motor fuel.
 `(14) The term `freight' means the per gallon rate at which a third party,
 unaffiliated petroleum carrier will deliver motor fuel in tank truck
 quantities. Said rate shall be established by reference to a published
 common carrier rate within the particular geographic area.
 `(15) The term `inventory shrinkage' means all losses of inventory from
 whatever cause or source including theft by suppliers, employees, or
 customers, contamination, drive-offs, or evaporation.
 `(16) The term `motor fuel' means gasoline and diesel fuel of a type
 distributed for use as a fuel in self-propelled vehicles designed primarily
 for use on public streets, roads, and highways.
 `(17) The term `person' means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
 municipal corporation, public corporation, or trade association.
 `(18) The term `refiner' means any person engaged in the refining of crude
 oil to produce motor fuel and includes any affiliate of such person.
 `(19) The term `retail operating expenses' means all direct and indirect
 expenses attributable to the retail sale of a gallon of motor fuel from
 a direct operated outlet.
 `(20) The term `retailer' means any person who purchases motor fuel for
 sale to the general public for ultimate consumption.
 `(21) The term `sale' or `sell' means any transfer, gift, sale, offer for
 sale, or advertisement for sale in any manner or by any means whatsoever,
 including product exchanges.
 `(22) The term `same geographic area' means the area served by any terminal
 from which a direct operated outlet obtains its motor fuel or any terminal
 within a commercially reasonable distance of such outlet.
 `(23) The term `same or similar grade or quality of motor fuel' means
 motor fuel containing an additive which does not change the octane or
 cetane rating of such product by more than 1 point.
 `(24) The term `scheme' means any threat, intimidation, communication,
 boycott, pattern of action, inducement, or coercion.
 `(25) The term `trademark' means any trademark, tradename, servicemark,
 or other identifying symbol or name.
 `(26) The term `wholesale operating expenses' means the direct and indirect
 expenses, and the cost of wholesale credit, attributable to the sale of a
 gallon of motor fuel by a refiner or a branded wholesaler to its branded
 dealers.
`SEC. 403. ENFORCEMENT.
 `(a) PROCEEDINGS BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OF THE UNITED STATES-
 `(1) Any person who shall violate section 401(a) shall forfeit and pay to the
 United States a penalty of not more than $5,000 for each such violation. Any
 refiner who shall violate section 401(b) shall forfeit and pay to the
 United States a penalty of $25,000 for each such violation. The Attorney
 General may bring a civil action under this subsection in any district
 court of the United States in which the defendant resides or has an agent.
 `(2) The several district courts of the United States are hereby vested
 with jurisdiction to prevent and restrain violation of this title. In any
 action under this subsection, the court shall grant such equitable relief
 as the court determines is necessary to remedy the effects of any violation;
 including declaratory judgment, mandatory or prohibitive injunctive relief,
 and interim equitable relief.
 `(b) MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE CIVIL ACTION-
 `(1) Any person who shall be injured in his business or property by reason
 of anything prohibited by this title may sue therefore acting either in an
 individual capacity or as a member of a class in any district court of the
 United States in the district in which the defendant resides or has an agent.
 `(2) Any person shall be entitled to sue for and have injunctive relief,
 in any court of the United States having jurisdiction over the parties,
 against threatened loss or damage by a violation of section 401. In any
 action under paragraph (1) of this subsection, the court shall grant such
 equitable relief as the court determines is necessary to remedy the effects
 of any violation; including declaratory judgment, mandatory or prohibitive
 injunctive relief, and interim equitable relief.
 `(3) For the purposes of section 401(a), any person who purchases motor
 fuel in an unlawful sale under this title shall be deemed injured in his
 business or property.
 `(4) No person shall be precluded from bringing suit under paragraph (1) or
 (2) of this subsection on grounds that he is a competitor of the defendant,
 or that no injury to competition has occurred.
 `(5) If the claimant in any action under paragraph (1) or (2) of this
 subsection prevails, he shall recover--
 `(A) the greater of--
 `(i) threefold the actual damages by him sustained to include, but not be
 limited to, the difference between the actual price paid by him and the
 lawful price; or
 `(ii) the sum of $5,000 for each violation; and
 `(B) the cost of suit, including reasonable attorneys' fees and expert
 witness fees.
 `(c) PROCEEDINGS BY STATE ATTORNEYS GENERAL-
 `(1) The attorney general of any State of the United States may bring
 a civil action in the name of such State, as parens patriae on behalf
 of persons residing in such State, in any district court of the United
 States having jurisdiction over the defendant to secure monetary relief as
 provided in subsection (b) for injury sustained by such persons to their
 business or property by reason of any violations of section 401.
 `(2)(A) Any refiner who shall violate section 401(a) shall forfeit and
 pay to each State of the United States where such violation has occurred a
 penalty of $1,000 for each such violation and an additional $5,000 for each
 such violation which occurs more than 3 business days after the refiner's
 receipt of a notice of probable violation related thereto from the attorney
 general of such State.
 `(B) Any refiner who shall violate section 401(b) shall forfeit and pay
 to each State of the United States where such violation has occurred,
 a penalty of $25,000 for each violation and an additional $5,000 per day
 for each day such violation continues more than 3 business days after the
 refiner's receipt of a notice of probable violation related thereto from
 the attorney general of such State.
 `(C) The attorney general of any State may bring a civil action under this
 paragraph in any district court of the United States or any appropriate
 State court having jurisdiction over the defendant. In any action under
 this paragraph, the court shall grant such equitable relief as the court
 determines is necessary to remedy the effects of any violation; including
 declaratory judgment, mandatory or prohibitive injunctive relief, and
 interim equitable relief.
 `(3) After determination by the attorney general of any State of the United
 States of a probable violation of this title in such State by a refiner, the
 attorney general may, but shall not be obligated to, send written notice of
 such probable violation to the refiner. Neither the failure of any attorney
 general to give notice under this paragraph nor any lack of adequacy of
 such notice shall affect the right of any attorney general to maintain a
 proceeding under this subsection or to collect the damages set forth herein.
 `(d) ESTABLISHMENT OF PRIMA FACIE CASE-
 `(1) Any person bringing an action to enforce the provisions of section
 401(a) may establish a prima facie case that a refiner has violated such
 provision by establishing that the refiner has sold motor fuel to a customer
 for resale, at a price which is higher than--
 `(A) 94 percent of its consumer retail price per gallon;
 `(B) in the event of a sale to a branded wholesaler, 90 percent of its
 consumer retail price per gallon; or
 `(C) the refiner's consumer retail price per gallon less the most recently
 available average retail operating expenses per gallon and, in the event of
 a sale by a refiner to a branded wholesaler, also less the most recently
 available average wholesale operating expenses per gallon for the State
 in which the consumer retail price was charged.
In the event that the relevant State has not conducted an annual survey under
section 404 to determine such average retail operating expenses or such
average wholesale operating expenses, then the average operating expenses
for the retail petroleum industry and the wholesale petroleum industry,
as determined by the Secretary of Energy, shall be used instead.
 `(2) The average retail operating expenses and average wholesale operating
 expenses for the petroleum industry shall be established as set forth in
 this subsection.
 `(3) Such prima facie case may be overcome by a preponderance of evidence
 that the refiner's actual retail operating expenses and average wholesale
 operating expenses, if applicable, are less than the evidence presented
 by the plaintiff to establish such prima facie case.
 `(e) JURY TRIAL- In any action brought under subsection (b)(1) of this
 section there shall be a right of trial by jury.
`SEC. 404. ANNUAL SURVEY.
 `The Secretary of Energy shall conduct an annual survey to determine the
 average retail operating and average wholesale operating expenses per gallon
 for the petroleum industry. Any State or any agency thereof may authorize
 an annual State survey to reflect local conditions with respect to motor
 fuels sold to the public in that State. Any such survey with respect to
 retail operating expenses and actual wholesale operating expenses shall
 be based upon all direct and indirect expenses attributable to the sale
 of a gallon of motor fuel to the public by direct operated outlets and
 by nondirect operated outlets. Any such survey with respect to wholesale
 operating expenses shall be based upon all direct and indirect expenses
 attributable to the wholesale sale of a gallon of motor fuel by a refiner
 or a branded wholesaler to a branded dealer.
`SEC. 405. CONSTRUCTION.
 `This title shall be construed liberally so that its purposes may be
 served.'.
SEC. 3. CONFORMING AMENDMENT.
 The table of contents for the Petroleum Marketing Practices Act (15
 U.S.C. 2801 note) is amended by adding at the end the following new items:
`TITLE IV--MOTOR FUEL
`Sec. 401. Prohibited Marketing Practices.
`Sec. 402. Definitions.
`Sec. 403. Enforcement.
`Sec. 404. Annual Survey
`Sec. 405. Construction.'.
SEC. 4. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 The amendments made by this Act shall become effective 30 days after the
 date of the enactment of this Act.