[Congressional Bills 105th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]
[H.R. 1091 Introduced in House (IH)]

105th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 1091

 To impose certain requirements on health care liability claims.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 March 18, 1997

 Mr. Stump (for himself, Mr. Callahan, and Mr. Everett) introduced the 
 following bill; which was referred to the Committee on the Judiciary

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To impose certain requirements on health care liability claims.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Health Care 
Liability Reform Act of 1997''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
 TITLE I--GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sec. 101. Federal reform of medical injury compensation.
Sec. 102. Preemption of State law.
Sec. 103. Definitions.
Sec. 104. Effective date.
 TITLE II--HEALTH CARE LIABILITY REFORM

 Subtitle A--Reform Described

Sec. 201. Requirement for initial resolution of action through 
 alternative dispute resolution.
Sec. 202. Statute of limitations.
Sec. 203. Attorneys' fees.
Sec. 204. Calculation and payment of damages.
Sec. 205. Joint and several liability.
Sec. 206. Injunctive relief.
Sec. 207. Permitting State professional societies to participate in 
 disciplinary activities.
 Subtitle B--Requirements for State Alternative Dispute Resolution 
 Systems (ADR)

Sec. 211. Basic requirements.
Sec. 212. Certification of State systems; applicability of alternative 
 Federal system.
Sec. 213. Reports on implementation and effectiveness of alternative 
 dispute resolution systems.

 TITLE I--GENERAL PROVISIONS

SEC. 101. FEDERAL REFORM OF MEDICAL INJURY COMPENSATION.

 (a) Congressional Findings.--
 (1) Effect on interstate commerce.--The Congress finds that 
 the health care and insurance industries are industries 
 affecting interstate commerce and the medical malpractice 
 litigation systems existing throughout the United States affect 
 interstate commerce by contributing to the high cost of health 
 care and premiums for malpractice insurance purchased by health 
 care providers.
 (2) Effect on federal spending.--The Congress finds that 
 the medical malpractice litigation systems existing throughout 
 the United States have a significant effect on the amount, 
 distribution, and use of Federal funds because of--
 (A) the large number of individuals who receive 
 health care benefits under programs operated or 
 financed by the Federal Government;
 (B) the large number of individuals who benefit 
 because of the exclusion from Federal taxes of the 
 amounts spent by their employers to provide them with 
 health insurance benefits;
 (C) the large number of health care providers and 
 health care professionals who provide items or services 
 for which the Federal Government makes payments; and
 (D) the large number of such providers and 
 professionals who have received direct or indirect 
 financial assistance from the Federal Government 
 because of their status as such professionals or 
 providers.
 (b) Applicability.--This Act shall apply with respect to any health 
care liability claim and to any health care liability action brought in 
any State or Federal court, except that this Act shall not apply to--
 (1) a claim or action for damages arising from a vaccine-
 related injury or death to the extent that title XXI of the 
 Public Health Service Act applies to the claim or action; or
 (2) a claim or action in which the claimant's sole 
 allegation is an allegation of an injury arising from the use 
 of a medical product.
 (c) Federal Court Jurisdiction Not Established on Federal Question 
Grounds.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to establish any 
jurisdiction in the district courts of the United States over health 
care liability actions on the basis of section 1331 or 1337 of title 
28, United States Code.

SEC. 102. PREEMPTION OF STATE LAW.

 (a) In General.--Subject to the provisions contained in subsection 
(b) of this section, the provisions governing health care liability 
actions set forth in this Act supersede State law to the extent that 
State law differs from any provisions of law established by or under 
this Act with respect to the limitation contained in such provisions. 
Any issue that is not governed by any provision of law established 
herein will be governed by otherwise applicable State or Federal law.
 (b) Limitations.--The provisions of this Act will supersede any 
State law, with respect to both procedural and substantive matters, 
only to the extent that State law permits the recovery of a greater 
amount of damages by a plaintiff than that authorized under section 
204, permits the awarding of a greater amount of attorneys' fees than 
what is authorized under section 203, reduces the applicability or 
scope of the regulation of periodic payment of future damages 
authorized under section 204(b), or establishes a longer period during 
which a health care liability claim may be initiated than that 
permitted under section 202. The provisions of this Act shall supersede 
any Federal or State law which mandates reimbursement from the 
plaintiff's recovery for the cost of collateral source benefits. The 
provisions of this Act shall not preempt any State law that imposes 
greater restrictions on liability or damages than those provided 
herein.
 (c) Vaccine Injury.--
 (1) To the extent that title XXI of the Public Health 
 Service Act establishes a Federal rule of law applicable to a 
 civil action brought for a vaccine-related injury or death--
 (A) this Act does not affect the application of the 
 rule of law to such an action, and
 (B) any rule of law prescribed by this Act in 
 conflict with a rule of law of such title XXI shall not 
 apply to such action.
 (2) If there is an aspect of a civil action brought for a 
 vaccine-related injury or death to which a Federal rule of law 
 under title XXI of the Public Health Service Act does not 
 apply, then this Act or otherwise applicable law (as determined 
 under this Act) will apply to such aspect of such action.
 (d) Other Federal Law.--Except as provided in this section, nothing 
in this Act shall be deemed to effect any defense available to a 
defendant in a health care liability claim or action under any other 
provision of Federal law.

SEC. 103. DEFINITIONS.

 As used in this Act:
 (1) Alternative dispute resolution system; adr.--The term 
 ``alternative dispute resolution system'' or ``ADR'' means a 
 system that provides for the resolution of health care 
 liability claims in a manner other than through health care 
 liability actions brought in the State or Federal courts.
 (2) Claimant.--The term ``claimant'' means any person who 
 asserts a health care liability claim or bring a health care 
 liability action, including a person who asserts or claims a 
 right to legal or equitable contribution, indemnity or 
 subrogation, arising out of a health care liability claim or 
 action, and any person on whose behalf such a claim is asserted 
 or such an action is brought, whether deceased, incompetent or 
 a minor.
 (3) Derivative claim.--The term ``derivative claim'' means 
 any third-party claim arising from the claim of injury of a 
 person by a health care service or product, such as loss of 
 consortium, emotional distress, injury to an unborn child, or 
 wrongful death.
 (4) Economic damages.--The term ``economic damages'' means 
 objectively verifiable monetary losses incurred as a result of 
 the provision of (or failure to provide) health care services 
 or the use of a medical product, such as past and future 
 medical expenses, loss of past and future earnings, cost of 
 obtaining domestic services, loss of employment, and loss of 
 business or employment opportunities.
 (5) Health care liability action.--The term ``health care 
 liability action'' means a civil action brought in a State or 
 Federal court or pursuant to ADR, against a health care 
 provider, a health care organization, or the manufacturer, 
 distributor or supplier of a medical product, regardless of the 
 theory of liability on which the claim is based, or the number 
 of plaintiffs, or defendants or causes of action, in which the 
 claimant alleges a health care liability claim.
 (6) Health care liability claim.--The term ``health care 
 liability claim'' means a demand by any person, whether or not 
 pursuant to ADR, against a health care provider, health care 
 organization, or the manufacturer, distributor or supplier of a 
 medical product, including, but not limited to, third-party 
 claims, cross-claims, counter-claims or contribution claims, 
 which are based upon the provision of (or the failure to 
 provide) health care services or the use of a medical product, 
 regardless of the theory of liability on which the claim is 
 based, or the number of plaintiffs, defendants, or causes of 
 action.
 (7) Health care organization.--The term ``health care 
 organization'' means any person or entity which is obligated to 
 provide health benefits under any health plans, including any 
 person or entity acting under a contract or arrangement with a 
 health care organization to provide or administer any health 
 benefit.
 (8) Health care provider.--The term ``health care 
 provider'' means any person or entity required by State or 
 Federal laws or regulations to be licensed, registered, or 
 certified to provide health care services, and being either so 
 licensed, registered, or certified, or exempted from such 
 requirement by other statute or regulation.
 (9) Health care services.--The term ``health care 
 services'' means any service provided by a health care 
 provider, or by any individual working under the supervision of 
 a health care provider, that relates to the diagnosis, 
 prevention, or treatment of any human disease or impairment, or 
 the assessment of the health of human beings.
 (10) Medical product.--The term ``medical product'' means a 
 drug (as defined in section 201(g)(1) of the Federal Food, Drug 
 and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321(g)(1))) or a medical device as 
 defined in section 201(h) of the Federal Food, Drug and 
 Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321(h)), including any component or raw 
 material used therein, but excluding health care services, as 
 defined in paragraph (1) of this section.
 (11) Noneconomic damages.--The term ``noneconomic damages'' 
 means damages for physical and emotional pain, suffering, 
 inconvenience, physical impairment, mental anguish, 
 disfigurement, loss of enjoyment of life, loss of society and 
 companionship, loss of consortium (other than loss of domestic 
 service), hedonic damages, injury to reputation and all other 
 nonpecuniary losses of any kind or nature.
 (12) Punitive damages.--The term ``punitive damages'' means 
 damages awarded, for the purpose of punishment or deterrence, 
 and not solely for compensatory purposes, against a health care 
 provider, health care organization, or a manufacturer, 
 distributor or supplier of a medical product. Punitive damages 
 are neither economic nor noneconomic damages.
 (13) State.--The term ``State'' means each of the several 
 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto 
 Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Northern 
 Mariana Islands, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, 
 and any other territory or possession of the United States.

SEC. 104. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 (a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b) and section 
207, this Act shall apply with respect to claims accruing or actions 
brought on or after the expiration of the 3-year period that begins on 
the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) Exception for States Requesting Earlier Implementation of 
Reforms.--
 (1) Application.--A State may submit an application to the 
 Secretary requesting the early implementation of this Act with 
 respect to claims or actions brought in the State.
 (2) Decision by secretary.--The Secretary shall issue a 
 response to a State's application under paragraph (1) not later 
 than 90 days after receiving the application. If the Secretary 
 determines that the State meets the requirements of this Act at 
 the time of submitting its application, the Secretary shall 
 approve the State's application, and this Act shall apply with 
 respect to actions brought in the State on or after the 
 expiration of the 90-day period that begins on the date the 
 Secretary issues the response. If the Secretary denies the 
 State's application, the Secretary shall provide the State with 
 a written explanation of the grounds for the decision.

 TITLE II--HEALTH CARE LIABILITY REFORM

 Subtitle A--Reform Described

SEC. 201. REQUIREMENT FOR INITIAL RESOLUTION OF ACTION THROUGH 
 ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) State cases.--A health care liability action may not be 
 brought in any State court during a calendar year unless the 
 health care liability claim that is the subject of the action 
 has been initially resolved under an alternative dispute 
 resolution system certified for the year by the Secretary under 
 section 212(a), or, in the case of a State in which such a 
 system is not in effect for the year, under the alternative 
 Federal system established under section 212(b).
 (2) Federal diversity actions.--A health care liability 
 action may not be brought in any Federal court under section 
 1332 of title 28, United States Code, during a calendar year 
 unless the health care liability claim that is the subject of 
 the action has been initially resolved under the alternative 
 dispute resolution system referred to in paragraph (1) that 
 applied in the State whose law applies in such action.
 (3) Claims against united states.--
 (A) Establishment of process for claims.--The 
 Attorney General shall establish an alternative dispute 
 resolution process for the resolution of tort claims 
 consisting of health care liability claims brought 
 against the United States under chapter 171 of title 
 28, United States Code. Under such process, the 
 resolution of a claim shall occur after the completion 
 of the administrative claim process applicable to the 
 claim under section 2675 of such title.
 (B) Requirement for initial resolution under 
 process.--A health care liability action based on a 
 health care liability claim described in subparagraph 
 (A) may not be brought in any Federal court unless the 
 claim has been initially resolved under the alternative 
 dispute resolution process established by the Attorney 
 General under such subparagraph.
 (b) Initial Resolution of Claims Under ADR.--For purposes of 
subsection (a), an action is ``initially resolved'' under an 
alternative dispute resolution system if--
 (1) the ADR reaches a decision on whether the defendant is 
 liable to the plaintiff for damages; and
 (2) if the ADR determines that the defendant is liable, the 
 ADR reaches a decision on the amount of damages assessed 
 against the defendant.
 (c) Procedures for Filing Actions.--
 (1) Notice of intent to contest decision.--Not later than 
 60 days after a decision is issued with respect to a health 
 care liability claim under an alternative dispute resolution 
 system, each party affected by the decision shall submit a 
 sealed statement to a court of competent jurisdiction 
 indicating whether or not the party intends to contest the 
 decision.
 (2) Deadline for filing action.--A health care liability 
 action may not be brought by a party unless--
 (A) the party has filed the notice of intent 
 required by paragraph (1); and
 (B) the party files the action in a court of 
 competent jurisdiction not later than 90 days after the 
 decision resolving the health care liability claim that 
 is the subject of the action is issued under the 
 applicable alternative dispute resolution system.
 (3) Court of competent jurisdiction.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term ``court of competent jurisdiction'' 
 means--
 (A) with respect to actions filed in a State court, 
 the appropriate State trial court; and
 (B) with respect to actions filed in a Federal 
 court, the appropriate United States district court.
 (d) Legal Effect of Uncontested ADR Decision.--The decision reached 
under an alternative dispute resolution system shall, for purposes of 
enforcement by a court of competent jurisdiction, have the same status 
in the court as the verdict of a health care liability action 
adjudicated in a State or Federal trial court. The previous sentence 
shall not apply to a decision that is contested by a party affected by 
the decision pursuant to subsection (c)(1).

SEC. 202. STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.

 (a) General Statute of Limitations.--No health care liability claim 
or action may be commenced later than one year after the plaintiff 
discovers, or through the use of reasonable diligence should have 
discovered, the injury. In no event shall a health care liability claim 
or action be permitted to be filed later than 3 years after the date of 
the injury. Such time limitation may be tolled upon proof of the 
presence of a foreign object, exclusive of infectious agents, which has 
no therapeutic or diagnostic purpose or effect in the person of the 
injured plaintiff.
 (b) Minors Under the Age of 6.--In the case of an alleged injury 
sustained by a minor before the age of 6, no health care liability 
claim or action may be commenced by or on behalf of the minor later 
than (1) 3 years from the date of injury or (2) the date on which the 
minor attains the age of 8, whichever provides a longer period. Such 
limitation may be tolled upon proof of the presence of a foreign 
object, exclusive of infectious agents, which has no therapeutic or 
diagnostic purpose or effect in the person of the injured plaintiff.

SEC. 203. ATTORNEYS' FEES.

 (a) Limitation on Contingency Fees.--An attorney shall not contract 
for or collect a contingency fee for representing a claimant in a 
health care liability action in excess of the following:
 (1) 25 percent of the first $100,000 (or portion thereof) 
 recovered by the claimant.
 (2) 20 percent of the next $150,000 (or portion thereof) 
 recovered by the claimant.
 (3) 15 percent of the next $250,000 (or portion thereof) 
 recovered by the claimant.
 (4) 10 percent of any amount in excess of $500,000 
 recovered by the claimant.
 (b) Requiring Party Contesting ADR Ruling to Pay Attorney's Fees 
and Other Costs.--
 (1) In general.--The court in a health care liability 
 action shall require the party that (pursuant to section 
 201(c)(1)) contested the ruling of the alternative dispute 
 resolution system with respect to the health care liability 
 claim that is the subject of the action to pay to the opposing 
 party the costs incurred by the opposing party under the 
 action, including attorney's fees, fees paid to expert 
 witnesses, and other litigation expenses (but not including 
 court costs, filing fees, or other expenses paid directly by 
 the party to the court, or any fees or costs associated with 
 the resolution of the claim under the alternative dispute 
 resolution system), but only if--
 (A) in the case of an action in which the party 
 that contested the ruling is the claimant, the amount 
 of damages awarded to the party under the action does 
 not exceed the amount of damages awarded to the party 
 under the ADR system by at least 10 percent; and
 (B) in the case of an action in which the party 
 that contested the ruling is the defendant, the amount 
 of damages assessed against the party under the action 
 is not at least 10 percent less than the amount of 
 damages assessed under the ADR system.
 (2) Exceptions.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply if--
 (A) the party contesting the ruling made under the 
 previous alternative dispute resolution system shows 
 that--
 (i) the ruling was procured by corruption, 
 fraud, or undue means,
 (ii) there was partiality or corruption 
 under the system,
 (iii) there was other misconduct under the 
 system that materially prejudiced the party's 
 rights, or
 (iv) the ruling was based on an error of 
 law;
 (B) the party contesting the ruling made under the 
 alternative dispute resolution system presents new 
 evidence before the trier of fact that was not 
 available for presentation under the ADR system;
 (C) the health care liability action raised a novel 
 issue of law; or
 (D) the court finds that the application of such 
 paragraph to a party would constitute an undue 
 hardship, and issues an order waiving or modifying the 
 application of such paragraph that specifies the 
 grounds for the court's decision.
 (3) Requirement for performance bond.--The court in a 
 health care liability action shall require the party that 
 (pursuant to section 201(c)(1)) contested the ruling of the 
 alternative dispute resolution system with respect to the 
 health care liability claim that is the subject of the action 
 to post a performance bond (in such amount and consisting of 
 such funds and assets as the court determines to be 
 appropriate), except that the court may waive the application 
 of such requirement to a party if the court determines that the 
 posting of such a bond is not necessary to ensure that the 
 party shall meet the requirements of this subsection to pay the 
 opposing party the costs incurred by the opposing party under 
 the action.
 (4) Limit on attorneys' fees paid.--Attorneys' fees that 
 are required to be paid under paragraph (1) by the contesting 
 party shall not exceed the amount of the attorneys' fees 
 incurred by the contesting party in the action. If the 
 attorneys' fees of the contesting party are based on a 
 contingency fee agreement, the amount of attorneys' fees for 
 purposes of the preceding sentence shall not exceed the 
 reasonable value of those services.
 (5) Records.--In order to receive attorneys' fees under 
 paragraph (1), counsel of record in the health care liability 
 action involved shall maintain accurate, complete records of 
 hours worked on the action, regardless of the fee arrangement 
 with the client involved.
 (c) Calculation of Periodic Payments.--If periodic payments are 
awarded to the claimant pursuant to section 204(b), the court shall 
place a total value on these payments based upon the projected life 
expectancy of the claimant and include this amount in computing the 
total award from which attorneys' fees are calculated under subsection 
(a).
 (d) Effect of Failure To Comply.--Failure to comply with this 
section by an attorney at law shall be grounds for professional 
discipline by the appropriate State agency responsible for the conduct 
of disciplinary actions against attorneys-at-law.
 (e) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 (1) the term ``contingency fee'' means any fee for 
 professional legal services which is in whole or in part 
 contingent upon the recovery of any amount of damages, whether 
 through judgment or settlement; and
 (2) the term ``recovered'' means the net sum recovered 
 after deducting any disbursements or costs incurred in 
 connection with prosecution or settlement of the claim, except 
 that costs of medical care incurred by the claimant and the 
 attorney's office overhead costs or charges shall not be 
 deductible disbursements under this paragraph.

SEC. 204. CALCULATION AND PAYMENT OF DAMAGES.

 (a) Limitation on Noneconomic Damages.--The total amount of 
noneconomic damages that may be awarded to a claimant for losses 
resulting from the injury which is the subject of a health care 
liability action may not exceed $250,000, regardless of the number of 
parties against whom the action is brought or the number of actions 
brought with respect to the injury.
 (b) Periodic Payments for Future Losses.--If more than $50,000 in 
damages for expenses to be incurred in the future is awarded to the 
claimant in a health care liability action, the court shall, at the 
request of either party, enter a judgment ordering such damages to be 
paid on a periodic basis determined appropriate by the court (based 
upon projections of when such expenses are likely to be incurred).
 (c) Mandatory Offsets for Damages Paid by a Collateral Source.--The 
total amount of damages received by a claimant in a health care 
liability action shall be reduced by any other payment that has been or 
will be made to the individual to compensate the claimant for the 
injury that was the subject of the action, including payment under--
 (1) Federal or State disability or sickness programs;
 (2) Federal, State, or private health insurance programs;
 (3) private disability insurance programs;
 (4) employer wage continuation programs; and
 (5) any other source of payment intended to compensate the 
 claimant for such injury.
 (d) Treatment of Punitive Damages.--
 (1) In general.--Punitive damages may, if otherwise 
 permitted by applicable law, be awarded in any civil actions 
 subject to this Act only if it is proven by clear and 
 convincing evidence that the defendant intended to injure the 
 claimant for a reason unrelated to the provision of health care 
 services, or that the defendant understood the claimant was 
 substantially certain to suffer unnecessary injury, yet the 
 defendant deliberately failed to avoid such injury. Punitive 
 damages may not be awarded against a defendant, however, with 
 respect to any claim where no judgment for compensatory damages 
 (including nominal damages) is rendered against such defendant.
 (2) Limitation concerning certain medical products.--
 (A) In general.--Punitive damages shall not be 
 awarded pursuant to this section against a manufacturer 
 or distributor of a medical product which caused the 
 claimant's harm where--
 (i) such medical product was subject to 
 premarket approval of review by the Food and 
 Drug Administration under section 505, 506, 
 510, 515, or 520 of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
 Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355, 356, 360, 360e, or 
 360j) or section 351 of the Public Health 
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262) with respect to the 
 safety of the formulation or performance of the 
 aspect of such medical product which caused the 
 claimant's harm or the adequacy of the 
 packaging or labeling of such medical product, 
 and, where required, such medical product was 
 marketed in conformity with regulations of the 
 Food and Drug Administration; or
 (ii) the medical product is generally 
 recognized as safe and effective pursuant to 
 conditions established by the Food and Drug 
 Administration and applicable regulations, 
 including without limitations those related to 
 packaging and labeling.
 (B) Exceptions.--The provisions of subparagraph (A) 
 shall not apply in any case in which--
 (i) the defendant, before or after the 
 grant of permission to market such medical 
 product, knowingly withheld from or 
 misrepresented to the Food and Drug 
 Administration required information that is 
 material and relevant to the performance of 
 such medical product and is casually related to 
 the harm which the claimant allegedly suffered; 
 or
 (ii) the defendant made an illegal payment 
 to an official of the Food and Drug 
 Administration for the purpose of either 
 securing or maintaining approval of such 
 medical product.
 (3) Requirements for pleading of punitive damages.--No 
 demand for punitive damages shall be included in a claim or 
 action for health care liability as initially filed. A court 
 may allow a claimant to file an amended pleading for punitive 
 damages only upon motion by a claimant and after a finding by a 
 court upon review of supporting and opposing affidavits or 
 after a hearing, that after weighing the evidence the claimant 
 has established by a substantial probability that the claimant 
 will prevail on the claim for punitive damages. The court shall 
 not grant a motion allowing the filing of an amended pleading 
 that includes a claim for punitive damages if the motion for 
 such an order is not filed within 2 years after the complaint 
 or initial pleading is filed or not less than 9 months before 
 the date the matter is first set for trial, whichever is 
 earlier.
 (4) Separate proceeding.--At the request of any defendant 
 in a health care liability action, the trier of fact shall 
 consider in a separate proceeding (1) whether punitive damages 
 are to be awarded and the amount of such award, or (2) the 
 amount of punitive damages following a determination of 
 punitive liability. If a separate proceeding is requested, 
 evidence relevant only to the claim of punitive damages, as 
 determined by applicable State law, shall be admissible in any 
 proceeding to determine whether compensatory damages are to be 
 awarded.
 (5) Determining amount of punitive damages.--
 (A) Factors considered.--In determining the amount 
 of punitive damages, the trier of fact shall consider 
 only--
 (i) the severity of the harm caused by the 
 conduct of the defendant;
 (ii) the duration of the conduct or any 
 concealment of it by the defendant;
 (iii) the profitability of the conduct to 
 the defendant;
 (iv) the number of products sold or medical 
 procedures rendered for compensation, as the 
 case may be, by the defendant of the kind 
 causing the harm complained of by the claimant;
 (v) awards of punitive or exemplary damages 
 to persons similarly situated to the claimant;
 (vi) prospective awards of compensatory 
 damages to persons similarly situated to the 
 claimant;
 (vii) any criminal imposed on the defendant 
 as a result of the conduct complained of by the 
 claimant; and
 (viii) the amount of any civil fines 
 assessed against the defendant as a result of 
 the conduct complained of by the claimant.
 (B) General limitation.--In no event shall the 
 amount of punitive damages awarded exceed 2 times the 
 amount of compensatory damages awarded or $250,000 
 whichever is greater. The jury shall not be informed of 
 this limitation.

SEC. 205. JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY.

 A defendant may be held severally but not jointly liable in a 
health care liability action. A person found liable for damages in any 
such action may be found liable, if at all, only for those damages 
directly attributable to the person's proportionate share of fault or 
responsibility for the injury, and may not be found liable for damages 
attributable to the proportionate share of fault or responsibility of 
any other person (without regard to whether that person is a party to 
the action) for the injury, including any person bringing the action.

SEC. 206. INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.

 Whenever any person has engaged or is about to engage in any 
conduct in violation of this subtitle, the appropriate court may, upon 
application of an interested party, issue an injunction or other 
appropriate order restraining such conduct.

SEC. 207. PERMITTING STATE PROFESSIONAL SOCIETIES TO PARTICIPATE IN 
 DISCIPLINARY ACTIVITIES.

 (a) Role of Professional Societies.--Notwithstanding any other 
provision of State or Federal law, a State agency responsible for the 
conduct of disciplinary actions for a type of health care practitioner 
may enter into agreements with State or county professional societies 
of such type of health care practitioner to permit such societies to 
participate in the licensing of such health care practitioner, and to 
review any health care malpractice action, health care malpractice 
claim or allegation, or other information concerning the practice 
patterns of any such health care practitioner. Any such agreement shall 
comply with subsection (b).
 (b) Requirements of Agreements.--Any agreement entered into under 
subsection (a) for licensing activities or the review of any health 
care malpractice action, health care malpractice claim or allegation, 
or other information concerning the practice patterns of a health care 
practitioner shall provide that--
 (1) the health care professional society conducts such 
 activities or review as expeditiously as possible;
 (2) after the completion of such review, such society shall 
 report its findings to the State agency with which it entered 
 into such agreement;
 (3) the conduct of such activities or review and the 
 reporting of such findings be conducted in a manner which 
 assures the preservation of confidentiality of health care 
 information and of the review process; and
 (4) no individual affiliated with such society is liable 
 for any damages or injury directly caused by the individual's 
 actions in conducting such activities or review.
 (c) Agreements Not Mandatory.--Nothing in this section may be 
construed to require a State to enter into agreements with societies 
described in subsection (a) to conduct the activities described in such 
subsection.
 (d) Effective Date.--This section shall take effect 2 years after 
the date of the enactment of this Act.

 Subtitle B--Requirements for State Alternative Dispute Resolution 
 Systems (ADR)

SEC. 211. BASIC REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) In General.--A State's alternative dispute resolution system 
meets the requirements of this section if the system--
 (1) applies to all health care liability claims under the 
 jurisdiction of the courts of that State;
 (2) requires that a written opinion resolving the dispute 
 be issued not later than 6 months after the date by which each 
 party against whom the claim is filed has received notice of 
 the claim (other than in exceptional cases for which a longer 
 period is required for the issuance of such an opinion), and 
 that the opinion contain--
 (A) findings of fact relating to the dispute, and
 (B) a description of the costs incurred in 
 resolving the dispute under the system (including any 
 fees paid to the individuals hearing and resolving the 
 claim), together with an appropriate assessment of the 
 costs against any of the parties;
 (3) requires individuals who hear and resolve claims under 
 the system to meet such qualifications as the State may require 
 (in accordance with regulations of the Secretary);
 (4) is approved by the State or by local governments in the 
 State;
 (5) with respect to a State system that consists of 
 multiple dispute resolution procedures--
 (A) permits the parties to a dispute to select the 
 procedure to be used for the resolution of the dispute 
 under the system, and
 (B) if the parties do not agree on the procedure to 
 be used for the resolution of the dispute, assigns a 
 particular procedure to the parties;
 (6) provides for the transmittal to the State agency 
 responsible for monitoring or disciplining health care 
 professionals and health care providers of any findings made 
 under the system that such a professional or provider committed 
 malpractice, unless, during the 90-day period beginning on the 
 date the system resolves the claim against the professional or 
 provider, the professional or provider brings an action 
 contesting the decision made under the system; and
 (7) provides for the regular transmittal to the 
 Administrator for Health Care Policy and Research of 
 information on disputes resolved under the system, in a manner 
 that assures that the identity of the parties to a dispute 
 shall not be revealed.
 (b) Application of Malpractice Liability Standards to Alternative 
Dispute Resolution.--The provisions of subtitle A shall apply with 
respect to claims brought under a State alternative dispute resolution 
system or the alternative Federal system in the same manner as such 
provisions apply with respect to health care liability actions brought 
in the State.

SEC. 212. CERTIFICATION OF STATE SYSTEMS; APPLICABILITY OF ALTERNATIVE 
 FEDERAL SYSTEM.

 (a) Certification.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than October 1 of each year 
 (beginning with 1997), the Secretary, in consultation with the 
 Attorney General, shall determine whether a State's alternative 
 dispute resolution system meets the requirements of this 
 subtitle for the following calendar year.
 (2) Basis for certification.--The Secretary shall certify a 
 State's alternative dispute resolution system under this 
 subsection for a calendar year if the Secretary determines 
 under paragraph (1) that the system meets the requirements of 
 section 211.
 (b) Applicability of Alternative Federal System.--
 (1) Establishment and applicability.--Not later than 
 October 1, 1997, the Secretary, in consultation with the 
 Attorney General, shall establish by rule an alternative 
 Federal ADR system for the resolution of health care liability 
 claims during a calendar year in States that do not have in 
 effect an alternative dispute resolution system certified under 
 subsection (a) for the year.
 (2) Requirements for system.--Under the alternative Federal 
 ADR system established under paragraph (1)--
 (A) paragraphs (1), (2), (6), and (7) of section 
 211(a) shall apply to claims brought under the system;
 (B) if the system provides for the resolution of 
 claims through arbitration, the claims brought under 
 the system shall be heard and resolved by arbitrators 
 appointed by the Secretary in consultation with the 
 Attorney General; and
 (C) with respect to a State in which the system is 
 in effect, the Secretary may (at the State's request) 
 modify the system to take into account the existence of 
 dispute resolution procedures in the State that affect 
 the resolution of health care liability claims.
 (3) Treatment of States with alternative system in 
 effect.--If the alternative Federal ADR system established 
 under this subsection is applied with respect to a State for a 
 calendar year--
 (A) the State shall reimburse the United States (at 
 such time and in such manner as the Secretary may 
 require) for the costs incurred by the United States 
 during the year as a result of the application of the 
 system with respect to the State; and
 (B) notwithstanding any other provision of law, no 
 funds may be paid to the State (or to any unit of local 
 government in the State) or to any entity in the State 
 pursuant to the Public Health Service Act.

SEC. 213. REPORTS ON IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS OF ALTERNATIVE 
 DISPUTE RESOLUTION SYSTEMS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 5 years after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the 
Congress a report describing and evaluating State alternative dispute 
resolution systems operated pursuant to this part and the alternative 
Federal system established under section 212(b).
 (b) Contents of Report.--The Secretary shall include in the report 
prepared and submitted under subsection (a)--
 (1) information on--
 (A) the effect of the alternative dispute 
 resolution systems on the cost of health care within 
 each State,
 (B) the impact of such systems on the access of 
 individuals to health care within the State, and
 (C) the effect of such systems on the quality of 
 health care provided within the State; and
 (2) to the extent that such report does not provide 
 information on no-fault systems operated by States as 
 alternative dispute resolution systems pursuant to this part, 
 an analysis of the feasibility and desirability of establishing 
 a system under which health care liability claims shall be 
 resolved on a no-fault basis.
 <all>
HR 1195 IH----2
HR 1195 IH----3