HR 4899 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 4899
To establish an Old-Growth Forest Reserve, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
April 9, 1992
Mr. DE LA GARZA (for himself, Mr. MILLER of California, Mr. JONES of North
Carolina, Mr. VENTO, Mr. VOLKMER, and Mr. STUDDS) introduced the following
bill; which was referred jointly to the Committees on Agriculture and Interior
and Insular Affairs
A BILL
To establish an Old-Growth Forest Reserve, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
 Congress finds that legislation is needed to establish an Old-Growth
 Reserve and institute other land management practices in the Pacific
 Northwest that will protect late-successional old-growth forests, and the
 wildlife and fish species associated with those forests, and to provide
 for a stable and predictable timber program. The purpose of this Act is
 to establish an Old-Growth Reserve and other land management practices to
 achieve these objectives.
SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.
 The terms in this Act shall have the same definitions as those contained
 in the Glossary of the report entitled `Alternatives for Management of
 Late-Successional Forests of the Pacific Northwest' by the Scientific Panel
 on Late-Successional Forest Ecosystems, dated October 8, 1991 (hereinafter
 referred to as the Panel Report).
SEC. 3. ESTABLISHMENT.
 (a) THE RESERVE- There is hereby established an Old-Growth Forest Reserve
 consisting of those areas and management requirements comprising Alternative
 XXX of the Panel Report. The removal of merchantable timber (including
 salvage) from reserve areas not yet sold is prohibited. Other management
 activities described in the Panel Report as appropriate for the Reserve
 are authorized within the Reserve.
 (b) LAND MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENT OUTSIDE THE RESERVE- The Secretaries of
 Agriculture and the Interior are directed within six months to implement
 the requirements for management of lands outside the Reserve established by
 subsection (a) in accordance with Land Management Option XXX, as described
 in the Panel Report.
SEC. 4. REGULATIONS.
 The Secretaries of the Interior and Agriculture are directed to undertake
 such modifications to their policies, regulations, and guidelines as are
 necessary to implement the requirements of this Act.
SEC. 5. REPORT.
 The Secretaries of the Interior and Agriculture shall review the Reserve and
 land management requirements of this Act and submit a report to Congress
 not later than three years after enactment describing actions taken to
 implement this Act and containing such recommendations as may be appropriate.