S 1442 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1442
Relating to the rights of consumers in connection with telephone advertising.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
July 10 (legislative day, JULY 8), 1991
Mr. PRESSLER introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
A BILL
Relating to the rights of consumers in connection with telephone advertising.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Telephone Advertising Consumer Rights Act'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that:
 (1) The use of the telephone to market goods and services to the home and
 other businesses is now pervasive due to the increased use of cost-effective
 telemarketing techniques.
 (2) Over 30,000 businesses actively telemarket goods and services to
 business and residential customers.
 (3) More than 300,000 solicitors call more than 18,000,000 Americans
 every day.
 (4) Total United States sales generated through telemarketing amounted to
 $435,000,000,000 in 1990, a more than four-fold increase since 1984.
 (5) Unrestricted telemarketing, however, can be an intrusive invasion of
 privacy and, when an emergency or medical assistance telephone line is
 seized, a risk to public safety.
 (6) Many consumers are outraged over the proliferation of intrusive,
 nuisance calls to their homes from telemarketers.
 (7) Over half the States now have statutes restricting various uses of the
 telephone for marketing, but telemarketers can evade their prohibitions
 through interstate operations; therefore, Federal law is needed to control
 residential telemarketing practices.
 (8) The Constitution does not prohibit restrictions on commercial
 telemarketing solicitations.
 (9) Individuals privacy rights, public safety interests, and commercial
 freedoms of speech and trade must be balanced in a way that protects the
 privacy of individuals and permits legitimate telemarketing practices.
SEC. 3. RESTRICTIONS ON THE USE OF TELEPHONE EQUIPMENT FOR ADVERTISING.
 Title II of the Communications Act of 1934 is amended by inserting
 immediately after section 226 (47 U.S.C. 226) the following new section:
`SEC. 227. RESTRICTIONS ON THE USE OF TELEPHONE EQUIPMENT FOR ADVERTISING.
 `(a) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section:
 `(1) The term `automatic telephone dialing system' means equipment which
 has the capacity--
 `(A) to store or produce telephone numbers to be called, using a random
 or sequential number generator;
 `(B) to dial such numbers; and
 `(C) to deliver, without initial live operator assistance, a prerecorded
 voice message to the number dialed, with or without manual assistance.
 `(2) The term `telephone facsimile machine' means equipment which has the
 capacity to do either or both of the following: (A) to transcribe text or
 images (or both) from paper into an electronic signal and to transmit that
 signal over a regular telephone line, or (B) to transcribe text or images
 (or both) from an electronic signal received over a regular telephone line
 onto paper.
 `(3) The term `telephone solicitation' means the initiation of a telephone
 call or message for the purpose of encouraging the purchase or rental of,
 or investment in, property, goods, or services, which is transmitted
 to any person (A) without that person's prior express invitation or
 permission, or (B) with whom the caller does not have an established
 business relationship. Such term does not include a call or message by a
 tax exempt nonprofit organization.
 `(4) The term `unsolicited advertisement' means any material advertising
 the commercial availability or quality of any property, goods, or services
 which is transmitted to any person (A) without that person's prior express
 invitation or permission, or (B) with whom the caller does not have an
 established business relationship.
 `(b) RESTRICTIONS- It shall be unlawful for any person within the United
 States by means of telephone--
 `(1) to make any telephone solicitation in violation of the regulations
 prescribed by the Commission pursuant to subsection (c);
 `(2) to use, to make any telephone solicitation, any telephone facsimile
 machine or any automatic telephone dialing system that does not comply with
 the technical and procedural standards prescribed under subsection (d),
 or to use, to make any telephone solicitation, any telephone facsimile
 machine or automatic telephone dialing system in a manner that does not
 comply with such standards;
 `(3) to use any telephone facsimile machine, computer, or other device to
 send an unsolicited advertisement in violation of any regulations prescribed
 by the Commission pursuant to subsection (e);
 `(4) to use any automatic telephone dialing system to make unsolicited
 calls--
 `(A) to any emergency telephone line or pager of any hospital, medical
 physician or service office, health care facility, or fire protection or
 law enforcement agency; or
 `(B) to any telephone number assigned to paging, specialized mobile radio,
 or cellular telephone service; or
 `(5) to use a computer or other electronic device to send an unsolicited
 advertisement via a telephone facsimile machine unless such person clearly
 marks, in a margin at the top or bottom of each transmitted page of the
 advertisement or on the first page of each transmission, the date and time
 it is sent, an identification of the business sending the advertisement,
 and the telephone number of the sending machine or of such business.
 `(c) PROTECTION OF SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY RIGHTS-
 `(1) RULEMAKING PROCEEDING REQUIRED- Within 120 days after the date of
 enactment of this section, the Commission shall initiate a rulemaking
 proceeding concerning the need to protect residential telephone subscribers'
 privacy rights to avoid receiving telephone solicitations to which they
 object. The proceeding shall--
 `(A) compare and evaluate alternative methods and procedures (including
 the use of telephone network technologies) for protecting such privacy
 rights, in terms of their cost effectiveness and their other advantages
 and disadvantages;
 `(B) evaluate the categories of public and private entities that would
 have the capacity to establish and administer such methods and procedures;
 `(C) develop proposed regulations to implement the methods and procedures
 that the Commission determines are most effective and efficient to accomplish
 the purposes of this section.
 `(2) REGULATIONS- Not later than 240 days after the date of enactment
 of this section, the Commission shall conclude the rulemaking proceeding
 initiated under paragraph (1) and shall prescribe regulations to implement
 methods and procedures for protecting the privacy rights described in such
 paragraph in an efficient, effective, and economic manner and without the
 imposition of any additional charge to telephone subscribers.
 `(3) USE OF DATABASE PERMITTED- The regulations required by paragraph (2)
 may require the establishment and operation of a single national database to
 compile a list of telephone numbers of residential subscribers who object
 to receiving telephone solicitations, or to receiving certain classes or
 categories of telephone solicitations, and to make that compiled list
 available for purchase. If the Commission determines to require such a
 database, such regulations shall--
 `(A) specify a method by which the Commission will select an entity to
 administer such database;
 `(B) require each common carrier providing telephone exchange service,
 in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Commission, to inform
 subscribers for telephone exchange service of the opportunity to provide
 notification, in accordance with regulations established under this
 paragraph, that such subscriber objects to receiving telephone solicitations;
 `(C) specify the methods by which each telephone subscriber shall be
 informed, by the common carrier that provides local exchange service to that
 subscriber, of (i) the subscriber's right to give or revoke a notification
 of an objection under subparagraph (A), and (ii) the methods by which such
 right may be exercised by the subscriber;
 `(D) specify the methods by which such objections shall be collected and
 added to the database;
 `(E) prohibit any residential subscriber from being charged for giving or
 revoking such notification or for being included in a database compiled
 under this section;
 `(F) prohibit any person from making or transmitting a telephone solicitation
 to the telephone number of any subscriber included in such database;
 `(G) specify (i) the methods by which any person desiring to make or
 transmit telephone solicitations will obtain access to the database,
 by area code or local exchange prefix, as required to avoid calling the
 telephone numbers of subscribers included in such database; and (ii)
 the costs to be recovered from such persons;
 `(H) specify the methods for recovering, from persons accessing
 such database, the costs involved in notifying, collecting, updating,
 disseminating, and selling, and other activities relating to, the operations
 of the database that are incurred by the entities carrying out those
 activities;
 `(I) specify the frequency with which such database will be updated and
 specify the method by which such updating will take effect for purposes
 of compliance with subsection (b);
 `(J) be designed to enable and require States to use the database mechanism
 selected by the Commission for purposes of administering or enforcing
 State law;
 `(K) prohibit the use of such database for any purpose other than compliance
 with the requirements of this section and any such State law and specify
 methods for protection of the privacy rights of persons whose numbers are
 included in such database; and
 `(L) require each common carrier providing services to any person for the
 purpose of making telephone solicitations to notify such person of the
 requirements of this section and the regulations thereunder.
 `(4) Considerations required for use of database method- If the Commission
 determines to require the database mechanism described in paragraph (3),
 the Commission shall--
 `(A) in developing procedures for gaining access to the database, consider
 the different needs of telemarketers conducting business on a national,
 regional, State, or local level;
 `(B) develop a fee schedule or price structure for recouping the cost of
 such database that recognizes such differences and--
 `(i) reflect the relative costs of providing a national, regional, State,
 or local list of phone numbers of subscribers who object to receiving
 telephone solicitations;
 `(ii) reflect the relative costs of providing such lists on paper or
 electronic media; and
 `(iii) not place an unreasonable financial burden on small businesses; and
 `(C) consider (i) whether the needs of telemarketers operating on a local
 basis could be met through special markings of area white pages directories,
 and (ii) if such directories are needed as an adjunct to database lists
 prepared by area code and local exchange prefix.
 `(d) TECHNICAL AND PROCEDURAL STANDARDS-
 `(1) TELEPHONE FACSIMILE MACHINES- The Commission shall revise the
 regulations setting technical and procedural standards for telephone
 facsimile machines to require that any such machine which is manufactured
 after 6 months after the date of enactment of this section clearly marks,
 in a margin at the top or bottom of each transmitted page or on the first
 page of each transmission, the date and time sent, an identification of
 the business or other entity sending the advertisement, and the telephone
 number of the sending machine or of such business. The Commission shall
 exempt from such standards, for 12 months after such date of enactment,
 telephone facsimile machines that do not have the capacity for automatic
 dialing and transmission and that are not capable of operation through an
 interface with a computer.
 `(2) AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE DIALING SYSTEMS- The Commission shall prescribe
 technical and procedural standards for automatic telephone dialing systems
 that are used to transmit any prerecorded telephone solicitation. Such
 standards shall require that--
 `(A) all prerecorded telephone messages (i) shall, at the beginning of
 the message, state clearly the identity of the business or other entity
 initiating the call, and (ii) shall, during or after the message, state
 clearly the telephone number or address of such business or other entity; and
 `(B) such systems will, as soon as is technically practicable (given
 the limitations of the telephone exchange service facilities) after the
 called party hangs up, automatically create a disconnect signal or on-hook
 condition which allows the called party's line to be released.
 `(e) CONSIDERATION OF FACSIMILE MACHINE RESTRICTIONS- Within 120 days
 after the date of enactment of this section, the Commission shall initiate
 a rulemaking proceeding to prescribe rules to restrict the use of any
 telephone facsimile machine or computer or other electronic device to send
 any unsolicited advertisement to the telephone facsimile machine of any
 person. In establishing such restrictions, the Commission shall consider--
 `(1) the extent to which unsolicited advertisements are transmitted through
 telephone facsimile machines;
 `(2) the extent to which recipients of such advertisements incur costs
 for such receipt; and
 `(3) the most cost effective methods of preventing advertising abuses with
 telephone facsimile machines.
 `(f) STATE LAW NOT PREEMPTED- Nothing in this section or in the regulations
 prescribed under this section shall preempt any State law that imposes more
 restrictive intrastate requirements or regulations on, or which prohibits,
 either or both of the following:
 `(1) The use of telephone facsimile machines or other electronic devices
 to send unsolicited advertisements.
 `(2) The use of automatic telephone dialing systems to transmit prerecorded
 telephone solicitations.
 `(g) EFFECTIVE DATE OF REQUIREMENTS- The requirements of this section
 shall take effect 30 days after the date that regulations are prescribed
 under subsection (c).'.
SEC. 4. CONFORMING AMENDMENT.
 Section 2(b) of the Communications Act of 1934 is amended by striking
 `Except as provided' and all that follows through `and subject to the
 provisions' and inserting `Except as provided in sections 223 through 227,
 inclusive, and subject to the provisions'.