B37 5-19-89 [OC's]
S 1050 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1050
To amend the Federal Railroad Safety Act of 1970.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
May 18 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. HEINZ (for himself and Mr. CONRAD) introduced the following bill;
which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation
A BILL
To amend the Federal Railroad Safety Act of 1970.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SHORT TITLE
 SECTION 1. This Act may be cited as the `Federal Rail Safety Enforcement
 Improvement Act of 1989'.
INVESTIGATIONS
 SEC. 2. Section 208 of the Federal Railroad Safety Act of 1970 (45
 U.S.C. 437) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(e) On and after the date of expiration of the 120-day period following the
 date of the enactment of this subsection, the Secretary, acting through
 the Federal Railroad Administration, shall thoroughly investigate each
 accident or incident, occurring on or after such date, involving a collision
 or derailment of a train if such collision or derailment resulted in or
 caused the release or other escape of hazardous materials or resulted in
 a fatality or personal injury requiring at least out-patient care.'.
ENFORCEMENT
 SEC. 3. Section 209 of the Federal Railroad Safety Act of 1970 (45
 U.S.C. 438) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(f)(1) In the administration of this Act, a civil penalty shall be imposed
 for the noncompliance by any person of any safety rule, regulation, order,
 or standard issued under this Act without regard to whether or not the person
 had prior knowledge of such noncompliance, if such noncompliance resulted
 in or caused the release or other escape of hazardous materials or resulted
 in a fatality or personal injury requiring at least out-patient care.
 `(2) The provisions of paragraph (1) shall be applicable only in the case
 of a violation occurring after the expiration of a 90-day period following
 the date of the enactment of this subsection.'.
REPORTING
 SEC. 4. Section 211 of the Federal Railroad Safety Act of 1970 (45
 U.S.C. 440) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(d)(1) On or before March 31, 1990, and each calendar year thereafter,
 the Secretary shall issue such rules and regulations as may be necessary
 to require each railroad to report, at least annually, on its national,
 State and regional operations during the calendar year preceding such report.
 `(2) On application by any railroad, the Secretary may waive in whole or in
 part compliance by such railroad with any rule or regulation issued pursuant
 to paragraph (1), if the Secretary determines that the cost of compliance by
 such railroad with such rule or regulation, or part thereof, would outweigh
 the benefit to the rail safety mission of the Department of Transportation.
 `(3) Within the 60-day period following any such waiver granted pursuant
 to paragraph (2), the Secretary shall report such waiver to the Congress,
 including the basis on which the Secretary made his or her determination
 to the effect that the cost of compliance by such railroad would outweigh
 the benefit to the rail safety mission of the Department.'.
MINIMUM PENALTY
 SEC. 5. Subsection (b) of section 209 of the Federal Railroad Safety Act
 of 1970 (45 U.S.C. 438) is amended by deleting `not less than $250' and
 inserting in lieu thereof `not less than $500'.
STUDY
 SEC. 6. (a) On or before the expiration of the 90-day period following
 the date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary shall enter
 into a contract with the National Academy of Sciences pursuant to which
 the Academy would conduct a study with respect to the railroad track
 designing process, including specification development, design approval,
 repair process approval, repair accountability, and the process by which
 designs and repairs are presented, weighed, and evaluated. Such study
 shall include an evaluation of the adequacy of Federal track maintenance
 and condition standards as they relate to accidents. The results of such
 study shall be reported by the Secretary, together with his recommendations,
 to the Congress prior to the expiration of the 12-month period following
 the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) There is authorized to be appropriated such sum as may be necessary
 to carry out the provisions of this section.