HR 939 SC
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 939
To amend title XVIII of the Social Security Act to provide civil money
penalties and other remedies for certain improper referral arrangements for
items and services provided under the Medicare Program.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
February 9, 1989
Mr. STARK (for himself, Mr. DONNELLY, Mr. COYNE, Mr. LEVIN of Michigan,
Mr. MOODY, and Mr. GUARINI) introduced the following bill; which was referred
jointly to the Committees on Ways and Means and Energy and Commerce
July 6, 1989
Additional sponsors: Mr. BATES, Mr. TORRICELLI, Mr. AKAKA, Mr. MILLER of
California, Mr. ATKINS, Mr. MORRISON of Connecticut, Mr. KASTENMEIER,
Mr. MCDERMOTT, Mr. RAVENEL, Mr. FAUNTROY, Mr. DE LUGO, Mr. MONTGOMERY,
Mr. KLECZKA, and Mr. Rangel
A BILL
To amend title XVIII of the Social Security Act to provide civil money
penalties and other remedies for certain improper referral arrangements for
items and services provided under the Medicare Program.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Ethics in Patient Referrals Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS BETWEEN REFERRING
PHYSICIANS AND PROVIDERS OF CERTAIN MEDICARE COVERED ITEMS AND SERVICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title XVIII of the Social Security Act is amended by
 inserting after section 1876 the following new section:
`LIMITATION ON CERTAIN PHYSICIAN REFERRALS
 `SEC. 1877. (a) PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN REFERRALS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b), if a physician (or
 immediate family member of such physician) has a financial relationship
 with an entity specified in paragraph (2), then--
 `(A) the physician may not make a referral to the entity for the furnishing
 of an item or service for which payment otherwise may be made under this
 title, and
 `(B) the entity may not present or cause to be presented a claim under
 this title or bill to any individual, third party payor, or other entity
 for an item or service furnished pursuant to a referral prohibited under
 subparagraph (A).
 `(2) FINANCIAL RELATIONSHIP SPECIFIED- For purposes of this section,
 a financial relationship of a physician (or immediate family member)
 with an entity specified in this paragraph is--
 `(A) except as provided in subsection (c), an ownership or investment
 interest in the entity; or
 `(B) except as provided in subsection (d), other compensation arrangement
 (as defined in subsection (f)(1)) between the physician (or immediate
 family member) and the entity.
An ownership or investment interest described in subparagraph (A) may be
through equity, debt, or other means.
 `(b) GENERAL EXCEPTIONS- Subsection (a)(1) shall not apply in the following
 cases:
 `(1) PHYSICIANS' SERVICES- In the case of physicians' services (as defined in
 section 1861(q)) provided personally by (or under the personal supervision
 of) another physician in the same group practice (as defined in subsection
 (f)(3)) as the referring physician.
 `(2) SERVICES OF PRACTITIONERS EMPLOYED BY PHYSICIAN- In the case of
 services described in subparagraph (K), (L), or (M) of section 1861(s)(2)
 or section 1861(s)(11), provided by a practitioner who is employed by--
 `(A) the referring physician,
 `(B) the same group practice as the referring physician, or
 `(C) another physician in that same group practice.
 `(3) PREPAID PLANS- In the case of items and services furnished--
 `(A) by an organization with a contract under section 1876 to an individual
 enrolled with the organization,
 `(B) by an organization described in section 1833(a)(1)(A) to an individual
 enrolled with the organization, or
 `(C) by an organization receiving payments on a prepaid basis, under a
 demonstration project under section 402(a) of the Social Security Amendments
 of 1967 or under section 222(a) of the Social Security Amendments of 1972,
 to an individual enrolled with the organization.
 `(4) OTHER PERMISSIBLE EXCEPTIONS- In the case of any other financial
 relationship which the Secretary determines, and specifies in regulations,
 does not pose a risk of program or patient abuse.
 `(c) EXCEPTIONS RELATED TO OWNERSHIP OR INVESTMENT PROHIBITION- The following
 shall not be considered to be an ownership or investment interest described
 in subsection (a)(2)(A):
 `(1) OWNERSHIP OF PUBLICLY-TRADED SECURITIES- In the case of the ownership
 of investment securities (including shares or bonds, debentures, notes, or
 other debt instruments) which were purchased on terms generally available
 to the public and which are in a corporation that--
 `(A) is listed for trading on the New York Stock Exchange or on the
 American Stock Exchange, or is a national market system security traded
 under an automated interdealer quotation system operated by the National
 Association of Securities Dealers, and
 `(B) had, at the end of the corporation's most recent fiscal year, total
 assets exceeding $100,000,000.
 `(2) SOLE RURAL PROVIDER- In the case of a particular item or service if
 the entity furnishing the item or service is the sole entity furnishing
 such item or service in a rural area.
 `(3) HOSPITAL SERVICES- In the case of items and services provided by a
 hospital if--
 `(A) the referring physician is authorized to perform services at the
 hospital,
 `(B) the ownership or investment interest is in the hospital itself (and
 not merely in a subdivision thereof), and
 `(C) the ownership or investment interest was established before March
 1, 1989.
 `(4) AMBULATORY SURGICAL CENTERS- In the case of items and services provided
 by an ambulatory surgical center (described in section 1832(a)(1)(F)(i)) in
 conjunction with a surgical procedure performed by the referring physician
 at the center.
 `(5) IN-OFFICE ANCILLARY SERVICES- In the case of medical and other health
 services (as defined in section 1861(s), but excluding durable medical
 equipment, ambulance services, and parenteral and enteral nutrition), if--
 `(A) the services are furnished--
 `(i) personally by the referring physician, personally by a physician
 who is a member of the same group practice as the referring physician,
 or personally by individuals who are employed by such physician or group
 practice and who are personally supervised by the physician or by another
 physician in the group practice, and
 `(ii) in the same building in which the referring physician (or another
 physician who is a member of the same group practice) furnishes physicians'
 services;
 `(B) the services are billed by the physician performing or supervising the
 services, by a group practice of which such physician is a member, or by
 an entity that is wholly owned by such physician or such group practice; and
 `(C) the ownership or investment interest meets such other requirements
 as the Secretary may impose by regulation as needed to protect against
 program or patient abuse.
 `(d) EXCEPTIONS RELATING TO OTHER COMPENSATION ARRANGEMENTS- The following
 shall not be considered to be a compensation arrangement described in
 subsection (a)(2)(B):
 `(1) RENTAL OF OFFICE SPACE- In the case of payments made for the rental
 or lease of office space if--
 `(A) there is a written agreement, signed by the parties, for the rental
 or lease of the space, which agreement--
 `(i) specifies the space covered by the agreement and dedicated for the
 use of the lessee,
 `(ii) provides for a term of rental or lease of at least one year;
 `(iii) provides for payment on a periodic basis of an amount that is
 consistent with fair market value;
 `(iv) provides for an amount of aggregate payments that does not vary
 (directly or indirectly) based on the volume or value of any referrals of
 business between the parties; and
 `(v) would be considered to be commercially reasonable even if no referrals
 were made between the parties;
 `(B) in the case of rental or lease of office space in which the physician
 (or immediate family member) has an ownership or investment interest, the
 office space is in the same building as the building in which the physician
 (or group practice of which the physician is a member) has a practice; and
 `(C) the arrangement meets such other requirements as the Secretary may
 impose by regulation as needed to protect against program or patient abuse.
 `(2) EMPLOYMENT AND SERVICE ARRANGEMENTS WITH HOSPITALS- In the case of
 an arrangement between a hospital and a physician (or immediate family
 member) for the employment of the physician (or immediate family member)
 or for the provision of administrative services and personnel, if--
 `(A) the arrangement is for identifiable services;
 `(B) the amount of the remuneration under the arrangement--
 `(i) is consistent with the fair market value of the services, and
 `(ii) is not determined in a manner that takes into account (directly or
 indirectly) the volume or value of any referrals by the referring physician;
 `(C) the remuneration is provided pursuant to an agreement which would be
 considered to be commercially reasonable even if no referrals were made
 to the hospital; and
 `(D) the arrangement meets such other requirements as the Secretary may
 impose by regulation as needed to protect against program or patient abuse.
 `(3) OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES- In the case of remuneration from an
 entity (other than a hospital) under an arrangement if--
 `(A) the arrangement is--
 `(i) for specific identifiable services as the medical director at the
 entity pursuant to a requirement of this title,
 `(ii) for specific identifiable physicians' services to be furnished to
 an individual receiving hospice care if payment for such services may only
 be made under this title as hospice care, or
 `(iii) for specific identifiable administrative services (other than direct
 patient care services), but only under exceptional circumstances specified
 by the Secretary in regulations; and
 `(B) the requirements described in subparagraphs (B), (C), and (D) of
 paragraph (2) are met with respect to the entity in the same manner as
 they apply to a hospital.
 `(4) PHYSICIAN RECRUITMENT- In the case of remuneration which is provided
 by a hospital to a physician to induce the physician to relocate to the
 geographic area served by the hospital in order to be a member of the
 medical staff of the hospital, if--
 `(A) the physician is not required to refer patients to the hospital, and
 `(B) the requirements described in subparagraphs (B)(ii) and (D) of paragraph
 (2) are met.
 `(5) ISOLATED TRANSACTIONS- In the case of an isolated financial transaction,
 such as a one-time sale of property, if the requirements described in
 subparagraphs (B), (C), and (D) of paragraph (2) are met with respect to
 the entity in the same manner as they apply to a hospital.
 `(e) SANCTIONS-
 `(1) DENIAL OF PAYMENT- No payment may be made under this title for an
 item or service which is provided in violation of subsection (a)(1).
 `(2) REQUIRING REFUNDS FOR CERTAIN CLAIMS- If a person collects any amounts
 that were billed in violation of subsection (a)(1), the person shall refund
 on a timely basis to the individual (and shall be liable to the individual
 for) any amounts so collected.
 `(3) CIVIL MONEY PENALTY AND EXCLUSION FOR IMPROPER CLAIMS- Any person
 that presents or causes to be presented a bill or a claim for an item or
 service that such person knows or should know is for an item or service
 for which payment may not be made under paragraph (1) or for which a
 refund has not been made under paragraph (2) shall be subject to a civil
 money penalty of not more than $15,000 for each such item or service. The
 provisions of section 1128A (other than the first sentence of subsection
 (a) and other than subsection (b)) shall apply to a civil money penalty
 under the previous sentence in the same manner as such provisions apply
 to a penalty or proceeding under section 1128A(a).
 `(4) CIVIL MONEY PENALTY AND EXCLUSION FOR CIRCUMVENTION SCHEMES- Any
 physician or other entity that enters into an arrangement or scheme (such
 as a cross-referral arrangement) which the physician or entity knows or
 should know has a principal purpose assuring referrals by the physician
 to a particular entity which, if the physician directly made referrals to
 such entity, would be in violation of this section, shall be subject to a
 civil money penalty of not more than $100,000 for each such arrangement or
 scheme. The provisions of section 1128A (other than the first sentence of
 subsection (a) and other than subsection (b)) shall apply to a civil money
 penalty under the previous sentence in the same manner as such provisions
 apply to a penalty or proceeding under section 1128A(a).
 `(f) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section:
 `(1) COMPENSATION ARRANGEMENT; REMUNERATION- (A) The term `compensation
 arrangement' means any arrangement involving any remuneration between a
 physician (or immediate family member) and an entity.
 `(B) The term `remuneration' includes any remuneration, directly or
 indirectly, overtly or covertly, in cash or in kind.
 `(2) FAIR MARKET VALUE- The term `fair market value' means the value
 in arms length transactions, consistent with the general market value,
 and, with respect to rentals or leases, the value of rental property for
 general commercial purposes (not taking into account its intended use) and,
 in the case of a lease of space, not adjusted to reflect the additional
 value the prospective lessee or lessor would attribute to the proximity
 or convenience to the lesser where the lessor is a potential source of
 patient referrals to the lessee.
 `(3) GROUP PRACTICE- The term `group practice' means a group of two or more
 physicians legally organized as a partnership, professional corporation,
 or similar association--
 `(A) in which each physician who is a member of the group provides
 substantially the full range of services which the physician routinely
 provides (including medical care, consultation, diagnosis, or treatment)
 through the joint use of shared office space, facilities, equipment,
 and personnel;
 `(B) for which substantially all of the services of the physicians who
 are members of the group are provided through the group and are billed in
 the name of the group and amounts so received are treated as receipts of
 the group;
 `(C) in which the overhead expenses of and the income from the practice
 are distributed in accordance with methods previously determined by members
 of the group; and
 `(D) which meets such other standards as the Secretary may impose by
 regulation.
 `(4) REFERRAL; REFERRING PHYSICIAN-
 `(A) PRESCRIPTIONS- In the case of a covered outpatient drug, the
 prescription of the drug by a physician constitutes a `referral' by a
 `referring physician', but only if the physician directs the patient to
 the specific pharmacy, home intravenous drug therapy provider, or other
 entity dispensing the drug.
 `(B) PHYSICIANS' SERVICES- Except as provided in subparagraphs (D) and
 (E), in the case of an item or service which under law is required to be
 provided by (or under the supervision of) a physician, the request by a
 physician for the item or service, including the request by a physician for
 a consultation with another physician (and any test or procedure ordered by,
 or to be performed by (or under the supervision of), that other physician),
 constitutes a `referral' by a `referring physician'.
 `(C) OTHER ITEMS- Except as provided in subparagraphs (D) and (E), in the
 case of another item or service, the request or establishment of a plan of
 care, by a physician for the provision of the item or service constitutes a
 `referral' by a `referring physician'.
 `(D) CLARIFICATION RESPECTING PHYSICIANS' SERVICES PROVIDED PERSONALLY
 BY REFERRING PHYSICIAN- A request by a physician for physicians' services
 consisting solely of professional services to be furnished personally by
 that physician (or under that physician's personal supervision) does not
 constitute a `referral' by a `referring physician'.
 `(E) CLARIFICATION RESPECTING CERTAIN SERVICES INTEGRAL TO A CONSULTATION
 BY CERTAIN SPECIALISTS- A request--
 `(i) by a radiologist for diagnostic imaging services,
 `(ii) by a physician specializing in the provision of radiation therapy
 services for such services, or
 `(iii) by a pathologist for diagnostic clinical laboratory tests and
 pathological examination services,
if such services are furnished by (or under the supervision of) such a
physician pursuant to a consultation requested by another physician does
not constitute a `referral' by a `referring physician'.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- (1) Sections 1814(a) and 1835(a) of such Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1395f(a), 1395n(a)) are each amended by striking the third and
 fourth sentences.
 (2) Section 1834(d) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(d)) is amended by striking
 paragraph (3).
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall become
 effective with respect to referrals made after June 30, 1989; except that
 with respect to financial relationships that were entered into and became
 legally binding before February 9, 1989, the amendments shall not apply
 to referrals occurring before July 1, 1990.
 (d) DEADLINE FOR CERTAIN REGULATIONS- The Secretary of Health and Human
 Services shall publish final regulations--
 (1) defining `ownership or investment interest', under subsection (a)(2)(A)
 of section 1877 of the Social Security Act (as inserted by this Act),
 involving an indirect ownership or investment interest;
 (2) defining, under subsection (f)(1) of such section, `compensation
 arrangement' involving renumeration indirectly made between the parties
 to the arrangement; and
 (3) defining `sole entity furnishing such item or service in a rural area',
 under subsection (c)(2) of such section,
by not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.