S 1836 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1836
To provide economic incentives through Medicaid bonus funds to promote State
alternative dispute resolution systems, to assist States in the creation and
evaluation of alternative dispute resolution systems, to encourage State-based
quality improvement programs, and to provide comprehensive reform of State tort
law to curb excesses in the current liability system, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
October 17 (legislative day, SEPTEMBER 19), 1991
Mr. DURENBERGER (for himself, Mr. DANFORTH, and Mr. BURNS) introduced the
following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Finance
A BILL
To provide economic incentives through Medicaid bonus funds to promote State
alternative dispute resolution systems, to assist States in the creation and
evaluation of alternative dispute resolution systems, to encourage State-based
quality improvement programs, and to provide comprehensive reform of State tort
law to curb excesses in the current liability system, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `American Health Quality Act'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
 (a) FINDINGS- Congress finds that--
 (1) the Federal Government has a major interest in health care as a direct
 provider through the Public Health Service, as a source of payment for
 health care through Medicare, Medicaid, and other programs;
 (2) the Federal Government has a demonstrated interest in assessing
 the quality of care, access to care, and the costs of care through the
 evaluative activities of several Federal agencies;
 (3) the Federal Government has a longstanding interest in the quality of
 medical practice through its support for medical education and training
 of professionals under grant and loan programs, including the National
 Health Services Corps.
 (4) there is increasing concern that health care liability claims have
 significant negative effects on the health care system, including--
 (A) increasing costs attributable to defensive medical practices, the cost
 of medical liability insurance, and costs attributable to the inefficiencies
 in the civil justice system;
 (B) adversely affecting the quality of health care through the encouragement
 of defensive health care practices including unnecessary tests and
 procedures; and
 (C) adversely affecting patient access to care because of the threat of
 liability suits and liability costs, including the ability of health care
 professionals to continue to practice in high risk specialties, particularly
 obstetrical care, and in certain geographic regions of the country;
 (5) it has been clearly demonstrated that the civil justice system is a
 costly, inefficient, and inequitable mechanism for all parties in resolving
 claims against health care providers, professionals, producers and employers;
 (6) a disproportionately large percentage of funds expended to compensate
 patients is distributed to a few individuals, while others are denied
 adequate compensation;
 (7) an exorbitant amount of funds in health care liability actions go to
 the transaction costs of the judicial system rather than to compensate
 for health care injuries;
 (8) there is optimism that alternative dispute resolution systems have
 the potential to significantly improve the adverse effects of the health
 care liability environment, however more data and analysis is necessary to
 fully understand the benefits of various alternative procedural devices; and
 (9) there is optimism that State-based disciplinary bodies could improve
 overall health care quality rather than merely penalize a few bad actors.
 (b) PURPOSE- It is the purpose of this Act to--
 (1) provide incentives through a Medicaid bonus program for States
 to develop alternative dispute resolution procedures to attain a more
 efficient, expeditious, and equitable resolution of health care disputes;
 (2) enhance general knowledge concerning the benefits of different forms
 of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms;
 (3) provide incentives through a Medicaid bonus program for States to
 improve the health care professional disciplinary and licensing bodies
 and to encourage the adoption of quality assurance reforms to reduce the
 incidence of health care injuries; and
 (4) promote uniformity and curb excesses in the State-based health care
 liability systems through Federally mandated tort reforms.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act:
 (1) AGENCY- The term `Agency' means the Agency for Health Care Policy
 and Research.
 (2) ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION SYSTEM- The term `alternative dispute
 resolution system' means a system that is enacted or adopted by a State
 to resolve health care liability claims as an alternative to a judicial
 proceeding in a Federal or State court.
 (3) CLAIMANT- The term `claimant' means any person who brings a civil action
 that is subject to the requirements of this Act, and any person on whose
 behalf such an action is brought, if such an action is brought through
 or on behalf of an estate. Such term includes the claimant's decedent,
 or if it is brought through or on behalf of a minor or incompetent, such
 term includes the claimant's parent or guardian.
 (4) CLEAR AND CONVINCING EVIDENCE- The term `clear and convincing evidence'
 is that measure or degree of proof that will produce in the mind of the
 trier of fact a firm belief or conviction as to the truth of the allegations
 sought to be established. The level of proof required to satisfy such
 standard is more than that required under preponderance of the evidence,
 but less than that required for proof beyond a reasonable doubt.
 (5) COMPENSATORY DAMAGES- The term `compensatory damages' means all damages
 awarded to compensate a plaintiff, including economic and noneconomic
 damages.
 (6) ECONOMIC DAMAGES- The term `economic damages' means awards for losses
 suffered by the plaintiff to compensate for hospital and other medical
 expenses including rehabilitation costs, such as lost wages, lost employment,
 and other pecuniary losses.
 (7) HEALTH CARE CLAIM- The term `health care claim' means any claim relating
 to the provision (or failure to provide) health care services based on
 negligence or gross negligence, breach of express or implied warranty or
 contract, failure to discharge a duty to warn or instruct to obtain consent.
 (8) HEALTH CARE EMPLOYER- The term `health care employer' means any
 organization or institution that provides employee health benefits or
 systems of care, including employers, employee health benefit plans,
 multiple employer trusts, union trusts and managed care arrangements.
 (9) HEALTH CARE LIABILITY ACTION- The term `health care liability action'
 means any civil action or proceeding in any judicial tribunal brought
 pursuant to Federal or State law against a health care provider, health care
 professional, health care producer, or health care employer, alleging that
 injury was suffered by the claimant as a result of any act or omission by
 such provider, professional, producer, or employer, without regard to the
 theory of liability asserted in the action. Such term includes a claim,
 third-party claim, cross-claim, counter-claim or contribution claim.
 (10) HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL- The term `health care professional' means
 any individual who provides health care services in a State and who is
 required by State law or regulation to be licensed or certified by the
 State to provide such services in the State, including a physician, nurse,
 chiropractor, physical therapist, or physician assistant.
 (11) HEALTH CARE PROVIDER- The term `health care provider' means any
 organization or institution that is engaged in the delivery of health
 care services in a State that is required by State law or regulation to
 be licensed or certified by the State to engage in the delivery of such
 services in the State.
 (12) HEALTH CARE PRODUCER- The term `health care producer' means any firm
 or business enterprise that designs, manufactures, produces or sells a
 medical product that is the subject of a liability action.
 (13) INJURY- The term `injury' means any illness, disease, or other harm
 that is the subject of a health care liability claim.
 (14) NONECONOMIC DAMAGES- The term `noneconomic damages' means losses for
 physical and emotional pain, suffering, inconvenience, physical impairment,
 mental anguish, disfigurement, loss of enjoyment of life, loss of consortium,
 and other nonpecuniary losses.
 (15) PUNITIVE DAMAGES- The term `punitive damages' means damages awarded
 as a form of punishment.
 (16) SECRETARY- The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Health and
 Human Services.
 (17) STATE- The term `State' means each of the several States, the District
 of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, and Guam.
SEC. 4. EFFECT ON INTERSTATE COMMERCE.
 Congress finds that the health care and insurance industries are industries
 affecting interstate commerce and the health care liability systems existing
 throughout the United States impact on interstate commerce by contributing
 to the high cost of health care and premiums for malpractice and products
 liability insurance purchased by health care providers and producers.
TITLE I--ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION SYSTEMS
SEC. 101. ESTABLISHMENT OF INCENTIVE PROGRAM.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall establish a program to make bonus or
 enhanced payments for a 2-year period pursuant to subsection (e) to eligible
 States that submit a State plan for the development or implementation of
 alternative dispute resolution systems in the State, under such terms as
 the Secretary may require.
 (b) ELIGIBILITY- To be eligible to receive enhanced payments under this
 section a State shall--
 (1) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in
 such form and containing such information as the Secretary may require
 including a description of the alternative dispute resolution system that
 the State intends to develop or implement that--
 (A) should support access to health care;
 (B) encourage improvements in the quality of care;
 (C) enhance the patient-provider relationship;
 (D) encourage innovation in health care delivery systems;
 (E) provide prompt resolution and fair compensation;
 (G) provide predictable outcomes; and
 (H) operate efficiently in terms of costs and processes; and
 (2) provide assurances that the State will comply with all data gathering
 and analysis requirements promulgated by the Agency under section 102(c)(2).
 (c) APPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS- The Secretary shall review applications
 and assurances submitted under subsection (b) and shall award enhanced
 payments to States based on demonstrations made by such States that the
 alternative dispute resolution systems to be developed or implemented meet
 the qualification standards developed by the Agency under section 102.
 (d) DESIGNATION OF APPROVED STATES- A State that receives enhanced payments
 under this section shall be designated as an approved alternative dispute
 resolution State by the Agency. Such approved States shall be eligible,
 upon application, for a 2-year extension of the applications and plans
 approved under this section and shall receive enhanced payments during
 such 2-year period.
 (e) ENHANCED PAYMENTS-
 (1) AMOUNT- A State that has an application approved by the Secretary
 under this section shall receive enhanced payments in accordance with
 section 1903(w) of the Social Security Act.
 (2) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (3), the Secretary shall
 provide enhanced payments to not less than five and not more than 10 States
 in each fiscal year under this section.
 (3) EXCEPTION- Notwithstanding paragraph (2), the Secretary may provide
 enhanced payments to less than five States under this section in a fiscal
 year if the Secretary determines that there are an inadequate number of
 applications submitted that meet the eligibility and approval requirements
 of this section in such fiscal year.
SEC. 102. ESTABLISHMENT OF ADVISORY PANEL.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Agency for Health Care Policy and Research shall make
 recommendations to the Secretary concerning the eligibility, approval and
 review requirements for alternative dispute resolution programs described
 in applications submitted under section 101.
 (b) PANEL OF ADVISORS- The Agency shall appoint 15 individuals to serve
 as a panel of advisors to assist in carrying out its activities under this
 section. Members of the panel shall include at least one representative, but
 in no event more than three such representatives, of each of the following--
 (1) patient advocacy groups;
 (2) groups representing State governments, such as the National Governors
 Association or National Conference of State Legislatures;
 (3) health care provider organizations;
 (4) professional groups, including organized medicine;
 (5) health care insurers;
 (6) health care employers;
 (7) medical product manufacturers; and
 (8) academic researchers from disciplines such as medicine, economics, law
 or health services, with expertise in alternative dispute resolution models.
 (c) DUTIES OF ADVISORY PANEL- The panel appointed under subsection (b)
 shall--
 (1) assist in the development of criteria for alternative dispute resolution
 systems that States must meet to be eligible to receive enhanced payments
 under section 101 and make information on such criteria available to the
 States to assist such States in preparing applications under section 101(b);
 (2) as part of the criteria developed under paragraph (1), require that
 States receiving enhanced payments under section 101 comply with data
 gathering and evaluation guidelines established by the panel;
 (3) provide advice and assistance to representatives from State governments
 concerning the establishment of alternative dispute resolution systems;
 (4) develop the qualification standards and provide advice and assistance
 to States applying to be quality improvement States under title III;
 (5) not later than 4 years after the approval of an application of a
 State under section 101(b), prepare and submit to the Secretary and the
 appropriate committees of Congress, a report and evaluation concerning
 the alternative dispute resolution systems implemented by States receiving
 enhanced payments under this section, including information--
 (A) on the effect of such systems on the cost of health care within
 the State;
 (B) the impact of such systems on the access of individuals to health care
 within the State;
 (C) the effect of such systems on the quality of health care provided
 within such State; and
 (D) such other effects otherwise determined appropriate by the Secretary;
 (6) not later than 4 years after the date of enactment of this Act, submit to
 the Secretary and to the appropriate committees of Congress a recommendation
 on the feasibility of a mandated alternative dispute resolution system; and
 (7) not later than 4 years after the approval of the first quality
 improvement State plan under title III, prepare and submit to the Secretary
 and the appropriate Committees of Congress a report and evaluation concerning
 the reform of State health professions disciplinary boards or alternative
 quality assurance plans.
SEC. 103. DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary shall establish a program to award grants
 to private entities for the establishment of demonstration alternative
 dispute resolution programs in the private sector.
 (b) APPLICATION- To be eligible to receive a grant under this section an
 entity shall prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such
 time, in such form and containing such information as the Secretary may
 require including a description of the alternative dispute resolution
 system that the entity intends to develop or implement.
 (c) CRITERIA- The Secretary shall consider applications received under
 subsection (b) and award grants based on criteria for such developed by
 the panel.
 (d) REQUIREMENTS- An alternative dispute resolution system that receives
 assistance under this section shall--
 (1) be a dispute resolution system agreed to by health care providers and
 purchasers or members;
 (2) be in compliance with applicable State laws; and
 (3) meet such other requirements as the panel determines to be appropriate.
 (e) DUTIES OF PANEL- The panel shall--
 (1) provide assistance to entities receiving a grant under this section
 in designing and implementing alternative dispute resolution systems; and
 (2) collect data on alternative dispute resolutions systems implemented
 with assistance provided under this section and submit such data to the
 Agency, the Secretary and the appropriate Committees of Congress, together
 with a report concerning recommendations for improving such systems.
 (f) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 to carry out this section, $100,000,000 for fiscal year 1992, and such
 sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1993 through 1996.
SEC. 104. AMENDMENT TO SOCIAL SECURITY ACT.
 Section 1903 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b) is amended by
 adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(w) Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, with respect to a
 State with an application approved under section 101(b) of the Health Care
 Injury Compensation and Quality Improvement Act, such State shall receive,
 in addition to the Federal medical assistance percentage determined for
 such State, not less than an additional .4 percent for each calendar quarter
 in which such State qualifies for such additional percentage under section
 101 of such Act.'.
TITLE II--UNIFORM STANDARDS FOR HEALTH CARE LIABILITY CLAIMS
SEC. 201. APPLICATION TO CIVIL ACTIONS.
 This title shall apply to any health care liability action brought in
 any Federal or State court and any health care action resolved through an
 alternative dispute resolution system. This title shall not be construed
 to create or effect any cause of action or theory of liability recognized
 in any Federal or State proceeding.
SEC. 202. EXPEDITED HEALTH CARE LIABILITY SETTLEMENTS.
 (a) RIGHT TO BRING ACTION- Any claimant may bring a civil action for
 damages against a person for harm caused during the provision of health
 care pursuant to applicable Federal or State law, except to the extent
 that such law is superseded by this title.
 (b) SETTLEMENT OFFERS-
 (1) BY CLAIMANT- Any claimant may, in addition to any claim for relief made
 in accordance with Federal or State law as provided for in subsection (a),
 include in the complaint filed by such complainant an offer of settlement
 for a specific dollar amount.
 (2) BY DEFENDANT- Within 60 days after service of the complaint of a
 claimant of the type referred to in paragraph (1), or within the time
 permitted pursuant to Federal or State law for a responsive pleading,
 whichever is longer, the defendant may make an offer of settlement for a
 specific dollar amount, except that if such pleading includes a motion to
 dismiss in accordance with applicable Federal or State law, the defendant
 may tender such relief to the claimant within 10 days after the determination
 of the court regarding such motion.
 (c) EXTENSION OF TIME-
 (1) AUTHORITY- In any case in which an offer of settlement is made pursuant
 to subsection (a) or (b), the court may, upon motion made prior to the
 expiration of the applicable period for response, enter an order extending
 such period.
 (2) CONTENTS OF EXTENSION ORDER- Any order extending the period for
 response under paragraph (1) shall contain a schedule for discovery of
 evidence material to the issue of the appropriate amount of relief, and
 shall not extend such period for more than 60 days. Any such motion shall be
 accompanied by a supporting affidavit of the moving party setting forth the
 reasons why such extension is necessary to promote the interests of justice
 and stating that the information likely to be discovered is material, and
 is not, after reasonable inquiry, otherwise available to the moving party.
 (d) REJECTION OF OFFER BY DEFENDANT OFFEREE- If the defendant, as offeree,
 does not accept the offer of settlement made by a claimant in accordance
 with subsection (b)(1) within the time permitted pursuant to Federal or
 State law for a responsive pleading or, if such pleading includes a motion
 to dismiss in accordance with applicable law, within 30 days after the
 court's determination regarding such motion, and a verdict is entered in
 such action equal to or greater than the specific dollar amount of such
 offer of settlement, the court shall enter judgment against the defendant
 and shall include in such judgment an amount for the claimant's reasonable
 attorney's fees and costs. Such fees shall be offset against any fees owed
 by the claimant to the claimant's attorney by reason of the verdict.
 (e) REJECTION OF OFFER BY CLAIMANT OFFEREE- If the claimant, as offeree,
 does not accept the offer of settlement made by a defendant in accordance
 with subsection (b)(2) within 30 days after the date on which such offer
 is made and a verdict is entered in such action equal to or less than the
 specific dollar amount of such offer of settlement, the court shall reduce
 the amount of the verdict in such action by an amount equal to the reasonable
 attorney's fees and costs owed by the defendant to the defendant's attorney
 by reason of the verdict, except that the amount of such reduction shall not
 exceed that portion of the verdict which is allocable to noneconomic damages.
 (f) CALCULATION OF ATTORNEY'S FEES- For purposes of this section, attorney's
 fees shall be calculated on the basis of an hourly rate that should not
 exceed that which is considered acceptable in the community in which the
 attorney practices, considering the attorney's qualifications, experience
 and the complexity of the case.
SEC. 203. DAMAGES.
 (a) PAYMENTS- With respect to a civil action or claim of the type referred
 to in section 201, no person may be required to pay more than $100,000 in
 a single payment for future losses, but such person shall be permitted to
 make such payments on a periodic basis. The periods for such payments shall
 be determined by the court, based upon projections of such future losses.
 (b) LIMITATION ON NONECONOMIC DAMAGES- With respect to a civil action
 or claim of the type referred to in section 201, the total amount of
 damages that may be awarded to an individual and the family members of such
 individual for noneconomic damages may not exceed $250,000, regardless of
 the number of health care professionals, health care providers, health
 care producers, health care employers against whom the claim is brought
 or the number of claims brought with respect to the injury.
 (c) MANDATORY OFFSETS FOR DAMAGES PAID BY A COLLATERAL SOURCE-
 (1) IN GENERAL- With respect to a civil action or claim of the type referred
 to in section 201, the total amount of damages received by an individual
 under such action or claim shall be reduced, in accordance with paragraph
 (2), by any other payment that has been, or will be, made to an individual
 to compensate such individual for the injury that was the subject of such
 action or claim.
 (2) AMOUNT OF REDUCTION- The amount by which an award of damages to an
 individual for an injury shall be reduced under paragraph (1) shall be--
 (A) the total amount of any payments (other than such award) that have been
 made or that will be made to such individual to compensate such individual
 for the injury that was the subject of the action or claim; minus
 (B) the amount paid by such individual (or by the spouse, parent, or legal
 guardian of such individual) to secure the payments described in subparagraph
 (A).
 (d) ATTORNEYS' FEES- With respect to a civil action or claim of the type
 referred to in section 201, attorneys' fees may not exceed--
 (1) 25 percent of the first $150,000 of any award or settlement under such
 action or claim; or
 (2) 15 percent of any additional amounts in excess of $150,000.
 (e) PUNITIVE DAMAGES-
 (1) LIMITATION- With respect to a civil action or claim of the type referred
 to in section 201, punitive damages may not exceed an amount twice that
 of the award of compensatory damages.
 (2) SEPARATE PROCEEDING-
 (A) CONSIDERATIONS- At the request of the defendant or defendants, the
 trier of law shall consider in a separate proceeding--
 (i) whether punitive damages are to be awarded and the amount of the
 award; or
 (ii) the amount of punitive damages following a determination of punitive
 liability.
 (B) EVIDENCE- If a separate proceeding is requested in accordance with
 subparagraph (A), evidence relevant only to the claim of punitive damages,
 as determined by applicable Federal or State law, shall be inadmissible in
 any proceeding to determine whether compensatory damages are to be awarded.
 (3) AMOUNT- In determining the amount of punitive damages in an action
 under this section, the trier of law shall consider all relevant evidence,
 including--
 (A) the financial condition of the defendant;
 (B) the severity of the harm caused by the conduct of the defendant;
 (C) the duration of the conduct or any concealment of the conduct by
 the defendant;
 (D) the profitability of the conduct to the defendant;
 (E) the number of products sold by the defendant who is a manufacturer or
 product seller of the kind causing the harm complained of by the claimant;
 (F) awards of punitive of exemplary damages to persons similarly situated
 to the claimant;
 (G) prospective awards of compensatory damages to persons similarly situated
 to the claimant;
 (H) any criminal penalties imposed on the defendant seller as a result of
 the conduct complained of by the claimant; and
 (I) the amount of any civil fines assessed against the defendant as a
 result of the conduct complained of by the claimant.
 (4) TRUST FUND- Each State shall establish a health care disciplinary trust
 fund consisting of such amounts as are transferred to the trust fund under
 paragraph (5).
 (5) TRANSFER OF AMOUNTS- Each State shall require that 50 percent of all
 awards of punitive damages resulting from all health care liability actions
 in that State be transferred to the trust fund established under paragraph
 (4) in the State.
 (6) OBLIGATIONS- A State shall obligate the sums available in the trust fund
 established in that State under paragraph (3) to provide additional resources
 to State health care professional disciplinary boards for the disciplining of
 health care professionals and to provide additional resources for alternative
 dispute resolution programs if the State is an approved alternative dispute
 resolution State or a quality improvement State under title III.
 (7) ATTORNEY'S FEES- Claimants pursuing punitive damage awards in health
 care liability actions are permitted to collect reasonable attorneys fees
 under such actions as provided for in this Act and at the discretion of
 the trial judge.
SEC. 204. JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY FOR NONECONOMIC DAMAGES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- With respect to a civil action or claim of the type referred
 to in section 201, the liability of each defendant for noneconomic damages
 shall be several only and shall not be joint. Each defendant shall be liable
 only for the amount of noneconomic damages allocated to such defendant
 in direct proportion to such defendant's percentage of responsibility as
 determined under subsection (b).
 (b) PROPORTION OF RESPONSIBILITY- For purposes of this section, the trier
 of fact shall determine the proportion of responsibility of each party
 for the claimant's harm.
SEC. 205. UNIFORM STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b), no health care
 liability action may be initiated after the expiration of the 2-year period
 that begins on the date on which the alleged injury should reasonably have
 been discovered, but in no event later than 4 years after the date of the
 alleged occurrence of the injury.
 (b) EXCEPTION FOR MINORS- In the case of an alleged injury suffered by a
 minor who has not attained 4 years of age, no health care liability claim
 may be initiated after the expiration of the 2-year period that begins on
 the date on which the alleged injury should reasonably have been discovered,
 but in no event later than 4 years after the date of the alleged occurrence
 of the injury or the date on which the minor attains 8 years of age,
 whichever is later.
SEC. 206. PROVISION FOR SPECIAL OBSTETRIC CASES.
 With respect to a civil action or claim of the type referred to in section
 201, related to services provided during the delivery of a baby, a court
 shall only find in favor of the claimant if such malpractice on the part of
 the defendant health care professional is proven by clear and convincing
 evidence, except that such evidentiary standard shall only apply if a
 defendant did not previously provide prenatal care to the claimant for
 this pregnancy, was not part of a group practice that previously treated
 the claimant during the pregnancy resulting in this delivery, or was
 not providing coverage pursuant to an agreement with another health care
 professional for this delivery.
SEC. 207. MEDICAL PRODUCTS LIABILITY REFORM.
 (a) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section:
 (1) DEVICE- The term `device' has the meaning given the term in section
 201(h) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321(h)).
 (2) DRUG- The term `drug' has the meaning given the term in section 201(g)(1)
 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321(g)(1).
 (b) LIMITATION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Punitive damages otherwise permitted by applicable law
 shall not be awarded in an action under this Act against a manufacturer
 or product seller of a drug or device that caused the harm complained of
 by the claimant if--
 (A) the drug was subject to approval under section 505 (21 U.S.C. 355)
 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act;
 (B) the device was subject to premarket approval under section 505 (21
 U.S.C. 360e); or subject either to special controls under section 513
 (21 U.S.C. 360c) or is filed as a 510k premarket notification submissions
 only is such special controls or notification submission are supported by
 substantial evidence of safety and effectiveness based on valid scientific
 clinical data, with respect to--
 (i) the safety of the formulation or performance of the aspect of the drug
 or device that caused the harm; or
 (ii) the adequacy of the packaging or labeling of the drug or device; and
 (C) the drug or device is generally recognized as safe and effective
 pursuant to conditions established by the Food and Drug Administration
 and applicable regulations, including packaging and labeling regulations.
 (2) WITHHELD INFORMATION; MISREPRESENTATION; ILLEGAL PAYMENT- The provisions
 of paragraph (1) shall not apply in any case in which the court determines
 on the basis on clear and convincing evidence that the defendant--
 (A) withheld from or misrepresented to the Food and Drug Administration
 information concerning such drug or device that is required to be submitted
 under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act of section 352 of the Public
 Health Service Act that is material and relevant to the harm suffered by
 the claimant; or
 (B) made an illegal payment to an official of the Food and Drug
 Administration for the purpose of securing approval of the drug or device.
SEC. 208. PREEMPTION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The provisions of this title supersede any State law only
 to the extent that such State law establishes higher payment limits, applies
 joint and several liability to all damages, permits the recovery of a greater
 amount of damages or the awarding of a greater amount of attorneys' fees,
 or establishes a longer period during which a health care liability claim
 may be initiated.
 (b) EFFECT ON SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY AND CHOICE OF LAW OR VENUE- Nothing in
 this title shall be construed to--
 (1) waive or affect any defense of sovereign immunity asserted by any
 State under any provision of law;
 (2) waive or affect any defense of sovereign immunity asserted by the
 United States;
 (3) affect the applicability of any provision of the Foreign Sovereign
 Immunities Act of 1976;
 (4) preempt State choice-of-law rules with respect to claims brought by
 a foreign nation or a citizen of a foreign nation; or
 (5) affect the right of any court to transfer venue or to apply the law of
 a foreign nation or to dismiss a claim of a foreign nation or of a citizen
 of a foreign nation on the ground in inconvenient forum.
 (c) APPLICATION- Subsection (a) shall apply to health care liability claims
 initiated after the expiration of the 1-year period that begins on the
 date of enactment of this Act.
TITLE III--HEALTH CARE INJURY PREVENTION
SEC. 301. ENHANCED PAYMENTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall establish a program to make enhanced
 Medicaid bonus payments pursuant to subsection (e) for a 2-year period
 to eligible States that submit a State plan for the development or
 implementation of a health care injury prevention program or an approved
 alternative, under such terms as the Secretary may require.
 (b) ELIGIBILITY- To be eligible to receive enhanced payments under this
 section a State shall--
 (1) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in
 such form and containing such information as the Secretary may require
 including a description of the health care injury prevention program that
 the State intends to develop or implement and assurances that the State
 will comply with the requirements of this title; and
 (2) provide assurances that the State will comply with all data gathering
 requirements promulgated by the Agency under section 102(c)(2).
 (c) STANDARDS- The Agency shall establish qualification standards that
 applications submitted under subsection (b)(1) must meet to be eligible to
 receive enhanced payments under this section. The Secretary shall review
 applications submitted under subsection (b)(1) and shall award enhanced
 payments to States based on demonstrations made by such States that the
 health care injury prevention programs to be implemented meet the standards
 developed by the Agency. The advisory panel shall provide assistance to
 the Agency in carrying out this subsection.
 (d) DESIGNATION OF APPROVED STATES- A State that receives enhanced
 payments under this section shall be designated as a quality improvement
 State by the Secretary. Such States shall be eligible, upon application,
 for a 2-year extension of the applications and plans approved under this
 section and shall receive enhanced payments during such 2-year period.
 (e) ENHANCED PAYMENTS- A State that has an application approved by the
 Secretary under this section shall receive enhanced Medicaid bonus payments
 in accordance with section 1903(x) of the Social Security Act.
SEC. 302. USE OF AMOUNTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) PROVISION OF PAYMENTS- Except as provided in paragraph (2), the Secretary
 shall provide enhanced payments to not less than 10 and not more than 20
 States in each fiscal year under this section.
 (2) EXCEPTION- Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the Secretary may provide
 enhanced payments to less than 10 States under this section in a fiscal
 year if the Secretary determines that there are an inadequate number of
 applications submitted that meet the eligibility and approval requirement
 of this section.
 (3) USE- Each State that receives enhanced payments under section 301 shall--
 (A) establish a Statewide health care injury prevention program that
 complies with the requirements of this title; and
 (B) cooperate with Federal research efforts with respect to patient outcomes,
 clinical effectiveness and clinical practice guidelines.
 (b) PERFORMANCE OF STATE MEDICAL BOARDS-
 (1) PERFORMANCE CRITERIA- The Secretary shall promulgate regulations
 that establish performance criteria that State health care practitioner
 disciplinary boards of States referred to in subsection (a) should
 meet in performing their oversight functions concerning the health care
 professionals that are subject to such boards. Such criteria shall apply
 to procedural matters such as expeditious review of cases, appropriate
 reports of findings, and preservation of confidentiality.
 (2) ALLOCATION OF CERTAIN FUNDS- As part of the program established under
 subsection (a), the State shall allocate the total amount of fees paid to
 the State in each year for the licensing or certification of each type of
 health care professionals, or an amount of State funds equal to such total
 amount, to the State agency or agencies responsible for the conduct of
 disciplinary actions with respect to such type of health care professionals.
 (3) MEMBERSHIP OF STATE HEALTH CARE PRACTITIONER BOARDS- As part of the
 program established under subsection (a), the State shall ensure that the
 general public is represented on State health care professional disciplinary
 boards. Not less than 25 percent of the membership of each such health care
 practitioner disciplinary board shall be appointed from among the general
 public. Such members shall be representative of as many different regions
 of the State as practicable.
 (4) IMMUNITY- As part of the program established under subsection (a), the
 State shall ensure that there shall be no monetary liability on the part
 of, and no cause of action for damages shall arise against, any current
 or former member, officer, administrator, staff member, committee member,
 examiner, representative, agent, employee, consultant, witness, or any other
 individual serving or having served on a State health care professional
 disciplinary board, either as a part of the board's operation or as an
 individual, or under contract with the Board to provide such services as
 a result of any act, omission, proceeding, conduct or decision related to
 the duties of such individual undertaken or performed in good faith and
 within the scope of the function of the board.
 (5) INFORMATION AND DATA- A State referred to in subsection (a),
 acting through the appropriate State health authority, shall collect,
 analyze and provide the Agency with information and data concerning the
 staffing, revenue, disciplinary actions, expenditures, and case-loads of
 the State health care professional disciplinary boards, and concerning
 the use of continuing medical education programs in the State, in order
 to demonstrate to the Agency that such State boards meet the performance
 criteria established under paragraph (1).
 (6) REQUIREMENT OF CONTINUING EDUCATION- The performance criteria established
 under paragraph (1) shall provide that State health care professional
 disciplinary boards require a physician who is disciplined by such boards
 to complete a minimum number of continuing education courses for which he
 or she has been adjudged deficient if the Board determines such courses
 are appropriate and available. In areas in which the Board determines that
 the physician's knowledge is deficient, the Board may require enrollment
 in treatment programs for substance abuse problems.
 (c) ALTERNATIVE PROGRAMS-
 (1) IN LIEU OF PERFORMANCE CRITERIA- A State referred to in subsection
 (a) shall be considered to be in compliance with the performance criteria
 established under subsection (b)(1) if the Agency determines that the State
 has in effect a program that the Agency finds to be at least as effective
 in reducing the incidence of disciplinary violations as compliance of the
 State with the performance criteria established under subsection (b)(1).
 (2) REGULATIONS- Not later than 4 years after the date on which the first
 model quality improvement State is designated under section 301, the
 Secretary, based on the recommendations of the Agency, shall promulgate
 regulations establishing criteria under which the Secretary will evaluate
 the effectiveness of a State program of the type referred to in paragraph
 (1). Such regulations shall include--
 (A) requirements that health care providers within the State implement
 risk management systems;
 (B) requirements that quality assurance systems be established in the State,
 to be administered by the State or by professional medical societies or
 associations, that review the quality of care rendered by health care
 professionals in the State; and
 (C) requirements that the State review and evaluate programs for the
 promulgation of professional guidelines in areas of medical practice in
 which the risk of negligence is greatest.
SEC. 303. AMENDMENT TO SOCIAL SECURITY ACT.
 Section 1903 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b) (as amended by
 section 104) is further amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new subsection:
 `(x) Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, with respect to a
 State with an application approved under section 301(b) of the Health Care
 Injury Compensation and Quality Improvement Act, such State shall receive,
 in addition to the Federal medical assistance percentage determined for such
 State, an additional .1 percent for each calendar quarter in which such State
 qualifies for such additional percentage under section 301 of such Act.'.
TITLE IV--COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTERS
SEC. 401. COMMUNITY AND MIGRANT HEALTH CENTERS RISK RETENTION GROUP.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subpart I of part D of title III of the Public Health
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254b et seq.) is amended by adding at the end
 thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 330A. RISK RETENTION GROUP.
 `(a) GRANT- The Secretary shall make a grant to an entity that represents
 recipients of assistance under section 329 and 330 to enable such entity to
 develop a business plan as described in subsection (b)(2) and establish a
 nationwide risk retention group as provided for in Liability Risk Retention
 Act of 1986 (15 U.S.C. 3901 et seq.), and that meets the requirements of
 this section.
 `(b) BUSINESS PLAN AND FORMATION-
 `(1) DEVELOPMENT AND ESTABLISHMENT-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Not later than September 30, 1992, the grantee shall
 develop a business plan as described in paragraph (2) and have established
 a risk retention group that meets the requirements of section 2(4) of the
 Product Liability Risk Retention Act of 1981 (15 U.S.C. 3901(2)(4)).
 `(B) ESTABLISHMENT- In establishing the risk retention group under
 subparagraph (A), the grantee shall take all steps, in accordance with
 this subsection, necessary to enable such group to be prepared to issue
 insurance policies under this section.
 `(2) BUSINESS PLAN- The grantee shall develop a plan for the operation
 of the risk retention group that shall include all actuarial reports
 and studies conducted with respect to the formation, capitalization,
 and operation of the group.
 `(3) STRUCTURE, RIGHTS, AND DUTIES OF THE RISK RETENTION GROUP-
 `(A) BOARD OF DIRECTORS-
 `(i) APPOINTMENT- The board of directors of the risk retention group shall
 consist of 12 members to be appointed by the recipient of the grant under
 subsection (a), and approved as provided in clause (ii).
 `(ii) APPROVAL- The initial members appointed under clause (i) shall
 be approved by the Secretary, and shall serve for a term as provided in
 clause (iii). All subsequent members shall be subject to the approval of
 the members of the risk retention group.
 `(iii) TERMS- The recipient of the grant under subsection (a) shall appoint
 the members of the board under clause (i) as follows:
 `(I) Four members shall be appointed for an initial term of 1 year.
 `(II) Four members shall be appointed for an initial term of 2 years.
 `(III) Four members shall be appointed for an initial term of 3 years.
Members serving terms other than initial terms shall serve for 3 years. Members
may serve successive terms.
 `(iv) EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR- The Executive Director of the board shall be
 elected by the members of the board, and shall serve at the pleasure of
 such members.
 `(v) VACANCIES- Vacancies on the board shall be filled through a vote of
 the remaining members of the board, subject to the approval of the members
 of the risk retention group.
 `(B) BYLAWS- The board shall develop the bylaws of the risk retention group
 that shall be subject to the disapproval of the Secretary. Any changes
 that the board desires to make in such bylaws shall also be subject to
 the disapproval of the Secretary. The Secretary shall provide the board
 with 90 days notice of the Secretary's intent to disapprove a bylaw.
 `(C) ADMINISTRATION- The risk retention group may negotiate with other
 entities for the purposes of managing and administering the risk retention
 group, and for purposes of obtaining reinsurance.
 `(D) PROVISION OF INSURANCE- The risk retention group shall provide
 professional liability insurance, and other types of profitable insurance
 approved for issuance by the Secretary, to migrant and community health
 centers that receive assistance under sections 329 and 330 and that meet
 the requirements of subparagraph (E).
 `(E) PARTICIPANTS-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in clause (ii), all community and
 migrant health centers that receive assistance under section 329 and 330
 shall become members in the risk retention group established under this
 section and shall purchase the professional liability insurance that
 is offered by such group for such centers and any health care staff or
 personnel employed by such centers or under contract with such centers. All
 professional staff members of such centers shall be eligible to obtain
 the insurance offered by such group.
 `(ii) EXCEPTIONS-
 `(I) GOOD CAUSE- The Secretary may, on a showing of good cause by the
 center, exempt such center from the requirements of clause (i).
 `(II) FAILURE TO MEET CONDITIONS- If the risk retention group determines
 that a center is not complying with the established underwriting standards,
 such group may decline to provide insurance to such center. The risk
 retention group shall provide a center with 60 days notice of a decision
 by the group not to provide insurance to such center.
 `(III) HEARING- Prior to the Secretary granting an exemption or severance
 as requested in an application submitted under subclause (I), the Secretary
 shall require that the applicant provide evidence concerning its application
 and shall afford the risk retention group an opportunity to address the
 allegations contained in such application. The Secretary may grant the
 center temporary relief under this subparagraph without a hearing in
 emergency situations.
 `(F) APPLICABILITY OF INSURANCE TO CLAIMS- Insurance provided by the
 risk retention group under this section shall apply to all claims filed
 against a covered community or migrant health center after the initiation
 of insurance coverage by the risk retention group, including acts that occur
 prior to coverage under this section that are not covered by other insurance.
 `(c) SUBMISSION OF BUSINESS PLAN TO OUTSIDE EXPERTS- After the development
 of the business plan and the establishment of the risk retention group as
 required under subsection (b), the risk retention group shall enter into
 a contract with individuals or entities who are insurance, financing,
 and business experts to require such individuals or entities to analyze
 and audit the group. Such individuals and entities shall provide the group
 with an evaluation of such plan and group.
 `(d) SUBMISSION OF PLAN AND EVALUATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The risk retention group shall submit to the Secretary the
 business plan required under subsection (b) and the evaluation completed
 under subsection (c) to the Secretary.
 `(2) DETERMINATION BY SECRETARY- Not later than September 30, 1992, the
 Secretary shall make a determination, based on the plan and evaluation
 submitted under paragraph (1), of whether the operation of the risk
 retention group result in an increase in the amount of funds available
 for use by community and migrant health centers and other entities that
 receive assistance under sections 329 and 330 in the 2 year period ending
 on September 30, 1994.
 `(3) IMPLEMENTATION- If the Secretary makes an affirmative determination
 under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall permit the implementation of the
 plan and the operation of the risk retention group as provided for in this
 section, and shall capitalize such group as provided for in subsection
 (e)(2).
 `(e) FUNDING-
 `(1) CAPITALIZATION- There are authorized to be appropriated to carry
 out this section, $40,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1992 and
 1993. Amounts appropriated under this paragraph may only be made available
 if the Secretary makes an affirmative determination under subsection (d)(2).
 `(2) REMAINING ASSETS- All assets of the risk retention group that remain
 after the dissolution of such group shall become the property of the
 Secretary who shall use such assets to pay the remaining expenses of
 the group.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Section 329(h)(1)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 254b(h)(1)(A)) is amended
 by striking `1991' and inserting `1993'.
 (2) Section 330(g)(2)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 254b(h)(1)(A)) is amended
 by inserting `, and such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 1992'
 after `1991'.
TITLE V--AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS
SEC. 501. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for
 the establishment and operation of the Council of Advisors.
TITLE VI--CONSTRUCTION AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SEC. 601. CONSTRUCTION.
 Nothing in this Act shall be construed to--
 (1) preempt State choice-of-law rules with respect to claims brought by
 a foreign nation of a citizen of a foreign nation;
 (2) to affect the right of any court to transfer venue, to apply the law
 of a foreign nation, or to dismiss a claim of a foreign nation or of a
 citizen of a foreign nation on the ground of inconvenient forum; or
 (3) to prevent a State from enacting, adopting, or otherwise having in
 effect more comprehensive or additional health care liability reforms than
 those required under this Act.
SEC. 602. SEVERABILITY.
 If any provision of this Act, or an amendment made by this Act, or the
 application of such provision to any person or circumstance is held to
 be unconstitutional, the remainder of this Act and the amendments made by
 this Act, and the application of the provisions of such to any person or
 circumstance shall not be affected thereby.
SEC. 603. COMPLIANCE.
 Except as otherwise specifically provided, not later than 1 year after the
 date of enactment of this Act, a State shall enact, adopt, or otherwise
 comply with the provisions of this Act.