HR 4242 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 4242
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to impose an excise tax with
respect to the issuance of medicare supplement insurance policies which do
not meet Federal standards, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
March 12, 1990
Mr. STARK introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the
Committees on Ways and Means and Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to impose an excise tax with
respect to the issuance of medicare supplement insurance policies which do
not meet Federal standards, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Medigap Reform Act of 1990'.
SEC. 2. EXCISE TAX ON NONCONFORMING MEDICARE SUPPLEMENT INSURANCE POLICIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Chapter 34 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new subchapter:
`Subchapter B--Nonconforming Medicare Supplement Insurance Policies
 `Sec. 4381. Excise tax on nonconforming medicare supplement policies.
`SEC. 4381. EXCISE TAX ON NONCONFORMING MEDICARE SUPPLEMENT INSURANCE POLICIES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- There is hereby imposed a tax on any nonconforming
 medicare supplement insurance policy equal to 50 percent of any premium
 paid on such policy.
 `(b) LIABILITY FOR TAX- The tax imposed by subsection (a) shall be paid by
 the person who issues the nonconforming medicare supplement insurance policy.
 `(c) STANDARDS FOR CONFORMING MEDICARE SUPPLEMENT INSURANCE POLICIES-
 For purposes of this section, the term `nonconforming medicare supplement
 insurance policy' means a medicare supplement insurance policy which is not
 a conforming medicare supplement insurance policy, and the term `conforming
 medicare supplement insurance policy' means a medicare supplement insurance
 policy which the Secretary of Health and Human Services determines complies
 with the following standards:
 `(1) BENEFITS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to subparagraphs (D) through (F), the policy
 provides coverage of minimum benefits (as defined in subparagraph (B))
 and may provide additional benefit coverage only of the optional additional
 benefits specified under subparagraph (C).
 `(B) MINIMUM BENEFITS DEFINED- For purposes of this section, the term
 `minimum benefits' means the following:
 `(i) Hospital coinsurance amounts imposed under section 1813(a) of the
 Social Security Act.
 `(ii) Upon exhaustion of all benefits under medicare with respect to
 inpatient hospital services, coverage of 90 percent of all expenses for
 inpatient hospital services recognized by medicare but not otherwise covered
 under medicare, subject to a lifetime maximum benefit of an additional
 365 days of inpatient hospital services.
 `(iii) Coverage of any deductible for blood under section 1813(a)(2)
 or 1833(b) of such Act.
 `(iv) Coverage of coinsurance amounts (other than the deductible under
 section 1833(b) of such Act) imposed under part B of medicare.
 `(C) ADDITIONAL BENEFITS- For purposes of this section, the Secretary,
 after consultation with the Advisory Committee, shall specify additional
 benefits which may be covered under conforming medicare supplement insurance
 policies. Such specific benefits shall include at least the following:
 `(i) Coverage of the medicare part A inpatient hospital deductible amount.
 `(ii) Coverage of the medicare part B deductible amount.
 `(iii) Coverage of copayments for 80 days of post-hospital extended
 care services during a spell of illness after the initial 20 days during
 the spell.
 `(iv) Coverage, at 3 levels of benefit, with respect to prescription drugs,
 with 1 such level of benefit representing a mail-order prescription drug
 benefit.
 `(v) Coverage of some payments for some portion of the allowable charges
 under part B of medicare that exceed the amounts recognized under such part.
 `(vi) Coverage of services outside the United States during a temporary
 period of travel abroad.
 `(vii) Coverage for private duty nursing.
Such benefits may include such other benefits as the Secretary finds,
considering the experience with benefits authorized under subparagraph (E)(i)
and the criteria described in subparagraph (E)(ii) and after consultation
with the Advisory Committee, to be appropriate.
 `(D) REVISION OF BENEFITS TO CONFORM WITH CHANGES IN MEDICARE BENEFITS-
 If there is enacted a law changing benefits under title XVIII of the Social
 Security Act--
 `(i) not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of the law, the
 Secretary shall review and, after consultation with the Advisory Committee,
 revise by regulation the minimum benefits and additional benefits specified
 in subparagraphs (B) and (C) to reflect such changes in a manner to assure
 nonduplication of benefits, and
 `(ii) if a revision in benefits is made under clause (i), in order for a
 policy to be or remain a conforming medicare supplement insurance policy,
 the policy must change its benefits to conform to such revision in a manner
 specified by the Secretary.
 `(E) DEMONSTRATION OF INNOVATIVE BENEFITS-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- In order to recognize and promote innovation, the
 Secretary, upon application of the issuer of a medicare supplement
 insurance policy and under such conditions and for such time periods as
 the Secretary specifies and after consultation with the Advisory Committee,
 may authorize benefits which are different from, or in addition to, those
 specified under subparagraph (C).
 `(ii) CRITERIA- In acting on applications under this subparagraph the
 Secretary shall consider the value to consumers of the new benefit and
 the consumer demand for the benefit in light of the potential for consumer
 confusion arising from additional or different benefits under conforming
 medicare supplement insurance policies.
 `(iii) RESPONSE- The Secretary shall approve or deny an application under
 clause (i) within 90 days after the date of its submittal. If the Secretary
 finds that, with respect to an additional benefit, such an additional
 benefit should be generally permitted to be offered, the Secretary may
 add such benefit to the list of benefits specified in subparagraph (C).
 `(2) UNIFORM FORMAT AND LANGUAGE- Benefits under the policy are specified
 in a uniform language and format (including layout and print size) that
 facilitates comparison among conforming medicare supplement insurance
 policies and comparison with medicare benefits.
 `(3) LOSS RATIOS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The policy meets the requirements specified in section
 10 of the NAIC Model Regulation (relating to loss ratios), as modified
 under subparagraph (B).
 `(B) MODIFICATIONS- In applying section 10 of the NAIC Model Regulation
 under subparagraph (A)--
 `(i) the minimum loss ratio for group policies specified in paragraph
 A. shall be 80 percent and the minimum loss ratio for individuals policies
 specified in paragraph B. shall be 70 percent; and
 `(ii) filings required under paragraphs C. and D. shall be made with
 the Secretary annually in accordance with uniform standards specified by
 the Secretary.
 `(C) ENFORCEMENT-
 `(i) ANNUAL FILINGS- The issuer of the policy transmits to the Secretary
 annually (at a time and in a manner specified by the Secretary) such
 information as may be required to monitor compliance with the requirement
 of this paragraph. Such information shall be filed on forms developed by
 the Secretary. Such information shall be made available to the Comptroller
 General for the purpose of conducting audits under clause (ii).
 `(ii) GAO AUDITS- The Comptroller General shall periodically perform audits
 with respect to the compliance of medicare supplement insurance policies
 with the requirements of subparagraph (A) and shall report the results of
 such audits to the Secretary.
 `(iii) NOTICE- If the Secretary finds that a policy has failed to meet the
 requirement of subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall notify the issuer
 of the policy of such finding and permit the issuer an opportunity to
 submit information establishing that the policy meets the requirement or
 that the issuer is making such refunds or credits as may be necessary to
 comply with such requirement.
 `(iv) NOTICE TO SECRETARY OF TREASURY- If the Secretary determines, after
 notice and opportunity for correction under clause (iii), that a policy
 has failed to meet the requirements of subparagraph (A), the Secretary
 shall notify the Secretary of the Treasury of such failure and request the
 Secretary of the Treasury to impose the tax provided under subsection (a).
 `(4) OTHER MINIMUM BENEFIT STANDARDS-
 `(A) TREATMENT OF PREEXISTING CONDITIONS-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- The policy--
 `(I) may not deny a claim for losses incurred more than 6 months after
 the effective date of the coverage for a preexisting condition, and
 `(II) may not define a preexisting condition more restrictively than a
 condition for which medical advice was given or treatment was recommended
 by or received from a physician within 6 months before the effective date
 of coverage.
 `(ii) REPLACEMENT POLICIES- If a policy (or certificate) replaces another
 policy or certificate, the replacing issuer shall waive any time periods
 applicable to preexisting conditions, waiting periods, elimination periods
 and probationary periods in the new policy or certificate for similar
 benefits to the extent such time was spent under the original policy.
 `(B) AUTOMATIC CHANGE IN BENEFITS- The policy shall provide that benefits
 designed to cover cost-sharing amounts under medicare will be changed
 automatically to coincide with any changes in the applicable medicare
 deductible amount and copayment percentage factors. The premiums may be
 modified to correspond with such changes.
 `(C) GUARANTEED RENEWABLE POLICIES- If the policy is issued as a
 `noncancellable', `guaranteed renewable', or `noncancellable and guaranteed
 renewable' policy, the policy may not--
 `(i) provide for termination of coverage of a spouse solely because of
 the occurrence of an event specified for termination of coverage of the
 insured, other than the nonpayment of premium, or
 `(ii) be cancelled or nonrenewed by the issuer solely on the grounds of
 deterioration of health.
 `(D) TERMS OF CANCELLATION-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Except as authorized by the Secretary, the issuer of the
 policy shall neither cancel nor nonrenew a conforming medicare supplement
 insurance policy (or a certificate thereunder) for any reason other than
 the nonpayment of premium or material misrepresentation.
 `(ii) CONVERSION RIGHT ON TERMINATION OF GROUP POLICY- If a conforming group
 medicare supplement insurance policy is terminated by the group policyholder
 and is not replaced as provided under clause (iv), the issuer shall offer
 certificateholders an individual conforming medicare supplement insurance
 policy which (as specified by the certificateholder)--
 `(I) provides for continuation of the benefits contained in the group
 policy, or
 `(II) provides for such benefits as meets the requirements of paragraph (2).
 `(iii) CONVERSION RIGHT ON TERMINATION OF MEMBERSHIP IN GROUP- If an
 individual is a certificateholder in a group medicare supplement insurance
 policy, the issuer shall--
 `(I) offer the certificateholder the conversion opportunity described in
 clause (ii), or
 `(II) at the option of the group policyholder, offer the certificateholder
 continuation of coverage under the group policy.
 `(iv) REPLACEMENT OF GROUP POLICIES- If a group conforming medicare
 supplement insurance policy is replaced by another conforming group
 medicare supplement insurance policy purchased by the same policyholder,
 the succeeding issuer shall offer coverage to all persons covered under
 the old group policy on its date of termination. Coverage under the new
 group policy shall not result in any exclusion for preexisting conditions
 that would have been covered under the group policy being replaced.
 `(E) COORDINATION OF CLAIMS AND RIGHT OF EXAMINATION- The policy meets
 the requirements specified in paragraphs (3) and (4) of section 1882(c)
 of the Social Security Act.
 `(d) REGISTRATION OF ISSUANCE OF POLICIES AND PROHIBITING ISSUANCE OF
 DUPLICATE POLICIES OR POLICIES TO MEDICAID BENEFICIARIES- For purposes
 of this section, a conforming medicare supplement insurance policy (or
 certificate thereunder) shall be considered a nonconforming medicare
 supplement insurance policy unless there is filed with the Secretary (in
 a form and manner specified by the Secretary) at the time of issuance of
 the policy or certificate a certification that--
 `(1) includes the name of the policyholder (and, if applicable, the
 certificateholder), date issued, the class of benefits provided in the
 policy, and the premiums to be charged;
 `(2) certifies at the time of the issuance that--
 `(A) the policyholder (or certificateholder) is not the policyholder
 (or certificateholder) of another conforming medicare supplement insurance
 policy or, if so, the policy or certificate is being issued as a replacement
 for such policy or certificate and will not become effective (and premiums
 will not be collected) for periods in which the other policy or certificate
 is in effect, and
 `(B) the policyholder (or certificateholder) is not entitled to benefits
 under a State plan approved under title XIX of the Social Security Act
 (whether as a qualified medicare beneficiary or otherwise); and
 `(3) certifies that any premiums that may be collected in violation of
 subparagraph (A) will be refunded.
The certification under paragraph (2) may be based on a signed statement
of the policyholder (or certificateholder), unless the agent selling the
policy or certificate (or other representative of the issuer of the policy
or certificate) has reason to believe that such a statement is not true.
 `(e) MEDICAL UNDERWRITING- For purposes of this section, a conforming
 medicare supplement insurance policy shall be considered a nonconforming
 medicare supplement insurance policy if the issuance of the policy is
 conditioned or otherwise related to the medical history or health status
 of the prospective policyholder or certificateholder.
 `(f) SALES COMMISSIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this section, a conforming medicare
 supplement insurance policy shall be considered a nonconforming medicare
 supplement insurance policy if--
 `(A) any commission or other compensation to an agent or other representative
 with respect to the sale or servicing of the policy during its first year
 exceeds 200 percent of the commission or other compensation for the selling
 or servicing of the policy in a second or subsequent year, or
 `(B) except as provided in paragraph (2), any commission or other
 compensation with respect to replacement of the policy may not exceed the
 commission or compensation that would apply to the renewal of the policy.
 `(2) EXCEPTION- Paragraph (1)(B) shall not apply if the benefits in the
 replacement policy are clearly and substantially greater than the benefits
 under the replaced policy.
 `(3) COMPENSATION DEFINED- For purposes of this subsection, the term
 `compensation' includes pecuniary and nonpecuniary compensation of any
 kind relating to the sale or renewal of a policy and specifically includes
 bonuses, gifts, prizes, awards, and finders' fees.
 `(g) EFFECT ON STATE LAW- This section shall not be construed as prohibiting
 a State--
 `(1) from limiting the additional benefits (described in subsection
 (c)(1)(B)) that may be offered or the groups of such benefits that may be
 offered together;
 `(2) from requiring a loss ratio that is greater than the loss-ratio
 required under subsection (c)(3), or
 `(3) from regulating the premium rates charged for policies, so long as such
 rates comply with the loss-ratio requirements specified in subsection (c)(3);
 `(4) from defining and regulating financial requirements (including reserves)
 required for an insurer to offer a medicare supplement insurance policy; or
 `(5) from regulating marketing and advertising practices with respect to
 medicare supplement insurance policies.
 `(h) ADVISORY COMMITTEE- The Secretary shall establish an advisory committee,
 composed of representatives of issuers of medicare supplement insurance
 policies, State commissioners of insurance, the National Association of
 Insurance Commissioners, the Comptroller General, medicare beneficiaries, and
 other qualified individuals, to review and advise the Secretary concerning
 the standards established under this section. The Secretary shall consult
 with such committee in conducting activities under this section.
 `(i) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section:
 `(1) ADVISORY COMMITTEE- The term `Advisory Committee' refers to the
 advisory committee established under subsection (h).
 `(2) MEDICARE- The term `medicare' refers to the insurance programs under
 title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
 `(3) MEDICARE SUPPLEMENT INSURANCE POLICY- The term `medicare supplement
 insurance policy' means a health insurance policy (including a certificate
 issued under such a policy) or other health benefit plan offered by a
 private entity to individuals who are entitled to have payment made under
 medicare, which provides reimbursement for expenses incurred for services
 and items for which payment may be made under such title but which are not
 reimbursable by reason of the applicability of deductibles, coinsurance
 amounts, or other limitation imposed pursuant to such title. Such term
 also includes any indemnity or dread disease policy offered by a private
 entity to an individual entitled to have payment made under medicare, but
 does not include such a policy if it was first issued before the effective
 date of the requirements of this section.
 `(4) NAIC MODEL REGULATION- The term `NAIC Model Regulation' refers to the
 `Model Regulation to Implement the NAIC Medicare Supplement Insurance
 Minimum Standards Model Act' adopted by the National Association of
 Insurance Commissioners in December 1989.
 `(5) SECRETARY- The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Health and
 Human Services.'
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- Chapter 34 of such Code is amended by striking
 the chapter heading and inserting the following:
`CHAPTER 34--Certain Insurance Policies
`Subchapter A. Policies issued by foreign insurers.
`Subchapter B. Nonconforming medicare supplement insurance policies.
`Subchapter A--Policies Issued by Foreign Insurers'.
 (c) IMPLEMENTATION-
 (1) ISSUANCE OF STANDARDS- The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall
 issue regulations to implement the amendments made by this section by not
 later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) IMPLEMENTATION- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 the issuance of policies occurring on or after the date that is 6 months
 after the date of issuance of the regulations described in paragraph (1),
 except that such amendments (insofar as they require a policy to meet
 loss ratios described in subsection (c)(3) of section 4381 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986) shall apply, as of such effective date, to policies
 (other than policies described in the last sentence of subsection (i)(3)
 of such section) issued before such date for policy years beginning on or
 after such date.