HR 1470 SC
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1470
To amend the Clean Air Act to control acid deposition.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
March 16, 1989
Mr. SIKORSKI (for himself, Mr. CONTE, Mr. BOEHLERT, Mr. UDALL, Mr. RINALDO,
Mr. MARKEY, Mr. TAUKE, Mr. FLORIO, Mr. GREEN, Mr. ACKERMAN, Mr. ATKINS,
Mr. BATES, Mr. BEILENSON, Mr. BERMAN, Mr. BILBRAY, Mr. BOSCO, Mrs. BOXER,
Mr. BROWN of California, Mr. CAMPBELL of California, Mr. CHANDLER, Mr. CLAY,
Mrs. COLLINS, Mr. CONYERS, Mr. COUGHLIN, Mr. DEFAZIO, Mr. DELLUMS, Mr. DE LUGO,
Mr. DIXON, Mr. DONNELLY, Mr. DOUGLAS, Mr. DOWNEY, Mr. DREIER of California,
Mr. DWYER of New Jersey, Mr. DYMALLY, Mr. DYSON, Mr. EARLY, Mr. EDWARDS
of California, Mr. FAZIO, Mr. FISH, Mr. FOGLIETTA, Mr. FORD of Tennessee,
Mr. FRANK, Mr. GALLO, Mr. GARCIA, Mr. GEJDENSON, Mr. GILMAN, Mr. GLICKMAN,
Mr. GONZALEZ, Mr. GOODLING, Mr. GUARINI, Mr. HAWKINS, Mr. HAYES of Illinois,
Mr. HOCHBRUECKNER, Mr. HORTON, Mr. HOUGHTON, Mr. HUGHES, Mrs. JOHNSON of
Connecticut, Mr. KASTENMEIER, Mr. KENNEDY, Mrs. KENNELLY, Mr. KOSTMAYER,
Mr. LAFALCE, Mr. LANTOS, Mr. LEACH of Iowa, Mr. LEHMAN of California,
Mr. LELAND, Mr. LEVINE of California, Mr. LEWIS of Georgia, Mrs. LOWEY of
New York, Mr. MCDERMOTT, Mr. MCGRATH, Mr. MCHUGH, Mr. MACHTLEY, Mr. MARTIN
of New York, Mr. MARTINEZ, Mr. MATSUI, Mr. MAVROULES, Mr. MFUME, Mr. MILLER
of California, Mr. MINETA, Mr. MOAKLEY, Mrs. MORELLA, Mr. MORRISON of
Connecticut, Mr. MRAZEK, Mr. NAGLE, Mr. NEAL of Massachusetts, Mr. NELSON of
Florida, Mr. NOWAK, Mr. OBERSTAR, Mr. OWENS of New York, Mr. OWENS of Utah,
Mr. PALLONE, Mr. PANETTA, Mr. PAYNE of New Jersey, Ms. PELOSI, Mr. PICKLE,
Mr. RANGEL, Mr. RAVENEL, Mr. ROBINSON, Mr. ROE, Mr. ROSE, Mrs. ROUKEMA,
Mr. ROWLAND of Connecticut, Mr. ROYBAL, Mr. SABO, Mrs. SAIKI, Mr. SAVAGE,
Mr. SAXTON, Mr. SCHEUER, Ms. SCHNEIDER, Mrs. SCHROEDER, Mr. SCHUMER,
Mr. SHAYS, Mr. SKAGGS, Ms. SLAUGHTER of New York, Mr. SMITH of New Jersey,
Mr. SMITH of Iowa, Mr. SMITH of Vermont, Mr. SMITH of New Hampshire,
Mr. SOLARZ, Mr. SOLOMON, Mr. STARK, Mr. STUDDS, Mr. TALLON, Mr. TORRES,
Mr. TORRICELLI, Mr. VENTO, Mr. WALGREN, Mr. WALSH, Mr. WAXMAN, Mr. WEBER,
Mr. WEISS, Mr. WILSON, Mr. WYDEN, Mr. YATES, Mr. AKAKA, Mr. BRYANT, Mr. ENGEL,
Mr. FASCELL, Mr. KLECZKA, and Mr. MOODY) introduced the following bill;
which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
June 14, 1989
Additional sponsors: Mr. BORSKI, Mrs. MEYERS of Kansas, Mr. COURTER,
Mr. WALKER, Mr. CARPER, Mr. BRENNAN, Mr. CARDIN, Mr. LAGOMARSINO, and
Mr. MCNULTY
Deleted sponsor: Mr. ROBINSON (added March 16, 1989; deleted May 23, 1989)
A BILL
To amend the Clean Air Act to control acid deposition.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 This Act may be cited as the `Acid Deposition Control Act of 1989'.
Table of Contents
Sec. 1. Short title and table of contents.
TITLE I--STATIONARY SOURCES
Sec. 101. Acid deposition control.
Sec. 102. Revisions of new source performance standards for control of
nitrogen oxide emissions.
Sec. 103. Conforming amendments.
TITLE II--MOBILE SOURCES
Sec. 201. Emissions of oxides of nitrogen and certain other air pollutants.
TITLE I--STATIONARY SOURCES
SEC. 101. ACID DEPOSITION CONTROL.
 Title I of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following new part
 at the end thereof:
`Part E--Acid Deposition Control
`SEC. 181. EMISSIONS FROM UTILITY BOILERS
 `(a) STATE PLANS TO CONTROL EMISSIONS- Not later than 21 months after the
 enactment of this section, the Governor of each State, after notice and
 opportunity for public hearing, shall submit to the Administrator a plan
 establishing emission limitations and compliance schedules for controlling
 emissions of sulfur dioxide and oxides of nitrogen from fossil fuel fired
 electric utility steam generating units in the State. The plan shall meet
 the requirements of subsections (b) and (c).
 `(b) PHASE I REQUIREMENTS; 1994 SO2 EMISSION RATE- The emission limitations
 and compliance schedules contained in the plan under this section shall
 be adequate to ensure that, by January 1, 1994, and thereafter, Statewide
 emissions of sulfur dioxide (per million Btu of heat input) from the total
 of all fossil fuel fired electric utility steam generating units in the
 State shall not exceed an average monthly rate of 2.0 pounds per million
 Btu of heat input.
 `(c) PHASE II REQUIREMENTS- The emission limitations and compliance schedules
 contained in the plan under this section shall be adequate to ensure that,
 by January 1, 1998, and thereafter, Statewide emissions from the total
 of all fossil fuel fired electric utility steam generating units in the
 State shall not exceed the average monthly rate provided in table 1.
Table 1
------------------------------------------
 Pollutant Average Monthly Rate*
------------------------------------------
 Sulfur dioxide 1.2
 Oxides of nitrogen 0.6
------------------------------------------
*Expressed in pounds per million Btu of heat input.
`SEC. 182. EMISSIONS FROM INDUSTRIAL BOILERS
 `(a) STATE PLANS TO CONTROL EMISSIONS- Not later than June 1, 1995, after
 notice and opportunity for public hearing, the Governor of each State shall
 submit to the Administrator a plan establishing emission limitations and
 compliance schedules for emissions of sulfur dioxide and oxides of nitrogen
 from fossil fuel fired steam generating units in the State other than
 fossil fuel fired electric utility steam generating units. Such State plan
 may include any emissions limitations and compliance schedules, applicable
 to any such units within the State, which the State deems appropriate and
 which are adequate to ensure compliance with subsections (b) and (c).
 `(b) 1998 STATEWIDE AVERAGE SO2 EMISSION RATE- The emission limitations
 and compliance schedules contained in the plan under this section shall
 be adequate to ensure that, by January 1, 1998, and thereafter, Statewide
 emissions of sulfur dioxide (per million Btu of heat input) from the total
 of all fossil fuel fired steam generating units in the State (other than
 fossil fuel fired electric utility steam generating units) shall not exceed
 an average monthly rate of 1.2 pounds per million Btu of heat input.
 `(c) 1998 STATEWIDE AVERAGE NOx EMISSION RATE- The emission limitations
 and compliance schedules contained in the plan under this section shall
 be adequate to ensure that, by January 1, 1998, and thereafter, Statewide
 emissions of oxides of nitrogen (per million Btu of heat input) from the
 total of all fossil fuel fired steam generating units in the State (other
 than fossil fuel fired electric utility steam generating units) shall not
 exceed an average monthly rate of 0.6 pounds per million Btu of heat input.
`SEC. 183. INDUSTRIAL PROCESS EMISSIONS.
 `(a) INVENTORIES- The Administrator shall conduct and periodically update
 a comprehensive annual inventory of emissions of sulfur dioxide and oxides
 of nitrogen from stationary sources of such air pollutants, including
 fossil fuel fired electric utility steam generating units, other fossil
 fuel fired steam generating units, and stationary sources of industrial
 process emissions.
 `(b) IDENTIFICATION OF EMISSION REDUCTIONS FROM INDUSTRIAL PROCESSES- The
 Administrator shall identify the total Statewide potential reductions in
 emissions of sulfur dioxide and oxides of nitrogen which are economically
 and technically achievable by December 31, 1997 by stationary sources
 of industrial process emissions in each State. By December 31, 1991,
 the Administrator shall transmit to each State a statement containing a
 calculation of the total reductions identified for that State under this
 subsection, together with an explanation of such calculation.
 `(c) EMISSIONS LIMITATIONS- Not later than June 1, 1995, the Governor
 of each State, after notice and opportunity for public hearing, shall
 submit to the Administrator a plan establishing emission limitations
 and compliance schedules for emissions of sulfur dioxide and oxides of
 nitrogen from stationary sources of industrial process emissions. Such
 State plan may include any emissions limitations and compliance schedules,
 applicable to any sources of industrial process emissions within the State,
 which the State deems appropriate and which are adequate to ensure that,
 by January 1, 1998, the aggregate annual reductions in emissions of sulfur
 dioxide and oxides of nitrogen from the total of such sources located in
 the State will be at least equal to the total Statewide potential emission
 reductions for each of such air pollutants identified by the Administrator
 under subsection (b).
`SEC. 184. GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO STATE PLANS.
 `(a) GUIDELINES- Not later than 9 months after the enactment of this part the
 Administrator shall promulgate guidelines for State plans under this part.
 `(b) CHOICE OF COMPLIANCE MEASURES UNDER STATE PLANS- State plans under
 this part may provide for compliance with the requirements of this part
 through any emission limitations and other requirements which the State
 deems appropriate.
 `(c) DISPROPORTIONATE EFFECTS AMONG UTILITIES- Each State plan under
 this part shall contain provisions to reasonably ensure that the emission
 reductions required for fossil fuel fired electric utility steam generating
 units under the State plan do not have an unnecessarily disproportionate
 economic effect on electric utility ratepayers in any region of the State or
 in any utility service area. Following approval of any plan under subsection
 (f) for any State, the State regulatory authority for that State shall,
 after notice and opportunity for public hearing, implement the provisions of
 such plan required by this subsection for each electric utility for which
 it has ratemaking authority and each nonregulated electric utility shall,
 after notice and opportunity for public hearing, implement such provisions.
 `(d) STUDY AND REPORT TO CONGRESS- The Administrator shall conduct a
 study to determine the reduction in acid deposition achieved pursuant to
 phase I requirements under section 181(b). The study shall also examine
 the feasibility of meeting the phase II requirements specified in section
 181(c). A report containing the results of the study shall be submitted
 to Congress on or before June 30, 1994.
 `(e) CONGRESSIONAL REVIEW OF REQUIREMENTS- The phase II requirements of
 section 181(c) and the requirements of sections 182 and 183 shall not
 take effect if, after the receipt of the study under subsection (d), but
 before January 1, 1995, the Congress enacts legislation providing that
 such requirements shall not take effect.
 `(f) APPROVAL-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Within 9 months after the submission of a State plan under
 this part, the Administrator shall approve the plan if he determines that the
 plan contains provisions, including compliance schedules with enforceable
 increments of progress, adequate to ensure that the requirements of this
 part will be achieved within the applicable time period specified in
 section 181, 182, or 183, as the case may be.
 `(2) CONDITIONAL APPROVALS DISALLOWED- The Administrator may not approve
 a plan under this part unless he finds that, under provisions of the plan
 without any amendment, condition, or other contingency, each emission
 rate specified in section 181, or 182 or each aggregate reduction level
 specified in section 183 (as the case may be) will be attained by the date
 required under those sections.
 `(g) DISAPPROVAL-
 `(1) ELECTRIC UTILITY BOILERS- If a State plan is submitted under subsection
 181 on or before the required date and the Administrator disapproves such
 plan, the Administrator shall notify the State of the reasons for such
 disapproval and the State may resubmit such plan within 6 months from the
 date on which such notice is provided. If no State plan has been submitted
 under section 181 within 27 months after the enactment of this section or if
 no State plan has been approved by the Administrator within 3 years after
 the enactment of this section, each fossil fuel fired electric utility
 steam generating unit in the State shall comply with the emissions rate
 specified in table 2 by the applicable date and thereafter:
Table 2
----------------------------------------------------------
 Pollutant Applicable Date Average Monthly Rate*
----------------------------------------------------------
 Sulfur dioxide January 1, 1994 2.0
 Sulfur dioxide January 1, 1998 1.2
 Oxides of nitrogen January 1, 1998 0.6
----------------------------------------------------------
*Expressed in pounds per million Btu of heat input.
 `(2) INDUSTRIAL BOILERS- If a State plan is submitted under section 182 on
 or before June 1, 1995 and the Administrator disapproves such plan, the
 Administrator shall notify the State of the reasons for such disapproval
 within 6 months after the submission by the State. The State may resubmit
 such plan within 6 months from the date on which such notice is provided. If
 no State plan has been submitted under section 182 on or before June 1, 1995
 or if no State plan under section 182 has been approved by the Administrator
 on or before June 1, 1996, each fossil fuel fired steam generating unit
 in the State shall comply with the emissions rate specified in table 3 by
 January 1, 1998 and thereafter:
Table 3
------------------------------------------
 Pollutant Average Monthly Rate*
------------------------------------------
 Sulfur dioxide 1.2
 Oxides of nitrogen 0.6
------------------------------------------
*Expressed in pounds per million Btu of heat input.
 `(3) PLANS FOR PROCESS EMISSIONS- If a State plan is submitted under
 section 183 on or before June 1, 1995 and the Administrator disapproves
 such plan, the Administrator shall notify the State of the reasons for such
 disapproval within 6 months after the submission by the State. The State
 may resubmit such plan within 6 months from the date on which such notice
 is provided. If no State plan has been submitted under section 183 on or
 before June 1, 1995 or if no State plan under section 183 has been approved
 by the Administrator on or before June 1, 1996, the Administrator shall
 promulgate a State plan under section 183 for such State on June 1, 1996.
 `(4) SEPARATE PLAN PROVISIONS FOR SO2 AND NOX- In approving a plan under
 this section, the Administrator may approve portions of the plan relating
 to sulfur dioxide while disapproving portions of relating to oxides of
 nitrogen or approve portions of the plan relating to oxides of nitrogen
 while disapproving portions of relating to sulfur dioxide. In any such
 case, the provisons of this subsection shall apply only to the disapproved
 portions of the plan.
 `(h) ENFORCEMENT- Each emission limitation in effect under subsection
 (g) and each requirement of a State plan approved or promulgated by the
 Administrator under this part shall be treated, for purposes of sections 113,
 114, 116, 120, and 304 as a requirement of an applicable implementation plan.
 `(i) OTHER APPLICABLE REQUIREMENTS- Nothing in this part shall be construed
 to affect or impair the requirements of section 110 (or of any applicable
 implementation plan) or of any other section of this Act, except that any
 stationary source which is subject to any such requirements may also be
 subject to additional requirements under this part.
 `(j) AMENDMENT OF PLANS- Amendments to a plan approved under this part
 may be submitted to the Administrator from time to time. Such amendments
 shall be approved or disapproved in the same manner as the original plan.
`SEC. 185. FEES.
 `(a) IMPOSITION- Under regulations promulgated by the Administrator,
 the Administrator shall impose a fee on the generation and importation of
 electric energy if any electric utility is eligible for subsidy payments
 under section 187. Such fee shall be established by the Administrator at
 such level (and adjusted from time to time) as will ensure that adequate
 funds are available to make subsidy payments in the amount authorized under
 section 187. The Administrator shall determine the amount of revenue required
 before establishing the fee. To the extent that adequate revenues can be
 raised, the fee shall vary in proportion to the sulfur dioxide emission
 rate so that a higher fee will be imposed in the case of a higher sulfur
 dioxide emissions rate. In establishing the fee, the Administrator shall
 include provisions to protect low income residential electric consumers. The
 amount of such fee shall not exceed 1/2 mill per kilowatt hour. The fee
 shall not apply with respect to the generation of electric energy within
 the United States by hydroelectric or nuclear power.
 `(b) PERIOD OF APPLICATION- No fee under subsection (a) may take effect
 before the date 12 months after the enactment of this section. No such
 fee may continue to apply after December 31, 1997. The Administrator
 may terminate the fee at an earlier date if, under estimates made by the
 Administrator, sufficient funds have been collected from the fee to fund
 the subsidy payments authorized to be made under section 187.
 `(c) REGULATIONS- Any regulations promulgated by the Administrator under
 subsection (a) shall be promulgated within 6 months after the enactment
 of this Act. The regulations shall set forth the time and manner required
 for payment of the fee imposed under subsection (a) and the information
 required to be reported in connection with the payment of such fee.
 `(d) ENFORCEMENT-
 `(1) PENALTIES- Any electric utility (or importer of electric energy) which
 fails or refuses to pay any amount of a fee imposed under the authority
 of this section (a) or which fails or refuses to file any report or other
 document required by the Administrator in connection with the imposition of
 such fee shall, in addition to liability for any unpaid amount of such fee
 (and interest on any such unpaid amount), be liable for a civil penalty of
 $50,000 for each day during which such failure or refusal continues. Any
 person who makes any false or misleading statement in any such report
 or other document required by the Administrator in connection with the
 imposition of such fee shall be liable for a civil penalty of $50,000.
 `(2) CIVIL ACTION- If any electric utility (or importer) which fails or
 refuses to pay any amount of a fee imposed under subsection (a), fails or
 refuses to file any report or other document required by the Administrator in
 connection with the imposition of such fee, or makes any false or misleading
 statement in any such report or other document required by the Administrator
 in connection with the imposition of such fee, the Administrator shall bring
 a civil action against such electric utility (or importer) to collect such
 fee and any civil penalty applicable under paragraph (1).
`SEC. 186. FUND.
 `(a) FUND- There is established in the Treasury of the United States a
 trust fund to be known as the `Acid Deposition Control Fund' (hereinafter
 in this section referred to as the `Fund'), consisting of such amounts as
 may be transferred to such Fund as provided in this section.
 `(b) TRANSFER OF FEES- There are hereby credited, out of any money in the
 Treasury not otherwise appropriated, to the Fund amounts determined by the
 Secretary of the Treasury (hereinafter in this section referred to as the
 `Secretary') to be equivalent to the amounts received in the Treasury from
 the fees under section 185.
 `(c) USE OF FUND- Amounts in the Fund shall be available only for purposes
 of making subsidy payments under section 187.
 `(d) MANAGEMENT OF FUND-
 `(1) TRANSFERS- The amounts appropriated by subsection (b) shall be
 transferred at least monthly from the general fund of the Treasury to
 the Fund on the basis of estimates made by the Secretary of the amounts
 referred to in such subsection (b). Proper adjustments shall be made in
 the amount subsequently transferred to the extent prior estimates were in
 excess of or less than the amounts required to be transferred.
 `(2) REPORTS- The Secretary shall be the trustee of the Fund, and shall
 report to the Congress for each fiscal year ending on or after September 30,
 1990, on the financial condition and the results of the operations of such
 Fund during such fiscal year and on its expected condition and operations
 during the next 5 fiscal years. Such report shall be printed as a House
 document of the session of the Congress to which the report is made.
 `(3) INVESTMENTS- It shall be the duty of the Secretary to invest
 such portion of such Fund as is not, in his judgment, required to meet
 current withdrawals. Such investments shall be in public debt securities
 with maturities suitable for the needs of such Fund and bearing interest
 at rates determined by the Secretary, taking into consideration current
 market yields on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States of
 comparable maturities. The income on such investments shall be credited to,
 and form a part of, such Fund.
`SEC. 187. UTILITY RATE SUBSIDY PROGRAM.
 `(a) RATE SUBSIDIES- The Administrator shall promulgate regulations under
 this section establishing a program to provide for Federal payments to
 electric utilities to cover a portion of electric utility rate increases
 attributable to compliance with the sulfur dioxide emission reduction
 requirements under section 181.
 `(b) PURPOSE OF PAYMENTS TO ASSURE RESIDENTIAL RATEPAYER PROTECTION-
 The program established under this section shall provide for payments
 by the Administrator to electric utilities to protect electric utility
 residential customers from excessive rate increases due to the imposition
 of sulfur dioxide emission reduction requirements under section 181.
 `(c) AMOUNT OF PAYMENTS- Payments under this section shall cover the
 portion of the rates of electric utility residential customers which--
 `(1) is attributable to the imposition of requirements for the reduction
 of sulfur dioxide emissions pursuant to section 181; and
 `(2) exceeds by more than 10 percent of the rates which would have been
 applicable in the absence of such requirements.
 `(d) EQUALIZATION AND LEVELIZATION OF ECONOMIC EFFECTS- No subsidy payment
 may be made to a utility in any State under this section unless the Governor
 of the State has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Administrator, after
 notice and opportunity for hearing, that the State has taken such steps as
 necessary to assure that the electric utility rate increases attributable
 to compliance with sulfur dioxide emission reduction requirements under
 section 181 are--
 `(1) substantially equivalent for residential electric utility ratepayers
 throughout the State, and
 `(2) substantially levelized over the period during which such requirements
 are in effect.
 `(e) EPA RULES REGARDING DETERMINATION OF AMOUNT OF SUBSIDY- The
 Administrator shall promulgate rules regarding the determination and
 approval by the Administrator of the amount of electric utility rates which
 are qualified for subsidy payments under this section. The rules shall
 require the costs of compliance with the sulfur dioxide emission reduction
 requirements under section 181 to be separately stated in connection
 with any rate or charge imposed with respect to electric energy sold by
 any electric utility which sells electric energy to another utility for
 resale. The rules shall provide for approval of such amounts only if the
 Administrator determines, based upon information submitted by the utility
 and upon any other information available to the Administrator, that the
 utility's costs of compliance with such requirements, the methods financing
 such costs, the accounting systems used by the utility with respect to
 such costs, and any other circumstances relating to compliance with the
 requirements of this part are such that the Administrator is satisfied that
 the costs of compliance are not unreasonable or excessive. In the case of
 costs for the purchase, installation, and operation of any technological
 system of continuous emission reduction for the control of emissions of
 sulfur dioxide, such costs shall not be treated as attributable to the
 imposition of requirements under this part unless the system meets each
 of the following requirements:
 `(1) The system is installed on a steam generating unit in order to
 comply with emission limitations established for that unit under State
 plan provisions adopted pursuant to section 181.
 `(2) The steam generating unit is specifically designated by the Governor of
 the State as a unit on which a technological system of continuous emission
 control is to be installed for purposes of meeting such emission limitations.
 `(3) The construction of the steam generating unit commenced on or before
 September 18, 1978 so that the unit is not subject to new source performance
 standards under 40 CFR 60.40a.
`SEC. 188. DEFINITIONS; SCOPE.
 `(a) DEFINITIONS- As used in this part:
 `(1) The terms `electric utility steam generating unit' and `fossil fuel'
 have the same meanings as provided in regulations set forth in 40 CFR 60.41a.
 `(2) The term `stationary source of industrial process emissions' means
 any major stationary source in any category of stationary sources (other
 than fossil fuel fired steam generating units) which the Administrator
 determines, by rule, contributes significantly to concentrations of sulfur
 dioxide in the ambient air.
 `(3) The average monthly statewide emissions rate for any State for any air
 pollutant shall be calculated in accordance with the following formula:
 the sum of the quantity of fuel burned by each plant multiplied by the
 monthly emissions rate for that plant, divided by the fuel burned by all
 plants within the entire State.
 `(b) SCOPE- This part shall apply only to the continental United States.
`SEC. 189. INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGIES.
 `(a) INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGY ALTERNATIVE- The Administrator may provide
 financial assistance to the owners or operators of stationary sources for
 the purpose of promoting the use of innovative emissions technologies
 to control sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and other emissions from
 fossil fuels covered under this Act. To qualify for assistance under this
 section, such technologies shall not be currently in general use, but,
 in the judgment of the Administrator in consultation with the Secretary
 of Energy, shall have the potential for commercial application within 10
 years after the enactment of this part. Such assistance shall be funded
 from revenues as set out in subsection (f).
 `(b) DESIGN AND FEASIBILITY STUDIES- The assistance made available under
 this section may include funds for the development of initial designs
 and feasibility studies to evaluate costs and benefits associated with
 proposals using an innovative technology. To be eligible for funding
 under this section, the Administrator must judge the technology to be
 cost-effective, environmentally beneficial, or effective in preventing
 switching of fuel sources. In evaluating proposals for funding under this
 section, the Administrator shall consider each of the following:
 `(1) The social costs, including employment dislocation associated with
 fuel switching.
 `(2) The economic impacts including comparative costs of capital, operating,
 and maintenance expenses, and energy-efficiency.
 `(3) The environmental benefits including comparative effects on air,
 water and solid waste.
 `(c) CAPITAL COSTS AND OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE- Under this section, the
 Administrator may award grants to share in the cost of the total annualized
 costs of controls, including capital, and operating and maintenance costs
 associated with innovative technologies. To qualify for assistance, the
 Administrator must determine that the project's economic, environmental
 or social benefits, as described in subsection (b) would be greater than
 those of the conventional technology.
 `(d) STATE PLANS- A State plan under this part may provide for compliance
 with the requirements of this part through the use of innovative technology
 at any stationary source in the State. If innovative technology is to be
 used for such purposes, the State plan shall also include other contingent
 emission limitations and compliance schedules applicable to any stationary
 source in the State. The contingent emission limitations shall take
 effect if the innovative technology installed on a unit fails to meet the
 emission limitations and compliance schedules applicable to that unit under
 the State plan. The contingent emission limitations shall be adequate to
 achieve emission reductions at least equivalent to the emission reductions
 which the innovative technology failed to achieve. Such contingent emission
 limitation requirements shall be adequate to assure that the State will meet
 the average monthly emission rates and deadlines set forth in section 181.
 `(e) SUBSEQUENT PLAN REVISIONS- In order to permit the use of innovative
 technology after the date of approval of a State plan under this part,
 the State may submit to the Administrator amendments to plan provisions
 adopted under this part at any time after such approval. The plan amendments
 shall be approved by the Administrator if he determines that the plan, as
 amended, will be adequate to achieve compliance with the average monthly
 emission rates and deadlines set forth in this part.
 `(f) FEES- Upon the application of any State, the Administrator may
 promulgate regulations imposing a fee not to exceed 0.25 mills per kilowatt
 hour on the generation of electric energy in that State. The revenues
 derived from such fee shall be made available by the Administrator,
 subject to appropriation, solely for the purpose of promoting the use
 of innovative technologies in that State. The failure or refusal of any
 person subject to such fee to pay the fee or to file any report or other
 document required by the Administrator in connection with the imposition
 of such fee shall be subject to the same penalties and sanctions as are
 applicable to the fee imposed under section 185.
 `(g) REPORT- The Administrator shall report annually each year until January
 1, 1995 on the status of innovative technologies which are available,
 or which may be available, to meet the requirements of this part.'.
SEC. 102. REVISIONS OF NEW SOURCE PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR CONTROL OF
NITROGEN OXIDE EMISSIONS.
 Section 111 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following new
 subsections at the end thereof:
 `(k) NOX EMISSIONS FROM CERTAIN ELECTRIC UTILITY BOILERS- The Administrator
 shall revise the standards of performance for emissions of nitrogen oxides
 from electric utility steam generating units which burn bituminous or
 subbituminous coal. Such revised standards shall prohibit the emission of
 nitrogen oxides from such units at a rate which exceeds:
 `(1) 0.30 pounds per million Btu's, in the case of subbituminous coal,
 based on a 30-day rolling average.
 `(2) 0.40 pounds per million Btu's, in the case of bituminous coal, based
 on a 30-day rolling average.
Such revised standard shall take effect with respect to units which commence
construction after the date of the enactment of this subsection. As used
in this subsection, the terms `electric utility steam generating unit',
`bituminous coal', and `subbituminous coal' have the same meanings as when
used in 40 C.F.R. part 60, subpart Da, as in effect on January 1, 1983.
 `(l) NSPS FOR NOx EMISSIONS FROM INDUSTRIAL BOILERS- The Administrator
 shall promulgate standards of performance under this section for emissions
 of oxides of nitrogen from all fossil-fuel-fired steam generating units
 which meet each of the following requirements:
 `(1) The units are new sources within the meaning of subsection (a)(2).
 `(2) The units are capable of combusting more than 50 million Btu's per
 hour heat input of fossil fuel (either alone or in combination with any
 other fuel).
 `(3) The units are not owned or operated by an electric utility.
The standards under this section applicable to fossil-fuel-fired steam
generating units which are capable of combusting more than 250 million Btu's
per hour heat input may vary from the standards applicable to units which are
not capable of combusting more than 250 million Btu's per hour heat input.'.
SEC. 103. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
 The Clean Air Act is amended as follows:
 (1) Section 113(a)(3) is amended by inserting `or is in violation of any
 requirement in effect pursuant to subpart 1 of part E,' after `inspections,
 etc.)'.
 (2) Section 113(b) is amended by inserting the following immediately after
 paragraph (5): `Whenever any person violates any requirement in effect
 pursuant to subpart 1 of part E, the Administrator may commence a civil
 action for permanent or temporary injunction or to assess and recover a
 civil penalty of not more than $25,000 per day of violation, or both.'.
 (3) Section 113(c)(1)(C) is amended by inserting `or violates any requirement
 in effect pursuant to subpart 1 of part E,' before `or'.
 (4) Section 307(b)(1) is amended by inserting `, any final action taken
 by the Administrator under part E of title I' after `120' in the first
 sentence thereof.
TITLE II--EMISSIONS FROM MOBILE SOURCES
SEC. 201. EMISSIONS OF OXIDES OF NITROGEN AND CERTAIN OTHER AIR POLLUTANTS.
 (a) NOx EMISSIONS FROM CERTAIN MOTOR VEHICLES- Section 202 of the Clean
 Air Act is amended by adding the following new subsection at the end thereof:
 `(g) NOx EMISSIONS FROM CERTAIN MOTOR VEHICLES- Effective with respect
 to the model years specified in table 1, the regulations under subsection
 (a) applicable to emissions of oxides of nitrogen from the motor vehicles
 (and from motor vehicle engines for such vehicles) specified in table 1
 shall contain standards which provide that such emissions may not exceed
 the level specified in table 1:
Table 1
NOx emissions from certain passenger cars and trucks
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Vehicle type Model
 Year Standard
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Passenger cars 1991
 and after 0.7 gpm
 Gasoline and diesel powered trucks weighing up to 6,000 lbs 1991
 and after 1.2 gpm
 Gasoline and diesel powered trucks weighing from 6,000 up to 8,500 lbs 1994
 and after 1.7 gpm
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The weights specified in the first column of table 1 (and in table 2 of
subsection (h)) shall be based upon the gross vehicle weight rating determined
by the Administrator. In the case of any motor vehicle specified in the table
(and in the case of motor vehicle engines for such vehicles) the standard
established pursuant to this subsection shall apply in lieu of any standard
otherwise applicable pursuant to this section.
 `(h) HYDROCARBON STANDARDS FOR TRUCKS- Effective with respect to model year
 1992 and thereafter, the regulations under subsection (a) applicable to
 emissions of hydrocarbon from the motor vehicles (and from motor vehicle
 engines for such vehicles) specified in the first column of table 2 shall
 contain standards which provide that such emissions may not exceed the
 level specified in the second column of table 2:
Table 2
Hydrocarbon standard for trucks model year 1992 and after
-----------------------------------------------------
 Vehicle Type Standard
-----------------------------------------------------
 Trucks weighing up to 6,000 lbs 0.41 gpm
 Trucks weighing from 6,000 up to 8,500 lbs 0.53 gpm
-----------------------------------------------------
In the case of any motor vehicle specified in the table (and in the case of
motor vehicle engines for such vehicles) the standard established pursuant
to this subsection shall apply in lieu of any standard otherwise applicable
pursuant to this section'.
 (b) DEFINITIONS- Section 216 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding
 the following at the end thereof:
 `(6) The terms `passenger car' and `truck' shall have such meaning as
 shall be prescribed by the Administrator.
 `(7) The term `gpm' means grams per mile.
 `(8) The term `g/Bhp' means grams per brake horsepower hour.
 (c) REGULATION OF SULFUR IN DIESEL FUEL-
 (1) 0.05 PERCENT LIMIT- Section 211 of the Clean Air Act is amended by
 adding the following new subsection at the end thereof:
 `(h) REGULATION OF SULFUR IN DIESEL FUEL- The Administrator shall promulgate
 regulations under this subsection requiring that the sulfur content of any
 motor vehicle diesel fuel shall not exceed 0.05 percent (by weight). After
 January 1, 1991, no manufacturer or processor of motor vehicle diesel
 fuel may sell, offer for sale, or introduce into commerce any fuel which
 does not comply with such regulations. In the case of a State standard
 which is more stringent than the standard under this subsection, section
 211(c)(4)(A) shall not apply to regulations regarding the sulfur content
 of any motor vehicle diesel fuel.'.
 (2) ENFORCEMENT- Section 211(d) of such Act is amended by inserting after
 `under subsection (c)' the following `or (h)'.
 (d) EVAPORATIVE HC- Section 202(a)(6) of the Clean Air Act is amended to
 read as follows:
 `(6) EVAPORATIVE HC- Not later than 6 months after the enactment of this
 paragraph, the Administrator shall promulgate regulations requiring one
 or both of the following on a nationwide basis:
 `(A) The use of onboard hydrocarbon control technology by motor vehicles
 manufactured for any model year after the model year 1991.
 `(B) The use of gasoline vapor recovery of hydrocarbon emissions emanating
 from the fueling of motor vehicles.'.
 (g) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 202(a)(3) (A)(ii) of the Clean Air Act is
 amended by inserting `and except as otherwise provided in subsections (g),
 (h), and (i)' after `(E)'.