HR 6090 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 6090
To prohibit the importation of goods produced abroad with child labor and
for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
October 1, 1992
Mr. PEASE introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Ways and Means
A BILL
To prohibit the importation of goods produced abroad with child labor and
for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Child Labor Deterrence Act of 1992.'
SEC. 2. FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND POLICY.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds the following:
 (1) Principle 9 of the Declaration of the Rights of the Child proclaimed by
 the General Assembly of the United Nations on November 20, 1959, states that
 `. . . the child shall not be admitted to employment before an appropriate
 minimum age; he shall in no case be caused or permitted to engage in any
 occupation or employment which would prejudice his health or education,
 or interfere with his physical, mental, or moral development . . .'.
 (2) Article 2 of the International Labor Convention No. 138 Concerning
 Minimum Age For Admission to Employment states that, `The minimum age
 specified in pursuance of paragraph 1 of this article shall not be less
 than the age of compulsory schooling and, in any case, shall not be less
 than 15 years.'.
 (3) According to the International Labor Organization, worldwide an
 estimated 200,000,000 children under age 15 are working, many of them in
 dangerous industries like mining and fireworks.
 (4) Children under the age 15 constitute approximately 11 percent of the
 workforce in some Asian countries, 17 percent in parts of Africa, and a
 reported 12-26 percent in many countries in Latin America.
 (5) The number of children under age 15 who are working, and the scale of
 their suffering, increase every year, despite the existence of more than 20
 International Labor Organization conventions on child labor and laws in many
 countries which purportedly prohibit the employment of under age children.
 (6) In many countries, children under the age 15 lack either the legal
 standing or means to protect themselves from exploitation in the workplace.
 (7) The employment of children under the age of 15 commonly deprives the
 children of the opportunity for basic education and also denies gainful
 employment to millions of adults.
 (8) The employment of children under the age of 15, often at pitifully low
 wages, undermines the stability of families and ignores the importance of
 increasing jobs, aggregated demand, and purchasing power among adults as
 a catalyst to the development of internal markets and the achievement of
 broad-based, self-reliant economic development in many developing countries.
 (9) Adult workers in the United States and other developed countries
 should not have their jobs imperiled by imports produced by child labor
 in developing countries.
 (b) PURPOSE- The purpose of this Act is to curtail the employment of
 children under age 15 in the production of goods for export by--
 (1) eliminating the role of the United States in providing a market for
 foreign products made by underage children; and
 (2) encouraging other nations to join in a ban on trade in such products.
SEC. 3. UNITED STATES INITIATIVE TO CURTAIL INTERNATIONAL TRADE IN PRODUCTS
OF CHILD LABOR.
 In pursuit of the policy set forth in this Act, the President is urged
 to seek an agreement with governments that conduct trade with the United
 States for the purpose of securing an international ban on trade in the
 products of child labor.
SEC. 4. IDENTIFICATION OF FOREIGN INDUSTRIES AND THEIR RESPECTIVE HOST
COUNTRIES THAT UTILIZE CHILD LABOR IN EXPORT OF GOODS.
 (a) IDENTIFICATION OF INDUSTRIES AND HOST COUNTRIES- The Secretary of Labor
 (hereafter in this section referred to as the `Secretary') shall undertake
 periodic reviews using all available information, including information
 made available by the International Labor Organization and human rights
 organizations (the first such review to be undertaken not later than 180
 days after the date of the enactment of the Act), to identify any foreign
 industry and its host country that--
 (1) utilize child labor in the export of products; and
 (2) has on a continuing basis exported products of child labor to the
 United States.
 (b) PETITIONS REQUESTING IDENTIFICATION-
 (1) FILING- Any person may file a petition with the Secretary requesting
 that a particular foreign industry and its host country be identified under
 subsection (a). The petition must set forth the allegations in support of
 the request.
 (2) ACTION ON RECEIPT OF PETITION- Not later than 90 days after receiving
 a petition under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall--
 (A) decide whether or not the allegations in the petition warrant further
 action by the Secretary in regard to the foreign industry and its host
 country under subsection (a); and
 (B) notify the petitioner of the decision under subparagraph (A) and the
 facts and reasons supporting the decision.
 (c) CONSULTATION AND COMMENT- Prior to identifying a foreign industry and
 its host country under subsection (a), the Secretary shall--
 (1) consult with the United States Trade Representative, the Secretary
 of State, the Secretary of Commerce and the Secretary of the Treasury
 regarding such action;
 (2) publish notice in the Federal Register that such an identification is
 being considered and inviting the submission within a reasonable time of
 written comment from the public; and
 (3) take into account the information obtained under paragraphs (1) and (2).
 (d) REVOCATION OF IDENTIFICATION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary may revoke the
 identification of any foreign industry and its host country under subsection
 (a) if information available to the Secretary indicates that such action
 is appropriate.
 (2) REPORT OF SECRETARY- No revocation under paragraph (1) may take effect
 earlier than the 60th day after the date on which the Secretary submits
 to the Congress a written report--
 (A) stating that in the opinion of the Secretary the foreign industry
 and host country concerned does not utilize child labor in the export of
 products; and
 (B) stating the facts on which such opinion is based and any other reason
 why the Secretary considers the revocation appropriate.
 (3) PROCEDURE- No revocation under paragraph (1) may take effect unless
 the Secretary--
 (A) publishes notice in the Federal Register that such a revocation is
 under consideration and inviting the submission within a reasonable time
 of written comment from the public on the revocation; and
 (B) takes into account the information received under subparagraph (A)
 before preparing the report required under paragraph (2).
 (e) PUBLICATION- The Secretary shall--
 (1) promptly publish in the Federal Register--
 (A) the name of each foreign industry and its host country identified
 under subsection (a);
 (B) the text of the decision made under subsection (b)(2)(A) and a statement
 of the facts and reasons supporting the decision; and
 (C) the name of each foreign industry and its host country with respect
 to which an identification has been revoked under subsection (d); and
 (2) maintain in the Federal Register a current list of all foreign industries
 and their respective host countries identified under subsection (a).
SEC. 5. PROHIBITION ON ENTRY.
 (a) PROHIBITION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), during the effective
 identification period for a foreign industry and its host country the
 Secretary may not permit the entry of any manufactured article that is a
 product of that foreign industry.
 (2) EXCEPTION- Paragraph (1) shall not apply to the entry of a manufactured
 article--
 (A) for which a certification that meets the requirements of subsection
 (b) is provided;
 (B) that is entered under any subheading in subchapter IV or VI of chapter
 98 (relating to personal exemptions) of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of
 the United States; or
 (C) that was exported from the foreign industry and its host country and
 was en route to the United States before the first day of the effective
 identification period for such industry and its host country.
 (b) CERTIFICATION THAT ARTICLE IS NOT A PRODUCT OF CHILD LABOR-
 (1) FORM AND CONTENT- The Secretary shall prescribe the form and content of
 documentation, for submission in connection with the entry of a manufactured
 article, that satisfies the Secretary that the importer of the article
 has undertaken reasonable steps to ensure, to the extent practicable,
 that the article is not a product of child labor.
 (2) WRITTEN EVIDENCE- The documentation required by the Secretary under
 paragraph (1) shall include written evidence that the agreement setting
 forth the terms and conditions of the acquisition or provision of the
 imported article includes the condition that the article not be a product
 of child labor.
SEC. 6. PENALTIES.
 (a) UNLAWFUL ACTS- It is unlawful--
 (1) during the effective identification period applicable to a foreign
 industry and its host country, to attempt to enter any manufactured article
 that is a product of that industry if the entry is prohibited under section
 5(a)(1); or
 (2) to violate any regulation prescribed under section 7.
 (b) CIVIL PENALTY- Any person who commits any unlawful act set forth in
 subsection (a) is liable for a civil penalty of not to exceed $25,000.
 (c) CRIMINAL PENALTY- In addition to being liable for a civil penalty under
 subsection (b), any person who intentionally commits any unlawful act set
 forth in subsection (a) is, upon conviction, liable for a fine of not less
 than $10,000 and not more than $35,000, or imprisonment for 1 year, or both.
 (d) CONSTRUCTION- The violations set forth in subsection (a) shall be
 treated as violations of the customs laws for purposes of applying the
 enforcement provisions of the Tariff Act of 1930, including--
 (1) the search, seizure and forfeiture provisions;
 (2) section 592 (relating to penalties for entry by fraud, gross negligence,
 or negligence); and
 (3) section 619 (relating to compensation to informers).
SEC. 7. REGULATIONS.
 The Secretary shall prescribe regulations that are necessary or appropriate
 to carry out this Act.
SEC. 8. DEFINITIONS.
 For the purposes of this Act:
 (1) MANUFACTURED ARTICLE- A manufactured article shall be treated as being
 a product of child labor if the article--
 (A) was fabricated, assembled, or processed, in whole or part;
 (B) contains any part that was fabricated, assembled, or processed, in
 whole or in part; or
 (C) was mined, quarried, pumped, or otherwise extracted, by one or
 more children who engaged in the fabrication, assembly, processing,
 or extraction--
 (i) in exchange for remuneration (regardless to whom paid), subsistence,
 goods or services, or any combination of the foregoing;
 (ii) under circumstances tantamount to involuntary servitude; or
 (iii) under exposure to toxic substances or working conditions otherwise
 posing serious health hazards.
 (2) CHILD- The term `child' means an individual who has not attained the
 age of 15.
 (3) EFFECTIVE IDENTIFICATION PERIOD- The term `effective identification
 period' means, with respect to a foreign industry or country, the period
 that--
 (A) begins on the date of that issue of the Federal Register in which
 the identification of the foreign industry or country is published under
 section 4(e)(1)(A); and
 (B) terminates on the date of that issue on the Federal Register in which
 the revocation of the identification referred to in subparagraph (A)
 is published under section 4(e)(1)(B).
 (4) ENTERED- The term `entered' means entered, or withdrawn from warehouse
 for consumption, in the customs territory of the United States.
 (5) FOREIGN INDUSTRY- The term `foreign industry' includes any entity
 that produces a manufactured article in any possession or territory of a
 foreign country.
 (6) HOST COUNTRY- The term `host country' means any possession or territory
 of a foreign country that is administered separately for customs purposes
 and on which a foreign industry produces a manufactured article.
 (7) MANUFACTURED ARTICLE- The term `manufactured article' means any good that
 is fabricated, assembled, or processed. The term also includes any mineral
 resources (including any mineral fuel) that is entered in a crude state. Any
 mineral resource that at entry has been subjected to only washing, crushing,
 grinding, powdering, levigation, sifting, screening, or concentration by
 flotation, magnetic separation, or other mechanical or physical processes
 shall be treated as having been processed for the purposes of this Act.
 (8) SECRETARY- The term `Secretary', except for purposes of section 4,
 means the Secretary of the Treasury.