[Congressional Bills 105th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]
[H.R. 978 Introduced in House (IH)]

105th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 978

To assess the impact of NAFTA, to require the renegotiation of certain 
 provisions of NAFTA, and to provide for the withdrawal from NAFTA 
 unless certain conditions are met.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 March 6, 1997

 Ms. Kaptur (for herself, Mr. Brown of Ohio, Ms. Danner, Mr. Miller of 
 California, Mrs. Meek of Florida, Ms. McKinney, Mr. Conyers, Mr. 
 Sanders, Mr. Rahall, Mr. Evans, Mrs. Carson, Mr. Pallone, Mr. Bonior, 
 Mr. Costello, Mr. Klink, Mr. Traficant, Mr. Pascrell, Mr. Lewis of 
 Georgia, Mr. Tierney, Mr. Stupak, Mr. Visclosky, Mr. Doyle, Mr. 
Dellums, Mr. Lipinski, Mr. Kucinich, Mr. DeFazio, Mr. Lantos, Mr. Sabo, 
 Ms. Waters, Mr. Davis of Illinois, Mr. Obey, Mr. Vento, Mr. Oberstar, 
 Mr. Rush, Mr. Clay, Mr. Kleczka, Mr. Hilliard, Mr. Hunter, Mr. Quinn, 
 Mr. Watts of Oklahoma, Mr. Stearns, Mr. Wamp, Mr. Bono, Mr. Metcalf, 
 Mr. Souder, and Mr. Tiahrt) introduced the following bill; which was 
 referred to the Committee on Ways and Means

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

To assess the impact of NAFTA, to require the renegotiation of certain 
 provisions of NAFTA, and to provide for the withdrawal from NAFTA 
 unless certain conditions are met.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``NAFTA Accountability Act''.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS.

 The Congress makes the following findings:
 (1) Expanded markets.--One of the purposes of NAFTA, as 
 stated in its preamble, is to ``create an expanded and secure 
 market'' for United States goods and services. Instead, NAFTA 
 has resulted in an enormous increase in imports to the United 
 States from Mexico and Canada and a spiraling trade deficit 
 with Mexico and Canada that has exceeded $30,000,000,000 in 
 both 1995 and 1996. Before NAFTA, the United States had a 
 $1,700,000,000 trade surplus with Mexico. Rather than 
 harmonious development and expansion in all 3 NAFTA countries 
 as envisioned, NAFTA has resulted in United States trade 
 deficits which are draining $2,500,000,000 a month from the 
 United States economy and causing greater economic instability 
 in Mexico.
 (2) Currency stability.--One of the purposes of NAFTA, as 
 stated in its preamble, is to ``ensure a predictable commercial 
 framework for business planning and investment''. However, 
 NAFTA contains no safeguards to minimize the negative economic 
 impacts of severe shifts in currency exchange rates among the 
 NAFTA Parties. Mexico's sudden devaluation of its peso in 
 December 1994 has more than offset tariff reductions and other 
 trade benefits the United States expected to achieve from the 
 agreement. The dollar-peso exchange rate when NAFTA passed was 
 1:3.5. It is now approximately 1:8 and is not expected to 
 return to its previous value. Indeed, economic experts are 
 stating that conditions are building for another severe Mexican 
 currency crisis.
 (3) Jobs, wages, and living standards.--One of the purposes 
 of NAFTA, as stated in its preamble, is to ``create new 
 employment opportunities and improve working conditions and 
 living standards'' in the respective territories of the NAFTA 
 Parties. Instead, there has been a substantial loss of a half 
 million high paying jobs in the United States. A survey of 
 United States companies conducted 3 years after the 
 implementation of NAFTA found that 90 percent of the companies 
 that had anticipated creating United States jobs through NAFTA 
 have, in fact, not created jobs because of NAFTA. In the first 
 3 years of NAFTA's implementation, United States workers have 
 seen steady drops in real hourly wages. In Mexico employment in 
 the border Maquiladora zone has increased by more than 46 
 percent under NAFTA. However, Mexico has seen much greater job 
 losses in the agricultural, small retail, and small industrial 
sectors. Thus, more than 2,000,000 workers have become unemployed in 
Mexico since the implementation of NAFTA, and real wages of Mexican 
workers have been slashed 50 percent.
 (4) Manufacturing base.--One of the purposes of NAFTA is to 
 enhance the competitiveness of firms in the global market. 
 However, rather than increase the ability of the manufacturing 
 sector in the United States to compete in the world market, 
 NAFTA has facilitated the movement of United States 
 manufacturing facilities and jobs to Mexico. NAFTA has 
 contributed to a net loss of approximately 400,000 
 manufacturing jobs in the United States and an unprecedented 
 flood of imports of manufactured goods into the United States.
 (5) Health and environment.--Other purposes of NAFTA, as 
 stated in its preamble, are ``to safeguard the public welfare'' 
 and ``to strengthen the development and enforcement of 
 environmental laws and regulations''. Yet, since the 
 implementation of NAFTA, the public welfare has been undermined 
 by increased imports of food products that do not meet United 
 States health standards. In addition, NAFTA has accelerated the 
 relocation of United States manufacturing facilities to the 
 United States-Mexico border zone. Without adequate 
 environmental safeguards, the uncontrolled industrial and 
 population growth in the border zone has aggravated pollution 
 and health hazards, increasing the incidence of infectious 
 diseases and human exposure to toxins.
 (6) Illegal drugs.--Rather than safeguarding the public 
 welfare, NAFTA has allowed the increased flow of illegal drugs 
 and controlled substances into the United States from Mexico. 
 More than half of all marijuana and 70 percent of cocaine 
 entering the United States now comes through Mexico. NAFTA's 
 rules limit inspection of trucks crossing the border into the 
 United States, and the major increase of Mexico to United 
 States truck traffic has provided a new route for drug 
 smuggling. The General Accounting Office has reported that 
 interdiction efforts have had little, if any, impact on the 
 overall flow of drugs through Mexico into the United States.
 (7) Protect rights.--The promotion of sustainable 
 development as well as the protection and enhancement of basic 
 rights are stated objectives of NAFTA. As envisioned, NAFTA was 
 to increase economic opportunity together with expansion of 
 political freedoms and human rights. Yet these objectives are 
 not being fulfilled, especially in Mexico, where many citizens 
 continue to experience infringements of such rights and 
 freedoms.
 (8) Fair agricultural trade.--One of the purposes of NAFTA, 
 as stated in its preamble, is to ``reduce distortions to 
 trade''. In addition, NAFTA is supposed to promote conditions 
 of fair competition and to establish mutually advantageous 
 rules governing trade. However, since NAFTA, there have been 
 sharp drops and escalations of one-way agricultural trade. One-
 way trade of Canadian grain exports of wheat, durum wheat, and 
 barley to the United States has disrupted markets and marketing 
 channels. Surges in the importation of certain Mexican fruits 
 and vegetables have damaged United States domestic production. 
 The importation of livestock and meat products from the NAFTA 
 Parties raises serious health concerns and has exacerbated the 
 severe problems facing United States livestock producers. 
 NAFTA's destabilization of the Mexican small agricultural 
 sector has undermined the country's ability to ensure a stable 
 supply of food, which has led to an unprecedented migration of 
 landless peasants and an increase in emigration to Mexican 
 cities and to the United States.
 (9) Highway safety.--NAFTA is intended to preserve the 
 flexibility of each nation to safeguard its public welfare. 
 Mexican motor carriers and drivers do not have to meet the more 
 stringent United States safety standards when operating in 
 Mexico. Canadian law allows significantly longer and heavier 
 trucks than permitted by United States law. These fundamental 
 differences in safety standards make it practically impossible 
 to develop effective enforcement programs in the United States 
 to bring all Mexican or Canadian motor carriers and drivers 
 into compliance with United States laws. Yet, NAFTA would allow 
 Mexican and Canadian trucks to operate in United States border 
 States and eventually all States, posing a serious threat to 
 highway safety in the United States.
 (10) NAFTA should not be expanded.--The Congress approved 
 NAFTA in order to achieve economic, social, and environmental 
 benefits for the people of the United States. Based on 
 currently available information, the goals and objectives of 
 NAFTA are not being achieved. Therefore, until the 
 certifications of NAFTA's effect, required in section 3, are 
made, NAFTA should not be expanded to include any other country. It is 
also inappropriate, prior to the certification of NAFTA's effects, to 
consider any request for ``fast track'' negotiating authority to expand 
NAFTA.

SEC. 3. CONDITIONS FOR CONTINUED PARTICIPATION IN NAFTA.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Withdrawal of approval.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of law, unless each of the conditions described in 
 paragraph (2) is met--
 (A) the approval of NAFTA by the Congress provided 
 for in section 101(a) of the North American Free Trade 
 Agreement Implementation Act shall cease to be 
 effective on January 1, 1999; and
 (B) not later than July 1, 1998, the President 
 shall provide 6 months written notice of withdrawal to 
 the Governments of Canada and Mexico in accordance with 
 Article 2205 of NAFTA.
 (2) Conditions for continuing participation in nafta.--The 
 conditions described in this paragraph are that before March 
 31, 1998--
 (A) the President--
 (i) provide the certification to the 
 Congress described in subsection (b)(6); and
 (ii) renegotiate the terms of NAFTA in 
 accordance with section 4;
 (B) the Secretary of Commerce provide the 
 certification described in subsection (b)(1);
 (C) the Secretary of the Treasury provide the 
 certification described in subsection (b)(2);
 (D) the Secretary of Labor provide the 
 certification described in subsection (b)(3);
 (E) the Secretary of Agriculture and the 
 Administrator of the Food and Drug Administration 
 provide the certification described in subsection 
 (b)(4)(A);
 (F) the Administrator of the Environmental 
 Protection Agency submit the certification and report 
 described in subsection (b)(4)(B);
 (G) the Attorney General of the United States 
 provide the certification described in subsection 
 (b)(5);
 (H) the Secretary of Agriculture provide the 
 certification described in subsection (b)(7); and
 (I) the Secretary of Transportation provide the 
 certification described in subsection (b)(8).
 (b) Areas of Certification.--The areas of certification described 
in this subsection are as follows:
 (1) Certification of the nafta balance of trade.--If the 
 Secretary of Commerce, after consulting with appropriate 
 government agencies and citizen organizations, determines that 
 the cumulative trade balance between the United States and 
 Mexico and the United States and Canada during the first 3 
 years that NAFTA was in effect is at least as positive as in 
 the 3 years before NAFTA took effect, so that the net trade 
 balance does not show a greater overall deficit, the Secretary 
 shall so certify.
 (2) Certification of currency values.--If the Secretary of 
 the Treasury, after consulting with appropriate government 
 agencies and citizen organizations, determines that the 
 exchange rates between the United States dollar and both the 
 Canadian dollar and the Mexican peso are within 10 percent of 
 the exchange rates when NAFTA took effect, the Secretary shall 
 so certify.
 (3) Certification of nafta's effects on united states jobs 
 and living standards.-- If the Secretary of Labor, after 
consultation with appropriate government agencies and citizen 
organizations, determines that--
 (A) the number of specific United States jobs 
 resulting from increased exports of United States 
 manufactured goods to other NAFTA Parties exceeds the 
 number of specific jobs lost because of imports of 
 manufactured goods from other NAFTA Parties since 
 January 1, 1994, by comparing jobs created with jobs 
 lost, and
 (B) the hourly real wage rate of wage earners in 
 the United States has not decreased since January 1, 
 1994,
 the Secretary shall so certify to the Congress.
 (4) Certification relating to health and environmental 
 standards.--
 (A) In general.--If the Secretary of Agriculture 
 and the Administrator of the Food and Drug 
 Administration, after consultation with appropriate 
 government agencies and citizen organizations, 
 determine, with respect to imports from NAFTA Parties, 
 that since January 1, 1994, there has been a reduced 
 incidence of contaminated and adulterated food, food 
 containing additives or pesticide residues exceeding 
 United States standards, or food containing additives 
 or pesticide residues which cannot be legally used in 
 the United States, the Secretary and Administrator 
 shall so certify to the Congress. In making this 
 determination, all foods and food products, including 
 fruits, vegetables, grains, oilseeds, and meats, both 
 fresh and processed, shall be reviewed. Special 
 attention shall be given to foods which have had a 
 history of violations of United States standards or 
 laws described in this subparagraph.
 (B) Border area pollution.--(i) If the 
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency 
 determines, taking into account the matters required to 
 be included in the report under clause (ii), that 
 conditions affecting public health and the environment 
 in the United States-Mexico border zone have not 
 worsened since January 1, 1994, the Administrator shall 
 so certify to the Congress.
 (ii) In addition, the Administrator, in 
 consultation with the Secretariat for the NAFTA 
 Commission on Environmental Cooperation, shall report 
 to the Congress on the outcomes of the investigations 
 by the Environmental Protection Agency on pollution and 
 health hazards in and around the United States-Mexico 
 border zone since NAFTA went into effect. The report 
 shall include--
 (I) a description and status report of all 
 industrial site cleanup and environmental 
 improvement projects begun in the border zone 
 since January 1, 1994;
 (II) information available from local, 
 State, and Federal health agencies reflecting 
 the incidence since January 1, 1990, in and 
 around the border zone of hepatitis, neural 
 stem birth defects, lupus, chronic diarrhea, 
 tuberculosis, nonneural birth defects, cholera, 
 botulism, and other disorders commonly related 
 to industrial pollution, inadequate 
 infrastructures, and hazardous waste; and
 (III) information on the incidence of air 
 and water pollution since January 1, 1990, and 
 the causes, levels, and types of pollution 
 which have occurred.
 (5) Certification relating to illegal drugs.--If the 
 Attorney General of the United States determines, after a 
 review by the Drug Enforcement Administration and consultation 
 with appropriate government agencies and citizen organizations, 
 that the importation into the United States of illegal drugs or 
 other controlled substances from Mexico or Canada has not 
 increased since NAFTA went into effect, the Attorney General 
 shall so certify to the Congress. The Attorney General, through 
 the Drug Enforcement Administration, shall conduct a thorough 
 review and report to the Congress regarding the flow of illegal 
 drugs from Mexico and Canada and the relationship of such flow 
 to trade of other commodities and services with the NAFTA 
 Parties.
 (6) Certification relating to democracy and human 
 freedoms.--If the President, after consultation with 
 appropriate government agencies, international organizations, 
 and citizen organizations, determines that each NAFTA Party--
 (A) elects its government in free and fair 
 elections;
 (B) protects the rights of its citizens to organize 
 into political parties;
 (C) protects the rights of its citizens to free 
 speech and the right of the news media to operate 
without fear of government control or reprisal; and
 (D) protects the rights of its citizens to assemble 
 and to organize associations to advance human rights 
 and economic opportunities,
 the President shall so certify to the Congress.
 (7) Certification relating to nafta's effect on united 
 states agriculture.--If the Secretary of Agriculture, after 
 consultation with appropriate government agencies and citizen 
 organizations, determines that United States agricultural 
 interests have been left in at least as good a position as 
 before NAFTA, the Secretary shall so certify to the Congress.
 (8) Certification relating to highway safety.--If the 
 Secretary of Transportation, after consultation with attorneys 
 general of the States, law enforcement officials, State highway 
 safety agencies, other appropriate government agencies, and 
 citizen organizations, determines that a comprehensive 
 enforcement system is in place to ensure that every Mexican 
 commercial truck or bus is properly inspected so that the 
 vehicle and its driver are in compliance with United States 
 transportation safety standards before crossing the border into 
 the United States, the Secretary shall so certify to the 
 Congress. In making such determination, the Secretary shall 
 review and take into account the results of border inspections 
 of Mexican vehicles coming into the United States since January 
 1, 1994.

SEC. 4. RENEGOTIATIONS.

 (a) Renegotiate NAFTA To Correct Trade Deficits.--The President is 
authorized and directed to confer with the Governments of Canada and 
Mexico and to renegotiate the terms of NAFTA to provide for 
implementation of adjustments of tariffs, quotas, and other measures to 
stabilize the flow of trade among the NAFTA Parties when the dollar 
value of United States imports of goods and services from another NAFTA 
Party exceeds 10 percent of the dollar value of United States exports 
to that Party.
 (b) Renegotiate NAFTA To Correct Currency Distortions.--The 
President is authorized and directed to confer with the Governments of 
Canada and Mexico and to renegotiate the terms of NAFTA to provide for 
the implementation of adjustments of tariffs, quotas, and other 
measures to mitigate the adverse effects of rapid or substantial 
changes in exchange rates between the United States dollar and the 
currency of another NAFTA Party.
 (c) Renegotiate NAFTA To Correct Job Loss.--The President is 
authorized and directed to confer with the Governments of Canada and 
Mexico and to renegotiate the terms of NAFTA to ensure that under NAFTA 
trade with Mexico and Canada creates at least as many United States 
jobs as it costs United States jobs as measured by specific jobs 
created since January 1, 1994, compared to specific jobs lost since 
January 1, 1994, in United States trade with Mexico and Canada.
 (d) Renegotiate NAFTA To Protect Public Health and the 
Environment.--The President is authorized and directed to confer with 
the Governments of Canada and Mexico and to renegotiate the terms of 
NAFTA to ensure that--
 (1) under NAFTA--
 (A) the rate of importation of food failing United 
 States safety standards from Mexico and Canada,
 (B) the rate of hepatitis, chronic diarrhea, and 
 other pollution-related diseases along the United 
 States-Mexico border, and
 (C) the rate of toxic waste dumping and other 
 improper disposal along the United States-Mexico and 
 United States-Canada borders,
 are no higher than before NAFTA went into effect; and
 (2) under NAFTA the air and water quality in the United 
 States-Mexico border zone, and along and near the border 
 between the United States and Canada, as determined under the 
 Clean Air Act and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, are 
 no worse than before NAFTA went into effect.
 (e) Renegotiate NAFTA To Interdict Drug Traffic.--The President is 
authorized and directed to confer with the Governments of Canada and 
Mexico and to renegotiate the terms of NAFTA, including those relating 
to increasing border inspection of all cargoes coming from Mexico and 
Canada carried by truck, rail, or ship, to ensure that the flow of 
illegal drugs into the United States from Mexico or Canada is no 
greater than such illegal drug flow before NAFTA went into effect.
 (f) Renegotiate NAFTA To Correct Agricultural Provisions.--The 
President is authorized and directed to confer with the Governments of 
Canada and Mexico and to renegotiate the terms of NAFTA to provide for 
the implementation of tariffs, quotas, and other measures to bring the 
levels of wheat, durum wheat, and barley imported from Canada to levels 
that are comparable to the levels of these products imported during the 
10-year period before the date NAFTA went into effect. The President is 
further authorized and directed to renegotiate NAFTA to establish and 
strengthen provisions to prevent imports of agricultural commodities 
from any NAFTA Party from unfairly displacing United States production 
and to provide improved mechanisms for relief for United States 
producers that are adversely affected by such imports.
 (g) Renegotiate NAFTA To Ensure Compliance With United States 
Transportation Standards.--The President is authorized and directed to 
confer with the Governments of Canada and Mexico and to renegotiate the 
terms of NAFTA and other relevant agreements to provide for 
implementation of a comprehensive enforcement system to ensure that 
every commercial truck or bus entering the United States is properly 
inspected so that the vehicle and its driver are in compliance with 
United States transportation standards before entering the United 
States.

SEC. 5. CONSULTATION WITH CONGRESS.

 The President shall consult regularly with the Congress regarding 
the certifications described in section 3(b) and the renegotiations 
described in section 4. The United States Trade Representative shall 
consult with the appropriate committees of Congress in the development 
of any technical and conforming amendments that may be required to 
carry out the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 6. NO EXPANSION OF NAFTA.

 Until such time as the conditions described in section 3 are met, 
it is the sense of the Congress that the President should not engage in 
negotiations to expand NAFTA to include other countries and that fast-
track authority should not be renewed with respect to the approval of 
any such expansion of NAFTA.

SEC. 7. DEFINITIONS.

 As used in this Act:
 (1) NAFTA.--The term ``NAFTA'' means the North American 
 Free Trade Agreement entered into between the United States, 
 Canada, and Mexico on December 17, 1992, and effective as of 
 January 1, 1994.
 (2) NAFTA party.--The term ``NAFTA Party'' means the United 
 States, Canada, or Mexico.
 (3) United states-mexico border zone.--The term ``United 
 States-Mexico border zone'' means the area that comprises the 
 12-mile zone on the Mexican side of the United States-Mexico 
 border and the counties within any State of the United States 
 that are contiguous with Mexico.
 <all>