[Congressional Bills 116th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 851 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

<DOC>

116th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 S. 851

 To direct the Secretary of Labor to issue an occupational safety and 
health standard that requires covered employers within the health care 
and social service industries to develop and implement a comprehensive 
 workplace violence prevention plan, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 March 14, 2019

Ms. Baldwin (for herself, Ms. Warren, Mr. Schatz, Mrs. Gillibrand, Mr. 
 Brown, and Mr. Blumenthal) introduced the following bill; which was 
 read twice and referred to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, 
 and Pensions

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To direct the Secretary of Labor to issue an occupational safety and 
health standard that requires covered employers within the health care 
and social service industries to develop and implement a comprehensive 
 workplace violence prevention plan, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Workplace Violence Prevention for 
Health Care and Social Service Workers Act''.

SEC. 2. TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 The table of contents for this Act is as follows:

Sec. 1. Short title.
Sec. 2. Table of contents.
 TITLE I--WORKPLACE VIOLENCE PREVENTION STANDARD

Sec. 101. Workplace violence prevention standard.
Sec. 102. Scope and application.
Sec. 103. Requirements for workplace violence prevention standard.
Sec. 104. Rules of construction.
Sec. 105. Other definitions.
 TITLE II--AMENDMENTS TO THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT

Sec. 201. Application of the workplace violence prevention standard to 
 certain facilities receiving Medicare 
 funds.

 TITLE I--WORKPLACE VIOLENCE PREVENTION STANDARD

SEC. 101. WORKPLACE VIOLENCE PREVENTION STANDARD.

 (a) Interim Final Standard.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Labor shall promulgate 
 an interim final standard on workplace violence prevention--
 (A) to require certain employers in the health care 
 and social service sectors, and certain employers in 
 sectors that conduct activities similar to the 
 activities in the health care and social service 
 sectors, to develop and implement a comprehensive 
 workplace violence prevention plan to protect health 
 care workers, social service workers, and other 
 personnel from workplace violence; and
 (B) that shall, at a minimum, be based on the 
 Guidelines for Preventing Workplace Violence for 
 Healthcare and Social Service Workers published by the 
 Occupational Safety and Health Administration of the 
 Department of Labor in 2015 and adhere to the 
 requirements of this title.
 (2) Applicability of other statutory requirements.--The 
 following shall not apply to the promulgation of the interim 
 final standard under this subsection:
 (A) The requirements applicable to occupational 
 safety and health standards under section 6(b) of the 
 Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 
 655(b)).
 (B) The requirements of chapters 5 and 6 of title 
 5, United States Code, and titles 2 and 42, United 
 States Code.
 (3) Notice and comment.--Notwithstanding paragraph (2)(B), 
 the Secretary shall, prior to promulgating the interim final 
 standard under this subsection, provide notice of the interim 
 final standard and a 30-day opportunity for public comment.
 (4) Effective date of interim standard.--The interim final 
 standard shall--
 (A) take effect on a date that is not later than 30 
 days after promulgation, except that such interim final 
 standard may include a reasonable phase-in period for 
 the implementation of required engineering controls 
 that take effect after such date;
 (B) be enforced in the same manner and to the same 
 extent as any standard promulgated under section 6(b) 
 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 
 U.S.C. 655(b)); and
 (C) be in effect until the final standard described 
 in subsection (b) becomes effective and enforceable.
 (5) Failure to promulgate.--If an interim final standard 
 described in paragraph (1) is not promulgated not later than 1 
 year of the date of enactment of this Act, the provisions of 
 this title shall be in effect and enforced in the same manner 
 and to the same extent as any standard promulgated under 
 section 6(b) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 
 (29 U.S.C. 655(b)) until such provisions are superseded in 
 whole by an interim final standard promulgated by the Secretary 
 that meets the requirements of paragraph (1).
 (b) Final Standard.--
 (1) Proposed final standard.--Not later than 2 years after 
 the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Labor 
 shall, pursuant to section 6 of the Occupational Safety and 
 Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 655), promulgate a proposed final 
 standard on workplace violence prevention--
 (A) for the purposes described in subsection 
 (a)(1)(A); and
 (B) that shall include, at a minimum, the elements 
 contained in the interim final standard promulgated 
 under subsection (a).
 (2) Final standard.--Not later than 42 months after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promulgate a 
 final standard on such proposed standard that shall--
 (A) provide no less protection than any workplace 
 violence standard adopted by a State plan that has been 
 approved by the Secretary under section 18 of the 
 Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 
 667); and
 (B) be effective and enforceable in the same manner 
 and to the same extent as any standard promulgated 
 under section 6(b) of the Occupational Safety and 
 Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 655(b)).

SEC. 102. SCOPE AND APPLICATION.

 In this title:
 (1) Covered facility.--The term ``covered facility'' 
 includes the following:
 (A) Any hospital, including any specialty hospital, 
 in-patient or outpatient setting, or clinic operating 
 within a hospital license, or any setting that provides 
 outpatient services.
 (B) Any residential treatment facility, including 
 any nursing home, skilled nursing facility, hospice 
 facility, and long-term care facility.
 (C) Any non-residential treatment or service 
 setting.
 (D) Any medical treatment or social service setting 
 or clinic at a correctional or detention facility.
 (E) Any community care setting, including a 
 community-based residential facility, group home, and 
 mental health clinic.
 (F) Any psychiatric treatment facility.
 (G) Any drug abuse or substance use disorder 
 treatment center.
 (H) Any independent freestanding emergency centers.
 (I) Any facility described in subparagraphs (A) 
 through (H) operated by a Federal Government agency and 
 required to comply with occupational safety and health 
 standards pursuant to part 1960 of title 29, Code of 
 Federal Regulations (or any corresponding similar 
 regulations or rulings).
 (J) Any other facility the Secretary determines 
 should be covered under the standards promulgated under 
 section 101.
 (2) Covered services.--The term ``covered service'' 
 includes the following services and operations:
 (A) Any services and operations provided in any 
 field work setting, including home health care, home-
 based hospice, and home-based social work.
 (B) Any emergency services and transport, including 
 such services provided by firefighters and emergency 
 responders.
 (C) Any services described in subparagraphs (A) and 
 (B) performed by a Federal Government agency and 
 required to comply with occupational safety and health 
 standards pursuant to part 1960 of title 29, Code of 
 Federal Regulations (or any corresponding similar 
 regulations or rulings).
 (D) Any other services and operations the Secretary 
 determines should be covered under the standards 
 promulgated under section 101.
 (3) Covered employer.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``covered employer'' 
 includes a person (including a contractor, 
 subcontractor, a temporary service firm, or an employee 
 leasing entity) that employs an individual to work at a 
 covered facility or to perform covered services.
 (B) Exclusion.--The term ``covered employer'' does 
 not include an individual who privately employs, in the 
 individual's residence, a person to perform covered 
 services for the individual or a family member of the 
 individual.
 (4) Covered employee.--The term ``covered employee'' 
 includes an individual employed by a covered employer to work 
 at a covered facility or to perform covered services.

SEC. 103. REQUIREMENTS FOR WORKPLACE VIOLENCE PREVENTION STANDARD.

 Each standard described in section 101 shall include, at a minimum, 
the following requirements:
 (1) Workplace violence prevention plan.--Not later than 6 
 months after the date of promulgation of the interim final 
 standard under section 101(a), a covered employer shall 
 develop, implement, and maintain an effective written workplace 
 violence prevention plan (referred to in this section as a 
 ``Plan'') for covered employees at each covered facility and 
 for covered employees performing a covered service on behalf of 
 such employer, which meets the following:
 (A) Plan development.--Each Plan shall--
 (i) be developed and implemented with the 
 meaningful participation of direct care 
 employees and, where applicable, employee 
 representatives and collective bargaining 
 representatives, for all aspects of the Plan;
 (ii) be tailored and specific to conditions 
 and hazards for the covered facility or the 
 covered service, including patient-specific 
 risk factors and risk factors specific to each 
 work area or unit; and
 (iii) be suitable for the size, complexity, 
 and type of operations at the covered facility 
 or for the covered service, and remain in 
 effect at all times.
 (B) Plan content.--Each Plan shall include 
 procedures and methods for the following:
 (i) Identification of the individual 
 responsible for implementation of the Plan.
 (ii) With respect to each work area and 
 unit at the covered facility or while covered 
 employees are performing the covered service, 
 risk assessment and identification of workplace 
 violence risks and hazards to employees exposed 
 to such risks and hazards (including 
 environmental risk factors and patient-specific 
 risk factors), which shall be--
 (I) informed by past violent 
 incidents specific to such covered 
 facility or such covered service; and
 (II) conducted with, at a minimum--
 (aa) direct care employees;
 (bb) where applicable, the 
 representatives of such 
 employees; and
 (cc) the employer.
 (iii) Hazard prevention, engineering 
 controls, or work practice controls to correct 
 hazards in a timely manner, applying industrial 
 hygiene principles of the hierarchy of 
 controls, which--
 (I) may include security and alarm 
 systems, adequate exit routes, 
 monitoring systems, barrier protection, 
 established areas for patients and 
 clients, lighting, entry procedures, 
 staffing and working in teams, and 
 systems to identify and flag clients 
 with a history of violence; and
 (II) shall ensure that employers 
 correct, in a timely manner, hazards 
 identified in the annual report 
 described in paragraph (5).
 (iv) Reporting, incident response, and 
 post-incident investigation procedures, 
 including procedures--
 (I) for employees to report 
 workplace violence risks, hazards, and 
 incidents;
 (II) for employers to respond to 
 reports of workplace violence;
 (III) for employers to perform a 
 post-incident investigation and 
 debriefing of all reports of workplace 
 violence with the participation of 
 employees and their representatives; 
 and
 (IV) to provide medical care or 
 first aid to affected employees.
 (v) Procedures for emergency response, 
 including procedures for threats of mass 
 casualties and procedures for incidents 
 involving a firearm or a dangerous weapon.
 (vi) Procedures for communicating with and 
 training of covered employees on workplace 
 violence hazards, threats, and work practice 
 controls, the Plan, and procedures for 
 confronting, responding to, and reporting 
 workplace violence threats, incidents, and 
 concerns, and employee rights.
 (vii) Procedures for determining which 
 covered employer or employers shall be 
 responsible for implementing and complying with 
 the provisions of the standard applicable to 
 the working conditions over which such 
 employers have control, and ensuring the 
 coordination of risk assessment efforts, Plan 
 development, and implementation of the Plan 
 with other employers who have employees who 
 work at the covered facility or who are 
 performing the covered service.
 (viii) Procedures for conducting the annual 
 evaluation under paragraph (6).
 (C) Availability of plan.--Each Plan shall be made 
 available at all times to the covered employees who are 
 covered under such Plan.
 (2) Violent incident investigation.--
 (A) In general.--As soon as practicable after a 
 workplace violence incident, risk, or hazard of which a 
 covered employer has knowledge, the employer shall 
 conduct an investigation of such incident, risk, or 
 hazard under which the employer shall--
 (i) review the circumstances of the 
 incident, risk, or hazard, and whether any 
 controls or measures implemented pursuant to 
 the Plan of the employer were effective; and
 (ii) solicit input from involved employees, 
 their representatives, and supervisors, about 
 the cause of the incident, risk, or hazard, and 
 whether further corrective measures (including 
 system-level factors) could have prevented the 
 incident, risk, or hazard.
 (B) Documentation.--A covered employer shall 
 document the findings, recommendations, and corrective 
 measures taken for each investigation conducted under 
 this paragraph.
 (3) Training and education.--With respect to the covered 
 employees covered under a Plan of a covered employer, the 
 employer shall provide training and education to such employees 
 who may be exposed to workplace violence hazards and risks, 
 which meet the following requirements:
 (A) Annual training and education includes 
 information on the Plan, including identified workplace 
 violence hazards, work practice control measures, 
 reporting procedures, record keeping requirements, 
 response procedures, and employee rights.
 (B) Additional hazard recognition training for 
 supervisors and managers to ensure they can recognize 
 high-risk situations and do not assign employees to 
 situations that predictably compromise their safety.
 (C) Additional training for each such covered 
 employee whose job circumstances has changed, within a 
 reasonable timeframe after such change.
 (D) New employee training prior to assignment.
 (E) All training provides such employees 
 opportunities to ask questions, give feedback on such 
 training, and request additional instruction, 
 clarification, or other follow up.
 (F) All training is provided in-person and by an 
 individual with knowledge of workplace violence 
 prevention and of the Plan.
 (G) All training is appropriate in content and 
 vocabulary to the language, educational level, and 
 literacy of such covered employees.
 (4) Recordkeeping and access to plan records.--
 (A) In general.--Each covered employer shall--
 (i) maintain at all times--
 (I) records related to each Plan of 
 the employer, including workplace 
 violence risk and hazard assessments, 
 and identification, evaluation, 
 correction, and training procedures;
 (II) a violent incident log 
 described in subparagraph (B) for 
 recording all workplace violence 
 incidents; and
 (III) records of all incident 
 investigations as required under 
 paragraph (2)(B); and
 (ii) make such records and logs available, 
 upon request, to covered employees and their 
 representatives for examination and copying in 
 accordance with section 1910.1020 of title 29, 
 Code of Federal Regulations (or any 
 corresponding similar regulation or ruling), 
 and in a manner consistent with HIPAA privacy 
 regulations (defined in section 1180(b)(3) of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320d-
 9(b)(3))) and part 2 of title 42, Code of 
 Federal Regulations (or any corresponding 
 similar regulations or rulings).
 (B) Violent incident log description.--Each violent 
 incident log shall--
 (i) be maintained by a covered employer for 
 each covered facility controlled by the 
 employer and for each covered service being 
 performed by a covered employee on behalf of 
 such employer;
 (ii) be based on a template developed by 
 the Secretary not later than 1 year after the 
 date of enactment of this Act;
 (iii) include, at a minimum, a description 
 of--
 (I) the violent incident (including 
 environmental risk factors present at 
 the time of the incident);
 (II) the date, time, and location 
 of the incident, and the names and job 
 titles of involved employees;
 (III) the nature and extent of 
 injuries to covered employees;
 (IV) a classification of the 
 perpetrator who committed the violence, 
 including whether the perpetrator was--
 (aa) a patient, client, or 
 customer of a covered employer;
 (bb) a family or friend of 
 a patient, client, or customer 
 of a covered employer;
 (cc) a stranger with 
 criminal intent;
 (dd) a coworker, 
 supervisor, or manager of a 
 covered employee;
 (ee) a partner, spouse, 
 parent, or relative of a 
 covered employee; or
 (ff) any other appropriate 
 classification;
 (V) the type of violent incident 
 (such as type 1 violence, type 2 
 violence, type 3 violence, or type 4 
 violence); and
 (VI) how the incident was abated;
 (iv) omit any element of personal 
 identifying information sufficient to allow 
 identification of any patient, resident or 
 client alleged to have committed a violent 
 incident (including the person's name, address, 
 electronic mail address, telephone number, or 
 social security number, or other information 
 that, alone or in combination with other 
 publicly available information, reveals such 
 person's identity);
 (v) not later than 7 days after the 
 employer learns of such incident, contain a 
 record of each violent incident, which is 
 updated to ensure completeness of such record;
 (vi) be maintained for not less than 5 
 years; and
 (vii) in the case of a violent incident 
 involving a privacy concern case, protect the 
 identity of employees in a manner consistent 
 with section 1904.29(b) of title 29, Code of 
 Federal Regulations (or any corresponding 
 similar regulation or ruling).
 (C) Annual summary.--
 (i) Covered employers.--Each covered 
 employer shall prepare an annual summary of 
 each violent incident log for the preceding 
 calendar year that shall--
 (I) with respect to each covered 
 facility, and each covered service, for 
 which such a log has been maintained, 
 include the total number of violent 
 incidents, the number of recordable 
 injuries related to such incidents, and 
 the total number of hours worked by the 
 covered employees for such preceding 
 year;
 (II) be completed on a form 
 provided by the Secretary;
 (III) be posted for three months 
 beginning February 1 of each year in a 
 manner consistent with the requirements 
 of part 1904 of title 29, Code of 
 Federal Regulations (or any 
 corresponding similar regulations or 
 rulings), relating to the posting of 
 summaries of injury and illness logs;
 (IV) be located in a conspicuous 
 place or places where notices to 
 employees are customarily posted; and
 (V) not be altered, defaced, or 
 covered by other material.
 (ii) Secretary.--Not later than 1 year 
 after the promulgation of the interim final 
 standard under section 101(a), the Secretary 
 shall make available a platform for the 
 electronic submission of annual summaries 
 required under this paragraph.
 (5) Annual report.--Not later than February 15 of each 
 year, each covered employer shall report to the Secretary, the 
 frequency, quantity, and severity of workplace violence, and 
 any incident response and post-incident investigation 
 (including abatement measures for the incidents) set forth in 
 the annual summary of the violent incident log described in 
 paragraph (4)(C).
 (6) Annual evaluation.--Each covered employer shall conduct 
 an annual written evaluation, conducted with the full, active 
 participation of covered employees and employee 
 representatives, of--
 (A) the implementation and effectiveness of the 
 Plan, including a review of the violent incident log; 
 and
 (B) compliance with training required by each 
 standard described in section 101, and specified in the 
 Plan.
 (7) Anti-retaliation.--
 (A) Policy.--Each covered employer shall adopt a 
 policy prohibiting any person (including an agent of 
 the employer) from discriminating or retaliating 
 against any employee for reporting, or seeking 
 assistance or intervention from, a workplace violence 
 incident, threat, or concern to the employer, law 
 enforcement, local emergency services, or a government 
 agency, or participating in an incident investigation.
 (B) Prohibition.--No covered employer shall 
 discriminate or retaliate against any employee for 
 reporting, or seeking assistance or intervention from, 
 a workplace violence incident, threat, or concern to 
 the employer, law enforcement, local emergency 
 services, or a government agency, or for exercising any 
 other rights under this paragraph.
 (C) Enforcement.--This paragraph shall be enforced 
 in the same manner and to the same extent as any 
 standard promulgated under section 6(b) of the 
 Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 
 655(b)).

SEC. 104. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.

 Notwithstanding section 18 of the Occupational Safety and Health 
Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 667)--
 (1) nothing in this title shall be construed to curtail or 
 limit authority of the Secretary under any other provision of 
 the law; and
 (2) the rights, privileges, or remedies of covered 
 employees shall be in addition to the rights, privileges, or 
 remedies provided under any Federal or State law, or any 
 collective bargaining agreement.

SEC. 105. OTHER DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Workplace violence.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``workplace violence'' 
 means any act of violence or threat of violence, 
 without regard to intent, that occurs at a covered 
 facility or while a covered employee performs a covered 
 service.
 (B) Exclusions.--The term ``workplace violence'' 
 does not include lawful acts of self-defense or defense 
 of others.
 (C) Inclusions.--The term ``workplace violence'' 
 includes--
 (i) the threat or use of physical force 
 against a covered employee that results in or 
 has a high likelihood of resulting in injury, 
 psychological trauma, or stress, without regard 
 to whether the covered employee sustains an 
 injury, psychological trauma, or stress; and
 (ii) an incident involving the threat or 
 use of a firearm or a dangerous weapon, 
 including the use of common objects as weapons, 
 without regard to whether the employee sustains 
 an injury, psychological trauma, or stress.
 (2) Type 1 violence.--The term ``type 1 violence''--
 (A) means workplace violence directed at a covered 
 employee at a covered facility or while performing a 
 covered service by an individual who has no legitimate 
 business at the covered facility or with respect to 
 such covered service; and
 (B) includes violent acts by any individual who 
 enters the covered facility or worksite where a covered 
 service is being performed with the intent to commit a 
 crime.
 (3) Type 2 violence.--The term ``type 2 violence'' means 
 workplace violence directed at a covered employee by customers, 
 clients, patients, students, inmates, or any individual for 
 whom a covered facility provides services or for whom the 
 employee performs covered services.
 (4) Type 3 violence.--The term ``type 3 violence'' means 
 workplace violence directed at a covered employee by a present 
 or former employee, supervisor, or manager.
 (5) Type 4 violence.--The term ``type 4 violence'' means 
 workplace violence directed at a covered employee by an 
 individual who is not an employee, but has or is known to have 
 had a personal relationship with such employee.
 (6) Threat of violence.--The term ``threat of violence'' 
 means a statement or conduct that causes a person to fear for 
 his or her safety because there is a reasonable possibility the 
 person might be physically injured, and that serves no 
 legitimate purpose.
 (7) Alarm.--The term ``alarm'' means a mechanical, 
 electrical, or electronic device that does not rely upon an 
 employee's vocalization in order to alert others.
 (8) Dangerous weapon.--The term ``dangerous weapon'' means 
 an instrument capable of inflicting death or serious bodily 
 injury, regardless of whether such instrument was designed for 
 that purpose.
 (9) Engineering controls.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``engineering controls'' 
 means an aspect of the built space or a device that 
 removes a hazard from the workplace or creates a 
 barrier between a covered employee and the hazard.
 (B) Inclusions.--For purposes of reducing workplace 
 violence hazards, the term ``engineering controls'' 
 includes electronic access controls to employee 
 occupied areas, weapon detectors (installed or 
 handheld), enclosed workstations with shatter-resistant 
 glass, deep service counters, separate rooms or areas 
 for high-risk patients, locks on doors, removing access 
 to or securing items that could be used as weapons, 
 furniture affixed to the floor, opaque glass in patient 
 rooms (which protects privacy, but allows the health 
 care provider to see where the patient is before 
 entering the room), closed-circuit television 
 monitoring and video recording, sight-aids, and 
 personal alarm devices.
 (10) Environmental risk factors.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``environmental risk 
 factors'' means factors in the covered facility or area 
 in which a covered service is performed that may 
 contribute to the likelihood or severity of a workplace 
 violence incident.
 (B) Clarification.--Environmental risk factors may 
 be associated with the specific task being performed or 
 the work area, such as working in an isolated area, 
 poor illumination or blocked visibility, and lack of 
 physical barriers between employees and persons at risk 
 of committing workplace violence.
 (11) Patient-specific risk factors.--The term ``patient-
 specific risk factors'' means factors specific to a patient 
 that may increase the likelihood or severity of a workplace 
 violence incident, including--
 (A) a patient's history of violence and use of 
 drugs or alcohol; and
 (B) any conditions or disease processes of the 
 patient that may cause the patient to experience 
 confusion or disorientation, to be non-responsive to 
 instruction, to behave unpredictably, or to engage in 
 disruptive, threatening, or violent behavior.
 (12) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Labor.
 (13) Work practice controls.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``work practice 
 controls'' means procedures and rules that are used to 
 effectively reduce workplace violence hazards.
 (B) Inclusions.--The term ``work practice 
 controls'' includes assigning and placing sufficient 
 numbers of staff to reduce patient-specific Type 2 
 workplace violence hazards, provision of dedicated and 
 available safety personnel such as security guards, 
 employee training on workplace violence prevention 
 method and techniques to de-escalate and minimize 
 violent behavior, and employee training on procedures 
 for response in the event of a workplace violence 
 incident and for post-incident response.

 TITLE II--AMENDMENTS TO THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT

SEC. 201. APPLICATION OF THE WORKPLACE VIOLENCE PREVENTION STANDARD TO 
 CERTAIN FACILITIES RECEIVING MEDICARE FUNDS.

 (a) In General.--Section 1866 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395cc) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1)--
 (A) by moving the indentation of subparagraph (W) 2 
 ems to the left;
 (B) in subparagraph (X)--
 (i) by moving the indentation 2 ems to the 
 left; and
 (ii) by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (C) in subparagraph (Y), by striking the period at 
 the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (D) by inserting after subparagraph (Y) the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(Z) in the case of hospitals that are not otherwise 
 subject to the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (or a 
 State occupational safety and health plan that is approved 
 under 18(b) of such Act) and skilled nursing facilities that 
 are not otherwise subject to such Act (or such a State 
 occupational safety and health plan), to comply with the 
 Workplace Violence Prevention Standard (as promulgated under 
 section 101 of the Workplace Violence Prevention for Health 
 Care and Social Service Workers Act).''; and
 (2) in subsection (b)(4)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A), by inserting ``and a 
 hospital or skilled nursing facility that fails to 
 comply with the requirement of subsection (a)(1)(Z) 
 (relating to the Workplace Violence Prevention 
 Standard)'' after ``Bloodborne Pathogens standard)''; 
 and
 (B) in subparagraph (B)--
 (i) by striking ``(a)(1)(U)'' and inserting 
 ``(a)(1)(V)''; and
 (ii) by inserting ``(or, in the case of a 
 failure to comply with the requirement of 
 subsection (a)(1)(Z), for a violation of the 
 Workplace Violence Prevention standard referred 
 to in such subsection by a hospital or skilled 
 nursing facility, as applicable, that is 
 subject to the provisions of such Act)'' before 
 the period at the end.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
apply beginning on the date that is 1 year after the date of issuance 
of the interim final standard on workplace violence prevention required 
under section 101.
 <all>