S 589 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 589
To amend the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974 to create an independent
Nuclear Safety Board.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
March 15 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. BIDEN (for himself, Mr. GORE, Mr. KERRY, Mr. METZENBAUM, and Mr. PRYOR)
introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the
Committee on Environment and Public Works
A BILL
To amend the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974 to create an independent
Nuclear Safety Board.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SHORT TITLE
 SECTION 1. This Act may be cited as the `Independent Nuclear Safety Board
 Act of 1989'.
FINDINGS AND PURPOSE
 SEC. 2. (a) The Congress finds that there is a great need for--
 (1) vigorous investigation of events at facilities, or involving materials,
 licensed or otherwise regulated by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission; and
 (2) continual review and assessment of licensing and other regulatory
 practices of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which assessment may
 result in conclusions critical of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission or
 its officials.
 (b) The purpose of this Act is to establish an Independent Nuclear Safety
 Board which shall promote nuclear safety by--
 (1) conducting independent investigations of events at facilities,
 or involving materials, licensed or otherwise regulated by the Nuclear
 Regulatory Commission;
 (2) reviewing and assessing the licensing and other regulatory practices
 of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission;
 (3) recommending to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission improvements in
 licensing and related regulatory practices; and
 (4) informing the Congress of its investigation findings and recommendations.
ESTABLISHMENT OF NUCLEAR SAFETY BOARD
 SEC. 3. Title II of the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974 (Public Law
 93-438; 42 U.S.C. 5841 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following new section:
`INDEPENDENT NUCLEAR SAFETY BOARD
 `SEC. 212. (a) There is established an Independent Nuclear Safety Board
 (hereafter in this section referred to as the `Board').
 `(b)(1) The Board shall be composed of 3 members appointed by the President,
 by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, from among respected
 experts in the field of commercial nuclear energy with a demonstrated
 competence and knowledge relevant to the independent investigative and
 prescriptive functions of the Board. No more than 2 members of the Board
 shall be of the same political party. Not later than 90 days after the
 date of the enactment of this section, the President shall submit such
 nominations for appointment to the Board.
 `(2) Any vacancy in the membership of the Board shall be filled in the
 same manner in which the original appointment was made.
 `(3) No member of the Board shall have any significant financial relationship
 in any firm, company, corporation, or other business entity engaged in
 activities regulated by the Commission either as licensee or contractor,
 or have such a relationship within the two years preceding his appointment.
 `(c)(1) The Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Board shall be designated
 by the President. The Chairman and Vice Chairman may be reappointed to
 such offices.
 `(2) The Chairman shall be the chief executive officer of the Board and
 shall, subject to such policies as the Board may establish, exercise the
 functions of the Board with respect to--
 `(A) the appointment and supervision of personnel employed by the Board;
 `(B) the organization of any administrative units established by the
 Board; and
 `(C) the use and expenditure of funds.
The Chairman may delegate any of the functions under this paragraph to any
other member or to any appropriate employee or officer of the Board.
 `(3) The Vice Chairman shall act as Chairman in the event of the absence or
 incapacity of the Chairman or in case of a vacancy in the office of Chairman.
 `(d)(1) Except as provided under paragraph (2), the members of the Board
 shall serve for terms of 6 years. Members of the Board may be reappointed.
 `(2) Of the members first appointed--
 `(A) one shall be appointed for a term of 2 years;
 `(B) one shall be appointed for a term of 4 years; and
 `(C) one shall be appointed for a term of 6 years;
as designated by the President at the time of appointment.
 `(3) Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration
 of the term of office for which such member's predecessor was appointed
 shall be appointed only for the remainder of such term. A member may serve
 after the expiration of the member's term until a successor has taken office.
 `(4) Any member of the Board may be removed by the President for
 inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office.
 `(e) Two members of the Board shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser
 number may hold hearings.
 `(f) The Board shall have the following functions and authorities:
 `(1)(A)(i) The Board shall investigate those events at any facility, or
 involving any materials, licensed or otherwise regulated by the Commission,
 which the Board determines to be significant because of possible adverse
 effects on the health or safety of the public or because such events could
 be the precursors of events that may adversely affect the health or safety
 of the public.
 `(ii) The Board may request the Commission to make an investigation of the
 events described in division (i) and to report its findings to the Board in
 a timely fashion. Whenever the Commission concludes such an investigation,
 the Board may analyze the findings of the Commission for the purpose of
 making its own conclusions and recommendations.
 `(B) The purpose of any Board investigation under this paragraph shall be--
 `(i) to ascertain information concerning the circumstances of the event
 involved, and its implications for the public health and safety;
 `(ii) to determine whether such event is part of a pattern of similar
 events at facilities, or involving any materials, licensed or otherwise
 regulated by the Commission which could adversely affect the public health
 or safety or which could be the precursor of events which could adversely
 affect the public health or safety; and
 `(iii) to provide such recommendations to the Commission for changes in
 licensing, safety regulations and requirements, and other regulatory policy
 as may be prudent or necessary.
 `(C) For the purpose of this paragraph, the term `event' shall include
 an action or failure to act by any person, including the Commission as an
 organization and its staff, or a continuing series of actions or failures
 to act by any such person, including operational failures, that the Board
 determines to have a potentially adverse effect on public health as provided
 in this paragraph.
 `(2) The Board shall have access to and may systematically analyze--
 `(A) operational data from any facility, or involving any materials,
 licensed or otherwise regulated by the Commission to determine whether
 there exist certain patterns of events that indicate safety problems; and
 `(B) operational data of the Commission including personnel and files.
 `(3) The Board may conduct special studies pertaining to the nuclear safety
 at any facility, or involving any materials, licensed or otherwise regulated
 by the Commission.
 `(4) The Board may evaluate suggestions received from the scientific
 and industrial communities, and from the interested public, on specific
 measures to improve safety at facilities, or involving materials, licensed
 or otherwise regulated by the Commission.
 `(5)(A) The Board shall recommend to the Commission those specific measures
 that should be adopted to minimize the likelihood that events will occur at
 any facility, or involving materials, licensed or otherwise regulated by the
 Commission which could adversely affect the public health or safety. The
 Commission shall respond in writing to the recommendations of the Board
 within 120 days of receipt of such recommendations. Such written response
 shall detail specific measures adopted by the Commission in response to
 such recommendations, and explanations for its inaction on recommendations
 it chose to reject.
 `(B) The recommendations of the Board made pursuant to subparagraph (A)
 shall also be sent to Congress.
 `(6)(A) For purposes of investigations, the Board shall establish reporting
 requirements which shall be binding upon--
 `(i) persons who operate, design, supply, maintain, or are otherwise
 involved with the operation or construction of, facilities licensed or
 otherwise regulated by the Commission; and
 `(ii) persons who process, store, transport, use, or possess materials
 licensed or otherwise regulated by the Commission.
 `(B)(i) The information which the Board may require to be reported under
 this paragraph may include any materials designated as classified material
 pursuant to the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, or any materials designated as
 safeguards information and protected from disclosure under section 147 of
 the Atomic Energy Act of 1954.
 `(ii) Information received by the Board shall be made available to the public
 in accordance with the applicable provisions of subsections (a) and (b)
 of section 306 of the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 (49 U.S.C. 1905).
 `(7)(A) The Board or, on the authorization of the Board, any member thereof,
 may, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this section, hold
 such hearings and sit and act at such times and places, administer such
 oaths, and require, by subpena or otherwise, the attendance and testimony
 of such witnesses and the production of such evidence as the Board or an
 authorized member may find advisable.
 `(B)(i) Subpenas may be issued only under the signature of the Chairman or
 any member of the Board designated by him and shall be served by any person
 designated by the Chairman or any member. The attendance of witnesses and
 the production of evidence may be required from any place in the United
 States at any designated place of hearing in the United States.
 `(ii) Any member of the Board may administer oaths or affirmations to
 witnesses appearing before the Board.
 `(iii) Any person who willfully neglects or refuses to qualify as a witness,
 or to testify, or to produce any evidence in obedience to any subpena
 duly issued under the authority of this paragraph shall be fined not more
 than $5,000, or imprisoned for not more than 6 months, or both. Upon
 certification by the Chairman of the Board of the facts concerning any
 willful disobedience by any person to the United States attorney for any
 judicial district in which the person resides or is found, the attorney
 may proceed by information for the prosecution of the person for the offense.
 `(8) The Board shall issue periodic reports which shall be made available
 to the Congress, and to Federal, State, and local government agencies
 concerned with safety at facilities, or involving materials, licensed or
 otherwise regulated by the Commission. Upon request, such reports shall be
 made available to other interested persons. Such reports shall contain the
 major findings of Board investigations, recommendations of specific measures
 to reduce the likelihood of a reoccurrence of nuclear events similar to
 those investigated by the Board and of corrective steps implemented or
 required by the Commission to enhance or improve safety conditions at such
 facilities investigated by the Board and other facilities as considered
 appropriate by the Board.
 `(9) In accordance with the Civil Service laws and regulations, the Chairman
 of the Board is authorized to hire staff and employ consultants for the
 purpose of carrying out the functions and duties of the Board.
 `(g)(1) There are hereby transferred to the Board--
 `(A) all functions of the Office for the Analysis and Evaluation of
 Operational Data relating to the functions of the Board described in
 subsection (f); and
 `(B) such personnel from the Office for the Analysis and Evaluation of
 Operational Data as the Director of the Office of Management and Budget
 determines are necessary to carry out the functions described in subsection
 (f).
 `(2) There are hereby authorized to be appropriated for each of the fiscal
 years 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994, and 1995 the sum of $6,000,000.
 `(3) The Board shall terminate at the end of fiscal year 1995.'.