HR 3938 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3938
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to impose an excise tax on group
health plans that fail to provide for preexisting conditions, and for other
purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
November 26, 1991
Mr. OWENS of Utah introduced the following bill; which was referred to the
Committee on Ways and Means
A BILL
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to impose an excise tax on group
health plans that fail to provide for preexisting conditions, and for other
purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Health Care Protection Act'.
SEC. 2. EXCISE TAX IMPOSED ON FAILURE TO PROVIDE FOR PREEXISTING CONDITION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Chapter 47 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating
 to taxes on group health plans) is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following new section:
`SEC. 5000A. FAILURE TO SATISFY PREEXISTING CONDITION REQUIREMENTS OF GROUP
HEALTH PLANS.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- There is hereby imposed a tax on the failure of--
 `(1) a group health plan to meet the requirements of subsection (e), or
 `(2) any person to meet the requirements of subsection (f),
with respect to any covered individual.
 `(b) Amount of Tax-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The amount of the tax imposed by subsection (a) on any
 failure with respect to a covered individual shall be $100 for each day
 in the noncompliance period with respect to such failure.
 `(2) NONCOMPLIANCE PERIOD- For purposes of this section, the term
 `noncompliance period' means, with respect to any failure, the period--
 `(A) beginning on the date such failure first occurs, and
 `(B) ending on the date such failure is corrected.
 `(3) CORRECTION- A failure of a group health plan to meet the requirements
 of subsection (e) with respect to any covered individual shall be treated
 as corrected if--
 `(A) such failure is retroactively undone to the extent possible, and
 `(B) the covered individual is placed in a financial position which is as
 good as such individual would have been in had such failure not occurred.
For purposes of applying subparagraph (B), the covered individual shall
be treated as if the individual had elected the most favorable coverage in
light of the expenses incurred since the failure first occurred.
 `(c) Limitations on Amount of Tax-
 `(1) TAX NOT TO APPLY WHERE FAILURE NOT DISCOVERED EXERCISING REASONABLE
 DILIGENCE- No tax shall be imposed by subsection (a) on any failure during
 any period for which it is established to the satisfaction of the Secretary
 that none of the persons referred to in subsection (d) knew, or exercising
 reasonable diligence would have known, that such failure existed.
 `(2) TAX NOT TO APPLY TO FAILURES CORRECTED WITHIN 30 DAYS- No tax shall
 be imposed by subsection (a) on any failure if--
 `(A) such failure was due to reasonable cause and not to willful neglect, and
 `(B) such failure is corrected during the 30-day period beginning on
 the first date any of the persons referred to in subsection (d) knew, or
 exercising reasonable diligence would have known, that such failure existed.
 `(3) WAIVER BY SECRETARY- In the case of a failure which is due to reasonable
 cause and not to willful neglect, the Secretary may waive part or all of
 the tax imposed by subsection (a) to the extent that the payment of such
 tax would be excessive relative to the failure involved.
 `(d) Liability for Tax-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the
 following shall be liable for the tax imposed by subsection (a) on a failure:
 `(A) In the case of a group health plan other than a self-insured group
 health plan, the issuer.
 `(B)(i) In the case of a self-insured group health plan other than a
 multiemployer group health plan, the employer.
 `(ii) In the case of a self-insured group health multiemployer plan,
 the plan.
 `(C) Each person who is responsible (other than in a capacity as an
 employee) for administering or providing benefits under the group health
 plan, health insurance plan, or other health benefit arrangement (including
 a self-insured plan) and whose act or failure to act caused (in whole or
 in part) the failure.
 `(2) SPECIAL RULES FOR PERSONS DESCRIBED IN PARAGRAPH (1)(C)- A person
 described in subparagraph (C) (and not in subparagraphs (A) and (B))
 of paragraph (1) shall be liable for the tax imposed by subsection (a)
 on any failure only if such person assumed (under a legally enforceable
 written agreement) responsibility for the performance of the act to which
 the failure relates.
 `(e) NO DISCRIMINATION BASED ON HEALTH STATUS FOR CERTAIN SERVICES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided under paragraph (2), group health plans
 may not deny, limit, or condition the coverage under (or benefits of) the
 plan based on the health status, claims experience, receipt of health care,
 medical history, or lack of evidence of insurability, of an individual.
 `(2) TREATMENT OF PREEXISTING CONDITION EXCLUSIONS FOR ALL SERVICES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this paragraph,
 group health plans may exclude coverage with respect to services related to
 treatment of a preexisting condition, but the period of such exclusion may
 not exceed 6 months. The exclusion of coverage shall not apply to services
 furnished to newborns.
 `(B) CREDITING OF PREVIOUS COVERAGE-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- A group health plan shall provide that if an individual
 under such plan is in a period of continuous coverage (as defined in clause
 (ii)(I)) with respect to particular services as of the date of initial
 coverage under such plan (determined without regard to any waiting period
 under such plan), any period of exclusion of coverage with respect to
 a preexisting condition for such services or type of services shall be
 reduced by 1 month for each month in the period of continuous coverage
 without regard to any waiting period.
 `(ii) DEFINITIONS- As used in this subparagraph:
 `(I) PERIOD OF CONTINUOUS COVERAGE- The term `period of continuous coverage'
 means, with respect to particular services, the period beginning on the
 date an individual is enrolled under a health insurance plan, title XVIII
 or XIX of the Social Security Act, or other health benefit arrangement
 (including a self-insured plan) which provides benefits with respect to
 such services and ends on the date the individual is not so enrolled for
 a continuous period of more than 3 months.
 `(II) PREEXISTING CONDITION- The term `preexisting condition' means, with
 respect to coverage under a group health plan, a condition which has been
 diagnosed or treated during the 3-month period ending on the day before
 the first date of such coverage without regard to any waiting period.
 `(f) DISCLOSURE OF COVERAGE, ETC- Any person who has provided coverage
 (other than under title XVIII or XIX of the Social Security Act) during a
 period of continuous coverage (as defined in subsection (e)(2)(B)(ii)(I))
 with respect to a covered individual shall disclose, upon the request of
 a group health plan subject to the requirements of subsection (e), the
 coverage provided the covered individual, the period of such coverage,
 and the benefits provided under such coverage.
 `(g) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) COVERED INDIVIDUAL- The term `covered individual' means--
 `(A) an individual who is (or will be) provided coverage under a group
 health plan by virtue of the performance of services by the individual for
 1 or more persons maintaining the plan (including as an employee defined
 in section 401(c)(1)), and
 `(B) the spouse or any dependent child of such individual.
 `(2) GROUP HEALTH PLAN- The term `group health plan' has the meaning given
 such term by section 5000(b)(1).'.
 `(b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for such chapter 47 is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`Sec. 5000A. Failure to satisfy preexisting condition requirements of group
health plans'.
 `(c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 plan years beginning after December 31, 1992.