[Congressional Bills 106th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 1133 Introduced in House (IH)]

106th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 1133

 To provide for comprehensive reform for managed health care plans.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 March 16, 1999

 Mr. Nadler (for himself and Mr. Frost) introduced the following bill; 
which was referred to the Committee on Ways and Means, and in addition 
 to the Committees on Commerce, and Education and the Workforce, for a 
 period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for 
consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the 
 committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To provide for comprehensive reform for managed health care plans.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Comprehensive 
Managed Health Care Reform Act of 1999''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Definitions.
Sec. 3. Enforcement of requirements.
Sec. 4. Assuring adequate access to covered services and providers.
Sec. 5. Assuring adequate scope of coverage.
Sec. 6. Assuring unbiased medical determinations by health care 
 professionals and providers.
Sec. 7. Nondiscrimination against enrollees and in the selection of 
 participating providers; equitable access 
 to networks.
Sec. 8. Disclosure of information.
Sec. 9. Grievance procedures and deadline for responding to requests 
 for coverage of services.
Sec. 10. Due process for health care professionals and providers.
Sec. 11. Requirements for quality improvement program and utilization 
 review programs.
Sec. 12. Minimum loss ratios; general consumer protections.

SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.

 (a) In General.--For purposes of this Act:
 (1) Enrollee.--The term ``enrollee'' means, with respect to 
 a managed care plan offered by a managed care organization, an 
 individual enrolled with the organization for coverage under 
 such a plan.
 (2) Health care professional.--The term ``health care 
 professional'' means a physician or other health care 
 practitioner who is licensed under State law with respect to 
 the health care services the practitioner furnishes.
 (3) Health plan.--The term ``health plan'' means a group 
 health plan or health insurance coverage offered by a health 
 insurance issuer.
 (4) Managed care organization.--The term ``managed care 
 organization'' means any entity, including a group health plan, 
 health maintenance organization, or provider-sponsored 
 organization, in relation to its offering of a managed care 
 plan, and includes any other entity that provides or manages 
 the coverage under such a plan under a contract or arrangement 
 with the entity.
 (5) Managed care plan.--The term ``managed care plan'' 
 means a health plan offered by an entity if the entity--
 (A) provides or arranges for the provision of 
 health care items and services to enrollees in the plan 
 through participating health care professionals and 
 providers, or
 (B) provides financial incentives (such as variable 
 copayments and deductibles) to induce enrollees to 
 obtain benefits through participating health care 
 professionals and providers,
 or both.
 (6) Participating.--The term ``participating'' means, with 
 respect to a health care professional or provider in relation 
 to a health plan offered by an entity, a physician or provider 
 that furnishes health care items and services to enrollees of 
 the entity under an agreement with the entity.
 (7) Primary care provider.--The term ``primary care 
 provider'' means a health care professional who acts as a 
 gatekeeper for the overall care of an enrollee.
 (8) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services .
 (9) State.--The term ``State'' includes the District of 
 Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American 
 Samoa, and the Northern Mariana Islands.
 (b) Incorporation of General Definitions from Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act.--For purposes of this Act, the 
definitions contained in section 2791 of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 300gg-91) shall apply under this Act.

SEC. 3. ENFORCEMENT OF REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) Application to Group Health Plans.--
 (1) Public health service act.--For purposes of applying 
 title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act, the requirements 
 of the succeeding sections of this Act shall be treated as 
 though they were included in the subpart 2 of part A of such 
 title (42 U.S.C. 300gg-4 et seq.).
 (2) Employee retirement income security act of 1974.--For 
 purposes of applying part 7 of subtitle B of title I of the 
 Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, the 
 requirements of the succeeding sections of this Act shall be 
 treated as though they were included in subpart B of such part 
 (29 U.S.C. 1185 et seq.).
 (3) Internal revenue code of 1986.--For purposes of 
 applying chapter 100 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, the 
 requirements of the succeeding sections of this Act shall be 
 treated as though they were included in subchapter B of such 
 chapter.
 (b) Application to Individual Health Insurance Coverage.--For 
purposes of applying title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act, the 
requirements of the succeeding sections of this Act also shall be 
treated as though they were part of subpart 2 of part B of such title 
(42 U.S.C. 300gg-51 et seq.).
 (c) Medicare.--The Secretary may not enter into a contract under 
section 1857 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-27) with a 
Medicare+Choice organization that is a managed care organization unless 
the contract contains assurances satisfactory to the Secretary that the 
organization will comply with the applicable requirements of the 
succeeding sections of this Act.
 (d) Medicaid.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no funds 
shall be paid to a State under section 1903(a)(1) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(a)(1)) with respect to medical assistance 
provided through payment to a Medicaid managed care organization (as 
defined in section 1903(m)(1)(A) of such Act, 42 U.S.C. 1396b(m)(1)(A)) 
unless the contract with such organization contains assurances 
satisfactory to the Secretary that the organization will comply with 
the applicable requirements of the succeeding sections of this Act.
 (e) Secretarial Enforcement Authority.--
 (1) In general.--In addition to any other authority 
 provided under law, the Secretary shall establish sanctions, 
 consistent with this subsection, for the enforcement of the 
 requirements of the succeeding sections of this Act.
 (2) Progressive civil monetary penalties.--Such sanctions 
 shall include the imposition of civil monetary penalties for 
 violations of such requirements. The amount of such penalties 
 shall increase as the frequency or severity of the violations 
 by a managed care organization increases.
 (3) Opportunity for corrective action plan.--The Secretary 
 shall provide an opportunity for a managed care organization to 
 implement a corrective action plan before imposing sanctions 
 for violations of such requirements.
 (4) Disqualification from medicare and medicaid.--In cases 
 of repeated or egregious violations of such requirements by 
 such an organization that has entered into a contract under 
 title XVIII or XIX of the Social Security Act--
 (A) the Secretary initially shall prohibit the 
 organization from enrolling any additional individuals 
 under either such title, and
 (B) if the Secretary finds that the violations 
 continue, the Secretary shall terminate the contracts 
 with the organization under such titles and require the 
 termination of enrollment of individuals enrolled with 
 the organization under either such title.
 (5) Printing list of violators.--The Secretary shall 
 periodically publish a list of the organizations which have 
 been sanctioned under this subsection, the nature of such 
 sanctions, and the violations for which such sanctions were 
 imposed. The Secretary may exclude from such list an 
 organization that, in lieu of imposition of a sanction, is 
 implementing (or has completed implementation of) a corrective 
 plan.
 (f) Additional Liability for Withholding of Medically Necessary 
Care.--If a managed care organization in connection with a managed care 
plan fails (through the curtailment of a hospital stay, a limitation on 
covered tests, a limitation on treatment, or otherwise) to provide any 
such benefit in accordance with the terms of the plan, insofar as such 
failure occurs pursuant to a clinically or medically inappropriate 
decision or determination resulting from--
 (1) the application of any cost containment technique,
 (2) any utilization review directed at cost containment, or
 (3) any other medical care delivery policy decision which 
 restricts the ability of providers of medical care from 
 utilizing their full discretion for treatment of enrollees,
the organization, and any agent of the organization having authority to 
make such decision or determination on behalf of the organization, 
shall be jointly and severally liable to any enrollee aggrieved by such 
failure for actual damages (including compensatory and 
consequential damages) proximately caused by such failure, and may, in 
the court's discretion, be liable to such enrollee for punitive 
damages. The remedies under this subsection are in addition to remedies 
otherwise provided under this section.
 (g) No Preemption of Stricter State Law.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), this Act shall 
 not be construed to supersede any provision of State law that 
 provides protections in relation to health insurance coverage 
 that are greater than the protections provided under this Act.
 (2) Continued preemption with respect to group health 
 plans.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to affect or 
 modify the provisions of section 514 of the Employee Retirement 
 Income Security Act of 1974 with respect to group health plans.
 (h) Nullification of Contrary Contractual Provisions.--Any contract 
provision or agreement that is in violation of any provision of this 
Act (or amendment made by this Act) shall be null and void.

SEC. 4. ASSURING ADEQUATE ACCESS TO COVERED SERVICES AND PROVIDERS.

 (a) General Access.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), a managed care 
 organization offering a managed care plan shall establish and 
 maintain adequate arrangements, as defined under regulations of 
 the Secretary, with a sufficient number, mix, and distribution 
 of health care professionals and providers to assure that 
 covered items and services are available and accessible to each 
 enrollee under the plan--
 (A) in the service area of the organization;
 (B) in a variety of sites of service;
 (C) with reasonable promptness (including 
 reasonable hours of operation and after-hours 
 services);
 (D) with reasonable proximity to the residences and 
 workplaces of enrollees; and
 (E) in a manner that--
 (i) takes into account the diverse needs of 
 enrollees, and
 (ii) reasonably assures continuity of care.
 (2) Treatment of organizations serving certain areas.--For 
 a managed care organization that serves a rural or medically 
 underserved area, the organization shall be treated as meeting 
 the requirement of paragraph (1) if the organization has 
 arrangements with a sufficient number, mix, and distribution of 
 health care professionals and providers having a history of 
 serving such areas. The use of telemedicine and other 
 innovative means to provide covered items and services by a 
 managed care organization that serves a rural or medically 
 underserved area shall also be considered in determining 
 whether the requirement of such paragraph is met.
 (3) Definitions.--For purposes of paragraph (1):
 (A) Medically underserved area.--The term 
 ``medically underserved area'' means an area that is 
 designated as a health professional shortage area under 
 section 332 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 254e) or as a medically underserved area for purposes 
 of section 330 or 1302(7) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 254c, 
 300e-1(7)).
 (B) Rural area.--The term ``rural area'' means an 
 area that is not within a Standard Metropolitan 
 Statistical Area or a New England County Metropolitan 
 Area (as defined by the Office of Management and 
 Budget).
 (b) Access to Specialized Services.--
 (1) In general.--A managed care organization shall 
 demonstrate that enrollees have access to specialized treatment 
 expertise when such treatment is medically or clinically 
 indicated in the professional judgment of the treating health 
 care professional, in consultation with the enrollee.
 (2) Medical specialists.--A managed care organization shall 
 develop a system to permit enrollees to use a medical 
 specialist primary care provider as a primary care provider 
 when the enrollee's medical conditions (including suffering 
 from a chronic disease or medical condition) warrant it.
 (3) Standing referrals to specialists.--A managed care 
 organization shall provide for a standing referral to a medical 
 specialist if the treating primary care provider, in 
 consultation with such specialists, determines such a referral 
 is necessary to provide adequate and continuous care for the 
 patient.
 (4) Specialized treatment expertise defined.--For purposes 
 of this subsection, the term ``specialized treatment 
 expertise'' means expertise in diagnosing or treating--
 (A) unusual diseases or conditions, or
 (B) diseases and conditions that are unusually 
 difficult to diagnose or treat.
 (5) Medical specialist defined.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (2), the term ``medical specialist'' means, with respect to a 
managed care organization, a health care professional who is certified 
by a national accreditation board (or pursuant to State licensing 
authority) as possessing specialized treatment expertise.
 (c) Use of Gynecologists As Primary Care Providers.--A managed care 
organization may not require an enrollee to obtain a referral from a 
physician in order to obtain covered items and services from a 
physician who specializes in obstetrics and gynecology.
 (d) Emergency and Urgent Care.--
 (1) In general.--A managed care organization shall--
 (A) assure the availability and accessibility of 
 medically or clinically necessary emergency services 
 and urgent care services within the service area of the 
 organization 24 hours a day, 7 days a week;
 (B) require no prior authorization for items and 
 services furnished in a hospital emergency department 
 to an enrollee (without regard to whether the health 
 care professional or hospital has a contractual or 
 other arrangement with the organization) with symptoms 
 that would reasonably suggest to a prudent layperson 
 that there is an emergency medical condition (including 
 items and services described in subparagraph (C)(iii));
 (C) cover (and make reasonable payments for)--
 (i) emergency services,
 (ii) services that are not emergency 
 services but are described in subparagraph (B),
 (iii) medical screening examinations and 
 other ancillary services necessary to diagnose, 
 treat, and stabilize an emergency medical 
 condition, and
 (iv) urgent care services,
 without regard to whether the health care professional 
 or provider furnishing such services has a contractual 
 (or other) arrangement with the organization; and
 (D) make prior authorization determinations for--
 (i) services that are furnished in a 
 hospital emergency department (other than 
 services described in clauses (i) and (iii) of 
 subparagraph (C)), and
 (ii) urgent care services,
 within the time periods specified in (or pursuant to) 
 sections 9(c)(3) and 10(f).
 (2) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection:
 (A) Emergency medical condition.--The term 
 ``emergency medical condition'' means a medical 
 condition (including emergency labor and delivery) 
 manifesting itself by acute symptoms of sufficient 
 severity (including severe pain) such that a prudent 
 layperson, who possesses an average knowledge of health 
 and medicine, could reasonably expect that the absence 
 of immediate medical attention might result in--
 (i) placing the patient's health in serious 
 jeopardy,
 (ii) serious impairment to bodily 
 functions, or
 (iii) serious dysfunction of any bodily 
 organ or part.
 (B) Emergency services.--The term ``emergency 
 services'' means health care items and services that 
 are necessary for the diagnosis, treatment, and 
 stabilization of an emergency medical condition.
 (C) Urgent care services.--The term ``urgent care 
 services'' means health care items and services that 
 are necessary for the treatment of a condition that--
 (i) is not an emergency medical condition,
 (ii) requires prompt medical or clinical 
 treatment, and
 (iii) poses a danger to the patient if not 
 treated in a timely manner, as defined by the 
 Secretary in consultation with relevant 
 treating health care professionals or 
 providers.
 (e) Right to Referral to Nonparticipating Providers.--A managed 
care organization shall permit an enrollee to obtain a referral to a 
nonparticipating provider if the organization does not have a 
participating provider with appropriate training and experience to meet 
the enrollee's needs and shall pay for care provided pursuant to such a 
referral.
 (f) Access to Centers of Excellence for Individuals Requiring 
Specialized Care.--
 (1) In general.--Each managed care organization shall 
 demonstrate that enrollees who have chronic diseases or 
 otherwise require specialized services, as determined by the 
 primary care provider or treating specialist, have access 
 through the organization to specialized treatment expertise at 
 designated centers of excellence in order to provide adequate 
 and continuous care for such enrollees. Such an organization 
 shall demonstrate such access according to standards developed 
 by the Secretary, including requirements relating to 
 arrangements with such centers and referral of enrollees to 
 such centers.
 (2) Designation process.--The Secretary shall establish a 
 process for the designation of facilities as centers of 
 excellence for purposes of this subsection. A facility may not 
 be designated unless the facility is determined--
 (A) to provide specialty care,
 (B) to deliver care for complex cases requiring 
 specialized treatment or for individuals with chronic 
 diseases, and
 (C) to meet other requirements that may be 
 established by the Secretary relating to specialized 
 education and training of health care professionals, 
 participation in peer-reviewed research, or treatment 
 of patients from outside the geographic area of the 
 facility.
 (g) Patient Access to Clinical Studies.--
 (1) Permitting participation in approved clinical 
 studies.--A managed care organization may not deny (or limit or 
 impose additional conditions on) coverage of items and services 
 furnished to an enrollee if--
 (A) the enrollee is participating in an approved 
 clinical study,
 (B) the items and services are furnished according 
 to the design of the study or to treat conditions 
 resulting from participation in the study, and
 (C) the items and services would otherwise be 
 covered by the organization except for the fact that 
 they are provided in connection with participation in 
 such a study.
 Such an organization may not discriminate against an enrollee 
 on the basis of the enrollee's participation in such a study.
 (2) Construction.--Nothing in paragraph (1) shall be 
 construed as requiring an organization to provide for payment 
 for items and services routinely paid for as part of an 
 approved clinical study.
 (3) Approved clinical study defined.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term ``approved clinical study'' means--
 (A) a research study approved by the Secretary, the 
 Director of the National Institutes of Health, the 
 Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, the 
 Secretary of Veterans Affairs, the Secretary of 
 Defense, or a qualified nongovernmental research entity 
 (as defined in guidelines of the National Institute of 
 Health), or
 (B) a peer-reviewed and approved research program, 
 as defined by the Secretary, conducted for the primary 
 purpose of determining whether or not a treatment is 
 safe, efficacious, or having any other characteristic 
 of a treatment which must be demonstrated in order for 
 the treatment to be medically necessary or appropriate.
 (h) Access to Experimental Treatments.--A managed care organization 
shall provide access to experimental treatments in the case of 
enrollees who have a life-threatening disease or condition, when 
determined to be medically necessary and appropriate by the treating 
health care provider in consultation with the enrollee.
 (i) Requirements Regarding Use of Prescription Drug Formularies.--
 (1) In general.--A managed care organization shall provide 
 coverage for a prescribed drug, approved for dispensing by the 
 Food and Drug Administration, whether or not such drug is on a 
 prescription drug formulary used by the organization if the use 
 of such drug is judged to be medically necessary and 
 appropriate by the prescribing health care professional.
 (2) Not permitting changes in prescriptions.--No pharmacist 
 or health care facility shall change the prescription 
 prescribed by a health care provider, or change the drug 
 dispensed to carry out a prescription for an enrollee of a 
 managed care plan unless--
 (A) the prescribing health care provider has 
 approved the change, and
 (B) the enrollee has been informed and given 
 consent to the change.
 (3) Use of generics permitted.--Nothing in this subsection 
 shall be construed as preventing a managed care organization 
 from using medically approved generic drugs.

SEC. 5. ASSURING ADEQUATE SCOPE OF COVERAGE.

 (a) Coverage of Prescription Drugs, Preventive Services, and 
Inpatient and Outpatient Services.--A managed care organization, in 
offering coverage under a managed care plan, shall include coverage of 
prescription drugs, preventive services, and inpatient and outpatient 
services, and shall--
 (1) include coverage of annual screening mammography for 
 any female enrollee who is 40 years of age or older and for any 
 female enrollee who is less than 40 years of age and who has a 
 medical condition that makes such coverage medically necessary 
 and appropriate;
 (2) not restrict benefits for any hospital length of stay 
 in connection with--
 (A) a mastectomy for the treatment of breast cancer 
 to less than 48 hours, or
 (B) a lymph node dissection for the treatment of 
 breast cancer to less than 24 hours; and
 (3) not exclude or restrict benefits--
 (A) for prescription contraceptive drugs or devices 
 approved by the Food and Drug Administration, or 
 generic equivalents approved as substitutable by the 
 Food and Drug Administration, or
 (B) for outpatient contraceptive services 
 (including consultations, examinations, procedures, and 
 medical services, provided on an outpatient basis and 
 related to the use of contraceptive methods (including 
 natural family planning) to prevent an unintended 
 pregnancy).
 (b) Mental Health Parity.--A managed care organization, in offering 
a managed care plan, may not distinguish in the amount, duration, or 
scope of coverage under the plan among items and services based on 
whether the items and services relate to mental health (or treatment of 
mental illness or disease) or to physical health (or treatment of 
physical illness or disease).
 (c) Coverage of Services of Essential Community Providers.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary may require a managed care 
 organization to enter into agreements with essential community 
 providers serving the organization's service area (in relation 
 to the coverage) to join the organization's provider network if 
 such Secretary finds that such agreements are necessary for the 
 organization to make contracted for services (A) available and 
 accessible to each enrollee, within the area served by the 
 organization (in relation to such coverage), with reasonable 
 promptness and in a manner which assures continuity, and (B) 
 when medically necessary, available and accessible 24 hours a 
 day and 7 days a week.
 (2) Essential community provider defined.--For purposes of 
 paragraph (1), the term ``essential community provider'' means 
 a rural health clinic (described in paragraph (2) of section 
 1861(aa) of the Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. 1395x(aa)), a 
 Federally qualified health center (described in paragraph (4) 
 of such section), and any other provider meeting such standards 
 as the Secretary may require.
 (d) Coverage of Emergency Services.--A managed care organization 
shall provide for coverage of emergency services (as defined in section 
4(d)(2)(B)), 24-hours a day, 7-days-a-week, without the need for any 
prior approval for coverage of such services.
 (e) Requirement for Point of Service Option.--A managed care 
organization that offers a managed care plan shall offer each enrollee 
an enrollment option under which the enrollee may receive benefits for 
services provided by nonparticipating health care professionals and 
providers. The organization may require that the enrollee pay a 
reasonable premium to reflect the cost of such option.
 (f) Requirement for Continuity of Care.--A managed care 
organization shall provide for continuity of care following enrollment, 
including appropriate continuity of care following termination of 
participation of a provider that is providing a course of treatment to 
an enrollee at the time of the termination.
 (g) Coverage of Consultation for Second Opinions.--A managed care 
organization shall provide enrollees with access to a consultation for 
a second opinion regarding treatment options.

SEC. 6. ASSURING UNBIASED MEDICAL DETERMINATIONS BY HEALTH CARE 
 PROFESSIONALS AND PROVIDERS.

 (a) Requiring Medical Determinations by Treating Professional.--A 
managed care organization may not deny payment for services covered 
under a managed care plan based upon the fact that the services are not 
medically necessary or appropriate with respect to an enrollee unless 
the determination is made solely by the health care professional 
treating the enrollee.
 (b) Prohibition of Certain Incentive Arrangements.--
 (1) In general.--No managed care organization shall offer 
 monetary rewards, penalties, or inducements (including varying 
 the amount of compensation) to a health care professional or 
 provider, or condition the initial or continued participation 
 of such a professional or provider in a managed care plan 
 offered by the organization, on the basis of the professional's 
 or provider's decision (or decisions) to reduce or limit the 
 availability of appropriate medical tests, services, or 
 treatment, on the basis of any utilization review decisions 
 relating to the professional or provider, or the number of 
 referrals, tests, or other procedures ordered or performed by 
 the professional or provider.
 (2) Penalty.--Any managed care organization, or executive 
 of such an organization, that knowingly offers a reward, 
 penalty, or inducement in violation of paragraph (1) shall be 
 fined in accordance with title 18, United States Code, 
 imprisoned for not more than 2 years, or both.
 (c) Prohibition of Interference With Certain Medical 
Communications.--
 (1) In general.--The provisions of any contract or 
 agreement, or the operation of any contract or agreement, 
 between a managed care organization and a health care 
 professional shall not prohibit or restrict the health care 
 professional from engaging in medical communications with a 
patient of the professional.
 (2) Medical communication defined.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term ``medical communication'' means a 
 communication made by a health care professional with a patient 
 of the health care professional (or the guardian or legal 
 representative of the patient) with respect to--
 (A) the patient's health status, medical care, or 
 treatment options;
 (B) any utilization review requirements that may 
 affect treatment options for the patient; or
 (C) any financial incentives that may affect the 
 treatment of the patient.
 (d) Whistleblower Protection.--
 (1) In general.--No managed care organization may discharge 
 or otherwise discriminate against any employee with respect to 
 compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment 
 because the employee (or any person acting pursuant to the 
 request of the employee) provided information to a Federal or 
 State official with any enforcement responsibility or authority 
 concerning the provisions of this Act regarding a possible 
 violation of any provision of this Act, or any regulation under 
 any such provision, by the organization or any director, 
 officer, or employee of the organization.
 (2) Enforcement.--Any employee or former employee who 
 believes that such employee has been discharged or 
 discriminated against in violation of paragraph (1) may file a 
 civil action in the appropriate United States District Court 
 before the end of the 2-year period beginning on the date of 
 such discharge or discrimination.
 (3) Remedies.--If the District Court determines that a 
 violation has occurred, the court may order the organization 
 which committed the violation--
 (A) to reinstate the employee to the employee's 
 former position;
 (B) to pay compensatory damages; or
 (C) to take other appropriate actions to remedy any 
 past discrimination.
 (4) Limitation.--The protections of this subsection shall 
 not apply to any employee who--
 (A) deliberately causes or participates in the 
 alleged violation of law or regulation; or
 (B) knowingly or recklessly provides substantially 
 false information to the Federal or State official 
 involved.
 (e) Protection of Advocacy Functions.--No managed care organization 
shall terminate, vary the compensation or working conditions, or refuse 
to renew a contract for participation with a health care professional 
because the professional has--
 (1) advocated on behalf of an enrollee,
 (2) filed a complaint against the organization,
 (3) appealed a decision of the organization,
 (4) provided information or filed a report with an 
 appropriate Federal or State official, or
 (5) requested a hearing or review pursuant to this Act.

SEC. 7. NONDISCRIMINATION AGAINST ENROLLEES AND IN THE SELECTION OF 
 PARTICIPATING PROVIDERS; EQUITABLE ACCESS TO NETWORKS.

 (a) Nondiscrimination Against Enrollees.--No managed care 
organization may discriminate (directly or through contractual 
arrangements) against any enrollee on the basis of age, gender, 
disability, health status, genetic information, or anticipated need for 
health services.
 (b) Nondiscrimination in Selection of Participating Health Care 
Professionals.--A managed care organization shall not discriminate in 
selecting participating health care professionals (or in establishing 
the terms and conditions for such participation) on the basis of--
 (1) the race, national origin, gender, age, or disability 
 (other than a disability that impairs the ability of an 
 individual to provide health care services or that may threaten 
 the health of enrollees) of the professional; or
 (2) the professional's lack of affiliation with, or 
 admitting privileges at, a hospital (unless such lack of 
 affiliation is a result of infractions of quality standards and 
 is not due to a professional's type of license).
 (c) Nondiscrimination in Access to Health Plans.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), a managed care 
 organization shall not discriminate in participation, 
 reimbursement, or indemnification against a health care 
 professional, who is acting within the scope of the 
 professional's license or certification under applicable State 
 law, solely on the basis of such license or certification.
 (2) Construction.--Nothing in this subsection shall be 
 construed as a requirement to include for participation every 
willing health care professional who meets the terms and conditions of 
a managed care organization.

SEC. 8. DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION.

 (a) Provision of Information and Orientation.--
 (1) General requirement.--A managed care organization 
 offering a managed care plan shall provide enrollees and, upon 
 request, prospective enrollees with written information 
 concerning the terms and conditions of the plan, including the 
 information described in subsection (c).
 (2) Information upon request.--In addition to the 
 information provided under subsection (c), a managed care 
 organization offering a managed care plan shall provide, upon 
 request of an enrollee or prospective enrollee, the information 
 described in subsection (d).
 (3) Requirement for initial information session.--
 (A) In general.--Within 30 days of enrolling an 
 individual under a managed care plan, the managed care 
 organization shall provide for an in-person information 
 session with the enrollee for the purpose of outlining 
 the information described in this section.
 (B) Payment.--Such a session shall be held with an 
 enrollee before the enrollee is required to pay for 
 services. This subparagraph shall not affect the 
 coverage of items and services under the plan 
 immediately upon the effective date of enrollment.
 (4) Comparative form.--The information provided under this 
 section shall be in a form, specified by the Secretary, so that 
 prospective enrollees may compare the attributes of all such 
 plans offered within a coverage area.
 (b) Understandability.--Information provided under this section, 
whether written or oral shall be easily understandable, truthful, 
linguistically appropriate and objective with respect to the terms 
used.
 (c) Required Information.--Information required under subsection 
(a)(1) shall include information concerning each of the following:
 (1) Coverage and benefits.--Coverage provisions, benefits, 
 and any exclusions by category of service or product, including 
 24-hour coverage of emergency services without a requirement 
 for prior approval.
 (2) Prior authorization requirements.--Prior authorization 
 requirements for coverage of benefits.
 (3) Utilization review policies.--Utilization review 
 procedures and policies (including preauthorization review, 
 concurrent review, post-service review, post-payment review 
 procedures that may lead an enrollee to be denied coverage for 
 or not be provided a particular service or product), including 
 time frames for review decisions and enrollee rights relating 
 to notice, reconsideration, and appeal of utilization review 
 decisions, and including information on the percentage of 
 utilization review determinations that disagree with the 
 judgment of the initial treating health care professional and 
 the percentage of such determinations which are reversed 
 (whether internally or externally) on appeal.
 (4) Payment methods.--Types of methodologies used by the 
 organization to reimburse types of providers or for types of 
 services.
 (5) Enrollee financial responsibilities.--Enrollees' 
 financial responsibility for services, including any variation 
 in the responsibility based on whether the provider is a 
 participating provider.
 (6) Grievance procedures.--Grievance procedures.
 (7) Provider selection procedures.--Procedures used by 
 enrollees to select and change primary and specialty providers 
 and to be referred to nonparticipating providers and 
 appropriate specialists, consistent with the requirements of 
 this Act.
 (8) Enrollee participation in policy development.--
 Procedures which enrollees may use to participate in 
 development of policy of the organization.
 (9) Procedures for non-english proficient enrollees.--
 Procedures which the organization has established to meet the 
 needs of enrollees who are not proficient in English.
 (10) Information.--An address and phone number at which 
 enrollees and prospective enrollees can obtain information 
 about the organization and managed care plans offered by the 
 organization.
 (11) List of contract facilities.--A list, annually 
 updated, of the facilities and providers, by specialty, through 
 which the organization provides its benefits. For each such 
 facility or provider the list shall include the name, address, 
 phone number, and (in the case of a physician) board 
 certification.
 (12) Non-health care expenditures.--A statement of the 
 percentage of health-care related revenues of the organization 
 used for administration, the percentage of such revenues used 
 for marketing, and the percentage of such revenues attributable 
 to profit.
 (13) Enrollee satisfaction.--Statistics on enrollee 
 satisfaction, stated separately for those who continue 
 enrollment and those who discontinue enrollment, and on the 
 proportion of enrollees who disenroll.
 (14) Availability of providers; provider incentives.--The 
 characteristics and availability of participating health care 
 providers and professionals, including a description of any 
 financial or contractual arrangements with hospitals, 
 utilization review organizations, physicians, or other health 
 care providers or professionals that would affect the services 
 offered, referral or treatment options, or providers' fiduciary 
 responsibility to patients, including any financial or other 
 incentives regarding the provision, denial, or limitation of 
 needed services.
 (15) Quality indicators.--Indicators that measure the 
 quality of services provided by the organization and by 
 participating health providers with the organization, including 
 population-based statistics such as immunization rates and 
 performance measures such as survival after surgery, adjusted 
 for case mix.
 (16) Physician credentialing standards.--Standards used by 
 the organization in the credentialing of participating 
 physicians.
 (17) Formularies.--Information on prescription drug 
 formularies used by the organization, consistent with section 
 4(i).
 (18) Loss-ratio.--Its loss-ratio.
 (d) Information Supplied Upon Request.--For purposes of subsection 
(a)(2), the information described in this subsection concerning a 
managed care organization offering a managed care plan is as follows:
 (1) Annual financial statement.--The most recent annual 
 financial statement of the organization.
 (2) Subscriber contract.--A copy of the most recent 
 individual, direct pay subscriber contract, or, in the case of 
 a group health plan, any contract between the plan and a health 
 insurance issuer providing coverage under the plan.
 (3) Consumer complaints.--Information relating to consumer 
 complaints compiled pursuant to insurance or other law.
 (4) Charges and benefits for services.--Information on the 
 enrollee charges for all covered items and services, including, 
 for the point of service option described in section 5(e), the 
 amounts that are payable with respect to items and services 
 furnished by nonparticipating health care professionals and 
 providers.
 (5) Confidentiality of medical records.--Information on the 
 procedures used by the organization to protect the 
 confidentiality of medical records maintained in relation to 
 enrollees.
 (6) Quality assurance programs.--A description of quality 
 assurance programs maintained by the organization in relation 
 to the plan.
 (7) Coverage of experimental or investigational drugs.--A 
 description of procedures used by the organization to determine 
 whether drugs, devices, or treatments in clinical trials are 
 experimental or investigational.
 (8) Provider affiliations.--Information on affiliations of 
 participating health care professionals with participating 
 hospitals.
 (9) Clinical review criteria.--Upon written request, a 
 description of the specific clinical written review criteria 
 relating to a particular condition or disease and how such 
 criteria are used.
 (10) Participation procedures and qualifications.--A 
 description of the written application procedures and 
 qualification requirements for providers to be considered for 
 participation under the plan.
 (11) Officials.--A list of the names, business addresses, 
 and official positions of the membership of the board of 
 directors, officers, or persons with an ownership or control 
 interest in the organization.
 (e) Notice of Termination of Providers.--A managed care 
organization shall provide written notice to each enrollee within 15 
business days of the date that the organization is aware that the 
participation of a health care provider, that is currently in a course 
of treating the enrollee, is being withdrawn or terminated. The 
organization shall include in such notice the procedures under section 
5(f) for the enrollee to continue to receive care from the provider.

SEC. 9. GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES AND DEADLINE FOR RESPONDING TO REQUESTS 
 FOR COVERAGE OF SERVICES.

 (a) Grievance Procedures.--A managed care organization shall 
provide meaningful procedures for hearing and resolving grievances 
between the organization (or any entity or individual through which the 
organization provides health care services) and its enrollees.
 (b) Details.--The procedures provided under subsection (a) shall 
include--
 (1) recorded (written or otherwise) procedures for 
 registering and responding to complaints and grievances in a 
 timely manner;
 (2) documentation concerning the substance of complaints, 
 grievances, and actions taken concerning such complaints and 
 grievances, which shall be in writing;
 (3) procedures to ensure a resolution of a complaint or 
 grievance;
 (4) the compilation and analysis of complaint and grievance 
 data;
 (5) procedures to expedite the complaint process if the 
 complaint involves a dispute about the coverage of an 
 immediately and urgently needed service; and
 (6) procedures to ensure that if an enrollee orally 
 notifies the organization about a complaint, the organization 
 (if requested) must send the enrollee a complaint form that 
 includes the telephone numbers and addresses of member 
 services, and a description of the organization's grievance 
 procedure.
The Secretary may establish deadlines for the complaint procedures 
under paragraph (5) in order to ensure timely resolution of disputes 
involving immediately and urgently needed services.
 (c) Appeals Process.--Each managed care organization shall adopt an 
appeals process to enable enrollees to appeal decisions that are 
adverse to them. Such a process shall include--
 (1) the right to a review by a grievance panel composed of 
 clinical peer professionals who are in the same or similar 
 specialty or field that would provide the item or service 
 involved in the grievance;
 (2) the right to a second review with a different panel 
 that is independent of the organization and that is composed of 
 clinical peer professionals who are in the same or similar 
 specialty or field that would provide the item or service 
 involved in the grievance, or to a review through an impartial 
 arbitration process which shall be described in writing by the 
 organization;
 (3) a process for completion of review in the case of 
 urgent or emergency care services within 24 hours; and
 (4) covering the costs of all appeals and not imposing any 
 such costs on an enrollee.
The Secretary shall develop guidelines for the structure and 
requirements applicable to the independent review panel and impartial 
arbitration process described in paragraph (2).
 (d) Written Decision.--With respect to the complaint, grievance, 
and appeals processes required under this section, the organization 
shall, upon the request of an enrollee, provide the enrollee a written 
decision concerning a complaint, grievance, or appeal in a timely 
manner consistent with subsections (c)(3) and (f).
 (e) Construction.--The complaint, grievance, and appeals processes 
established in accordance with this section may not be used in any 
fashion to discourage or prevent an enrollee from receiving medically 
necessary care in a timely manner.
 (f) Prompt Response to Requests for Services.--In addition to the 
procedures available pursuant to the previous provisions of this 
section, in the case of the request of an enrollee with a managed care 
organization--
 (1) the organization shall respond to the request not later 
 than 24 hours after the request is made; and
 (2) the organization shall hear and resolve the enrollee's 
 appeal of a denial of coverage of such services in accordance 
 with a process meeting standards established by the Secretary.

SEC. 10. DUE PROCESS FOR HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS AND PROVIDERS.

 (a) In General.--A managed care organization shall--
 (1) allow all health care professionals and providers in 
 its service area to apply to become a participating health care 
 professional or provider during at least one period in each 
 calendar year;
 (2) provide reasonable notice to such health care 
 professionals and providers of the opportunity to apply and of 
 the period during which applications are accepted;
 (3) provide for review of each application by a 
 credentialing committee with appropriate representation of the 
 category or type of health care professional or provider;
 (4) select participating health care professionals and 
 providers based on objective standards of quality developed 
 with the suggestions and advice of professional associations, 
 health care professionals, and providers;
 (5) make such selection standards available to--
 (A) those applying to become a participating 
 provider or health care professional,
 (B) health plan purchasers, and
 (C) enrollees;
 (6) when economic considerations are taken into account in 
 selecting participating health care professionals and 
 providers, use objective criteria that are available to those 
 applying to become a participating provider or health care 
 professional and enrollees;
 (7) adjust any economic profiling to take into account 
 patient characteristics (such as severity of illness) that may 
 result in atypical utilization of services;
 (8) make the results of such profiling available to 
 insurance purchasers, enrollees, and the health care 
 professional or provider involved;
 (9) notify any health care professional or provider being 
 reviewed under the process referred to in paragraph (3) of any 
 information indicating that the health care professional or 
 provider fails to meet the standards of the organization;
 (10) offer a health care professional or provider receiving 
 notice pursuant to the requirement of paragraph (9) with an 
 opportunity to--
 (A) review the information referred to in such 
 paragraph, and
 (B) submit supplemental or corrected information;
 (11) not include in its contracts with participating health 
 care professionals and providers a provision permitting the 
 organization to terminate the contract ``without cause'';
 (12) provide a due process appeal that conforms to the 
 process specified in section 412 of the Health Care Quality 
 Improvement Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11112) for all 
 determinations that are adverse to a health care professional 
 or provider; and
 (13) unless a health care professional or provider poses an 
 imminent harm to enrollees or an adverse action by a 
 governmental agency effectively impairs the ability to provide 
 health care items and services, provide--
 (A) reasonable notice of any decision to terminate 
 a health care professional or provider ``for cause'' 
 (including an explanation of the reasons for the 
 determination),
 (B) an opportunity to review and discuss all of the 
 information on which the determination is based, and
 (C) an opportunity to enter into a corrective 
 action plan, before the determination becomes subject 
 to appeal under the process referred to in paragraph 
 (12).
 (b) Limitation on Use of Non-Compete Clauses.--A managed care 
organization may not (directly or indirectly) seek to enforce any 
contractual provision which prevents a health care professional or 
provider whose contractual obligations to the organization for the 
provision of services through the organization have ended from joining 
or forming any competing managed care organization, whether or not the 
organization serves the same geographic area.
 (c) Equal Compensation Arrangements.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), a managed care 
 organization shall provide for comparable payment for all 
 health care professionals and providers in the same field or 
 specialty located in the same geographic area.
 (2) Adjustments authorized.--A managed care organization 
 may adjust the amount of compensation among professionals and 
 providers for experience and other relevant factors, including 
 bonus payments that reflect quality factors, such as enrollee 
 satisfaction and medical chart reviews, unless such payments 
 are based solely on cost-effectiveness of services provided.
 (d) Rule of Construction.--The requirements of subsection (a) shall 
not be construed as preempting or superseding any other reviews and 
appeals a managed care organization is required by law to make 
available.

SEC. 11. REQUIREMENTS FOR QUALITY IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM AND UTILIZATION 
 REVIEW PROGRAMS.

 (a) Quality Improvement Program.--
 (1) In general.--A managed care organization shall 
 establish a quality improvement program (consistent with 
 paragraph (2)) that systematically and continuously assesses 
 and improves--
 (A) enrollee health status, patient outcomes, 
 processes of care, and enrollee satisfaction associated 
with health care provided by the organization; and
 (B) the administrative and funding capacity of the 
 organization to support and emphasize preventive care, 
 utilization, access and availability, cost 
 effectiveness, acceptable treatment modalities, 
 specialists referrals, the peer review process, and the 
 efficiency of the administrative process.
 (2) Functions.--A quality improvement program established 
 pursuant to paragraph (1) shall--
 (A) assess the performance of the organization and 
 its participating health care professionals and 
 providers and report the results of such assessment to 
 purchasers, participating health care professionals and 
 providers, and administrative personnel;
 (B) demonstrate measurable improvements in clinical 
 outcomes and plan performance measured by identified 
 criteria, including those specified in paragraph 
 (1)(A); and
 (C) analyze quality assessment data to determine 
 specific interactions in the delivery system (both the 
 design and funding of the health care coverage and the 
 clinical provision of care) that have an adverse impact 
 on the quality of care.
 (b) Utilization Review.--The utilization review program of a 
managed care organization shall--
 (1) be developed (including any screening criteria used by 
 such program) with the involvement of participating health 
 professionals and providers;
 (2) to the extent consistent with the protection of 
 proprietary business information (as defined for purposes of 
 section 552 of title 5, United States Code) release, upon 
 request, to affected health professionals, providers, and 
 enrollees the screening criteria, weighting elements, and 
 computer algorithms used in reviews and a description of the 
 method by which they were developed;
 (3) uniformly apply review criteria that are based on sound 
 scientific principles and the most recent medical evidence;
 (4) use licensed, accredited, or certified health 
 professionals to make review determinations (and for services 
 requiring specialized training for their delivery, use a health 
 professional who is qualified through equivalent specialized 
 training and experience);
 (5) subject to reasonable safeguards, disclose to health 
 professionals and providers, upon request, the names and 
 credentials of individuals conducting utilization review;
 (6) not compensate individuals conducting utilization 
 review for denials of payment or coverage of benefits;
 (7) comply with the requirement of section 4(d)(1) that 
 prior authorization not be required for emergency and related 
 services furnished in a hospital emergency department;
 (8) make prior authorization determinations--
 (A) in the case of services that are urgent care 
 services described in section 4(d)(2)(C), within 30 
 minutes of a request for such determination, and
 (B) in the case of other services, within 24 hours 
 after the time of a request for determination;
 (9) include in any notice of such determination an 
 explanation of the basis of the determination and the right to 
 an immediate appeal;
 (10) treat a favorable prior authorization review 
 determination as a final determination for purposes of making 
 payment for a claim submitted for the item or service involved 
 unless such determination was based on false information 
 knowingly supplied by the person requesting the determination;
 (11) provide timely access, as defined by the applicable 
 State authority, to utilization review personnel and, if such 
 personnel are not available, waives any prior authorization 
 that would otherwise be required; and
 (12) provide notice of an initial determination on payment 
 of a claim within 30 days after the date the claim is submitted 
 for such item or service, and include in such notice an 
 explanation of the reasons for such determination and of the 
 right to an immediate appeal.

SEC. 12. MINIMUM LOSS RATIOS; GENERAL CONSUMER PROTECTIONS.

 (a) Minimum Loss Ratio.--The loss-ratio (as defined by the 
Secretary) for a managed care organization shall not be less than 85 
percent with respect to managed care plans it offers.
 (b) Participation in Policy Development.--A managed care 
organization shall have a procedure whereby enrollees may participate 
in the development of policies of the organization.
 (c) Needs of Non-English Proficient Enrollees.--A managed care 
organization shall have procedures for addressing the needs of 
enrollees who are not proficient in English.
 <all>