102d CONGRESS
2d Session
H. R. 5099
AN ACT
To provide for the restoration of fish and wildlife and their habitat in
the Central Valley of California, and for other purposes.
HR 5099 EH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5099
AN ACT
To provide for the restoration of fish and wildlife and their habitat in
the Central Valley of California, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Central Valley Project Reform Act'.
SEC. 2. PURPOSES.
 The purposes of this Act shall be--
 (a) to protect, restore, and enhance fish, wildlife, and associated habitats
 in the Central Valley basin of California;
 (b) to address impacts of the Central Valley Project on fish, wildlife
 and associated habitats;
 (c) to improve the operational flexibility of the Central Valley Project;
 (d) to increase water-related benefits provided by the Central Valley
 Project to the State of California through expanded use of voluntary water
 transfers and improved water conservation; and
 (e) to study transfer of the Central Valley Project to non-Federal interests;
 and for other purposes.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act:
 (a) The term `anadromous fish' means those stocks of salmon (including
 steelhead), striped bass, sturgeon, and American shad that ascend
 the Sacramento and San Joaquin rivers and their tributaries and the
 Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta to reproduce after maturing in San Francisco
 Bay or the Pacific Ocean.
 (b) The terms `artificial propagation' and `artificial production' mean
 spawning, incubating, hatching, and rearing fish in a hatchery or other
 facility constructed for fish production.
 (c) The term `Central Valley Habitat Joint Venture' means the association of
 Federal and State agencies and private parties established for the purpose
 of developing and implementing the North American Waterfowl Management
 Plan as it pertains to the Central Valley of California.
 (d) The terms `Central Valley Project' or `project' mean all Federal
 reclamation projects located within or diverting water from or to the
 watershed of the Sacramento and San Joaquin rivers and their tributaries
 as authorized by the Act of August 26, 1937 (50 Stat. 850) and all Acts
 amendatory or supplemental thereto, including but not limited to the Act
 of October 17, 1940 (54 Stat. 1198, 1199), Act of December 22, 1944 (58
 Stat. 887), Act of October 14, 1949 (63 Stat. 852), Act of September 26,
 1950 (64 Stat. 1036), Act of August 27, 1954 (68 Stat. 879), Act of August
 12, 1955 (69 Stat. 719), Act of June 3, 1960 (74 Stat. 156), Act of October
 23, 1962 (76 Stat. 1173), Act of September 2, 1965 (79 Stat. 615), Act of
 August 19, 1967 (81 Stat. 167), Act of August 27, 1967 (81 Stat. 173),
 Act of September 28, 1976 (90 Stat. 1324), and Act of October 27, 1986
 (100 Stat. 3050).
 (e) The term `Central Valley Project service area' means that area of
 the Central Valley and San Francisco Bay Area where water service has
 been expressly authorized pursuant to the various feasibility studies and
 consequent congressional authorizations for the Central Valley Project.
 (f) The term `Central Valley Project water' means all water is diverted,
 stored, or delivered by the Bureau of Reclamation pursuant to water rights
 acquired pursuant to California law, including water made available under
 the so-called `exchange contracts' and Sacramento River settlement contracts.
 (g) The term `Fish and Wildlife Advisory Committee' means the Central Valley
 Project Fish and Wildlife Advisory Committee established in section 9 of
 this Act.
 (h) The term `full cost' has the meaning given such term in paragraph (3)
 of section 202 of the Reclamation Reform Act of 1982.
 (i) The term `natural production' means fish produced to adulthood without
 direct human intervention in the spawning, rearing, or migration processes.
 (j) The term `Reclamation laws' means the Act of June 17, 1902 (82 Stat. 388)
 and all Acts amendatory thereof or supplemental thereto.
 (k) The term `Refuge Water Supply Report' means the report issued
 by the Mid-Pacific Region of the Bureau of Reclamation of the United
 States Department of the Interior entitled Report on Refuge Water Supply
 Investigations, Central Valley Hydrologic Basin, California (March 1989).
 (l) The terms `repayment contract' and `water service contract' have the
 same meaning as provided in sections 9(d) and 9(e) of the Reclamation
 Project Act of 1939 (53 Stat. 1187, 1195), as amended.
 (m) The terms `Restoration Fund' and `Fund' mean the Central Valley Project
 Restoration Fund established by this Act.
 (n) The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of the Interior.
SEC. 4. LIMITATION ON CONTRACTING AND CONTRACT REFORM.
 (a) NEW CONTRACTS- Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the
 Secretary shall not enter into any new short-term, temporary, or long-term
 contracts or agreements for water supply from the Central Valley Project
 for any purpose other than fish and wildlife before--
 (1) the provisions of subsections 6(b)-(e) of this Act are met;
 (2) the California State Water Resources Control Board concludes its current
 review of San Francisco Bay/Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta Estuary water
 quality standards and determines the means of implementing such standards,
 including any obligations of the Central Valley Project, if any, and the
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall have approved
 such standards pursuant to existing authorities; and
 (3) at least one hundred and twenty days shall have passed after the
 Secretary provides a report to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
 of the Senate and the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs and the
 Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries of the House of Representatives
 explaining the obligations, if any, of the Central Valley Project system,
 including its component facilities and contracts, with regard to achieving
 San Francisco Bay/Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta Estuary water quality
 standards as finally established and approved by relevant State and Federal
 authorities, and the impact of such obligations on Central Valley Project
 operations, supplies, and commitments.
 (b) EXCEPTION TO LIMIT ON NEW CONTRACTS- In recognition of water shortages
 facing urban areas of California, and subsection (a) of this section
 notwithstanding, the Secretary is authorized to make available one hundred
 thousand acre-feet of Central Valley Project water for sale through water
 service contracts not to exceed twenty years in length to any California
 water district, agency, member district or agency, municipality, or publicly
 regulated water utility, without discrimination among them, for municipal
 and industrial purposes, except that no water shall be made available under
 this subsection until the State of California has entered into a binding
 agreement with the Secretary concerning the cost allocations set forth in
 section 6 of this Act. In carrying out this subsection, the Secretary shall--
 (1) provide public notice of the availability of such water and be available
 to receive offers for such water for a period not to exceed one week in
 duration beginning not less than sixty days after enactment of this Act;
 (2) make all such offers public immediately upon completion of the period
 for submission of bids established under paragraph (1) of this subsection;
 (3) take such measures as are necessary to ensure that prospective agency
 purchasers do not engage in anti-competitive behavior;
 (4) accept the offers of the water agency or agencies offering the greatest
 monetary payments per acre-foot of water made available by the Secretary,
 except that--
 (A) such payment must be greater than $100 per acre-foot of contractual
 commitment annually and, in addition, cover all Federal costs associated
 with the proposed sale and delivery;
 (B) delivery under the contract must be feasible using existing facilities;
 and
 (C) the proposed use of the water must be consistent with State and
 Federal law.
All revenues collected by the Secretary from the contract or contracts
authorized by this subsection, other than actual operation and maintenance
costs, shall be covered into the Restoration Fund.
 (c) RENEWAL OF EXISTING LONG-TERM CONTRACTS- Notwithstanding the provisions
 of the Act of July 2, 1956 (70 Stat. 483), the Secretary may renew any
 existing long-term repayment or water service contract for the delivery of
 water from the Central Valley Project for a period not exceeding twenty
 years, except that the Secretary shall first analyze the impacts of such
 proposed contract pursuant to Federal and State environmental laws.
 (d) ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW OF PROPOSED CONTRACT RENEWALS- Not later than three
 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall prepare
 a programmatic environmental impact statement analyzing the impacts of the
 potential renewal of all existing Central Valley Project water contracts,
 including impacts within the Sacramento, San Joaquin, and Trinity River
 Basins, and the San Francisco Bay/Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta
 and Estuary.
 (e) INCLUDING RESULTS OF ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES- The provisions of any
 contract renewed under authority of subsection (c) of this section shall be
 subject to further modifications by the Secretary based on any environmental
 impact statements carried out under subsection (c) or (d) of this section.
 (f) WATER IDENTIFIED FOR FISH AND WILDLIFE PURPOSES- Any Central Valley
 Project water service or repayment contract entered into, renewed, or amended
 under this section shall provide that the Secretary may, under procedures
 specified in this Act, allocate a portion of the water supply contained
 in such contract for the purposes specified in section 6 of this Act.
 (g) CHANGE IN THE APPLICATION OF THE 1956 ACT- Notwithstanding any
 provision to the contrary in any existing contract, the provisions of the
 Act of July 2, 1956 (53 Stat. 1187, U.S.C.) shall not apply to any Central
 Valley Project water service or repayment contract entered into, renewed or
 amended under any provision of the Federal Reclamation law after December
 31, 1995. After December 31, 1995, the Secretary shall not be under any
 obligation to enter into, renew, or amend any water service or repayment
 contracts in the Central Valley Project with any district or individual who
 has previously had such a contract prior to the date of enactment of this
 Act. Any Central Valley Project water service or repayment contract entered
 into, renewed or amended after the date of enactment of this Act and prior
 to December 31, 1995, shall contain the renewal provisions of the Act of
 July 2, 1956, for the term of such contract, and any additional renewals.
SEC. 5. WATER TRANSFERS, IMPROVED WATER MANAGEMENT AND CONSERVATION.
 (a)(1) WATER TRANSFERS- Subject to review and approval by the Secretary,
 all individuals or districts who receive Central Valley Project water
 under water service or repayment contracts entered into prior to or after
 the date of enactment of this Act are authorized to transfer all water
 subject to such contract to any other California water user or water agency,
 State agency, or private non-profit organization for project purposes or
 any purpose recognized as beneficial under applicable State law. Except
 as provided herein, the terms of such transfers shall be set by mutual
 agreement between the transferee and the transferor.
 (2) CONDITIONS FOR TRANSFERS- Transfers of Central Valley Project water
 authorized by this subsection shall be subject to the following conditions:
 (A) No transfers shall be made in excess of the average annual quantity
 of water under contract actually delivered to the contracting district or
 agency between 1985 and 1989.
 (B) All water under the contract which is transferred to any district or
 agency which is not a Central Valley Project contractor at the time of
 enactment of this Act shall, if used for irrigation purposes, be repaid
 at the greater of the full-cost or cost of service rates, or, if the water
 is used for municipal and industrial purposes, at the greater of the cost
 of service or municipal and industrial rates.
 (C) No water transfers authorized under this section shall be approved
 unless the transfer is between a willing buyer and a willing seller under
 such terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed upon.
 (D) No water transfer authorized under this section shall be approved unless
 the transfer is consistent with State law, including but not limited to,
 the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act.
 (E) All transfers authorized under this section shall be deemed a beneficial
 use of water by the transferor.
 (F) All transfers in excess of 20 percent of the water in any district
 contract shall be approved by such district based on reasonable terms and
 conditions. Any review and approval of such transfer by a district shall
 be undertaken in a public process similar to those provided for in section
 226 of Public Law 97-293.
 (G) All transfers entered into pursuant to this subsection between Central
 Valley Project water contractors and entities outside the Central Valley
 Project service area shall be subject to a right of first refusal on the
 same terms and conditions by entities within the Central Valley Project
 service area. The right of first refusal must be exercised within ninety
 days from the date that notice is provided of the proposed transfer. Should
 an entity exercise the right of first refusal, it must compensate the
 transferee who had negotiated the agreement upon which the right of first
 refusal is being exercised for that entity's full costs associated with
 the development and negotiation of the transfer.
 (H) Any water transfer approved pursuant to this subsection shall not be
 considered as conferring supplemental or additional benefits on Central
 Valley Project water contractors as provided in section 203 of Public Law
 97-293 (43 U.S.C. 390(cc)).
 (I) No transfer shall be approved unless the Secretary has determined that
 the transfer will have no adverse effect on the Secretary's ability to
 deliver water pursuant to the Secretary's Central Valley Project contractual
 obligations because of limitations in conveyance or pumping capacity.
 (J) The agricultural water subject to any water transfer undertaken pursuant
 to this subsection shall be that water that would have been consumptively
 used on crops had those crops been produced during the year or years of
 the transfer or water that would have otherwise been lost to beneficial use.
 (K) No transfer shall be approved unless the Secretary determines that
 the program will have no significant long-term adverse impact on ground
 water conditions.
 (b) METERING OF WATER USE REQUIRED- All Central Valley Project water service
 or repayment contracts for agricultural, municipal, or industrial purposes
 that are entered into, renewed, or amended under any provision of Federal
 reclamation law after the date of enactment of this Act, shall provide
 that the contracting district or agency shall ensure that all surface water
 delivery systems within its boundaries are equipped with volumetric water
 meters or equally effective water measuring methods within five years of
 the date of contract execution, amendment, or renewal, and that any new
 surface water delivery systems installed within its boundaries on or after
 the date of contract renewal are so equipped. The contracting district or
 agency shall inform the Secretary and the State of California annually as
 to the volume of surface water delivered within its boundaries.
 (c) STATE AND FEDERAL WATER QUALITY STANDARDS- All Central Valley Project
 water service or repayment contracts for agricultural, municipal, or
 industrial purposes that are entered into, renewed, or amended under
 any provision of Federal reclamation law after the date of enactment of
 this Act, shall provide that the contracting district or agency shall
 be responsible for compliance with all applicable State and Federal water
 quality standards applicable to surface and subsurface agricultural drainage
 discharges generated within its boundaries.
 (d) WATER PRICING REFORM- All Central Valley Project water service or
 repayment contracts for agricultural, municipal, or industrial purposes
 that are entered into, renewed, or amended under any provision of Federal
 Reclamation law after the date of enactment of this Act, shall provide that
 all project water subject to contract shall be made available to districts,
 agencies, and other contracting entities pursuant to a system of tiered
 water pricing. Such a system shall specify rates for each district, agency
 or entity based on an inverted block rate structure with the following
 provisions:
 (1) The first rate tier shall apply to a quantity of water up to 60
 percent of the contract total and shall be not less than the applicable
 contract rate.
 (2) The second rate tier shall apply to that quantity of water up to 60
 percent and under 80 percent of the contract total at a level halfway between
 the rates established under paragraphs (1) and (3) of this subsection.
 (3) The third rate tier shall apply to that quantity of water up to 80
 percent of the contract total and shall not be less than full cost.
 (4) Rates shall be adjusted annually for inflation.
 (5) The Secretary shall charge contractors only for water actually delivered.
 (e) WATER CONSERVATION STANDARDS- The Secretary shall establish and
 administer an office on Central Valley Project water conservation best
 management practices that shall, in consultation with the Secretary of
 Agriculture, the California Department of Water Resources, California
 academic institutions, and Central Valley Project water users, develop
 criteria for evaluating the adequacy of all water conservation plans
 developed by project contractors, including those plans required by section
 210 of the Reclamation Reform Act of 1982.
 (1) Criteria developed pursuant to this subsection shall be established
 within six months following enactment of this Act and shall be reviewed
 periodically thereafter, but no less than every three years, with the
 purpose of promoting the highest level of water use efficiency achievable
 by project contractors using best available technology and best management
 practices. The criteria shall include, but not be limited to agricultural
 water suppliers' efficient water management practices developed pursuant
 to California State law or suitable alternatives.
 (2) The Secretary, through the office established under this subsection,
 shall review and evaluate within eighteen months following enactment of
 this Act all existing conservation plans submitted by project contractors
 to determine whether they meet the conservation and efficiency criteria
 established pursuant to this subsection.
 (3) In developing the water conservation best management practice criteria
 required by this subsection, the Secretary shall take into account and
 grant substantial deference to the recommendations for action proposed in
 the Final Report of the San Joaquin Valley Drainage Program, entitled A
 Management Plan for Agricultural Subsurface Drainage and Related Problems
 on the Westside San Joaquin Valley (September 1990).
 (f) INCREASED REVENUES APPLIED TO REIMBURSABLE COSTS- Except as otherwise
 provided in this section, all revenues received by the Secretary under
 paragraph (a) of this section shall be covered to the Restoration Fund.
SEC. 6. FISH, WILDLIFE AND HABITAT RESTORATION.
 (a) AMENDMENTS TO CENTRAL VALLEY PROJECT AUTHORIZATIONS--ACT OF AUGUST 26,
 1937- Section 2 of the Act of August 26, 1937 (chapter 832; 50 Stat. 850),
 as amended, is amended--
 (1) in the second proviso of subsection (a), by inserting `and mitigation,
 protection, restoration and enhancement of fish and wildlife,' after
 `Indian reservations,';
 (2) in the last priviso of subsection (a), by striking `domestic uses;'
 and inserting `domestic uses and fish and wildlife mitigation, protection
 and restoration purposes;' and by striking `power' and inserting `power
 and fish and wildlife enhancement';
 (3) by adding at the end the following: `The mitigation for fish and wildlife
 losses incurred as a result of construction, operation, or maintenance
 of the Central Valley Project shall be concurrent with such activity and
 shall be based on the replacement of ecologically equivalent habitat.'; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following:
 `(e) Nothing in this Act shall limit the State's authority to condition
 water rights permits for the Central Valley Project to make water available
 to preserve, protect, or restore, fish and wildlife and their habitat.'.
 (b) FISH AND WILDLIFE RESTORATION ACTIVITIES- The Secretary, in consultation
 with the Central Valley Project Fish and Wildlife Advisory Committee
 established under section 9 of this Act (hereafter `Fish and Wildlife
 Advisory Committee') and in cooperation with other State and Federal
 agencies, is authorized and directed to:
 (1) Develop within 18 months of enactment and implement a program which
 makes all reasonable efforts to ensure that, by the year 2002, natural
 production of anadromous fish in Central Valley rivers and streams will be
 sustained, on a long-term basis, at levels not less than twice the average
 levels attained during the period of 1981-1990:
 (A) This program shall give first priority to measures which protect and
 restore natural channel and riparian habitat values through direct and
 indirect habitat restoration actions, modifications to Central Valley Project
 operations, and implementation of the measures mandated by this subsection.
 (B) As needed to achieve the goals of the program, the Secretary is
 authorized and directed to modify Central Valley Project operations to
 provide flows of suitable quality, quantity, and timing to protect all
 life stages of anadromous fish. Instream flow needs for all Central Valley
 Project controlled streams and rivers shall be determined jointly by the
 United States Fish and Wildlife Service and the California Department of
 Fish and Game.
 (C) With respect to mitigation or restoration of upper San Joaquin River
 fish, wildlife, and habitat, the Secretary is directed to participate in
 the San Joaquin River Management Program under development by the State
 of California. In support of the objectives of the San Joaquin River
 Management Program and the Stanislaus and Calaveras Basin Environmental
 Impact Statement, and in furtherance of the purposes of this Act, the
 Secretary, in consultation with the Fish and Wildlife Advisory Committee
 and affected counties and interests, shall evaluate in-basin needs in
 the Stanislaus River basin, and shall investigate alternative storage,
 release, and delivery regimes for satisfying both in-basin and out-of-basin
 needs. Alternatives to be investigated shall include, but shall not be
 limited to, conjunctive use operations, conservation strategies, exchange
 arrangements, and the use of base and channel maintenance flows to assist in
 efforts to restore fish and wildlife populations and riparian habitat values
 in the San Joaquin River. Nothing in this Act or the amendments to the Act
 of August 26, 1937, shall be construed as requiring a re-establishment of
 flows between Gravely Ford and Mendota Pool for mitigation or restoration
 of fish, wildlife and habitat.
 (D) Costs associated with this paragraph shall be reimbursable pursuant
 to existing statutory and regulatory procedures.
 (2) Upon enactment of this Act, and after implementing the operational
 changes authorized in subsection (b)(1)(B), make available project water
 for the primary purpose of implementing the fish, wildlife, and habitat
 restoration purposes and measures authorized by this section, except that
 such water shall be in addition to that required to implement subsections
 (b)(6) and (b)(15)(A). This water may be assigned immediately to supplement
 instream flows. The United States Fish and Wildlife Service shall conduct
 studies and monitoring activities as may be necessary to determine the
 effectiveness of such flows in meeting the goal established in subsection
 (b)(1). At the end of the initial five year period, the Secretary shall
 adjust the quantity of water assigned as necessary to meet the goal.
 (3) Develop and implement a program for the acquisition of a water supply
 adequate to meet the purposes and requirements of this section. Such a
 program should identify how the Secretary will secure this water supply,
 utilizing the following options in order of priority: improvements in or
 modifications of the operations of the project; conservation; transfers;
 conjunctive use; purchase of water; purchase and idling of agricultural
 land; reductions in deliveries to Central Valley Project contractors.
 (4) Develop and implement a program to mitigate fully for fishery impacts
 associated with operations of the Tracy Pumping Plant. Such program shall
 include, but is not limited to improvement or replacement of the fish
 screens and fish recovery facilities and practices associated with the Tracy
 Pumping Plant. Costs associated with this paragraph shall be reimbursed in
 accordance with the following formula: 37.5 percent shall be reimbursed as
 main project features, 37.5 percent shall be considered a nonreimbursable
 Federal expenditure, and 25 percent shall be paid by the State of California.
 (5) Develop and implement a program to mitigate fully for fishery impacts
 resulting from operations of the Contra Costa Canal Pumping Plant No. 1. Such
 program shall provide for construction and operation of fish screening
 and recovery facilities, and for modified practices and operations. Costs
 associated with this paragraph shall be reimbursed in accordance with the
 following formula: 37.5 percent shall be reimbursed as main project features,
 37.5 percent shall be considered a nonreimbursable Federal expenditure,
 and 25 percent shall be paid by the State of California.
 (6) Install and operate a structural temperature control device at Shasta
 Dam to control water temperatures in the Upper Sacramento River in order
 to protect all life stages of anadromous fish in the Upper Sacramento River
 from Keswick Dam to Red Bluff Diversion Dam. Costs associated with planning
 and construction of the structural temperature control device shall be
 reimbursed in accordance with the following formula: 37.5 percent shall
 be reimbursed as main project features, 37.5 percent shall be considered
 a nonreimbursable Federal expenditure, and 25 percent shall be paid by
 the State of California.
 (7) Meet flow standards and objectives and diversion limits set forth in
 all State regulatory and judicial decisions which apply to Central Valley
 Project facilities.
 (8) Investigate the feasibility of using short pulses of increased water
 flows to increase the survival of migrating juvenile anadromous fish in the
 Sacramento San Joaquin Delta and Central Valley rivers and streams. Costs
 associated with implementation of this subparagraph shall be reimbursed in
 accordance with the following formula: 37.5 percent shall be reimbursed as
 main project features, 37.5 percent shall be considered a nonreimbursable
 Federal expenditure, and 25 percent shall be paid by the State of California.
 (9) Develop and implement a program which will eliminate, to the extent
 possible, losses of anadromous fish due to flow fluctuations caused by the
 operation of any Central Valley Project storage facility. The program shall
 be patterned after the agreement between the California Department of Water
 and Resources and the California Department of Fish and Game with respect
 to the operation of the California State Water Project Oroville Dam complex.
 (10) Develop and implement measures to correct fish passage problems for
 adult and juvenile anadromous fish at the Red Bluff Diversion Dam. Costs
 associated with implementation of this paragraph shall be reimbursed in
 accordance with the following formula: 37.5 percent shall be reimbursed as
 main for its efficient operation at all project flow release levels. The
 operation of Coleman National Fish Hatchery shall be coordinated with
 all other mitigation hatcheries in California. Costs associated with
 implementation of this paragraph shall be reimbursed in accordance with
 the following formula: 37.5 percent shall be reimbursed as main project
 features, 37.5 percent shall be considered a nonreimbursable Federal
 expenditure, and 25 percent shall be paid by the State of California.
 (11) Develop and implement a program to restore the natural channel and
 habitat values of Clear Creek, construct new fish passage facilities at the
 McCormick-Saeltzer Dam, and provide flows in Clear Creek to provide optimum
 spawning, incubation, rearing and outmigration conditions for all races of
 salmon and steelhead trout. Flows shall be provided by the Secretary from
 Whiskeytown Dam as determined by instream flow studies conducted jointly
 by the California Department of Fish and Game and U.S. Fish and Wildlife
 Service. Costs associated with providing the flows required by this
 paragraph shall be reimbursed in accordance with the following formula:
 37.5 percent shall be reimbursed as main project features, 37.5 percent
 shall be considered a nonreimbursable Federal expenditure, and 25 percent
 shall be paid by the State of California. Costs associated with channel
 restoration and passage improvements required by this paragraph shall be
 allocated 50 percent to the United States as a nonreimbursable expenditure
 and 50 percent of the State of California.
 (12) Develop and implement a program for the purpose of restoring and
 replenishing, as needed, spawning gravel lost due to the construction
 and operation of Central Valley Project dams, bank protection programs,
 and other actions that have reduced the availability of spawning gravel
 in the rivers impounded by Central Valley Project facilities. Costs
 associated with implementation of this paragraph shall be reimbursed in
 accordance with the following formula: 37.5 percent shall be reimbursed as
 main project features, 37.5 percent shall be considered a nonreimbursable
 Federal expenditure, and 25 percent shall be paid by the State of California.
 (13) Develop and implement a program which provides, as appropriate, for
 closure of the Delta Cross Channel and Georgiana Slough during times when
 significant numbers of striped bass eggs, larvae, and juveniles approach the
 Sacramento River intake to the Delta Cross Channel or Georgiana Slough. Costs
 associated with implementation of this paragraph shall be reimbursed in
 accordance with the following formula: 37.5 percent shall be reimbursed as
 main project features, 37.5 percent shall be considered a nonreimbursable
 Federal expenditure, and 25 percent shall be paid by the State of California.
 (14) Construct, in cooperation with the State of California, a barrier at
 the head of Old River to be operated on a seasonal basis to increase the
 survival of young outmigrating salmon that are diverted from the San Joaquin
 River to Central Valley Project and State Water Project pumping plants. The
 cost of constructing, operating and maintaining the barrier shall be shared
 equally by the State of California and the United States. The United States'
 share of costs associated with implementation of this paragraph shall be
 reimbursed in accordance with the following formula: 37.5 percent shall
 be reimbursed as main project features, 37.5 percent shall be considered
 as nonreimbursable Federal expenditure, and 25 percent shall be paid by
 the State of California.
 (15) In support of the objectives of the Central Valley Habitat Joint
 Venture, deliver firm water supplies of suitable quality to maintain and
 improve wetland habitat on units of the National Wildlife Refuge System in
 the Central Valley of California, the Gray Lodge, Los Banos, Volta, North
 Grasslands, and Mendota state wildlife management areas, and the Grasslands
 Resource Conservation District in the Central Valley of California.
 (A) Upon enactment of this Act, the quantity and delivery schedules of
 water for each refuge shall be in accordance with Level 2 of the `Dependable
 Water Supply Needs' table for that refuge as set forth in the Refuge Water
 Supply Report or two-thirds of the water supply needed for full habitat
 development for those refuges identified in the San Joaquin Basin Action
 Plan/Kesterson Mitigation Action Plan Report prepared by the Bureau of
 Reclamation. Such water shall be delivered until the water supply provided
 for in subparagraph (B) of this paragraph is provided.
 (B) Not later than ten years after enactment of this Act, the quantity and
 delivery schedules of water for each refuge shall be in accordance with level
 4 of the `Dependable Water Supply Needs' table for that refuge as set forth
 in the Refuge Water Supply Report or the full water supply needed for full
 habitat development for those refuges identified in the San Joaquin Basin
 Action Plan/Kesterson Mitigation Action Plan Report prepared by the Bureau
 of Reclamation, 37.5 percent of the costs associated with implementation of
 this paragraph shall be reimbursed as main project features, 37.5 percent
 shall be considered a nonreimbursable Federal expenditure, and 25 percent
 shall be paid by the State of California.
 (C) The Secretary is authorized to construct such water conveyance
 facilities and wells as are necessary to implement this paragraph. The
 increment of water required to fulfill subparagraph (B) of this paragraph
 shall be acquired by the Secretary through voluntary water conservation,
 conjunctive use, purchase, lease, donations, or similar activities,
 or a combination of such activities which do not require involuntary
 reallocation of project yield. The priority or priorities applicable to
 such incremental water deliveries for the purpose of shortage allocation
 shall be the priority or priorities which applied to the water in question
 prior to its transfer to the purpose of providing such increment.
 (16) Establish a comprehensive assessment program to monitor fish and
 wildlife resources in the Central Valley and to assess the biological results
 of actions implemented pursuant to this section. Of the costs associated
 with implementation of this paragraph, 37.5 percent shall be reimbursed as
 main project features, 37.5 percent shall be considered a nonreimbursable
 Federal expenditure, and 25 percent shall be paid by the State of California.
 (17) Develop and implement a plan to resolve fishery passage problems at
 the Anderson-Cottonwood Irrigation District Diversion Dam. Costs associated
 with implementation of this paragraph shall be allocated 50 percent to
 the United States as a nonreimbursable expenditure and 50 percent to the
 State of California.
 (18) If requested by the State of California, assist in developing and
 implementing management measures to restore the striped bass fishery of the
 Bay-Delta estuary. Costs associated with implementation of this paragraph
 shall be allocated 50 percent to the United States as a reimbursable
 expenditure and 50 percent to the State of California. The United States'
 share of costs associated with implementation of this paragraph shall be
 reimbursed in accordance with the following formula: 50 percent shall be
 reimbursed as main project features and 50 percent shall be considered a
 nonreimbursable Federal expenditure.
 (19) Evaluate and revise, as appropriate, existing operational criteria
 in order to maintain minimum carryover storage at Sacramento and Trinity
 river reservoirs sufficient to protect and restore the anadromous fish
 of the Sacramento and Trinity rivers in accordance with the mandates and
 requirements of this subsection.
 (20) Participate with the State of California and other Federal agencies in
 the implementation of the on-going program to mitigate fully for the fishery
 impacts associated with operations of the Glenn-Colusa Irrigation District's
 Hamilton City Pumping Plant. Such participation shall include replacement
 of the defective fish screens and fish recovery facilities associated with
 the Hamilton City Pumping Plant. This authorization shall not be deemed
 to supersede or alter existing authorizations for the participation of
 other Federal agencies in the mitigation program. Of the costs associated
 with implementation of this paragraph, 37.5 percent shall be reimbursed as
 main project features, 37.5 percent shall be considered a nonreimbursable
 Federal expenditure, and 25 percent shall be paid by the State of California.
 (21) Install a temperature control device on Lewiston Dam to converse
 cold water for fishery protection, provided that the cost of such device
 shall not exceed $1,500,000. Such devices, with the same cost restriction,
 may also be installed on the Trinity and Whiskeytown dams if the Secretary
 deems it appropriate. Of the costs associated with implementation of this
 paragraph, 37.5 percent shall be reimbursed as main project features,
 37.5 percent shall be considered a nonreimbursable Federal expenditure,
 and 25 percent shall be paid by the State of California.
 If the Secretary and the State of California determine that long-term
 natural fishery productivity in the Sacramento River, American River, and San
 Joaquin River resulting from implementation of this section is better than
 conditions that existed in the absence of Central Valley Project facilities,
 any enhancement provided shall become credits to offset reimbursable costs
 associated with implementation of this section.
 (c) ADDITIONAL HABITAT RESTORATION ACTIONS- Not later than five years
 after enactment of this Act, the Fish and Wildlife Advisory Committee
 shall investigate and provide recommendations to the Committee on Energy
 and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committees on Interior and
 Insular Affairs and Merchant Marine and Fisheries of the House on the
 following subjects:
 (1) Alternative means of improving the reliability and quality of water
 supplies currently available to privately owned wetlands in the Central
 Valley and the need, if any, for additional supplies.
 (2) Water supply and delivery requirements necessary to permit full habitat
 development for water dependent wildlife on one hundred twenty thousand
 acres supplemental to the acreage referenced in paragraph (b)(15) of this
 section and feasible means of meeting that water supply requirement.
 (3) Measures to maintain suitable temperatures for anadromous fish survival
 in the Sacramento and San Joaquin rivers and their tributaries, and the
 Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta by controlling or relocating the discharge of
 irrigation return flows and sewage effluent, and restoring riparian forests.
 (4) Opportunities for additional hatchery production to mitigate the
 impacts of water development on Central Valley fisheries where no other
 feasible means of mitigation is available.
 (5) Measures to eliminate losses of juvenile anadromous fish resulting from
 unscreened or inadequately screened diversions on the Sacramento and San
 Joaquin rivers, their tributaries, and in the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta,
 including measures such as construction of screens on unscreened diversions,
 rehabilitation of existing screens, replacement of existing non-functioning
 screens, and relocation of diversions to less fishery-sensitive areas.
 (6) Measures to eliminate barriers to upstream and downstream migration
 of salmonids in the Central Valley, including removal programs or programs
 for the construction of new fish ladders.
 (7) Construction of temperature control structures on Trinity, Lewiston,
 and Whiskeytown dams to conserve cold water for fishery protection.
 (d) REPORT ON PROJECT FISHERY IMPACTS- The Secretary, in consultation with
 the Secretary of Commerce, the State of California, appropriate Indian
 tribes, and other appropriate public and private entities, shall investigate
 and report on all effects of the Central Valley Project on anadromous
 fish populations and the fisheries, communities, tribes, businesses and
 other interests and entities that have now or in the past had significant
 economic, social or cultural association with those fishery resources. The
 Secretary shall provide such report to the Committee on Energy and Natural
 Resources of the Senate and the Committees on Interior and Insular Affairs
 and Merchant Marine and Fisheries of the House of Representatives not
 later than two years after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (e) ECOSYSTEM AND WATERSYSTEM OPERATIONS MODELS- The Secretary, in
 cooperation with the State of California and in consultation with the Fish
 and Wildlife Advisory Committee, and other relevant interests and experts,
 shall develop readily usable and broadly available models and supporting
 data to evaluate the ecologic and hydrologic effects of existing and
 alternative operations of public and private water facilities and systems
 in the Sacramento, San Joaquin, and Trinity river watersheds. The primary
 purpose of this effort shall be to support the Secretary's efforts in
 fulfilling the requirements of this Act through improved scientific
 understanding concerning, but not limited to, the following:
 (1) A comprehensive water budget of surface and ground water supplies,
 considering all sources of inflow and outflow available over extended
 periods.
 (2) Water quality.
 (3) Surface-ground and stream-wetland interactions.
 (4) Measures needed to restore anadromous fisheries to optimum and
 sustainable levels in accordance with the restored carrying capacities of
 Central Valley rivers, streams, and riparian habitats.
 (5) Development and use of base flows and channel maintenance flows to
 protect and restore natural channel and riparian habitat values.
 (6) Implementation of operational regimes at State and Federal facilities
 to increase springtime flow releases, retain additional floodwaters,
 and assist in restoring both upriver and downriver riparian habitats.
 (7) Measures designed to reach sustainable harvest levels of resident and
 anadromous fish, including development and use of systems of tradeable
 harvest rights.
 (8) Opportunities to protect and restore wetland and upland habitats
 throughout the Central Valley.
 (9) Measures to enhance the firm yield of existing Central Valley Project
 facilities, including improving management and operations, conjunctive
 use opportunities, development of offstream storage, levee setbacks,
 and riparian restoration.
In implementing this subsection, all studies and investigations shall take
into account and be fully consistent with the fish, wildlife, and habitat
protection and restoration measures required by this Act or by any other State
or Federal law, statute, or regulation. One-half of the costs associated with
implementation of this subsection shall be borne by the United States as a
nonreimbursable cost, the other half shall be borne by the State of California.
SEC. 7. RESTORATION FUND.
 (a) RESTORATION FUND ESTABLISHED- There is hereby established in the
 Treasury of the United States the `Central Valley Project Restoration Fund'
 (hereafter `Restoration Fund') which shall be available for deposit of
 donations from any source and revenues provided under this Act. Funds made
 available to the Restoration Fund are authorized to be appropriated to
 the Secretary to carry out the provisions of sections 8(c), section 8(i),
 and the habitat restoration, improvement, and acquisition (from willing
 sellers) provisions of this Act.
 (b) MAXIMUM SURCHARGE ON WATER AND POWER SALES- The Secretary shall impose
 an annual operations and maintenance charge on all sales of project power
 and water sufficient to generate $15,000,000 (October 1991 price levels)
 to be deposited in the Restoration Fund. The amount of the charge paid
 by Central Valley Project water and power users shall be assessed in the
 same proportion as their cost allocation.
 (c) FUNDING TO NON-FEDERAL ENTITIES- If the Secretary determines that
 the State of California or an agency thereof, or other nonprofit entity
 concerned with restoration, protection, or enhancement of fish, wildlife,
 habitat, or environmental values is best able to implement an action
 authorized by this Act in an efficient, timely, and cost effective manner,
 the Secretary is authorized to provide funding to such entity to implement
 the identified action.
 (d) LIMITATION OF EXPENDITURES- The Secretary shall not expend any funds
 on construction of capital facilities authorized under section 6 of this
 Act as to which the State of California is required to contribute a share
 of total costs until the State of California has agreed to meet such cost
 sharing requirement.
SEC. 8. ADDITIONAL AUTHORITIES.
 (a) REGULATIONS AND AGREEMENTS AUTHORIZED- The Secretary is authorized and
 directed to promulgate such regulations and enter into such agreements as may
 be necessary to implement the intent, purposes, and provisions of this Act.
 (b) USE OF ELECTRICAL ENERGY- Electrical energy used to operate and maintain
 facilities developed for fish and wildlife purposes pursuant to this Act,
 including that used for ground water development, shall be deemed as Central
 Valley Project power and shall be repaid by the user in accordance with
 Reclamation law and at a price not higher than the lowest price paid by
 or charged to Central Valley Project contractors.
 (c) ACQUISITION OF ADDITIONAL WATER SUPPLY- In order to carry out the
 intent, purposes, and provisions of this Act, the Secretary is authorized
 to obtain water supplies from any source available to the Secretary,
 including, but not limited to direct purchase from willing sellers of
 water, acquisition of land and associated ground and surface water rights,
 water made available from conjunctive use projects, and implementation of
 on-farm water conservation practices where water conserved thereby will
 be made available to the Secretary.
 (d) CONTRACTS FOR ADDITIONAL STORAGE AND DELIVERY OF WATER- The Secretary
 is authorized to enter into contracts pursuant to Reclamation law and this
 Act with any Federal agency, California water user or water agency, State
 agency, or private nonprofit organization for the exchange, impoundment,
 storage, carriage, and delivery of Central Valley Project and nonproject
 water for domestic, municipal, industrial, fish and wildlife, and any
 other beneficial purpose, except that nothing in this subsection shall
 be deemed to supersede the provisions of section 103 of Public Law 99-546
 (100 Stat. 3051).
 (e) USE OF PROJECT FOR WATER BANKING- The Secretary, in consultation
 with the State of California, is authorized to enter into agreements to
 allow project contracting entities to use project facilities, where such
 facilities are not otherwise committed or required to fulfill project
 purposes or other Federal obligations, for supplying carry-over storage
 of irrigation and other water for drought protection, multiple-benefit
 credit-storage operations, and other purposes. The use of such water shall
 be consistent with and subject to applicable State laws.
 (f) LIMITATION ON CONSTRUCTION- This Act does not and shall not be
 interpreted to authorize construction of water storage facilities.
 (g) ANNUAL REPORTS TO CONGRESS- Not later than October 1 of the first
 full fiscal year after enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter,
 the Secretary shall submit a detailed report to the Committee on Energy and
 Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Interior and Insular
 Affairs and the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries of the House of
 Representatives. Such report shall describe all significant actions taken
 by the Secretary pursuant to this Act and progress toward achievement
 of the intent, purposes, and provisions of this Act. Such report shall
 include recommendations for authorizing legislation or other measures,
 if any, needed to implement the intent, purposes, and provisions of this Act.
 (h) RECLAMATION LAW- This Act shall amend and supplement the Act of June
 17, 1902, and Acts supplementary thereto and amendatory thereof.
 (i) LAND RETIREMENT- (1) The Secretary is authorized to purchase from
 willing sellers at fair-market-value land and associated water rights and
 other property interests identified in subsection (2) which receives Central
 Valley Project water under a contract executed with the United States.
 (2) The Secretary is authorized to purchase, under the authority of
 subsection (i)(1), and pursuant to such rules and regulations as may be
 adopted or promulgated to implement the provisions of this subsection,
 agricultural land which, in the opinion of the Secretary--
 (A) would, if permanently retired from irrigation, improve water
 conservation by a district, or improve the quality of an irrigation
 district's agricultural wastewater and assist the district in implementing
 the provisions of a water conservation plan approved under section 210 of
 the Reclamation Reform Act of 1982 and agricultural wastewater management
 activities developed pursuant to the recommendations contained in the
 final report of the San Joaquin Valley Drainage Program (September, 1990); or
 (B) are no longer suitable for sustained agricultural production because of
 permanent damage resulting from severe drainage or agricultural wastewater
 management problems, ground water withdrawals, or other causes.
 (j) WATER CONSERVATION- (1) The Secretary is authorized to undertake,
 in cooperation with Central Valley Project irrigation contractors, water
 conservation projects or measures needed to meet the requirements of
 this Act. The Secretary shall execute a cost-sharing agreement for any
 such project or measure undertaken. Under such agreement, the Secretary
 is authorized to pay up to 100 percent of the costs of such projects
 or measures. Any water saved by such projects or measures shall be made
 available to the Secretary in proportion to the Secretary's contribution
 to the total cost of such project or measure. Such water shall be used
 by the Secretary to meet the Secretary's obligations under this Act,
 including the requirements of section 6(b)(2). Such projects or measures
 must be implemented fully by the end of fiscal year 1999.
 (2) There are authorized to be appropriated through the end of fiscal year
 1997 $---- million to carry out the provisions of this subsection. Funds
 appropriated under this subsection shall be a nonreimbursable Federal
 expenditure.
 (k) CITIZEN SUITS- (1) Any person may commence a civil suit in his or her
 own behalf against the Secretary where there is alleged a failure of the
 Secretary to perform any act or duty under sections 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 12
 of this Act which is not discretionary with the Secretary.
 (2) The court may award costs of litigation (including reasonable expenses
 and attorney and expert witness fees) to any party other than the United
 States whenever the court determines such award is appropriate.
 (3) The relief provided by this section shall not restrict any right which
 any person (or class of persons) may otherwise have under any statute or
 common law to seek enforcement of any standard or limitation or to seek
 any other relief.
 (4) The district courts shall have jurisdiction to prohibit or prevent
 any violation of this Act, to compel any action required by this Act,
 and to issue any other order to further the purposes of this Act. An
 action under this section may be brought in any judicial district where
 the alleged violation occurred or is about to occur, where fish or wildlife
 resources affected by the alleged violation are located, or in the District
 of Columbia.
SEC. 9. CENTRAL VALLEY PROJECT FISH AND WILDLIFE ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is hereby established the `Central Valley Project
 Fish and Wildlife Advisory Committee,' hereafter referred to as the `Fish
 and Wildlife Advisory Committee'.
 (b) DUTIES- The Fish and Wildlife Advisory Committee shall make
 recommendations to the Secretary with respect to the fish, wildlife,
 and environmental restoration actions identified in section 6. Such
 recommendations shall be advisory in nature and shall not be binding on the
 Secretary, however, the Secretary shall give substantial deference to such
 recommendations in carrying out responsibilities under this Act. Should the
 Secretary not implement any recommendations made by the Fish and Wildlife
 Advisory Committee, the Secretary shall notify the Committee in writing
 and explain the reasons for rejecting the recommendation.
 (c) APPOINTMENT AND MEMBERSHIP- The Fish and Wildlife Advisory Committee
 shall be comprised of the Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife
 Service and the Governor of California, or their designees, and twenty
 additional members appointed by the Secretary in consultation with the
 Governor to provide--
 (1) ten representatives of environmental and conservation interests
 (including one representative of the Hoopa Valley Tribe); and
 (2) ten representatives of agricultural and urban water users (including
 one representative of Central Valley Project power users).
 (d) TERMS- The term of a member of the Fish and Wildlife Advisory Committee
 shall be five years, except that five of the members appointed pursuant to
 subsection (c)(1) and five of the members appointed pursuant to subsection
 (c)(2) shall be appointed for an initial term of three years. Any vacancy on
 the Committee shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
 (e) CHAIRMANSHIP AND VOTING- The Fish and Wildlife Advisory Committee
 shall be cochaired by the Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife
 Service and the Governor of California, or their designees. The Committee
 shall meet at the call of the cochairs or upon the request of a majority
 of its members. The Committee shall operate with the objective of achieving
 consensus, but may provide recommendations based on a majority vote.
 (f) ADMINISTRATION- The Secretary, in cooperation with the State of
 California, shall provide the Fish and Wildlife Advisory Committee
 with necessary administrative and technical support service, including
 information relevant to the functions of the Committee. The Committee shall
 determine its organization and prescribe the practices and procedures for
 carrying out its functions, and may establish committees or working groups
 of technical representatives of Committee members to advise the Committee
 on specific matters.
 (g) EXPENSES- While away from their homes or regular places of business in
 the performance of service for the Fish and Wildlife Advisory Committee,
 members and their technical representatives shall be allowed travel expenses,
 including a per diem allowance in lieu of subsistence, in the same manner
 as persons employed intermittently in government service are allowed travel
 expenses under section 5703 of title 5, United States Code. Any Committee
 member or technical representative who is an employee of an agency or
 governmental unit of the United States or State of California and is eligible
 for travel expenses from that agency or unit for performing services for the
 Committee shall not be eligible for travel expenses under this subsection.
 (h) GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES- Members of the Fish and Wildlife Advisory Committee
 and technical representatives who are full-time officers or employees of
 the United States or the State of California shall receive no additional
 pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Committee.
 (i) FEDERAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE ACT- Except as provided in this section,
 the terms and provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act, Public
 Law 92-463, as amended, (5 U.S.C. App. 2), shall apply to the Fish and
 Wildlife Advisory Committee.
 (j) TERMINATION- The Fish and Wildlife Advisory Committee shall cease to
 exist on December 31, 2010.
SEC. 10. CENTRAL VALLEY PROJECT TRANSFER ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is hereby established the `Central Valley Project
 Transfer Advisory Committee,' hereafter referred to as the `Transfer
 Advisory Committee.'
 (b) MEMBERSHIP- The Transfer Advisory Committee shall be comprised of
 sixteen individuals, appointed as follows:
 (1) Eight appointed by the Governor of California, one to represent each
 of the following organizations and interests:
 (A) California Resources Agency;
 (B) California State Water Resources Control Board;
 (C) Central Valley Project agricultural water contractors;
 (D) Central Valley Project municipal and industrial water contractors;
 (E) Central Valley Project power contractors;
 (F) environmental organizations;
 (G) waterfowl conservation organizations; and
 (H) fishery conservation organizations.
 (2) One appointed by the president pro tempore of the California State
 Senate.
 (3) One appointed by the Speaker of the California State Assembly.
 (4) Two appointed by the Secretary of the United States Department of the
 Interior to represent individually the United States Fish and Wildlife
 Service and Bureau of Reclamation.
 (5) The Inspector General of the Department of the Interior or his or
 her designee.
 (6) The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency of his or
 her designee.
 (7) The Comptroller General of the United States or his or her designee.
 (8) One appointed by the Hoopa Valley Tribe.
 (c) DUTIES- The Transfer Advisory Committee shall prepare a report to
 Congress and the President on all issues associated with transfer of all
 Central Valley Project facilities and assets, assuming, first, that the
 transfer would be to the State of California, assuming, second that the
 transfer would be to Central Valley Project contractors, and assuming, third,
 that the transfer would be to a Commission with the members appointed by
 the Governor of California and the Secretary that would jointly operate
 the California State Water Project and the Central Valley Project. The
 Transfer Advisory Committee shall provide recommendations on which of
 these transfer options best serves the interests of the United States and
 the State of California, and on legislative and administrative measures
 required to execute such transfer which would ensure that--
 (1) the fish and wildlife protection and restoration goals of this Act
 are achieved;
 (2) the reserved fishing and water rights of affected Indian tribes
 are preserved, and the ability of the United States to meet its trust
 obligations with respect to such tribal assets is maintained;
 (3) the Secretary's contractual obligations and rights associated with
 the Central Valley Project are fulfilled;
 (4) the operations of the Central Valley Project and the California State
 Water Project are integrated to the maximum extent practicable; and
 (5) Federal expenditures associated with the Central Valley Project are
 minimized.
 (d) CHAIRMANSHIP AND VOTING- The Transfer Advisory Committee shall be
 cochaired by the Inspector General of the U.S. Department of the Interior
 and any individual selected by the Governor of California from among the
 Transfer Advisory Committee members appointed by the Governor of California
 pursuant to paragraph (a)(1) of this section. The Committee shall operate
 with the objective of achieving consensus, but may provide recommendations
 based on a majority vote.
 (e) FEDERAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE ACT- Except as provided herein, the terms
 and provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act, Public Law 92-463,
 as amended (5 U.S.C. App. 2), shall apply to the Advisory Committee.
 (f) ADMINISTRATOR- The Secretary, in cooperation with the State of
 California, shall provide the Transfer Advisory Committee with necessary
 administrative and technical support service, including information
 relevant to the functions of the Committee. The Committee shall determine
 its organization and prescribe the practices and procedures for carrying
 out its functions, and may establish committees or working groups of
 technical representatives of Committee members to advise the Committee on
 specific matters.
 (g) EXPENSES- While away from their homes or regular places of business in
 the performance of service for the Transfer Advisory Committee, members and
 their technical representatives shall be allowed travel expenses, including
 a per diem allowance in lieu of subsistence, in the same manner as persons
 employed intermittently in government service are allowed travel expenses
 under section 5703 of title 5, United States Code. Any Committee member or
 technical representative who is an employee of an agency or governmental
 unit of the United States or State of California and is eligible for travel
 expenses from that agency or unit for performing services for the Committee
 shall not be eligible for travel expenses under this subsection.
 (h) GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES- Members of the Transfer Advisory Committee and
 technical representatives who are full-time officers or employees of the
 United States or the State of California shall receive no additional pay,
 allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Committee.
 (i) REGULAR MEETINGS REQUIRED- The Transfer Advisory Committee shall meet
 at the call of the cochairs and, in any event, not less than once every
 three months following enactment of this Act.
 (j) DEADLINE FOR SUBMISSION OF REPORT- The Transfer Advisory Committee shall
 submit the report as required by subsection (c) of this section not later
 than December 31, 1993. The report shall be submitted to the President of the
 United States, the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate,
 the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate, the Committee on Interior
 and Insular Affairs and the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries of
 the House of Representatives, and the Committee on Appropriations of the
 House of Representatives.
 (k) TERMINATION- The Transfer Advisory Committee shall terminate ninety
 days after submission of such report.
SEC. 11. SAN FRANCISCO BAY AND DELTA WETLAND RESTORATION PROGRAM.
 (a) PROGRAM AUTHORIZED- The Secretary, in cooperation with the Secretary of
 the Army, and in consultation with the State of California, San Francisco
 Bay area port authorities, fishery and waterfowl conservation interests,
 and the Fish and Wildlife Advisory Committee shall investigate and, if
 feasible, develop and implement a program using dredged material to restore,
 protect, and expand San Francisco Bay and Delta wetlands for the purposes
 of recruitment and survival of waterfowl, fish, and other wetland dependent
 species, flood control, water quality improvement, and sedimentation control.
 (b) SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS- The program developed under this section shall
 consider a broad range of upland disposal and give emphasis to restoration,
 protection, and expansion of wetlands supporting abundant and diverse
 wetland ecosystems, including, but not limited to--
 (1) high primary productivity and functioning food chains;
 (2) seasonal values for waterfowl breeding, nesting, staging, and wintering;
 (3) habitat values for migrating anadromous fish; and
 (4) protection from predation and disease.
 (c) QUALITY OF DREDGE MATERIALS- The program developed under this section
 shall ensure that dredge materials used for wetland restoration, protection,
 or expansion shall be of appropriate quality for such purposes.
SEC. 12. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary
 to carry out the provisions of this Act. Funds appropriated under this
 section shall remain available until expended.
SEC. 13. SIPHON REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT.
 (a) Congress finds that the prestressed concrete pipe siphons installed in
 the Hayden-Rhodes Aqueduct portion of the Central Arizona Project designed
 and constructed by the Secretary pursuant to the Colorado River Basin
 Project Act (43 U.S.C. 1501 et seq.) have been determined to be defective,
 inadequate and unsuitable for aqueduct purposes and must be replaced or
 substantial repairs completed for the transfer of the operation of the
 Project to its local sponsor.
 (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law or contract, costs incurred
 in the repair, modification or replacement, together with associated
 costs, of the Hayden-Rhodes Aqueduct siphons at Salt River, New River,
 Hassayampa River, Jackrabbit Wash, Centennial Wash and Aqua Fria River,
 all features of the Central Arizona Project, shall be borne by the United
 States and shall be nonreimbursable and nonreturnable.
SEC. 14. BUFFALO BILL DAM AND RESERVOIR, SHOSHONE PROJECT, PICK-SLOAN MISSOURI
BASIN PROGRAM, WYOMING.
 There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be required due
 to increased costs of construction attributable to delays in enactment
 of any additional authorization of appropriations for the construction
 of the Buffalo Bill Dam and Reservoir modifications and recreational
 facilities: Provided, That such additional sums shall be nonreimbursable
 and nonreturnable under the Federal reclamation laws.'.'
SEC. 15. DEMONSTRATION PROJECT.
 The Secretary is authorized and directed to undertake a demonstration
 project in the City and County of San Francisco to examine the feasibility
 and effectiveness of using advanced ecologically engineered technology for
 water reclamation and reuse in accordance with the title 22 standards of
 the California Water Code. `Advanced ecologically engineered technology'
 refers to a greenhouse-based, ecologically engineered technology which
 employs highly populated pond and marsh ecosystems to produce water for
 reclamation and reuse. One half of the costs associated with implementation
 of this subsection shall be borne by the United States as a nonreimbursable
 cost; the other half shall be borne by the State of California and the
 City and County of San Francisco.
SEC. 16. RECREATION.
 The first section of the Act of August 27, 1954 (16 U.S.C. 695d), is
 amended by inserting `and also for the use and enjoyment of the lands,
 waters, and related facilities thereof for recreation,' after `fish and
 wildlife purposes,'.
Passed the House of Representatives June 18, 1992.
Attest:
Clerk.
HR 5099 EH----2
HR 5099 EH----3
HR 5099 EH----4
HR 5099 EH----5