[Congressional Bills 117th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 4551 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

<DOC>

117th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 S. 4551

 To provide a consumer protection framework necessary to support the 
growth of accessible, affordable, and accountable financing options for 
 postsecondary education, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 July 19, 2022

 Mr. Young (for himself, Mr. Warner, Mr. Rubio, and Mr. Coons) 
introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the 
 Committee on Finance

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To provide a consumer protection framework necessary to support the 
growth of accessible, affordable, and accountable financing options for 
 postsecondary education, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``ISA Student 
Protection Act of 2022''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Definitions.
Sec. 3. Effective date.
 TITLE I--NEW CONSUMER PROTECTIONS SPECIFIC TO INCOME SHARE AGREEMENTS

Sec. 101. Prohibition on acceleration; treatment of early completion 
 mechanisms.
Sec. 102. Consumer protections for educational income share agreements.
Sec. 103. Discharge protections for ISA recipients.
Sec. 104. Limitation on amounts treated as income under educational 
 ISAs.
 TITLE II--TAX TREATMENT OF INCOME SHARE AGREEMENTS

Sec. 201. Tax treatment.
 TITLE III--DISCLOSURES APPLICABLE TO INCOME SHARE AGREEMENTS

Sec. 301. Disclosures.
Sec. 302. Required disclosures for income share agreements.
Sec. 303. Additional requirements for educational ISAs.
Sec. 304. Advertising of income share agreements.
 TITLE IV--OTHER CLARIFICATIONS TO SUPPORT ISA PROGRAMS

Sec. 401. Treatment under securities laws.
Sec. 402. Treatment under bankruptcy laws.
Sec. 403. Consent to continuing release of taxpayer information under 
 educational ISAs and income share 
 agreements.
Sec. 404. Interplay with the Higher Education Act of 1965.
 TITLE V--APPLYING EXISTING CONSUMER PROTECTIONS TO INCOME SHARE 
 AGREEMENTS

Sec. 501. Equal access to income share agreements.
Sec. 502. Prohibition on requiring preauthorized electronic fund 
 transfers under the Electronic Fund 
 Transfer Act.
Sec. 503. Treatment under the Fair Credit Reporting Act.
Sec. 504. Treatment under the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act.
Sec. 505. Treatment of educational income share agreements for purposes 
 of Military Lending Act.
Sec. 506. Treatment under the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act.
Sec. 507. Preservation of consumers' claims and defenses.
 TITLE VI--RELATION TO OTHER LAWS

Sec. 601. Treatment under other laws.
Sec. 602. Relation to State law.
 TITLE VII--ENFORCEMENT AND REPORTING

Sec. 701. Enforcement.
Sec. 702. Reporting requirement for the Bureau of Consumer Financial 
 Protection.

SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act:
 (1) Adverse action.--The term ``adverse action''--
 (A) means a denial or revocation of rights under an 
 income share agreement, a change in the terms of an 
 existing income share agreement, or a refusal to grant 
 an income share agreement in substantially the amount 
 or on substantially the terms requested; and
 (B) does not include a refusal to extend additional 
 disbursements or amounts financed under an income share 
 agreement under an existing income share agreement 
 arrangement if--
 (i) the applicant is delinquent or 
 otherwise in default; or
 (ii) such additional amounts would exceed a 
 previously established limit on the amount 
 financed.
 (2) Amount financed.--The term ``amount financed'' means, 
 with respect to an income share agreement, the amounts credited 
 or advanced by the ISA provider to the ISA recipient or on 
 behalf of the ISA recipient.
 (3) Annual percentage rate.--The term ``annual percentage 
 rate'' means the annual percentage rate described in section 
 1026.22(a) of title 12, Code of Federal Regulations.
 (4) Applicant.--The term ``applicant'' means, with respect 
 to an income share agreement, any individual who applies to an 
 ISA provider directly or indirectly for an extension, renewal, 
 or continuation of an income share agreement and includes 
 applications for an additional amount exceeding a previously 
 established limit on the amount financed.
 (5) Bureau.--The term ``Bureau'' means the Bureau of 
 Consumer Financial Protection.
 (6) Comparable loan.--The term ``comparable loan'' means, 
 with respect to an income share agreement, a loan that--
 (A) has an amount financed, as described in section 
 1026.18(b) of title 12, Code of Federal Regulations, 
 that is equal to the total amount financed, as defined 
 in paragraph (2), for the income share agreement;
 (B) has--
 (i) the same disbursements or financing 
 dates, payment start date, and frequency of 
 payments as the income share agreement; and
 (ii) an expected number of payments equal 
 to the ISA maximum number of payments; and
 (C) is fully amortized over the ISA duration, with 
 substantially equal periodic payments of principal and 
 interest.
 (7) Consumer.--The term ``consumer'' means a natural person 
 using an income share agreement for personal, family, or 
 household purposes.
 (8) Consumer protection regulation.--The term ``consumer 
 protection regulation'' means a regulation that the Bureau is 
 authorized to prescribe under Federal consumer financial law, 
 as defined in section 1002 of the Consumer Financial Protection 
 Act of 2010 (12 U.S.C. 5481).
 (9) Covered educational institution.--The term ``covered 
 educational institution''--
 (A) means--
 (i) an educational institution that would 
 be an institution of higher education, if such 
 determination was made without regard to the 
 institution's accreditation status; and
 (ii) an institution-affiliated 
 organization, as defined in section 151 of the 
 Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1019); 
 and
 (B) includes an agent, officer, or employee of the 
 institution of higher education or institution-
 affiliated organization.
 (10) Date of the isa.--The term ``date of the ISA'' means 
 the date that is the later of--
 (A) the date on which the income share agreement is 
 signed by the ISA recipient and the ISA provider; or
 (B) the date on which the income share agreement is 
 accepted by the ISA recipient and the ISA provider.
 (11) Director.--The term ``Director'' means the Director of 
 the Bureau.
 (12) Disbursement.--The term ``disbursement'', when used 
 with respect to an income share agreement, means the advance of 
 ISA financing to an ISA recipient or the advancing of ISA 
 financing to a third party on the ISA recipient's behalf.
 (13) Educational isa; educational income share agreement.--
 The term ``educational ISA'' or ``educational income share 
 agreement''--
 (A) means an income share agreement that--
 (i) is not made, insured, or guaranteed 
 under title IV of the Higher Education Act of 
 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070 et seq.) or another 
 federally subsidized educational finance 
 program;
 (ii) pays amounts to, or on behalf of, the 
 ISA recipient for--
 (I) costs associated with a 
 postsecondary training program, or any 
 other program designed to increase the 
 individual's human capital, 
 employability, or earning potential 
 (and not limited to programs eligible 
 to participate under title IV of the 
 Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 1070 et seq.));
 (II) any personal expenses (such as 
 books, supplies, transportation, and 
 living costs) incurred by the 
 individual while enrolled in a program 
 described in subclause (I);
 (III) any other costs or expenses 
 included in the definition of a 
 ``qualified higher education expense'', 
 as defined in section 529(e)(3)(A) of 
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; and
 (IV) the refinancing of loans or 
 income share agreements used for the 
 purposes described in subclauses (I) 
 through (III), and without regard as to 
 whether the income share agreement is 
 provided by the educational institution 
 that the ISA recipient attends; and
 (B) does not include a loan, open-end credit, or 
 any loan or income share agreement that is secured by 
 real property or a dwelling.
 (14) Education loan.--The term ``education loan'' means--
 (A) a loan made, insured, or guaranteed under title 
 IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070 
 et seq.) or any other loan made, insured, or guaranteed 
 by the Federal Government; or
 (B) a private education loan, as such term is 
 defined in section 140(a) of the Truth in Lending Act 
 (15 U.S.C. 1650(a)).
 (15) Income.--The term ``income'' means the ISA Recipient's 
 income, as established in the income share agreement under 
 section 302(d)(8), subject to section 104.
 (16) Income share agreement.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``income share 
 agreement'' means a financial product whereby--
 (i)(I) the ISA provider credits or advances 
 financing to the ISA recipient or to a third 
 party on behalf of the ISA recipient; or
 (II) if the ISA provider is a merchant 
 financing the sale of goods or services to the 
 ISA recipient via the financial product, the 
 ISA provider credits the amount financed toward 
 the purchase of such goods or services;
 (ii) the ISA recipient is obligated to make 
 periodic ISA payments (if any become due) to 
 the ISA provider in the future calculated based 
 upon and determined by the ISA recipient's 
 future income;
 (iii) the ISA recipient's obligation to 
 make payments (if any become due) to the ISA 
 provider is conditional on the ISA recipient's 
 income exceeding the income threshold set in 
 the income share agreement;
 (iv) there is an ISA duration after which 
 the obligation is complete regardless of how 
 much has been paid (as long as the ISA 
 recipient has paid any prior amounts due);
 (v) the ISA provider and the ISA recipient 
 enter into an agreement that, as of the date of 
 the ISA, includes each element described in 
 clauses (i) through (iv); and
 (vi) the agreement states that it is an 
 income share agreement and subject to this Act.
 (B) Special rule.--If a provider offers a financial 
 product that meets the requirements of clauses (i) 
 through (v) but does not include the statement 
 described in clause (vi), then the financial product is 
 not an income share agreement and shall be considered 
 credit.
 (17) Income threshold.--The term ``income threshold'' means 
 a fixed dollar amount that is the minimum income per payment 
 period that an ISA recipient is required to earn before the ISA 
 recipient is required to make a payment on an income share 
 agreement for such payment period.
 (18) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 102 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 1002).
 (19) ISA duration.--The term ``ISA duration'' means the 
 maximum length of time during which the income of an ISA 
 recipient can be subject to an ISA payment (absent periods of 
 payment relief pause at the request of the ISA recipient).
 (20) ISA financing.--The term ``ISA financing'' means the 
 disbursement of funds by an ISA provider under an income share 
 agreement.
 (21) ISA maximum number of payments.--The term ``ISA 
 maximum number of payments'' means the maximum number of ISA 
 payments (during ISA payment periods in which the ISA 
 recipient's income is greater than the income threshold) that 
 an ISA recipient could be required to make.
 (22) ISA payment.--The term ``ISA payment''--
 (A) means the amount of an ISA recipient's periodic 
 payment obligation, based on the terms of the income 
 share agreement, during any payment period for which 
 the ISA recipient's income is greater than the income 
 threshold; and
 (B) is calculated using the ISA payment calculation 
 method, based on the ISA recipient's income for the 
 specified period.
 (23) ISA payment calculation method.--The term ``ISA 
 payment calculation method'' means the ISA percentage, or the 
 schedule of fixed dollar amounts based on the ISA recipient's 
 income for a payment period, that is used to calculate an ISA 
 recipient's ISA payment under the income share agreement.
 (24) ISA payment window.--The ``ISA payment window'' means 
 the period during which the ISA recipient is required to make 
 ISA payments in periods where the ISA recipient's income is 
 greater than the income threshold for the income share 
 agreement.
 (25) ISA percentage.--The term ``ISA percentage'' means a 
 percentage of income (or schedule of percentages of income 
 based on the ISA recipient's income in a given ISA payment 
 period) used to calculate an ISA recipient's ISA payment 
 pursuant to an income share agreement.
 (26) ISA provider.--The term ``ISA provider'' means a 
 person that provides financing to an ISA recipient pursuant to 
 an income share agreement or, in the case of a person who is a 
 merchant financing the sale of goods or services to the ISA 
 recipient, the merchant.
 (27) ISA recipient.--The term ``ISA recipient'' means a 
 consumer that receives financing from an ISA provider pursuant 
 to an income share agreement.
 (28) Loan.--The term ``loan'' means a financial product 
 that--
 (A) is credit, as defined in section 1026.2(a) of 
 title 12, Code of Federal Regulations;
 (B) is not an income share agreement; and
 (C) involves the advance of a sum of money to a 
 borrower under an obligation to repay the principal 
 with a corresponding right to defer payment of the 
 principal balance with or without interest.
 (29) Loan comparison.--The term ``loan comparison'' means 
 the comparison table required under section 302(d)(9).
 (30) Payment relief pause.--The term ``payment relief 
 pause'' means a period of time that--
 (A) is requested by the ISA recipient during which 
 any payment obligation the ISA recipient would have is 
 suspended; and
 (B) does not count toward an ISA recipient's ISA 
 payment window or ISA maximum number of payments.
 (31) Person.--The term ``person'' means a natural person or 
 an organization, including a corporation, partnership, 
 proprietorship, association, cooperative, estate, trust, or 
 government unit.
 (32) Poverty line.--The term ``poverty line'' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 673 of the Community Services 
 Block Grant Act (42 U.S.C. 9902).
 (33) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Education.
 (34) State.--The term ``State'' means the several States of 
 the United States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the 
 District of Columbia, Guam, American Samoa, the Virgin Islands, 
 the Northern Mariana Islands, the Federated States of 
 Micronesia, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, and the 
 Republic of Palau.
 (35) State law.--The term ``State law'' means--
 (A) any law, decision, rule, regulation, or other 
 action having the effect of a law of any State or any 
 political subdivision of a State, or any agency or 
 instrumentality of a State or political subdivision of 
 a State; and
 (B) any law of the United States applicable only to 
 the District of Columbia.

SEC. 3. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 This Act, and the amendments made by this Act, shall take effect on 
the date that is 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act.

 TITLE I--NEW CONSUMER PROTECTIONS SPECIFIC TO INCOME SHARE AGREEMENTS

SEC. 101. PROHIBITION ON ACCELERATION; TREATMENT OF EARLY COMPLETION 
 MECHANISMS.

 (a) No Acceleration.--
 (1) In general.--An ISA provider shall not include any 
 mechanism in an income share agreement that accelerates an 
 amount against an ISA recipient in the event of a default under 
 the income share agreement.
 (2) Effect of acceleration clause.--Any agreement with an 
 acceleration mechanism described in paragraph (1) shall, for 
 purposes of all Federal law, be treated as credit under Federal 
 law and shall not be treated as an income share agreement.
 (b) No Impact on Early Completion Mechanisms.--Notwithstanding 
subsection (a)--
 (1) an income share agreement may contain an early 
 completion provision that allows the ISA recipient to terminate 
 the income share agreement prior to any trigger terminating 
 further obligations under the income share agreement (such as a 
 total cap on payments due to the ISA provider or other rights 
 to partially or fully terminate further obligations under the 
 income share agreement) if the early completion provision is 
 optional to the ISA recipient and within the ISA recipient's 
 control; and
 (2) such early completion mechanism shall not be treated as 
 a form of acceleration prohibited under subsection (a), an 
 early completion penalty, or a prepayment penalty.

SEC. 102. CONSUMER PROTECTIONS FOR EDUCATIONAL INCOME SHARE AGREEMENTS.

 (a) Monthly Payment Affordability for Educational ISAs.--
 (1) Maximum isa income obligation for educational isas.--An 
 ISA provider shall not enter into an educational ISA with an 
 ISA recipient if the ISA recipient would be committing more 
 than a total of 20 percent of the student's future income 
 toward the payment of such educational ISA and all other 
 educational ISAs of the ISA recipient.
 (2) Self-certification.--In calculating the portion of a 
 student's future income for purposes of this subsection, the 
 ISA provider may rely on a self-certification from the ISA 
 recipient regarding the ISA recipient's outstanding educational 
 ISAs, as of the date of the agreement.
 (3) Calculation methodology and requirements.--
 (A) In general.--For the purposes of calculating 
 the portion of an ISA recipient's future income that 
 would be consumed by the educational ISA for which the 
 ISA recipient has applied and all other educational 
 ISAs of the ISA recipient as of the date of the 
 agreement, the ISA provider shall calculate the 
 aggregate future burden--
 (i) in any case where the income threshold 
 of the educational ISA is less than the maximum 
 described in subparagraph (B), at hypothetical 
 future income levels from such income threshold 
 to the such maximum, in increments of $10,000; 
 and
 (ii) in any case where the income threshold 
 of the educational ISA is equal to or greater 
 than such maximum, at such income threshold.
 (B) Maximum.--The maximum described in this 
 subparagraph shall be the greater of--
 (i)(I) for fiscal year 2023, $70,000; or
 (ii) for fiscal year 2024 and each 
 subsequent fiscal year, the maximum for the 
 preceding fiscal year--
 (I) increased by the percentage 
 increase in the consumer price index; 
 and
 (II) rounded to the nearest $1,000; 
 and
 (iii) in the case of an ISA recipient who 
 has (as of the date of the agreement), or has 
 applied for, an educational ISA that uses a 
 schedule of income percentages or a schedule of 
 fixed amounts as the ISA payment calculation 
 method, the highest income level referenced by 
 a schedule for any such educational ISA.
 (C) Calculation.--
 (i) In general.--The terms of an 
 educational ISA for which the ISA recipient has 
 applied cannot cause the student's aggregate 
 future burden (defined as the total amounts 
 expected to be due under all educational ISAs 
 of the ISA recipient as of the date of the 
 agreement, and all educational ISAs for which 
 the ISA recipient is applying) to exceed the 
 limit in paragraph (1) at any of the income 
 increments described in subparagraph (A).
 (ii) Calculation method.--For the purpose 
 of calculating the percentage burden of an 
 educational ISA at a given future income level, 
 the ISA provider shall, as applicable, use--
 (I) the income percentage that 
 would be applicable for the educational 
 ISA at such income level; or
 (II) the fixed amount applicable 
 for the educational ISA at such income 
 level, divided by such income level.
 (4) Protections during periods of low earnings.--
 (A) In general.--The educational ISA shall provide 
 that when an ISA recipient has an income that is equal 
 to or below the income threshold of the educational 
 ISA, the ISA payment obligation is zero dollars.
 (B) Threshold amount.--The income threshold for an 
 educational ISA shall be an amount such that the 
 difference between the ISA recipient's income for the 
 payment period, minus the subtraction of any ISA 
 obligation, is not less than 200 percent of the poverty 
 line for a single person (as defined in section 673 of 
 the Community Services Block Grant Act (42 U.S.C. 
 9902)), prorated for the payment period.
 (5) Required payment relief pauses.--An educational ISA 
 shall offer not less than 3 months of voluntary payment relief 
 pauses (as long as the ISA recipient's current income at the 
 time of requesting the payment relief pause is equal to or less 
 than 400 percent of the Federal poverty line (as defined in 
 section 673 of the Community Services Block Grant Act (42 
 U.S.C. 9902)) for a single individual) for every 30 income-
 determined payments required under the educational ISA.
 (b) Ensuring Appropriate Risk Sharing for Educational ISAs.--The 
payments required under an educational ISA for an individual with 
income during the payment term that is less than or equal to 300 
percent of the poverty line for a single individual, prorated for the 
payment period, shall not exceed the payments on a comparable loan that 
bears interest at a rate less than or equal to one-half of the annual 
percentage rate of interest limitation under section 987(b) of title 
10, United States Code.
 (c) Limits on Duration of Educational ISA Obligation.--
 (1) ISA maximum number of payments.--The ISA maximum number 
 of payments shall not exceed 240 monthly payments.
 (2) ISA duration.--The ISA duration of an educational ISA 
 shall not exceed 360 months (except in the case of an extension 
 requested by the ISA recipient).
 (d) Non-Interference.--An educational ISA shall not be construed to 
give the contract holder any rights over an individual's actions other 
than as provided in this Act.

SEC. 103. DISCHARGE PROTECTIONS FOR ISA RECIPIENTS.

 (a) Permanent and Total Disability.--In any case where an ISA 
recipient would be deemed totally and permanently disabled for purposes 
of benefits administered by the Department of Veterans Affairs or the 
Social Security Administration (determined without regard to whether 
the recipient receives such benefits), all further obligations of the 
ISA recipient under the income share agreement shall terminate, except 
those accruing before the date such a determination would apply.
 (b) Death.--Upon the death of an ISA recipient, all further 
obligations of the ISA recipient under the income share agreement shall 
terminate, except those obligations accruing before the ISA recipient's 
date of death.

SEC. 104. LIMITATION ON AMOUNTS TREATED AS INCOME UNDER EDUCATIONAL 
 ISAS.

 (a) In General.--For purposes of calculating the obligation of an 
ISA recipient to make ISA payments under an educational ISA, the income 
of the ISA recipient shall not include--
 (1) the income of any child or dependent of the ISA 
 recipient;
 (2) any item of income which is not included in the gross 
 income of the ISA recipient;
 (3) any amount received from an individual retirement plan 
 (as defined in section 7701 of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986), a pension, or an annuity; or
 (4) any social security benefit (as defined in section 86 
 of such Code).
 (b) Estimating Income.--
 (1) In general.--In the event that an ISA recipient fails 
 to provide income documentation as reasonably required by the 
 income share agreement, an ISA provider may assign an amount of 
 income to the participant and compute the monthly payment 
 amount for the participant by any of the following methods, to 
 the extent disclosed in the income share agreement:
 (A) Assigning an income amount obtained from a 
 reasonably reliable third party or a consumer reporting 
 agency, as defined in section 603(f) of the Fair Credit 
 Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681a(f)).
 (B) If the participant previously provided income 
 documentation or has had an income assigned in the 
 preceding 1-year period, assuming that such income has 
 increased by up to 10 percent, but such increase may 
 not be applied more than once per 1-year period.
 (C) Contacting the employer of the participant, or 
 any person or entity reasonably believed to the 
 employer of the participant, to obtain, verify, or 
 update the income information of the participant.
 (D) Contacting the State revenue department or the 
 Internal Revenue Service to obtain the most recent 
 information available about the income of the 
 participant.
 (E) For educational ISA providers, in any case 
 where the ISA provider has no prior history of income 
 information from the participant, assigning a 
 reasonable qualified income based on--
 (i) the median income for individuals 
 working in the profession for which the 
 educational program of the participant was 
 intended to prepare the participant, as 
 determined by information published by the 
 Bureau of Labor Statistics or other reasonably 
 reliable publicly available data sources; or
 (ii) the median income of participants who 
 attended the same or a reasonably comparable 
 covered educational program or course of study, 
 as determined by information published by the 
 Bureau of Labor Statistics or other reasonably 
 reliable publicly available data sources.
 (2) Notification.--If an ISA provider assigns an income to 
 the income share agreement of a participant, the ISA provider--
 (A) shall notify the participant in the monthly 
 billing statement, and in each billing statement 
 thereafter while the assigned income remains applicable 
 to the income share agreement of the participant, that 
 income has been assigned and of the rights of the 
 participant under this section;
 (B) in any tax year for which the ISA provider has 
 made an assumption about an individual's income using 
 any of the methods described in the prior paragraph and 
 if the participant has authorized ongoing access to the 
 participant's return information under section 403, 
 shall request such information in each year of the 
 payment term;
 (C) if the participant does provide income 
 information as reasonably required by the income share 
 agreement within 1 year of the date on which the ISA 
 provider notified the participant that assigned income 
 shall be applied to the income share agreement or if 
 the ISA provider receives updated income information 
 through return information authorized under section 
 403, then, within 15 days after the date on which the 
 ISA provider receives such information, shall--
 (i) update each prior instance in which 
 assigned income was applied using such new 
 income information; and
 (ii) reconcile any difference in amounts 
 owed by the participant based on those updates 
 to prior income; and
 (D) if the participant provides income information 
 more than 1 year after the ISA provider first assigned 
 income to the income share agreement of the 
 participant, may, but shall not be obligated to, update 
 each prior instance in which assigned income was 
 applied using the income information provided by the 
 participant.
 (3) Records retention.--An ISA provider that assigns income 
 to an income share agreement shall retain all applicable 
 records relating to the method and data sources used to make 
 such estimation for 3 years after the end of that income share 
 agreement.

 TITLE II--TAX TREATMENT OF INCOME SHARE AGREEMENTS

SEC. 201. TAX TREATMENT.

 (a) In General.--Subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following:

 ``PART XII--RULES RELATING TO QUALIFIED EDUCATIONAL INCOME SHARING 
 AGREEMENTS

``Sec. 293. Rules related to qualified educational ISAs.

``SEC. 293. RULES RELATED TO QUALIFIED EDUCATIONAL ISAS.

 ``(a) In General.--For purposes of this title, an educational ISA 
shall not be treated as indebtedness.
 ``(b) Treatment of ISA Recipient.--
 ``(1) Income exclusion.--In the case of an individual--
 ``(A) In general.--Gross income shall not include 
 so much of the amount received under an educational ISA 
 as does not exceed amounts paid or credited to such 
 individual under such qualified educational ISA for 
 costs and expenses described in section 
 2(13)(A)(ii)(II) of the ISA Student Protection Act of 
 2022.
 ``(B) Difference in payments.--In any case in which 
 the amount provided to the individual under the 
 educational ISA exceeds the total payments made by the 
 individual under the educational ISA, gross income 
 shall not include the amount of such excess.
 ``(2) Certain amounts treated as interest on qualified 
 education loans.--
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes of section 221, the 
 amount described in subparagraph (B) with respect to 
 any educational ISA shall be treated as interest paid 
 by the taxpayer during the taxable year on a qualified 
 education loan.
 ``(B) Amount described.--The amount described in 
 this subparagraph with respect to any educational ISA 
 is, for any taxable year, the excess of--
 ``(i) amounts paid by the taxpayer to 
 another person under the terms of a qualified 
 educational ISA during such taxable year, over
 ``(ii) the excess of--
 ``(I) the aggregate amount received 
 under such qualified educational ISA 
 during such taxable year and all 
 preceding taxable years, over
 ``(II) the aggregate amounts paid 
 by the taxpayer to another person under 
 the terms of such qualified educational 
 ISA during all preceding taxable years.
 ``(3) Amounts treated as educational assistance.--For 
 purposes of section 127(c)(1)(B), amounts paid by an employer 
 in satisfaction of obligations of an employee under a qualified 
 educational ISA shall be treated in the same manner as a 
 payment of principal or interest on a qualified education loan.
 ``(c) Treatment of ISA Funder.--Gross income shall not include so 
much of any amount received as a payment from a recipient under an 
educational ISA funded by the taxpayer as does not exceed the excess 
of--
 ``(1) the aggregate amount of financing provided by the 
 taxpayer under such educational ISA, over
 ``(2) the aggregate amount of such payments taken into 
 account under this subsection by the taxpayer for all preceding 
 taxable years.
 ``(d) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Educational isa.--The term `educational ISA' has the 
 meaning given such term under section 2 of the ISA Student 
 Protection Act of 2022.
 ``(2) Qualified educational isa.--The term `qualified 
 educational ISA' means an educational ISA that is extended for 
 expenses at an institution of higher education that 
 participates in a student financial assistance program under 
 title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070 et 
 seq.).''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--The table of parts for subchapter B of 
chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at 
the end the following new item:

 ``PART XII--Rules Relating to Qualified Educational Income Sharing 
 Agreements''.

 TITLE III--DISCLOSURES APPLICABLE TO INCOME SHARE AGREEMENTS

SEC. 301. DISCLOSURES.

 The following disclosures shall be provided to ISA recipients:
 (1) In general.--An ISA provider (regardless of whether the 
 ISA provided is an educational ISA) shall provide, to any 
 individual that applies for or signs an income share agreement, 
 a written document that clearly and simply discloses the 
 information required by this Act.
 (2) Application.--The provisions of this title shall not 
 apply to--
 (A) income share agreements primarily for business, 
 commercial, or agricultural purposes;
 (B) government or governmental agencies or 
 instrumentalities;
 (C) organizations; or
 (D) transactions for which the Bureau, by rule, 
 determines that coverage under the provisions of this 
 title are not necessary to carry out the purposes of 
 this title.
 (3) Regulations.--Not later than 270 days after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Bureau shall prescribe regulations 
 to carry out the purposes of this title, which may contain such 
 additional requirements, classifications, differentiations, or 
 other provisions, and may provide for such adjustments and 
 exceptions for all or any class of transactions, as in the 
 judgment of the Bureau are necessary or proper to effectuate 
 the purposes of this title, to prevent circumvention or evasion 
 thereof, or to facilitate compliance therewith.
 (4) Model disclosure forms and clauses.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 270 days after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Bureau shall publish 
 a model integrated disclosure for educational ISAs and 
 a model integrated disclosure for income share 
 agreements generally in order to facilitate compliance 
 with the disclosure requirements of this Act and aid 
 ISA recipients in understanding the transaction by 
 utilizing readily understandable language to simplify 
 the technical nature of the disclosures.
 (B) Consideration.--In devising the disclosure 
 forms required under subparagraph (A), the Bureau shall 
 consider the use by ISA providers of data processing or 
 similar automated equipment.
 (C) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this title 
 may be construed to require an ISA provider to use any 
 model form or clause published by the Bureau under this 
 section.
 (D) Compliance.--An ISA provider shall be deemed to 
 be in compliance with the disclosure provisions of this 
 title with respect to other than numerical disclosures 
 if the ISA provider--
 (i) uses any appropriate model form or 
 clause as published by the Bureau under this 
 section; or
 (ii) uses any such model form or clause and 
 changes the form or clause by--
 (I) deleting any information that 
 is not required under this title; or
 (II) rearranging the format, if in 
 making such deletion or rearranging the 
 format, the ISA provider does not 
 affect the substance, clarity, or 
 meaningful sequence of the disclosure.
 (5) Procedures applicable for adoption of model forms and 
 clauses.--Model disclosure forms and clauses under this section 
 shall be adopted by the Bureau after notice duly given in the 
 Federal Register and an opportunity for public comment in 
 accordance with section 553 of title 5, United States Code.
 (6) Effective dates of regulations containing new 
 disclosure requirements.--
 (A) In general.--Any regulation of the Bureau, or 
 any amendment or interpretation thereof, requiring any 
 disclosure which differs from the disclosures 
 previously required by this title or any regulation of 
 the Bureau promulgated under this title shall have an 
 effective date of that October 1 which follows by not 
 less than 6 months the date of promulgation, except 
 that the Bureau may at its discretion take interim 
 action by regulation, amendment, or interpretation to 
 lengthen the period of time permitted for ISA providers 
 to adjust their forms to accommodate new requirements 
 or shorten the length of time for ISA providers to make 
 such adjustments when the ISA provider makes a specific 
 finding that such action is necessary to comply with 
 the findings of a court or to prevent unfair or 
 deceptive disclosure practices.
 (B) Compliance.--Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), 
 any ISA provider may comply with any such newly 
 promulgated disclosure requirements prior to the 
 effective date of the requirements.
 (7) Deference.--Notwithstanding any power granted to any 
 Federal agency under this Act, the deference that a court 
 affords to the Bureau with respect to a determination made by 
 the Bureau relating to the meaning or interpretation of any 
 provision of this Act, shall be applied as if the Bureau were 
 the only agency authorized to apply, enforce, interpret, or 
 administer the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 302. REQUIRED DISCLOSURES FOR INCOME SHARE AGREEMENTS.

 (a) Disclosures Requirements for All ISAs.--
 (1) In general.--The ISA provider shall make the 
 disclosures required by this section clearly and conspicuously 
 in writing, in a form that the ISA recipient may retain.
 (2) Electronic form.--The disclosures required by this 
 section may be provided to the ISA recipient in electronic form 
 in accordance with the Electronic Signatures in Global and 
 National Commerce Act (15 U.S.C. 7001 et seq.).
 (3) Other requirements.--The disclosures required by this 
 section shall--
 (A) be grouped together;
 (B) be segregated from anything that is not such a 
 disclosure; and
 (C) only contain information directly related to 
 the disclosures required under this section.
 (b) Use of Estimates.--If any information necessary for an accurate 
disclosure is unknown to the ISA provider, the ISA provider shall make 
the disclosure based on the best information reasonably available at 
the time the disclosure is provided to the ISA recipient, and shall 
state clearly that the disclosure is an estimate.
 (c) Multiple ISA Providers, Multiple ISA Recipients.--
 (1) Multiple isa providers.--In any case where an income 
 share agreement transaction involves more than one ISA 
 provider, only one set of disclosures shall be given and the 
 ISA providers shall agree among themselves which ISA provider 
 shall comply with the requirements that this title imposes on 
 any or all of the ISA providers.
 (2) Multiple isa recipients.--In any case where an income 
 share agreement transaction has more than one ISA recipient, 
 the disclosures may be made to any ISA recipient whose income 
 will be used to calculate the ISA payments due to the ISA 
 provider.
 (d) Content of Disclosures.--An ISA provider of an income share 
agreement (regardless of whether the income share agreement is an 
educational ISA) shall provide, to any person that applies for or signs 
a consumer income share agreement, a written document that clearly and 
simply discloses the following information:
 (1) A statement that the income share agreement is not a 
 fixed payment installment loan, and that the amount the ISA 
 recipient will be required to pay under the income share 
 agreement may be more or less than the amount financed by the 
 ISA provider and will vary in proportion to the ISA recipient's 
 future income. An ISA provider may satisfy the requirements of 
 this paragraph by providing a table that compares periodic 
 payments under the ISA at different income levels showing that 
 payments vary with income, or that also compares such periodic 
 payments under the ISA at different income levels with a loan 
 product.
 (2) In the case of an educational ISA, the following 
 statement: ``This income share agreement is not a grant or 
 scholarship. If your income is above the income Threshold, you 
 will have to make payments under this income share 
 agreement.''.
 (3) The following statement: ``Payments due under this 
 income share agreement are determined by your income. Your 
 payments are calculated using the ISA payment calculation 
 method described in your ISA. The amount you pay may be more 
 than, equal to, or less than the amount financed.''.
 (4) In a series of boxes or other device designed to 
 feature the following information more prominently than 
 elsewhere in the income share agreement disclosures, the 
 following information:
 (A) The term ``Amount Financed'' and the dollar 
 amount of the amount funded, followed by a description 
 that states, ``The amount of funds you will receive or 
 that will be credited on your behalf.''.
 (B) The term ``ISA Payment Calculation Method'' and 
 the following:
 (i) In the case of an ISA payment 
 calculation method that is a percentage (or 
 schedule of percentages), such percentage (or 
 schedule of percentages) followed by a 
 description that states, ``The percentage of 
 your income used to calculate your ISA 
 Payment.'' and, if the ISA payment calculation 
 method is a schedule of percentages, an 
 explanation of where the ISA recipient can 
 learn more about how the ISA recipient's income 
 percentage is determined.
 (ii) In the case of an ISA payment 
 calculation method that is a schedule of fixed 
 dollar amounts calculated based on the ISA 
 recipient's income for a payment period, the 
 schedule of fixed amounts (or a reference to 
 the location of the schedule in the ISA) 
 followed by a description that states, ``The 
 amount of your ISA payment will vary based on 
 your income. See your ISA for more 
 information.''.
 (C) The term ``Maximum Number of Income-Determined 
 Payments'' and the ISA maximum number of payments, 
 followed by a description that states, ``The maximum 
 number of ISA Payments you will make when your income 
 is above the income threshold.''.
 (D) The term ``Maximum Duration'' and the ISA 
 duration, followed by a description that states, ``The 
 maximum amount of time that you are required to make 
 income-determined payments, excluding any extensions 
 that you request.''.
 (E) The term ``Income Threshold'' and the income 
 threshold for the income share agreement, followed by a 
 description that states, ``The minimum income you must 
 make in order to trigger a payment obligation under 
 this income share agreement. If your income is less 
 than or equal to this income threshold, you will not 
 owe any ISA Payments for that period.''.
 (5) A statement that during periods in which the ISA 
 recipient's income is not above the income threshold--
 (A) the ISA recipient will not owe an ISA payment 
 for that period of time; and
 (B) any such period of non-payment will not count 
 towards the ISA maximum number of payments but will 
 count toward the ISA duration.
 (6) A statement that the obligations of the ISA recipient 
 under the income share agreement would be dischargeable in a 
 case under title 11, United States Code, in the same manner as 
 a loan that is not described in section 523(a)(8) of title 11, 
 United States Code.
 (7) A description of the terms under which the obligations 
 of the ISA recipient under the income share agreement shall be 
 extinguished in advance of the full ISA duration.
 (8) The definition of income to be used for purposes of 
 calculating the ISA recipient's obligation under the income 
 share agreement, subject to section 104(a).
 (9) A comparison table that includes the following:
 (A)(i) The amounts and number of ISA payments that 
 an ISA recipient would be required to pay under the 
 income share agreement at a range of annual income 
 levels stated as both a monthly and annual income 
 amount.
 (ii) The income levels used in the disclosure under 
 this paragraph shall include, at a minimum, the 
 obligations for the ISA recipient--
 (I) with no income;
 (II) with income at the income threshold; 
 and
 (III) for various income scenarios, 
 including, at a minimum, calculations at annual 
 incomes of $40,000, $60,000, $80,000, $100,000, 
 $125,000, $150,000, $175,000, and $200,000.
 (iii) The comparison table under this paragraph 
 shall include the following statement: ``This table 
 assumes you have the same Income over the entire term 
 of your income share agreement. It does not take into 
 account changes in Income. Your Income will likely 
 change over time.''.
 (B) The total of all ISA payments over the life of 
 the income share agreement that the ISA recipient will 
 have made in each of the income level scenarios 
 described in subparagraph (A).
 (C) The amounts and number of payments, the total 
 of all payments, and the annual percentage rate 
 required to be paid under one or more comparable loans, 
 including, at a minimum--
 (i) if elected by the Bureau, a loan at a 
 fixed or variable rate and with a number of 
 payments determined by the Bureau to be an 
 approximation of the fixed or variable interest 
 rate available to ISA recipients in the private 
 marketplace;
 (ii) for an educational ISA, a comparable 
 loan made under part D of title IV of the 
 Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087a 
 et seq.) (including subsidized and unsubsidized 
 scenarios), if the individual would be eligible 
 for such a loan; and
 (iii) for an income share agreement that is 
 not an educational ISA, a loan or loans that 
 the ISA provider believes, in good faith, 
 represents other alternative loan options 
 available for the ISA recipient.
 (10) A statement of the intent of the ISA provider to 
 engage in an annual process of reconciliation to determine if 
 the ISA recipient's ISA payments for the preceding year are 
 more than, equal to, or less than the ISA payments owed under 
 the income share agreement, including--
 (A) a description of the process in which the ISA 
 recipient must participate in order for the ISA 
 provider to verify the ISA recipient's income; and
 (B) a description of any tax records or forms that 
 the ISA recipient must execute or that the ISA provider 
 intends to submit to the Internal Revenue Service.
 (11) A disclosure of the following items, to the extent 
 applicable:
 (A) The amount that is or will be paid directly to 
 the ISA recipient.
 (B) The amount that is or will be credited to the 
 ISA recipient's account to discharge obligations owed 
 to the ISA provider.
 (C) Each amount that is or will be paid to third 
 persons by the ISA provider on the ISA recipient's 
 behalf, together with an identification of or reference 
 to the third person.
 (D) The total amount of any charges that will be 
 paid by the ISA recipient before or at the time of the 
 consummation of the transaction, or have been withheld 
 from the proceeds of the income share agreement.
 (12) The name and mailing address of the ISA provider.
 (13) A payment schedule that--
 (A) shows the date upon which the first ISA payment 
 is expected to be due or, if such date is not 
 reasonably knowable--
 (i) an estimated date using the best 
 information available to the ISA provider; or
 (ii) a statement of the events that will 
 trigger the first payment; and
 (B) reflects each date thereafter during the ISA 
 duration that an ISA payment may be due.
 (e) Additional Disclosure Elements.--The Director may, through a 
rulemaking process--
 (1) add additional items to be disclosed under subsection 
 (d) if consumer testing shows those elements would help 
 consumers better understand the nature of the ISA obligation or 
 better compare it with other products; and
 (2) require that additional income scenarios be included in 
 the comparison table under paragraph (9)(A)(ii)(III), taking 
 into account the income levels the ISA recipient might 
 reasonably be expected to make given the intended use of the 
 funds provided under the income share agreement, except in no 
 case shall the number of scenarios exceed 20.

SEC. 303. ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR EDUCATIONAL ISAS.

 (a) Additional Disclosure Timing Rules for Educational ISAs.--The 
following additional provisions apply to any income share agreement 
that is an educational ISA:
 (1) Application and solicitation.--
 (A) In general.--The ISA provider of an educational 
 ISA that is to be used solely for postsecondary 
 educational expenses shall provide the disclosures 
 described in subsection (b)(1) with any application or 
 solicitation for the educational ISA. For purposes of 
 this section, the term ``solicitation'' means an offer 
 of an income share agreement that does not require the 
 potential ISA recipient to complete an application.
 (B) Telephone applications or solicitations.--In 
 the case of a telephone application or solicitation for 
 an educational ISA, the ISA provider shall provide the 
 disclosure by, at its option--
 (i) disclosing orally the information 
 described in subsection (b)(1); or
 (ii) mailing a copy of the disclosure 
 described in subsection (b)(1) not later than 3 
 business days after the potential ISA recipient 
 has applied for the educational ISA.
 (C) Special rule.--For an income share agreement 
 that the ISA recipient may use for multiple purposes 
 including postsecondary educational expenses, the ISA 
 provider need not provide the disclosures required 
 under subsection (b)(1) in the application or 
 solicitation.
 (2) Approval disclosures.--The ISA provider shall provide 
 the disclosures required by subsection (b)(2) before 
 consummation on, or with any notice of approval provided to the 
 applicant for, an educational ISA. If the ISA provider mails 
 notice of approval, the disclosures shall be mailed with the 
 notice. If the ISA provider communicates notice of approval by 
 telephone, the ISA provider shall mail the disclosures not 
 later than 3 business days after providing the notice of 
 approval. If the ISA provider communicates notice of approval 
 electronically, the ISA provider shall provide the disclosure, 
 at its option, either in electronic form in accordance with the 
 requirements of this title or by mailing the disclosure not 
 later than 3 business days after communicating the notice of 
 approval. If the ISA provider communicates approval in person, 
 the ISA provider shall provide the disclosures to the applicant 
 for an income share agreement at that time.
 (3) Final disclosures.--The disclosures required by 
 subsection (b)(3) shall be provided after the ISA recipient 
 accepts the income share agreement.
 (4) Receipt of mailed disclosures.--If a disclosure under 
 paragraph (1), (2), or (3) is mailed to the potential ISA 
 recipient or ISA recipient, as the case may be, the potential 
 ISA recipient or ISA recipient shall be deemed to have received 
 the disclosure 5 business days after the disclosure is mailed.
 (5) Basis of disclosures and use of estimates in 
 educational isas.--
 (A) Legal obligation.--Disclosures shall reflect 
 the terms of the legal obligation between the parties.
 (B) Estimates.--If any information necessary for an 
 accurate disclosure is unknown to the ISA provider, the 
 ISA provider shall make the disclosure based on the 
 best information reasonably available at the time the 
 disclosure is provided, and shall state clearly that 
 the disclosure is an estimate.
 (6) Effect of subsequent events.--
 (A) Approval disclosures.--If a disclosure made 
 under paragraph (2) becomes inaccurate because of an 
 event that occurs after the ISA provider delivers the 
 required disclosures, the inaccuracy is not a violation 
 of this Act, although new disclosures may be required 
 in accordance with this title.
 (B) Final disclosures.--If a disclosure under 
 paragraph (3) becomes inaccurate because of an event 
 that occurs after the creditor delivers the required 
 disclosures, the inaccuracy is not a violation of this 
 Act.
 (b) Additional Disclosures for Educational ISAs.--In addition to 
the other disclosure requirements of this title, an ISA provider of an 
educational ISA shall provide the disclosures required under this 
subsection as follows:
 (1) Application and solicitation disclosure.--On or with a 
 solicitation or an application for an educational ISA, an ISA 
 provider shall disclose the following:
 (A) ISA payment calculation method.--
 (i) The ISA payment calculation method that 
 applies to the educational ISA and actually 
 offered by the ISA provider at the time of 
 application or solicitation. If the ISA payment 
 calculation method will depend, in part, on a 
 later determination of the ISA recipient's 
 creditworthiness or other factors, a statement 
 that the ISA payment calculation method for 
 which the ISA recipient may qualify will depend 
 on the ISA recipient's creditworthiness and 
 other factors, if applicable.
 (ii) In the case of an ISA payment 
 calculation method that is based on a schedule 
 of percentages--
 (I) an explanation of how the 
 schedule of percentages is calculated 
 using percentages of income based on 
 the ISA recipient's income; and
 (II) the timing for recalculation 
 of the ISA recipient's payments under 
 the schedule of percentages.
 (iii) In the case of an ISA payment 
 calculation method that is based on a schedule 
 of fixed amounts that an ISA recipient is 
 required to pay that is calculated based on the 
 ISA recipient's income for a payment period--
 (I) an explanation of how the 
 schedule of fixed amounts is calculated 
 using fixed amounts based on the ISA 
 recipient's income; and
 (II) the timing for recalculation 
 of the ISA recipient's payments under 
 the schedule of fixed amounts.
 (B) Fees and default or late payment costs.--
 (i) An itemization of the fees or range of 
 fees required to obtain the educational ISA.
 (ii) Any fees or other penalties based on 
 the ISA recipient's default or late payment.
 (C) Payment terms.--
 (i) The ISA duration, or range of ISA 
 durations, offered by the ISA provider.
 (ii) A description of any payment deferral 
 options.
 (D) Cost estimates.--Using the highest dollar 
 amount or percentage applicable under the ISA payment 
 calculation method described in subparagraph (A)(i) and 
 using an amount financed of $10,000, or $5,000 if the 
 ISA provider only offers income share agreements of 
 this type for less than $5,000, the loan comparison 
 based on these assumptions.
 (E) Eligibility.--Any age or school enrollment 
 eligibility requirements relating to the ISA recipient.
 (F) Alternative to income share agreements.--
 (i) With respect to an educational ISA that 
 might be used for postsecondary expenses at an 
 institution of higher education that 
 participates in a student financial assistance 
 program under title IV of the Higher Education 
 Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070 et seq.)--
 (I) a statement the ISA recipient 
 may qualify for Federal student 
 financial assistance through a program 
 under such title; and
 (II) the interest rates for each 
 program of financial assistance 
 available under title IV of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070 
 et seq.) and information regarding 
 whether the rates for the loans 
 available under such title are fixed or 
 variable.
 (ii) If applicable to the student's 
 circumstances, a statement that the ISA 
 recipient may obtain additional information 
 concerning Federal student financial assistance 
 from the institution of higher education that 
 the student attends, or at the website of the 
 Department of Education, including an 
 appropriate website address for the Department.
 (iii) A statement that an institution of 
 higher education may have school-specific 
 education loan benefits and terms not detailed 
 on the disclosure form.
 (G) Rights of the consumer.--A statement that if 
 the application for the educational ISA is approved by 
 the ISA provider, the terms of the educational ISA will 
 be available and will not change for 30 days except as 
 a result of adjustments to the ISA payment calculation 
 method, ISA duration, or ISA maximum number of payments 
 and other changes permitted by law.
 (H) Self-certification information.--A statement 
 that, before the educational ISA may be consummated, 
 the ISA recipient must complete the self-certification 
 form and that the form may be obtained from the 
 institution of higher education that the student 
 attends.
 (I) Overall educational finance obligation 
 notice.--The following statement: ``IMPORTANT NOTICE 
 REQUIRED BY LAW: Students are cautioned to consider 
 carefully entering into this Income Share Agreement if 
 their total future payment commitment, including any 
 other forms of education finance, may exceed 20 percent 
 of their expected future income. Your total future 
 obligation may exceed this percentage if you have 
 received additional education financing, including 
 other income share agreements, Department of Education 
 Direct or FFEL Loans, or private education loans.''.
 (2) Disclosures upon approval of an isa.--Upon approval of 
 an educational ISA by an ISA provider, the ISA provider shall 
 disclose the information required under section 302(d) and the 
 following information:
 (A) ISA payment calculation method.--
 (i) The ISA payment calculation method that 
 applies to the educational ISA.
 (ii) In the case of an ISA payment 
 calculation method that is based on a schedule 
 of percentages--
 (I) an explanation of how the 
 schedule of percentages is calculated 
 using percentages of income based on 
 the ISA recipient's income; and
 (II) the timing for recalculation 
 of the ISA recipient's payments under 
 the schedule of percentages.
 (iii) In the case of an ISA payment 
 calculation method that is based on a schedule 
 of fixed amounts that an ISA recipient is 
 required to pay based on the ISA recipient's 
 income for a payment period--
 (I) an explanation of how the 
 schedule of fixed amounts is calculated 
 using fixed amounts based on the ISA 
 recipient's income; and
 (II) the timing for recalculation 
 of the ISA recipient's payments under 
 the schedule of fixed amounts.
 (B) Fees and default or late payment costs.--
 (i) An itemization of the fees or range of 
 fees required to obtain the educational ISA.
 (ii) Any fees or other penalties based on 
 the ISA recipient's defaults or late payments.
 (C) Payment terms.--
 (i) The ISA duration, or range of ISA 
 durations, offered by the ISA provider.
 (ii) A description of any payment deferral 
 options.
 (D) Cost estimates.--The following disclosure shall 
 be made using the ISA payment calculation method, ISA 
 duration, and ISA maximum number of payments for which 
 the ISA recipient has been approved:
 (i) The loan comparison based on these 
 assumptions.
 (ii) A description of the payment deferral 
 option chosen by the ISA recipient, if 
 applicable, and any other payment deferral 
 options that the ISA recipient may elect at a 
 later time.
 (iii) Any payments required while the ISA 
 recipient is enrolled at a covered educational 
 institution, based on the deferral option 
 chosen by the ISA recipient.
 (E) Alternatives to private education income share 
 agreements, if applicable to the student.--In the case 
 of an educational ISA that may be used for education 
 expenses at an institution of higher education that 
 participates in the student financial assistance 
 programs under title IV of the Higher Education Act of 
 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070 et seq.), the following:
 (i) A statement that the ISA recipient may 
 qualify for Federal student financial 
 assistance through a program under title IV of 
 the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 1070 et seq.).
 (ii) The interest rates for each program of 
 financial assistance available under title IV 
 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 1070 et seq.) and information regarding whether 
 the rates for the loans available under such 
 title are fixed or variable.
 (iii) A statement that the ISA recipient 
 may obtain additional information concerning 
 Federal student financial assistance from the 
 institution of higher education that the 
 student attends, or at the website of the 
 Department of Education, including an 
 appropriate website address for the Department.
 (F) Rights of the isa recipient.--
 (i) A statement that the ISA recipient may 
 accept the terms of the income share agreement 
 until the last day of the acceptance period 
 described in subsection (d)(1).
 (ii) The specific date on which the 
 acceptance period expires, based on the date 
 upon which the ISA recipient receives the 
 disclosures required under this paragraph for 
 the income share agreement.
 (iii) A specification of the method or 
 methods by which the ISA recipient may 
 communicate acceptance.
 (iv) A statement that, except for changes 
 to the ISA payment calculation method and other 
 changes permitted by law, the rates and terms 
 of the income share agreement may not be 
 changed by the ISA provider during the period 
 described in clause (i).
 (G) Overall educational finance obligation 
 notice.--The following statement: ``IMPORTANT NOTICE 
 REQUIRED BY LAW: Students are cautioned to consider 
 carefully entering into this Income Share Agreement if 
 their total future payment commitment, including any 
 other forms of education finance, may exceed 20 percent 
 of their expected future income. Your total future 
 obligation may exceed this percentage if you have 
 received additional education financing, including 
 other income share agreements, Department of Education 
 Direct or FFEL Loans, or private education loans.''.
 (3) Final disclosures.--After the ISA recipient has 
 accepted the income share agreement in accordance with 
 subsection (d)(1), the ISA provider shall disclose to the ISA 
 recipient the information required by this section and the 
 following information:
 (A) ISA payment calculation method.--
 (i) The ISA payment calculation method 
 applicable to the income share agreement.
 (ii) In the case of an ISA payment 
 calculation method that is based on a schedule 
 of percentages--
 (I) an explanation of how the 
 schedule of percentages is calculated 
 using percentages of income based on 
 the ISA recipient's income; and
 (II) the timing for recalculation 
 of the ISA recipient's payments under 
 the schedule of percentages.
 (iii) In the case of an ISA payment 
 calculation method that is based on a schedule 
 of fixed amounts that an ISA recipient is 
 required to pay based on the ISA recipient's 
 income for a payment period--
 (I) an explanation of how the 
 schedule of fixed amounts is calculated 
 using fixed amounts based on the ISA 
 recipient's income; and
 (II) the timing for recalculation 
 of the ISA recipient's payments under 
 the schedule of fixed amounts.
 (B) Fees and default or late payment costs.--
 (i) An itemization of the fees or range of 
 fees required to obtain the educational ISA.
 (ii) Any fees or other penalties based on 
 the ISA recipient's defaults or late payments.
 (C) Payment terms.--
 (i) The ISA duration or range of ISA 
 durations offered by the ISA provider.
 (ii) A description of any payment deferral 
 options.
 (D) Cost estimates.--The following disclosure shall 
 be made using the ISA payment calculation method, ISA 
 duration, and ISA maximum number of payments for which 
 the ISA recipient has been approved:
 (i) The loan comparison based on these 
 assumptions.
 (ii) A description of the payment deferral 
 option chosen by the ISA recipient, if 
 applicable, and any other payment deferral 
 options that the ISA recipient may elect at a 
 later time.
 (iii) Any payments required while the ISA 
 recipient is enrolled at a covered educational 
 institution, based on the deferral option 
 chosen by the ISA recipient.
 (E) Cancellation rights.--
 (i) A statement that--
 (I) the ISA recipient has the right 
 to cancel the income share agreement, 
 without penalty, at any time before the 
 cancellation period under subsection 
 (e) expires; and
 (II) the income share agreement 
 proceeds will not be disbursed until 
 after such cancellation period expires.
 (ii) The specific date on which the 
 cancellation period expires and a statement 
 that the ISA recipient may cancel by that date.
 (iii) A statement specifying--
 (I) all methods by which the ISA 
 recipient may cancel; and
 (II) if the ISA provider permits 
 cancellation by mail, that the ISA 
 recipient's mailed request will be 
 deemed timely if placed in the mail not 
 later than the cancellation date 
 specified in clause (ii).
 (F) Conspicuous disclosures.--The disclosures 
 required by subparagraph (E) shall be made more 
 conspicuous than any other disclosure required under 
 this section, except for the ISA payment calculation 
 method, ISA duration, ISA maximum number of payments, 
 amount financed, income threshold, and the ISA 
 provider's identity, which shall be disclosed in 
 accordance with the requirements of subsection (d).
 (G) Overall educational finance obligation 
 notice.--The following statement: ``IMPORTANT NOTICE 
 REQUIRED BY LAW: Students are cautioned to consider 
 carefully entering into this Income Share Agreement if 
 their total future payment commitment, including any 
 other forms of education finance, may exceed 20 percent 
 of their expected future income. Your total future 
 obligation may exceed this percentage if you have 
 received additional education financing, including 
 other income share agreements, Department of Education 
 Direct or FFEL Loans, or private education loans.''.
 (c) Limitation on Educational ISAs.--
 (1) Co-branding prohibited.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B) and paragraph (2), an ISA provider, other than the 
 covered educational institution itself, shall not use 
 the name, emblem, mascot, or logo of a covered 
 educational institution, or other words, pictures, or 
 symbols identified with a covered educational 
 institution, in the marketing of educational ISAs in a 
 way that implies that the covered education institution 
 endorses the ISA provider's income share agreements.
 (B) Special rule.--An ISA provider's marketing of 
 an educational ISA does not imply that the covered 
 education institution endorses the ISA provider's 
 income share agreements if the marketing includes a 
 clear and conspicuous disclosure, equally prominent and 
 closely proximate to the reference to the covered 
 educational institution, that the covered educational 
 institution does not endorse the ISA provider's income 
 share agreements and that the ISA provider is not 
 affiliated with the covered educational institution.
 (2) Endorsed isa provider arrangements.--If an ISA provider 
 and a covered educational institution have entered into an 
 arrangement under which the covered educational institution 
 agrees to endorse the ISA provider's educational ISAs, and such 
 arrangement is not prohibited by other applicable law or 
 regulation, paragraph (1)(A) shall not apply as long as the 
 educational ISA marketing includes a clear and conspicuous 
 disclosure, equally prominent and closely proximate to the 
 reference to the covered educational institution, that the ISA 
 provider's income share agreements are not offered or made by 
 the covered educational institution, but are made by the ISA 
 provider.
 (d) Educational ISA Recipient's Right To Accept.--
 (1) Acceptance period.--The ISA recipient has the right to 
 accept the terms of an educational ISA at any time not later 
 than 30 calendar days following the date on which the ISA 
 recipient receives the disclosures required under subsection 
 (b)(2).
 (2) Limitations on changes.--Except for changes permitted 
 under paragraph (3), the terms of the educational ISA that are 
 required to be disclosed under paragraphs (2) and (3) of 
 subsection (b) may not be changed by the ISA provider prior to 
 the earlier of--
 (A) the date of disbursement of the income share 
 agreement; or
 (B) the expiration of the 30-day period described 
 in paragraph (1), if the ISA recipient has not accepted 
 the income share agreement before within the period.
 (3) Exceptions not requiring re-disclosure.--
 (A) In general.--Notwithstanding paragraph (2), 
 nothing in this section shall prevent an ISA provider 
 of an educational ISA from--
 (i) withdrawing an offer before 
 consummation of the transaction if the making 
 of the income share agreement would be 
 prohibited by law or if the ISA provider has 
 reason to believe that the ISA recipient has 
 committed fraud in connection with the income 
 share agreement application;
 (ii) changing the ISA payment calculation 
 method and terms if the change will 
 unequivocally benefit the ISA recipient; or
 (iii) reducing the amount funded based upon 
 a certification or other information received 
 from the covered educational institution, or 
 from the ISA recipient, indicating that the 
 student's cost of attendance has decreased or 
 the ISA recipient's other financial aid has 
 increased, except that, in such case, the ISA 
 provider may make corresponding changes to the 
 terms of the ISA payment calculation method, 
 ISA duration, and other terms only to the 
 extent that the ISA recipient would have 
 received the terms if the ISA recipient had 
 applied for the reduced amount financed.
 (B) No new disclosures required.--If the ISA 
 provider changes the ISA payment calculation method or 
 terms of the income share agreement under this 
 paragraph, the ISA provider shall not be required to--
 (i) provide the disclosures required under 
 subsection (b)(2) for the new income share 
 agreement terms; or
 (ii) provide an additional 30-day period to 
 the ISA recipient to accept the new terms of 
 the income share agreement.
 (4) Exceptions requiring re-disclosure.--
 (A) In general.--Notwithstanding paragraphs (2) and 
 (3), nothing in this section prevents an ISA provider, 
 at its option, from changing the ISA payment 
 calculation method or terms of the income share 
 agreement to accommodate a specific request by the ISA 
 recipient, such as a request for a different repayment 
 option.
 (B) Additional disclosures required.--If the ISA 
 provider changes the rate or terms of the income share 
 agreement under subparagraph (A), the ISA provider--
 (i) shall provide the disclosures required 
 under subsection (b)(2) and shall provide the 
 ISA recipient the 30-day period to accept the 
 income share agreement, as required under 
 paragraph (1); and
 (ii) shall not make further changes to the 
 income share agreement and terms of the loan, 
 except as specified in paragraph (3)(B).
 (C) No further withdrawals or changes.--Except as 
 permitted under paragraph (3)(B), unless the ISA 
 recipient accepts the income share agreement offered by 
 the ISA provider in response to the ISA recipient's 
 request in accordance with subparagraph (A), the ISA 
 provider may not withdraw or change the ISA payment 
 calculation method or any terms of the income share 
 agreements for which the ISA recipient was approved 
 prior to the ISA recipient's request for a change in 
 income share agreement terms under this paragraph.
 (e) Educational ISA Recipient's Right To Cancel.--The ISA recipient 
may cancel an educational ISA, without penalty, until midnight of the 
third business day following the date on which the ISA recipient 
receives the disclosures required by subsection (b)(3). No funds may be 
disbursed for an educational ISA until the 3-business-day period has 
expired, absent exceptional circumstances necessitating disbursement 
based on a request from the covered educational institution. In such a 
case, the covered educational institution shall promptly, upon 
cancellation by the student, refund the amounts to the ISA provider.
 (f) Self-Certification Form.--For an educational ISA intended to be 
used for the postsecondary educational expenses of a student while the 
student is attending an institution of higher education, the ISA 
provider shall obtain, from the ISA recipient or the institution of 
higher education, the educational ISA certification form developed by 
the Secretary under section 155 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 1019d), signed by the ISA recipient, in written or electronic 
form, before consummating the educational ISA.
 (g) Provision of Information by Preferred ISA Provider.--
 (1) In general.--An ISA provider that has a preferred ISA 
 financing arrangement with a covered educational institution 
 shall, each year in accordance with paragraph (2), provide to 
 the covered educational institution the information required 
 under subsection (b)(1) for each type of educational ISA that 
 the ISA provider plans to offer to ISA recipients for students 
 attending the covered educational institution, for the period 
 beginning July 1 of the year in which the information is 
 provided and ending June 30 of the following year.
 (2) Timing.--For each year of a preferred ISA provider 
 financing arrangement, the ISA provider shall provide the 
 information required under paragraph (1) by the later of--
 (A) the first day of April; or
 (B) the date that is 30 days after entering into, 
 or learning the ISA provider is a party to, a preferred 
 ISA provider arrangement.

SEC. 304. ADVERTISING OF INCOME SHARE AGREEMENTS.

 (a) In General.--The restrictions on advertising of income share 
agreements shall be consistent with the restrictions placed on 
advertisements related to extensions of consumer credit as set forth in 
chapter 3 of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1661 et seq.).
 (b) Amendments to the Truth in Lending Act.--The Truth in Lending 
Act (15 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) is amended--
 (1) in section 103(f) (15 U.S.C. 1602(f))--
 (A) by striking ``means the'' and inserting 
 ``means--
 ``(1) the'';
 (B) in paragraph (1), as so designated, by striking 
 the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2) for purposes of chapter 3, shall include an income 
 share agreement, as defined in section 2 of the ISA Student 
 Protection Act of 2022.'';
 (2) in section 142 (15 U.S.C. 1662)--
 (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by 
 striking ``state'' and inserting ``state--'';
 (B) in paragraph (1), by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting a semicolon;
 (C) in paragraph (2), by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (D) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) with respect to an income share agreement (as defined 
 in section 2 of the ISA Student Protection Act of 2022), that a 
 specific ISA payment calculation method, ISA duration, ISA 
 maximum number of payments, or income threshold (as those terms 
 are defined in such section 2) can be arranged unless the ISA 
 provider (as defined in such section 2) usually and customarily 
 arranges income share agreements pursuant to the terms so 
 advertised.''; and
 (3) in section 144, by adding at the end the following:
 ``(f) Income Share Agreements.--
 ``(1) Definitions.--In this subsection, the terms `income 
 share agreement', `income threshold', `ISA duration', `ISA 
 maximum number of payments', and `ISA payment calculation 
 method' have the meanings given those terms in section 2 of the 
 ISA Student Protection Act of 2022.
 ``(2) Application.--This subsection shall apply to any 
 advertisement to aid, promote, or assist directly or indirectly 
 any income share agreement subject to the provisions of this 
 chapter.
 ``(3) Disclosure of key terms.--If any advertisement to 
 which this section applies states the ISA payment calculation 
 method, ISA duration, ISA maximum number of payments, income 
 threshold, or amounts of payments under an income share 
 agreement, the advertisement shall include the following:
 ``(A) The ISA payment calculation method.
 ``(B) The ISA duration.
 ``(C) The ISA maximum number of payments.
 ``(D) The income threshold.''.

 TITLE IV--OTHER CLARIFICATIONS TO SUPPORT ISA PROGRAMS

SEC. 401. TREATMENT UNDER SECURITIES LAWS.

 (a) Income Share Agreements Not Treated as Securities.--
 (1) In general.--An income share agreement shall not be 
 treated as a security for purposes of the securities laws (as 
 defined in section 3(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 
 (15 U.S.C. 78c(a))), any similar State law, or any State law 
 that directly or indirectly prohibits, limits, or imposes 
 conditions, based on the merits of an offering or issuer of 
 securities, upon the offer or sale of any security.
 (2) Rule of construction.--Nothing in paragraph (1) may be 
 construed to prevent an instrument that is collateralized by, 
 or serviced by the cash flows of, an income share agreement 
 from being treated as a security for purposes of any law 
 described in that paragraph.
 (b) ISA Providers Making Income Share Agreements Excluded From 
Investment Company Treatment.--Section 3(c) of the Investment Company 
Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-3(c)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (4), by inserting ``income share 
 agreements (as that term is defined in section 2 of the ISA 
 Student Protection Act of 2022),'' after ``industrial 
 banking,''; and
 (2) in paragraph (5)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A), by inserting ``, including 
 purchasing or otherwise acquiring income share 
 agreements (as that term is defined in section 2 of the 
 ISA Student Protection Act of 2022)'' after 
 ``services''; and
 (B) in subparagraph (B), by inserting ``, including 
 making income share agreements (as defined in 
 subparagraph (A))'' after ``services''.

SEC. 402. TREATMENT UNDER BANKRUPTCY LAWS.

 Section 523(a)(8) of title 11, United States Code, is amended, in 
the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by striking ``for--'' and 
inserting ``for, other than funds provided as part of an educational 
ISA (as defined in section 2 of the ISA Student Protection Act of 
2022)--''.

SEC. 403. CONSENT TO CONTINUING RELEASE OF TAXPAYER INFORMATION UNDER 
 EDUCATIONAL ISAS AND INCOME SHARE AGREEMENTS.

 By not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, 
the Secretary of the Treasury shall modify Treasury regulations and 
guidance to provide for continuing consent to disclosure of an 
individual's return information to an ISA provider (or the provider's 
successor in interest) under an educational ISA or other income share 
agreement, but only for periods relevant to, and only to the extent the 
Secretary determines is necessary and appropriate in carrying out the 
terms of, such educational ISA or income share agreement.

SEC. 404. INTERPLAY WITH THE HIGHER EDUCATION ACT OF 1965.

 (a) Title IV Definitions.--
 (1) In general.--Section 480 of the Higher Education Act of 
 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087vv), as amended by section 702 of the FAFSA 
 Simplification Act (title VII of division FF of Public Law 116-
 260; 134 Stat. 3191), is amended--
 (A) in subsection (e)--
 (i) in paragraph (2), by striking ``and'' 
 after the semicolon;
 (ii) in paragraph (3), by striking the 
 period and inserting ``; and''; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4) any amount provided to the applicant, or on whose 
 behalf funds are disbursed, under an income share agreement, as 
 defined in section 2 of the ISA Student Protection Act of 
 2022.''; and
 (B) in subsection (f)(1), by inserting ``amounts 
 provided to an individual, or on whose behalf the funds 
 are disbursed, under an income share agreement, as 
 defined in section 2 of the ISA Student Protection Act 
 of 2022,'' after ``income producing property,''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by paragraph (1) 
 shall take effect as if included in section 702 of the FAFSA 
 Simplification Act (title VII of division FF of Public Law 116-
 260; 134 Stat. 3191) and in accordance with section 701(b) of 
 such Act.
 (b) Program Participation Agreements.--Section 487(d)(1)(D) of the 
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1094(d)(1)(D)) is amended--
 (1) in clause (ii), by striking ``and'' after the 
 semicolon;
 (2) in clause (iii), by inserting ``and'' after the 
 semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(iv) in the case of educational income 
 share agreements (as such term is defined in 
 section 2 of the ISA Student Protection Act of 
 2022) made by a proprietary institution of 
 higher education, only the amount of ISA 
 payments (as defined in such section) received 
 during the applicable institutional fiscal 
 year, to the extent the amount of such payments 
 on the educational income share agreement does 
 not exceed the income share amount financed 
 under such educational income share 
 agreement;''.
 (c) Preferred Lender Arrangement Definitions.--Section 151 of the 
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1019) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (3), (4), (5), and (6) 
 through (9) as paragraphs (4), (5), (6), and (9) through (12), 
 respectively;
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following:
 ``(3) Educational isa.--The term `educational ISA' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 2 of the ISA Student 
 Protection Act of 2022.'';
 (3) in paragraph (6), as redesignated by paragraph (1)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A)(ii), by inserting ``or 
 educational ISAs'' after ``loans'';
 (B) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``and'' after 
 the semicolon;
 (C) in subparagraph (C), by striking the period at 
 the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (D) by adding at the end of the following:
 ``(D) notwithstanding subparagraphs (A) and (B), 
 does not include any ISA provider with respect to any 
 educational ISA secured, made, or extended by such ISA 
 provider.'';
 (4) by inserting after paragraph (6), as redesignated by 
 subparagraph (A), the following:
 ``(7) ISA provider.--The term `ISA provider' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 2 of the ISA Student 
 Protection Act of 2022.
 ``(8) ISA recipient.--The term `ISA recipient' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 2 of the ISA Student 
 Protection Act of 2022.''; and
 (5) in paragraph (11)(A), as redesignated by paragraph 
 (1)--
 (A) in the matter preceding clause (i), by 
 inserting ``or ISA provider'' after ``lender'';
 (B) in clause (i), by inserting ``or an ISA 
 provider provides or otherwise issues educational 
 ISAs'' after ``loans''; and
 (C) in clause (ii), by inserting ``or the 
 educational ISAs of the ISA provider'' after 
 ``lender''.
 (d) Responsibilities of Covered Institutions and ISA Providers 
Regarding Preferred Lender Arrangements.--Section 152 of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1019a) is amended--
 (1) in the section heading, by striking ``and lenders'' and 
 inserting ``lenders, and isa providers'';
 (2) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A)--
 (I) in clause (i)--
 (aa) in the matter 
 preceding subclause (I), by 
 inserting ``or educational 
 ISAs'' after ``loans'';
 (bb) in subclause (II)--

 (AA) by striking 
 ``section 151(3)(A)'' 
 and inserting ``section 
 151(4)(A)''; and

 (BB) by striking 
 ``and'' at the end;

 (cc) by redesignating 
 subclause (III) as subclause 
 (IV); and
 (dd) by inserting after 
 subclause (II) the following:
 ``(III) the information required to 
 be disclosed pursuant to section 
 153(a)(2)(A)(i), for an educational ISA 
 that is offered pursuant to a preferred 
 lender arrangement of the institution 
 or organization to students of the 
 institution or families of such 
 students; and''; and
 (II) in clause (ii)--
 (aa) in the matter 
 preceding subclause (I)--

 (AA) by striking 
 ``subparagraph (C)'' 
 and inserting 
 ``subparagraph (D)''; 
 and

 (BB) by inserting 
 ``or educational ISAs'' 
 after ``loans'';

 (bb) in subclause (I), by 
 striking ``and'' after the 
 semicolon; and
 (cc) by adding at the end 
 the following:
 ``(III) in the case of a covered 
 institution, the information described 
 in section 153(c) for each type of 
 educational ISA offered pursuant to a 
 preferred lender arrangement of the 
 institution to students of the 
 institution or the families of such 
 students; and
 ``(IV) in the case of an 
 institution-affiliated organization of 
 a covered institution, the information 
 in section 303(b)(1) of the ISA Student 
 Protection Act of 2022, for each type 
 of educational ISA offered pursuant to 
 a preferred lender arrangement of the 
 organization to students of such 
 institution or the families of such 
 students.'';
 (ii) by redesignating subparagraph (C) as 
 subparagraph (D); and
 (iii) by inserting after subparagraph (B) 
 the following:
 ``(C) Educational isa disclosures.--A covered 
 institution, or an institution-affiliated organization 
 of such covered institution, that provides information 
 regarding an educational ISA from an ISA provider to a 
 prospective ISA recipient shall--
 ``(i) provide the prospective ISA recipient 
 with the information described in section 
 303(b)(1) of the ISA Student Protection Act of 
 2022 for such educational ISA;
 ``(ii) inform the perspective ISA recipient 
 that--
 ``(I) the prospective ISA recipient 
 may qualify for loans or other 
 assistance under title IV; and
 ``(II) the terms and conditions of 
 the loans made, insured, or guaranteed 
 under title IV may be more favorable 
 than the provisions of educational 
 ISAs; and
 ``(iii) ensure that information regarding 
 educational ISAs is presented in such a manner 
 as to be distinct from information regarding 
 loans that are made, insured, or guaranteed 
 under title IV.'';
 (B) by striking paragraph (2) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(2) Use of institution name.--A covered institution, or 
 an institution-affiliated organization of such covered 
 institution, that enters into a preferred lender arrangement 
 with a lender regarding private education loans or an ISA 
 provider regarding educational ISAs shall not agree to the 
 lender's or ISA provider's use of the name, emblem, mascot, or 
 logo of such institution or organization, or other words, 
 pictures, or symbols readily identified with such institution 
 or organization, in the marketing of private education loans or 
 educational ISAs to students attending such institution in any 
 way that implies that the loan or educational ISA is offered or 
 made by such institution or organization instead of the lender 
 or ISA provider.''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4) Use of isa provider name.--A covered institution, or 
 an institution-affiliated organization of such covered 
 institution, that enters into a preferred lender arrangement 
 with an ISA provider regarding educational ISAs shall ensure 
 that the name of the ISA provider is displayed in all 
 information and documentation related to such educational 
 ISAs.''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(c) ISA Provider Responsibilities.--For each of an ISA provider's 
educational ISAs, the ISA provider shall comply with the disclosure 
requirements of sections 302 and 303 of the ISA Student Protection Act 
of 2022.''.
 (e) Disclosures for ISA Providers Participating in Preferred Lender 
Arrangements.--Section 153 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 1019b) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by striking 
 ``section 151(3)(A)'' and inserting ``section 
 151(4)(A)''; and
 (ii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(C) Additional information for educational 
 isas.--
 ``(i) In general.--By not later than 180 
 days after the date of enactment of the ISA 
 Student Protection Act of 2022, the Secretary, 
 in coordination with the Bureau of Consumer 
 Financial Protection, shall determine the 
 minimum information that ISA providers, covered 
 institutions, and institution-affiliated 
 organizations of such covered institutions 
 participating in preferred lender arrangements 
 shall make available regarding educational 
 ISAs.
 ``(ii) Consultation and content of minimum 
 disclosures.--In carrying out clause (i), the 
 Secretary shall--
 ``(I) consult with students, the 
 families of such students, 
 representatives of covered institutions 
 (including financial aid 
 administrators, admission officers, and 
 business officers), representatives of 
 institution-affiliated organizations, 
 secondary school guidance counselors, 
 and ISA providers;
 ``(II) include, in the minimum 
 information under clause (i) that is 
 required to be made available, the 
 information required to be disclosed 
 under section 303 of the ISA Student 
 Protection Act of 2022; and
 ``(III) consider the merits of 
 requiring each covered institution, and 
 each institution-affiliated 
 organization of such covered 
 institution, with a preferred lender 
 arrangement to provide prospective ISA 
 recipients and the families of such ISA 
 recipients the following information 
 for each type of educational ISA 
 offered pursuant to such preferred 
 lender arrangement:
 ``(aa)(AA) The ISA payment 
 calculation method, the income 
 threshold, the ISA maximum 
 number of payments (or a range 
 of the ISA maximum number of 
 payments), the ISA payment 
 window (or a range of the ISA 
 payment windows), and the terms 
 and conditions of the 
 educational ISA for the next 
 award year.
 ``(BB) In this subclause, 
 the terms `income threshold', 
 `ISA maximum number of 
 payments', `ISA payment 
 window', and `ISA payment 
 calculation method' have the 
 meanings given the terms in 
 section 2 of the ISA Student 
 Protection Act of 2022.
 ``(bb) An itemization of 
 the fees or range of fees 
 required to obtain the 
 educational ISA.
 ``(cc) Any fees or other 
 penalties based on the ISA 
 recipient's defaults or late 
 payments.
 ``(dd) The annual or 
 aggregate maximum financed 
 amounts.
 ``(ee) The average financed 
 amounts provided by the ISA 
 provider to students who--

 ``(AA) graduated 
 from such institution 
 in the preceding year 
 with certificates, 
 undergraduate degrees, 
 graduate degrees, and 
 professional degrees, 
 as applicable; and

 ``(BB) obtained 
 educational ISAs of 
 such type from the ISA 
 provider for the 
 preceding year.

 ``(ff) The consequences for 
 the ISA recipient for 
 defaulting on an educational 
 ISA.
 ``(gg) Contact information 
 for the ISA provider.
 ``(hh) Other information 
 suggested by the persons and 
 entities with whom the 
 Secretary has consulted under 
 subclause (I).'';
 (B) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A)--
 (I) in clause (i), by striking 
 ``section 151(3)(A)'' and inserting 
 ``section 151(4)(A), or to prospective 
 ISA recipients and the families of such 
 ISA recipients regarding educational 
 ISAs,''; and
 (II) in clause (ii), by striking 
 ``the model disclosure form'' and 
 inserting ``a model disclosure form'';
 (ii) in subparagraph (B)--
 (I) in the matter preceding clause 
 (i)--
 (aa) by striking ``a model 
 disclosure form'' and inserting 
 ``model disclosure forms''; and
 (bb) by striking ``and 
 preferred lenders'' and 
 inserting ``preferred lenders, 
 and ISA providers'';
 (II) in clause (i), by inserting 
 ``ISA providers,'' after 
 ``servicers,''; and
 (III) in clause (ii)--
 (aa) by striking ``format 
 to the form'' and inserting the 
 following: ``format to--
 ``(aa) with respect to 
 education loans, the form'';
 (bb) by striking ``section 
 151(3)(A)'' and inserting 
 ``section 151(4)(A)''; and
 (cc) by adding at the end 
 the following:
 ``(bb) with respect to 
 educational ISAs, the form 
 developed by the Bureau of 
 Consumer Financial Protection 
 under section 301(4) of the ISA 
 Student Protection Act of 2022 
 in order to permit students and 
 the families of students to 
 easily compare educational 
 ISAs; and''; and
 (iii) in subparagraph (C), by striking 
 ``such model disclosure form'' and inserting 
 ``the model disclosure forms described in 
 subparagraph (B)'';
 (2) in subsection (b), by striking ``section 151(3)(A)'' 
 each place the term appears and inserting ``section 
 151(4)(A)'';
 (3) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d);
 (4) by inserting after subsection (b) the following:
 ``(c) Duties of ISA Providers.--Each ISA provider that has a 
preferred lender arrangement with respect to educational ISAs with a 
covered institution, or an institution-affiliated organization of such 
covered institution, shall annually, by a date determined by the 
Secretary, provide to such covered institution or such institution-
affiliated organization, and to the Secretary, the information the 
Secretary requires pursuant to subsection (a)(2)(A)(i) for the 
educational ISAs that the ISA provider plans to offer pursuant to such 
preferred lender arrangement to students attending such covered 
institution, or to the families of such students, for the next award 
year.''; and
 (5) in subsection (d), as redesignated by paragraph (3)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A)--
 (I) in clause (i), by striking 
 ``section 151(3)(A)'' and inserting 
 ``section 151(4)(A) or educational 
 ISA''; and
 (II) by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(iii)(I) in the case of a covered 
 institution, the information described in 
 subsection (c), for each type of educational 
 ISA offered pursuant to a preferred lender 
 arrangement of the institution to students of 
 the institution or the families of such 
 students; and
 ``(II) in the case of an institution-
 affiliated organization of a covered 
 institution, the information described in 
 section 303(b)(1) of the ISA Student Protection 
 Act of 2022, for each type of educational ISA 
 offered pursuant to a preferred lender 
 arrangement of the organization to students of 
 such institution or the families of such 
 students.''; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (B)--
 (I) by inserting ``or ISA 
 provider'' after ``lender''; and
 (II) by inserting ``or an 
 educational ISA'' after ``loan''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2)(A)--
 (i) in the matter preceding clause (i), by 
 inserting ``or ISA provider'' after ``each 
 lender'';
 (ii) in clause (i), by striking ``clauses 
 (i) and (ii)'' and inserting ``clauses (i) 
 through (iii), as applicable''; and
 (iii) in clause (ii)--
 (I) by inserting ``or ISA 
 provider'' after ``the lender''; and
 (II) by inserting ``or educational 
 ISA'' after ``loan''.
 (f) Self-Certification Form for Educational ISAs.--Section 155 of 
the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1019d) is amended--
 (1) by striking the section heading and inserting the 
 following: ``self-certification forms for private education 
 loans or educational isas.'';
 (2) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1)--
 (i) by striking ``the self-certification 
 form'' and inserting ``a self-certification 
 form'';
 (ii) by inserting ``and, in consultation 
 with the Director of the Bureau of Consumer 
 Financial Protection, a self-certification form 
 for educational ISAs that shall be used to 
 satisfy the requirements of section 303(f) of 
 the ISA Student Protection Act of 2022'' after 
 ``Act''; and
 (iii) by striking ``Such form'' and 
 inserting ``Each form''; and
 (B) in paragraph (3)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by inserting ``or 
 educational ISA, as applicable'' after 
 ``loan''; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (C), by inserting ``or 
 educational ISA, as applicable'' after 
 ``loan''; and
 (3) in subsection (b), by striking ``the form'' and 
 inserting ``a form''.
 (g) Conforming Amendments.--Section 154 of the Higher Education Act 
of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1019c) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by inserting ``for education loans'' after 
 ``the model disclosure form''; and
 (B) by striking ``section 151(3)(A)'' and inserting 
 ``section 151(4)(A)''; and
 (2) in subsection (b)(2), by inserting ``for education 
 loans'' after ``model disclosure form''.

 TITLE V--APPLYING EXISTING CONSUMER PROTECTIONS TO INCOME SHARE 
 AGREEMENTS

SEC. 501. EQUAL ACCESS TO INCOME SHARE AGREEMENTS.

 (a) Activities Constituting Discrimination.--It shall be unlawful 
for any ISA provider to discriminate against any applicant, with 
respect to any aspect of an income share agreement--
 (1) on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, 
 sex or marital status, or age (provided the applicant has the 
 capacity to contract);
 (2) because all or part of the applicant's income derives 
 from any public assistance program (except for those excluded 
 from the definition of income established by the income share 
 agreement); or
 (3) because the applicant has in good faith exercised any 
 right under this Act.
 (b) Activities Not Constituting Discrimination.--It shall not 
constitute discrimination for purpose of subsection (a) for an ISA 
provider--
 (1) to make an inquiry of the applicant's age or of whether 
 the applicant's income derives from any public assistance 
 program, if such inquiry is for the purpose of determining the 
 amount and probable continuance of income levels, credit 
 history, or other pertinent element of creditworthiness as 
 provided in regulations of the Bureau;
 (2) to use any empirically derived credit system that 
 considers age if that system is demonstrably and statistically 
 sound in accordance with regulations of the Bureau, except that 
 in the operation of such a system, the age of an elderly 
 applicant may not be assigned a negative factor or value;
 (3) to make an inquiry of, or to consider the age of, an 
 elderly applicant when the age of that applicant is to be used 
 by the creditor in the extension of credit in favor of the 
 applicant; or
 (4) to use any empirically derived system that considers 
 the expected future income of an applicant to determine whether 
 to approve an application or to establish the financial and 
 other terms of an income share agreement, if that empirically 
 derived system is demonstrably and statistically sound and 
 reasonably designed such that approved applicants are all 
 reasonably expected to pay substantially similar effective 
 annual percentage rates as other similarly situated applicants, 
 except that in accordance with any regulations of the Bureau in 
 the operation of such a system to project an applicant's 
 expected future Income, an ISA provider--
 (A) may not consider an applicant's status as a 
 member or potential member of any of the classes 
 described in subsection (a);
 (B) may consider an applicant's current employment 
 status, current debt and other financial obligations, 
 or current and past income (as of the date of 
 application); or
 (C) in the case of educational ISAs, may consider 
 the historical income of consumers who have made 
 comparable progress toward the completion of the 
 educational program in which the applicant is or is 
 expected to be enrolled or toward a reasonably 
 comparable educational program.
 (c) Additional Activities Not Constituting Discrimination.--It 
shall not be a violation of subsection (a) for an ISA provider to 
refuse to extend an income share agreement--
 (1) that is offered pursuant to--
 (A) any financial assistance program expressly 
 authorized by law for an economically disadvantaged 
 class of persons;
 (B) any financial assistance program administered 
 by a nonprofit organization for its members or an 
 economically disadvantaged class of persons; or
 (C) any special purpose financial assistance 
 program that--
 (i) is carried out by a for-profit 
 organization to meet special social needs; and
 (ii) meets standards prescribed in 
 regulations by the Bureau; or
 (2) if the refusal is required by, or made pursuant to, a 
 program described in paragraph (1).
 (d) Reason for Adverse Action; Procedure Applicable.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 30 days (or such longer 
 reasonable time as specified in regulations of the Bureau for 
 any class of income share agreement transaction) after the date 
 on which an ISA provider receives a completed application for 
 an income share agreement, the ISA provider shall notify the 
 applicant of--
 (A) the action taken by the ISA provider with 
 respect to the application;
 (B) in the case of an adverse action, a clear and 
 accurate disclosure of the applicant's right to a 
 written statement of reasons in accordance with 
 paragraph (2) within 60 days after receiving the notice 
 under this paragraph; and
 (C) the identity of the person or office from which 
 the statement of reasons described in paragraph (2) may 
 be obtained.
 (2) Statement of reasons.--
 (A) In general.--Each applicant against which an 
 adverse action is taken shall be entitled to a written 
 statement from the applicable ISA provider regarding 
 the specific reasons for that adverse action, if the 
 request is made by the applicant not later than 60 days 
 after receiving the notice of an adverse action under 
 paragraph (1).
 (B) Timing.--An ISA provider shall provide an 
 applicant with the statement of reasons under 
 subparagraph (A) by the date that is not more than 30 
 days after the date of the consumer's request.
 (C) Oral statement.--Notwithstanding subparagraph 
 (A), the statement described in this paragraph may be 
 provided orally if the oral notification advises the 
 applicable applicant of the right of the applicant to 
 have the statement of reasons confirmed in writing, 
 upon written request by the applicant.
 (D) Third-party request.--If a third party requests 
 that an ISA provider make a specific extension of an 
 income share agreement directly or indirectly to an 
 applicant, the statement under this paragraph may be 
 made directly by the ISA provider, or indirectly 
 through the third party, if the identity of the ISA 
 provider is disclosed.
 (E) Verbal statements.--The requirements of this 
 paragraph may be satisfied by a verbal statement or 
 notification in the case of an ISA provider that acted 
 on not more than 150 applications during the calendar 
 year preceding the calendar year in which the 
 applicable adverse action is taken, as determined under 
 regulations of the Bureau.
 (e) Regulations.--
 (1) In general.--
 (A) Issuance of regulations.--The Bureau shall 
 prescribe regulations to carry out the purposes of this 
 section.
 (B) Contents.--The regulations prescribed under 
 subparagraph (A) may contain such classifications, 
 differentiation, or other provisions, and may provide 
 for such adjustments for any class of transactions, as 
 in the judgment of the Bureau are necessary or proper 
 to effectuate the purposes of this section, to prevent 
 circumvention or evasion of this section, or to 
 facilitate or substantiate compliance this section.
 (2) Consistent with equal credit opportunity act.--In 
 prescribing regulations under paragraph (1), the Bureau shall 
 be guided by the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (12 U.S.C. 1691 
 et seq.) and part 1002 of title 12, Code of Federal 
 Regulations, or any successor regulations.
 (3) Exempt transactions.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
 regulations prescribed under paragraph (1) may exempt 
 from the provisions of this section any class of 
 transactions that is not primarily for personal, 
 family, or household purposes, or any business or 
 commercial income share agreement or investment 
 contract made available by a financial institution, 
 except that a particular type of income share agreement 
 within such a class may be exempted only if the Bureau 
 makes an express finding that applying this section, or 
 of any provision of this section, to the income share 
 agreement would not contribute substantially to 
 effectuating the purposes of this section.
 (B) Limitation.--An exemption granted under 
 subparagraph (A) shall be--
 (i) for not longer than 5 years; and
 (ii) extended only if the Bureau makes a 
 subsequent determination, in the manner 
 described by that subparagraph, that the 
 exemption remains appropriate.
 (4) Maintenance of records.--Pursuant to the regulations 
 prescribed under paragraph (1), an entity making business or 
 commercial income share agreements shall maintain such records 
 or other data relating to those agreements as may be necessary 
 to evidence compliance with this section or enforce any action 
 pursuant to the authority of this section, except that in no 
 event shall those records or data be maintained for a period of 
 less than 1 year.
 (5) Deference.--Notwithstanding any power granted to any 
 Federal agency under this section, the deference that a court 
 affords to a Federal agency with respect to a determination 
 made by that agency relating to the meaning or interpretation 
 of any provision of this section that is subject to the 
 jurisdiction of the agency shall be applied as if that agency 
 were the only agency authorized to apply, enforce, interpret, 
 or administer the provisions of this section.
 (f) Enforcement.--The administrative enforcement of this section 
shall be consistent with section 704 of the Equal Credit Opportunity 
Act (15 U.S.C. 1691c) and the regulations implementing such section 
704.
 (g) Self-Testing and Self-Correction.--The incentives for self-
testing and self-correction under section 704A of the Equal Credit 
Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691c-1), and the regulations implementing 
such section 704A, shall apply to ISA providers offering income share 
agreements.
 (h) Applicability of Other Laws.--Section 705 of the Equal Credit 
Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691d), and the regulations implementing 
such section 705, shall apply to ISA providers offering income share 
agreements in the same manner in which those provisions apply to 
creditors offering loan products.
 (i) Civil Liability.--Section 706 of the Equal Credit Opportunity 
Act (15 U.S.C. 1691e), and the regulations implementing such section 
706, shall apply to ISA providers offering income share agreements.
 (j) Reports by Bureau and Attorney General.--
 (1) In general.--Each year, the Bureau and the Attorney 
 General shall, respectively, submit to Congress reports 
 concerning the administration of the functions of the Bureau 
 and the Attorney General, respectively, under this section, 
 including such recommendations as the Bureau and the Attorney 
 General, respectively determine necessary or appropriate.
 (2) Additional information.--Each report of the Bureau 
 submitted under paragraph (1) shall include the assessment of 
 the Bureau of the extent to which compliance with the 
 requirements of this title is being achieved and a summary of 
 the enforcement actions taken by each of the agencies assigned 
 administrative responsibilities under subsection (f).

SEC. 502. PROHIBITION ON REQUIRING PREAUTHORIZED ELECTRONIC FUND 
 TRANSFERS UNDER THE ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFER ACT.

 Section 913(1) of the Electronic Fund Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. 
1693k(1)) is amended by inserting ``, or the entering into an 
educational ISA or an income share agreement (as those terms are 
defined in section 2 of the ISA Student Protection Act of 2022) with a 
consumer'' after ``a consumer''.

SEC. 503. TREATMENT UNDER THE FAIR CREDIT REPORTING ACT.

 (a) In General.--Section 605 of the Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 
U.S.C. 1681c) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(i) Income Share Agreement Information.--With respect to an 
income share agreement (as that term is defined in section 2 of the ISA 
Student Protection Act of 2022), a consumer report made by a consumer 
reporting agency--
 ``(1) may include a description of the contract terms of 
 the income share agreement and, subject to subsection (a), 
 information with respect to amounts that are owed under the 
 income share agreement; and
 ``(2) may not include any speculation about future amounts 
 that may be owed under the income share agreement, including 
 the reporting of any payment caps or early termination 
 amounts.''.
 (b) Regulations.--The Bureau shall promulgate regulations with 
respect to the manner in which ISA providers may furnish, and consumer 
reporting agencies may report, information regarding income share 
agreements.

SEC. 504. TREATMENT UNDER THE FAIR DEBT COLLECTION PRACTICES ACT.

 (a) In General.--Section 803 of the Fair Debt Collection Practices 
Act (15 U.S.C. 1692a) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (5), by inserting ``, including such an 
 obligation or alleged obligation arising out of an income share 
 agreement, as that term is defined in section 2 of the ISA 
 Student Protection Act of 2022'' before the period at the end; 
 and
 (2) in paragraph (6), in the first sentence, by inserting 
 ``, including an ISA provider (as defined in section 2 of the 
 ISA Student Protection Act of 2022),'' after ``means any 
 person''.
 (b) Rules of Construction.--Nothing in this section, or the 
amendments made by this section, may be construed for purposes of any 
other Federal law as considering--
 (1) income share agreements as debts, once the ISA 
 recipient owes any amounts to the ISA provider under the income 
 share agreement; or
 (2) ISA providers as lenders, once the ISA recipient owes 
 any amounts to the ISA provider under the applicable income 
 share agreement.

SEC. 505. TREATMENT OF EDUCATIONAL INCOME SHARE AGREEMENTS FOR PURPOSES 
 OF MILITARY LENDING ACT.

 Section 987 of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (i) as subsection (j); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (h) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(i) Treatment of Educational Income Share Agreements.--The 
Secretary of Defense shall prescribe regulations to apply this section 
to educational ISAs (as that term is defined in section 2 of the ISA 
Student Protection Act of 2022), and an educational ISA shall be deemed 
to meet the annual percentage rate of interest limitation under 
subsection (b) of this section if the educational ISA, as applicable, 
would meet the requirements of section 102(b) of such Act (related to 
appropriate risk sharing) but with reference to the rate specified in 
subsection (b) of this section.''.

SEC. 506. TREATMENT UNDER THE SERVICEMEMBERS CIVIL RELIEF ACT.

 Section 207 of the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act (50 U.S.C. 3937) 
is amended--
 (1) in subsection (d)--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as 
 paragraphs (2) and (3), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting before paragraph (2), as 
 redesignated by subparagraph (A), the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(1) Educational income share agreement.--The term 
 `educational income share agreement' has the meaning given the 
 term `educational ISA' in section 2 of the ISA Student 
 Protection Act of 2022.'';
 (2) by redesignating subsections (d) and (e) as subsections 
 (e) and (f), respectively; and
 (3) by inserting before subsection (e), as redesignated by 
 paragraph (2), the following new subsection (d):
 ``(d) Educational Income Share Agreements.--
 ``(1) In general.--An educational income share agreement 
 shall be considered to be in compliance with the requirements 
 of subsection (a) if such agreement is compliant with the 
 requirements of section 102(b) of the ISA Student Protection 
 Act of 2022.
 ``(2) Interest rate.--In carrying out paragraph (1) of this 
 subsection, the interest rate referred to section 102(b) of 
 such Act shall be deemed to be the rate of interest specified 
 in subsection (a) of this section.''.

SEC. 507. PRESERVATION OF CONSUMERS' CLAIMS AND DEFENSES.

 (a) Application of Holder in Due Course Rule to Income Share 
Agreements.--Beginning on January 1, 2023, for purposes of applying 
part 433 of title 16, Code of Federal Regulations (commonly known as 
the ``Holder in Due Course Rule'' or the ``Holder Rule''), the term 
``consumer credit contract'', as defined in section 433.1 of such 
title, shall include income share agreements that--
 (1) involve the advancing of funds to, or on behalf of, a 
 consumer in return for the consumer's agreement to an income 
 share agreement; and
 (2) are related, in whole or substantial part, to a 
 purchase of goods or services from a seller who--
 (A) refers the consumer to the provider of the 
 income share agreement; or
 (B) is affiliated with the provider of the income 
 share agreement by common control, contract, or 
 business arrangement.
 (b) Disclosures.--In applying section 433.2 of title 16, Code of 
Federal Regulations, to a consumer credit contract that is an income 
share agreement described in subsection (a)--
 (1) in lieu of the disclosure required under section 
 433.2(a) of title 16, Code of Federal Regulations, the contract 
 shall contain the following disclosure in at least 10 point, 
 bold face type:
 ``NOTICE
 ``ANY HOLDER OF THIS INCOME SHARE AGREEMENT IS SUBJECT TO 
 ALL CLAIMS AND DEFENSES WHICH THE ISA RECIPIENT COULD ASSERT 
 AGAINST THE SELLER OF THE GOODS OR SERVICES OBTAINED UNDER THE 
 INCOME SHARE AGREEMENT OR WITH THE PROCEEDS OF THE INCOME SHARE 
 AGREEMENT. ANY RECOVERY BY THE ISA RECIPIENT UNDER SUCH A CLAIM 
 OR DEFENSE SHALL NOT EXCEED AMOUNTS PAID BY THE ISA RECIPIENT 
 UNDER THE INCOME SHARE AGREEMENT.''; and
 (2) in lieu of the disclosure required under section 
 433.2(b) of title 16, Code of Federal Regulations, the contract 
 shall contain the following disclosure in at least 10 point, 
 bold face type:
 ``NOTICE
 ``ANY HOLDER OF THIS INCOME SHARE AGREEMENT IS SUBJECT TO 
 ALL CLAIMS AND DEFENSES WHICH THE ISA RECIPIENT COULD ASSERT 
 AGAINST THE SELLER OF GOODS OR SERVICES OBTAINED UNDER THE 
 INCOME SHARE AGREEMENT OR WITH THE PROCEEDS OF THE INCOME SHARE 
 AGREEMENT. ANY RECOVERY UNDER SUCH A CLAIM OR DEFENSE BY THE 
 ISA RECIPIENT SHALL NOT EXCEED AMOUNTS PAID BY THE ISA 
 RECIPIENT UNDER THE INCOME SHARE AGREEMENT.''.

 TITLE VI--RELATION TO OTHER LAWS

SEC. 601. TREATMENT UNDER OTHER LAWS.

 (a) Insurance and Wagering.--An income share agreement shall not be 
treated as a contract for insurance, or as a betting or wagering 
contract, under any Federal or State law, except in the case of a State 
law that expressly states the law is intended to apply to income share 
agreements as defined in this Act.
 (b) Payments Not Considered Prepayments.--Any right that an ISA 
recipient may have to pay an amount greater than the amount financed 
under an income share agreement in order to extinguish the income share 
agreement earlier than the ISA duration or ISA maximum number of 
payments shall not be subject to any Federal or State law with respect 
to prepayment penalties, as long as--
 (1) the prepayment complies with the limitations on income 
 share agreements required under this Act and the amendments 
 made by this Act; and
 (2) in the case of a State law, the State law does not 
 expressly state that the law is intended to apply to income 
 share agreements as defined in this Act.
An income share agreement under this Act is not subject to the 
application of 15 U.S.C. 1650(e), to the extent it would be applicable 
to an income share agreement.
 (c) Treatment of Educational ISAs.--
 (1) Assignment of future wages for educational isas.--An 
 educational ISA shall be a valid, binding, and enforceable 
 contract, notwithstanding any State law limiting or otherwise 
 regulating assignments of future wages or other income, except 
 in the case of a State law that expressly states the law is 
 intended to apply to income share agreements as defined in this 
 Act.
 (2) Preemption of state law with respect to usury and 
 interest rates for educational isas.--An educational ISA shall 
 not be subject to a State law with respect to usury, interest 
 rates, fees, and charges for credit, loans, credit or 
 installment sales, or a State law requiring that installment 
 payments be substantially equal in amount, except in the case 
 of a State law that expressly states the law is intended to 
 apply to income share agreements as defined in this Act.
 (3) Preemption of state laws with respect to ability-to-
 repay and licensing laws for educational isas.--An educational 
 ISA shall not be subject to a State law with respect to 
 ``ability-to-repay'' requirements, and neither an ISA provider 
 issuing an educational ISA or its successor in interest, nor 
 any entity servicing any educational ISA on behalf of an ISA 
 provider or its successor in interest, shall be subject to any 
 State law with respect to licensing or registration, except in 
 the case of a State law that expressly states the law is 
 intended to apply to income share agreements, as defined in 
 this Act.

SEC. 602. RELATION TO STATE LAW.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Rule of construction.--This Act, other than the 
 provisions of titles I and III and section 501, may not be 
 construed as annulling, altering, or affecting, or exempting 
 any person subject to the provisions of this Act from complying 
 with the statutes, regulations, orders, or interpretations in 
 effect in any State, except to the extent that any such 
 provision of law is inconsistent with the provisions of this 
 Act, and then only to the extent of the inconsistency.
 (2) Greater protection under state law.--For purposes of 
 this subsection, a statute, regulation, order, or 
 interpretation in effect in any State is not inconsistent with 
 the provisions of this Act if the protection that such statute, 
 regulation, order, or interpretation affords to ISA recipients 
 or applicants is greater than the protection provided under 
 this Act. A determination regarding whether a statute, 
 regulation, order, or interpretation in effect in any State is 
 inconsistent with the provisions of this Act may be made by the 
 Bureau on its own motion or in response to a nonfrivolous 
 petition initiated by any interested person.
 (b) Relation to Other Provisions of Enumerated Consumer Laws That 
Relate to State Law.--No provision of this Act, except as provided in 
titles I and III and section 501, shall be construed as modifying, 
limiting, or superseding the operation of any provision of an 
enumerated consumer law that relates to the application of a law in 
effect in any State with respect to such enumerated consumer law.
 (c) Additional Consumer Protection Regulations in Response to State 
Action.--
 (1) Notice of proposed rule required.--The Bureau shall 
 issue a notice of proposed rulemaking whenever a majority of 
 the States has enacted a resolution in support of the 
 establishment or modification of a consumer protection 
 regulation by the Bureau.
 (2) Bureau considerations required for issuance of final 
 regulation.--Before prescribing a final regulation based upon a 
 notice issued under paragraph (1), the Bureau shall take into 
 account whether--
 (A) the proposed regulation would afford greater 
 protection to consumers than any existing regulation;
 (B) the intended benefits of the proposed 
 regulation for consumers would outweigh any increased 
 costs or inconveniences for consumers, and would not 
 discriminate unfairly against any category or class of 
 consumers; and
 (C) a Federal banking agency has advised that the 
 proposed regulation is likely to present an 
 unacceptable safety and soundness risk to insured 
 depository institutions.
 (3) Explanation of considerations.--The Bureau--
 (A) shall include a discussion of the 
 considerations required in paragraph (2) in the Federal 
 Register notice of a final regulation prescribed 
 pursuant to this subsection; and
 (B) whenever the Bureau determines not to prescribe 
 a final regulation, shall publish an explanation of 
 such determination in the Federal Register, and provide 
 a copy of such explanation to each State that enacted a 
 resolution in support of the proposed regulation, the 
 Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the 
 Senate, and the Committee on Financial Services of the 
 House of Representatives.
 (4) Reservation of authority.--No provision of this 
 subsection shall be construed as limiting or restricting the 
 authority of the Bureau to enhance consumer protection 
 standards established pursuant to this Act in response to a 
 motion of the Bureau or in response to a request by any other 
 interested person.
 (5) Rule of construction.--No provision of this subsection 
 shall be construed as exempting the Bureau from complying with 
 subchapter II of chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code.

 TITLE VII--ENFORCEMENT AND REPORTING

SEC. 701. ENFORCEMENT.

 (a) Enforcing Agencies.--Subject to subtitle B of the Consumer 
Financial Protection Act of 2010 (12 U.S.C. 5511 et seq.), compliance 
with the requirements imposed under this Act shall be enforced under--
 (1) section 8 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act by the 
 appropriate Federal banking agency, as defined in section 3(q) 
 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(q)), with 
 respect to--
 (A) national banks, Federal savings associations, 
 and Federal branches and Federal agencies of foreign 
 banks;
 (B) member banks of the Federal Reserve System 
 (other than national banks), branches and agencies of 
 foreign banks (other than Federal branches, Federal 
 agencies, and insured State branches of foreign banks), 
 commercial lending companies owned or controlled by 
 foreign banks, and organizations operating under 
 section 25 or 25A of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 
 601 et seq.); and
 (C) banks and State savings associations insured by 
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (other than 
 members of the Federal Reserve System), and insured 
 State branches of foreign banks;
 (2) the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1751 et seq.), 
 by the Director of the National Credit Union Administration, 
 with respect to any Federal credit union;
 (3) part A of subtitle VII of title 49, United States Code, 
 by the Secretary of Transportation, with respect to any air 
 carrier or foreign air carrier subject to that part;
 (4) the Packers and Stockyards Act, 1921 (7 U.S.C. 191 et 
 seq.) (except as provided in section 406 of that Act (7 U.S.C. 
 226)), by the Secretary of Agriculture, with respect to any 
 activities subject to that Act;
 (5) the Farm Credit Act of 1971 (12 U.S.C. 2001 et seq.), 
 by the Farm Credit Administration with respect to any Federal 
 land bank, Federal land bank association, Federal intermediate 
 credit bank, or production credit association;
 (6) subtitle E of the Consumer Financial Protection Act of 
 2010 (12 U.S.C. 5561 et seq.), by the Bureau, with respect to 
 any person subject to this Act; and
 (7) sections 21B and 21C of the Securities Exchange Act of 
 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78u-2, 78u-3), in the case of a broker or 
 dealer, other than a depository institution, by the Securities 
 and Exchange Commission.
 (b) Violations of This Act Deemed Violations of Pre-Existing 
Statutory Requirements; Additional Agency Powers.--For the purpose of 
the exercise by any agency referred to in subsection (a) of its powers 
under any Act referred to in that subsection, a violation of any 
requirement imposed under this Act shall be deemed to be a violation of 
a requirement imposed under that Act. In addition to its powers under 
any provision of law specifically referred to in subsection (a), each 
of the agencies referred to in that subsection may exercise, for the 
purpose of enforcing compliance with any requirement imposed under this 
Act, any other authority conferred on it by law.
 (c) Overall Enforcement Authority of the Bureau of Consumer 
Financial Protection.--Except to the extent that enforcement of the 
requirements imposed under this Act is specifically committed to some 
other Government agency under any of paragraphs (1) through (5) of 
subsection (a), and subject to subtitle B of the Consumer Financial 
Protection Act of 2010 (12 U.S.C. 5511 et seq.), the Bureau shall be 
authorized to enforce such requirements. All of the functions and 
powers of the Bureau under the Consumer Financial Protection Act of 
2010 (12 U.S.C. 5301 et seq.) are available to the Bureau to enforce 
compliance by any person with the requirements under this Act, 
irrespective of whether that person is engaged in commerce or meets any 
other jurisdictional tests under the Consumer Financial Protection Act 
of 2010 (12 U.S.C. 5301 et seq.).
 (d) Rules and Regulations.--The authority of the Bureau to issue 
regulations under this Act does not impair the authority of any other 
agency designated in this section to make rules respecting its own 
procedures in enforcing compliance with requirements imposed under this 
Act.

SEC. 702. REPORTING REQUIREMENT FOR THE BUREAU OF CONSUMER FINANCIAL 
 PROTECTION.

 Not less than frequently than once every 5 years, the Director 
shall submit to Congress a report that includes--
 (1) information on the prevalence and utilization of 
 educational ISAs and income share agreements; and
 (2) any other information pertaining to educational ISAs 
 and income share agreements that the Director determines is 
 appropriate.
 <all>