S 1227 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1227
To amend the Public Health Service Act, the Social Security Act, and the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide affordable health care of all
Americans, to reduce health care costs, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
June 5 (legislative day, JUNE 3), 1991
Mr. MITCHELL (for himself, Mr. KENNEDY, Mr. RIEGLE, and Mr. ROCKEFELLER)
introduced the following bill; which was read twice and ordered held at the
desk until the close of business June 6, 1991
June 6 (legislative day, JUNE 3), 1991
Referred to the Committee on Finance
A BILL
To amend the Public Health Service Act, the Social Security Act, and the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide affordable health care of all
Americans, to reduce health care costs, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `HealthAmerica: Affordable
 Health Care for All Americans Act'.
 (b) REFERENCE TO ACT- Hereafter this Act may be referred to as the
 `HealthAmerica Act'.
 (c) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents of this Act is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--AMENDMENTS TO PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT
Sec. 101. Basic health benefits for employees and their families.
Sec. 102. Obligation to secure health insurance.
TITLE II--REQUIREMENTS FOR HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS
Sec. 201. Requirements for health benefit plans.
TITLE III--SPECIAL ASSISTANCE FOR SMALL AND MEDIUM-SIZED BUSINESS
Sec. 301. Preemption of State mandated benefit laws.
Subtitle A--Reform of Small Group Insurance
Sec. 311. Group health insurance standards.
Subtitle B--Tax Equity for Small and Medium-Sized Businesses
Sec. 321. Deductible health coverage provisions.
Sec. 322. Excise tax for violation of health benefit plan requirements.
Subtitle C--Opportunity for Voluntary Provision of Coverage
Sec. 331. Medium-sized employers.
Sec. 332. Measurement surveys.
Sec. 333. Small employers.
Sec. 334. Failure to make surveys.
Subtitle D--Small Business Tax Credit
Sec. 341. Allowance of a credit for small and medium-sized business group
health plan expenditures.
Subtitle E--Additional Assistance to Small and Medium-Sized Businesses
Sec. 351. Opportunity to buy coverage at medicare rates.
Sec. 352. Special provisions for new small businesses.
Sec. 353. Small and medium-sized business advisory committee.
TITLE IV--REDUCING HEALTH CARE COST INFLATION
Subtitle A--Outcomes Research and Practice Guideline Development and
Dissemination
Sec. 401. Initial guidelines and standards.
Sec. 402. Amendments to the Social Security Act.
Subtitle B--Federal Health Expenditure Board
Sec. 411. Federal Health Expenditure Board.
Subtitle C--State Purchasing Consortia
Sec. 421. State purchasing consortia.
Subtitle D--Cost Control Grant Program
Sec. 431. Cost Control Grant Program.
Subtitle E--Malpractice Reform
Sec. 441. Malpractice reform.
Sec. 442. Study of medical malpractice.
Subtitle F--Reducing the Administrative Cost of Assuring Appropriate
Utilization of Health Care Services and Improving the Quality of Health
Care Services
Sec. 451. Establishment of a quality improvement board.
Subtitle G--Use of Practice Guidelines in Federal Health Insurance and
Service Programs
Sec. 461. Use of practice guidelines in Federal health insurance and service
programs.
Subtitle H--National Standards for the Promotion of Managed Care
Sec. 471. National standards for the promotion of managed care.
Subtitle I--Expansion of Technology Assessment
Sec. 481. Expansion of technology assessment.
TITLE V--CONTRIBUTION TO PUBLIC PLAN BY EMPLOYERS NOT PROVIDING HEALTH COVERAGE
Sec. 501. Contribution by employers not providing required private health
benefit plans.
TITLE VI--ASSURING PROVISION OF HEALTH BENEFITS TO ALL AMERICANS
Sec. 601. Establishment of AmeriCare.
TITLE VII--DEVELOPMENT OF HEALTH SERVICE CAPACITY
Sec. 701. Grants for expansion of availability of primary care services.
TITLE VIII--EFFECTIVE DATE
Sec. 801. Effective date.
Sec. 802. Policy respecting additional benefits.
TITLE I--AMENDMENTS TO PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT
SEC. 101. BASIC HEALTH BENEFITS FOR EMPLOYEES AND THEIR FAMILIES.
 (a) REQUIREMENT- The Public Health Service Act is amended--
 (1) by redesignating title XXVII (42 U.S.C. 300cc et seq.) as title
 XXVIII; and
 (2) by inserting after title XXVI the following new title:
`TITLE XXVII--BASIC HEALTH BENEFITS FOR EMPLOYEES AND THEIR FAMILIES
`Part A--Requirements of Health Benefits
`SEC. 2701. HEALTH BENEFITS.
 `(a) REQUIREMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in part B, each employer shall--
 `(A) enroll each of its employees (other than part-time employees) and
 their families in a health benefit plan in accordance with part B; or
 `(B) make a contribution under title V of the HealthAmerica Act, for the
 coverage for such employees and their families under the public health
 insurance plan established under title XXI of the Social Security Act.
 `(2) PART-TIME EMPLOYEES- In meeting the requirements of paragraph (1)
 with respect to part-time employees, an employer may, except as provided
 in part B--
 `(A) enroll all of its part-time employees and their families as required
 under paragraph (1)(A); or
 `(B) make a contribution to the public health insurance plan referred to
 in paragraph (1)(B) on behalf of all such employees.
 `(3) LIMITATION- An employer providing health insurance coverage for
 pregnancy-related services and for services for children in the 1-year
 period prior to the date of enactment of this section may not terminate
 coverage for such services or reduce the financial contribution provided
 for the cost of coverage for such services prior to the time such employer
 is required to provide or contribute to coverage under paragraph (1).
 `(b) COORDINATION WITH PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN- An employer making
 a contribution for coverage under the public health insurance plan as
 provided for in subsection (a)(1)(B) shall follow such procedures as the
 Secretary may prescribe to facilitate the enrollment of its employees in
 such public health insurance plan. Such procedures shall include--
 `(1) the distribution of enrollment forms and information to employees;
 `(2) notifying in writing each employee of the availability of premium
 and cost-sharing subsidies for low-income families;
 `(3) notifying the State in which an employee resides concerning the
 identify of an employee on behalf of whom a contribution is being made;
 `(4) submitting enrollment forms and information to the State agency
 administering the public health insurance plan established under title XXI
 of the Social Security Act on behalf of the employee and the employee's
 family, if required by the State in which the employee resides;
 `(5) withholding, in the form of payroll deductions, an employee's share of
 the public health insurance plan premium and submitting such withholding
 to the administering State agency on behalf of the employee, if required
 by the State in which the employee resides; and
 `(6) notifying the appropriate administering State agency of the public
 health insurance plan when an employee ceases to be an employee.
 `(c) ENFORCEMENT- Any employer that does not comply with subsections (a)
 and (b) shall be subject to section 2732.
 `(d) DEFINITIONS- The terms used in this section shall have the meanings
 prescribed for such terms by section 2713.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Sections 2701 through 2714 of the Public Health Service Act (42
 U.S.C. 300cc through 300cc-15) are redesignated as sections 2801 through
 2814, respectively.
 (2)(A) Sections 465(f) and 497 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 286(f) and 289(f))
 are amended by striking out `2701' each place that such appears and
 inserting in lieu thereof `2801'.
 (B) Section 305(i) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 242c(i)) is amended by striking
 out `2711' each place such appears and inserting in lieu thereof `2811'.
SEC. 102. OBLIGATION TO SECURE HEALTH INSURANCE.
 (a) FEDERAL PROGRAMS- Beginning with the seventh full year after the date of
 enactment of this Act, to be eligible for benefits under a Federal program,
 an individual seeking benefits under such program shall certify to the
 administrator of such program that such individual and the dependents of
 such individual possess health insurance coverage that meets the applicable
 minimum standards under this Act.
 (b) INTERNAL REVENUE EXEMPTIONS- To be eligible to claim the exemption amount
 to which an individual is entitled under section 151 of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986, such individual shall certify, as part of the personal income
 tax return filed by such individual with the Internal Revenue Service,
 that such individual is covered under a health insurance plan that meets
 the applicable minimum standards under this Act. A parent shall make such
 certification on behalf of a dependent child.
TITLE II--REQUIREMENTS FOR HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS
SEC. 201. REQUIREMENTS FOR HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS.
 Title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act (as added by section 101)
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new part:
`Part B--Requirements for Health Benefit Plans
`Subpart 1--Requirement and Definitions
`SEC. 2711. REQUIREMENT TO ENROLL EMPLOYEES AND FAMILIES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- This part shall apply to employers required to enroll
 employees and their families in health benefit plans under section 2701(a).
 `(b) TYPES OF PLANS PERMITTED- Except as required under chapter 2 of
 subtitle A of title III of the HealthAmerica Act (relating to small and
 medium-sized business insurance), an employer may meet the requirements
 of this part by means of enrollment in any health benefit plan.
 `(c) EXCEPTION FOR EMPLOYERS IN HAWAII- Employers that have employees in
 the State of Hawaii shall be exempt from the requirements of this part with
 respect to such employees, for so long as the Hawaii Prepaid Health Care Act
 (Hawaii Rev. Stat. Chapter 393) remains in effect. This subsection shall
 not apply if the proportion of the population with health care coverage
 provided under such Act that is at least actuarially equivalent to the
 coverage required under this title is, or becomes, less than that required
 to be provided in other States under this title or the HealthAmerica Act.
`SEC. 2712. COVERAGE OF EMPLOYEES AND FAMILY MEMBERS.
 `(a) REQUIREMENT- Except as permitted under subsections (b) and (d) and
 section 2723(c)--
 `(1) the enrollment of an employee in a health benefit plan under this part
 shall include the enrollment of the family of such employee in the plan; and
 `(2) the enrollment of an employee or the family of an employee in a health
 benefit plan may not be waived by the employee.
 `(b) EXCEPTIONS TO AVOID DUPLICATE FAMILY COVERAGE-
 `(1) SPOUSE OR PARENT EMPLOYED- An employee may waive enrollment in a health
 benefit plan under this part for the spouse or a child of the employee but
 only for such period as the employee demonstrates that such spouse or child,
 respectively, is actually covered under a health benefit plan.
 `(2) CHILD EMPLOYED- A child who is employed (or a parent on behalf of
 the child) may waive enrollment in a health benefit plan provided by the
 employer of such child during any period in which the child otherwise is
 covered under a health benefit plan.
 `(c) NONDISCRIMINATION BASED ON FAMILY STATUS- An employer shall not fail or
 refuse to hire, and shall not discharge or otherwise discriminate against,
 any individual because the individual has a spouse or child that would
 be required under this part to be enrolled by such employer in a health
 benefit plan.
 `(d) WAIVER IN CASE OF MULTIPLE EMPLOYERS- In the case of an individual who
 is an employee with respect to more than one employer and who is required
 to enroll in a health benefit plan, such employee may waive enrollment in
 the health benefit plan of any such employer, but only if such employee
 is, and certifies to the employer that such employee is, enrolled in the
 health benefit plan of one employer.
`SEC. 2713. DEFINITIONS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Unless otherwise specifically provided, as used in
 this title:
 `(1) CHILD- The term `child' means, with respect to an employee, an
 individual--
 `(A) who--
 `(i) is under 19 years of age;
 `(ii) is under 23 years of age and a full-time student; or
 `(iii) is an unmarried, dependent child, regardless of age, who is incapable
 of self-support as a result of a mental or physical disability that existed
 prior to the individual reaching 22 years of age; and
 `(B)(i) who is the biological, adopted, or foster child of the employee
 or the spouse of the employee, or of the dependent child of the employee
 or the spouse of the employee;
 `(ii) who is the legal ward of the employee or the spouse of the employee; or
 `(iii) with respect to whom the employee or spouse of the employee, stands
 in loco parentis during the course of an adoption application.
 `(2) Employee-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the term
 `employee' means, with respect to an employer, an individual who normally
 performs at least 1 hour of service per week for that employer.
 `(B) HANDICAPPED WORKERS- The term `employee' does not include an individual
 described in section 14(c) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29
 U.S.C. 214(c)).
 `(C) CERTAIN EMPLOYEES- The term `employee' means, with respect to an
 employer described in section 3(37) of the Employee Retirement Income
 Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(37)), an individual who performs--
 `(i) 17.5 hours or more of service per week for the employer; or
 `(ii) an equivalent amount of service during a 1-, 3-, or 6-month period
 for the employer, as determined under regulations issued by the Secretary.
 `(D) LESS-THAN-FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE DEFINED- The term `less-than-full-time
 employee' means, with respect to an employer, an employee who normally
 performs on a monthly basis less than 25 hours of service per week but
 more than 17.5 hours per week for that employer.
 `(E) CONSULTANTS AND CONTRACTORS- The term `employee' shall include an
 individual who is a consultant or independent contractor of an employer
 if the Secretary determines that the consulting arrangement or contract
 was entered into to avoid the requirements of this part.
 `(F) PART-TIME EMPLOYEE- The term `part-time employee' means, with respect
 to an employer, an individual who normally performs on a monthly basis--
 `(i) less than 17.5 hours per week; and
 `(ii) 1 hour or more per week for that employer.
 `(3) EMPLOYER-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the term
 `employer' means--
 `(i) an entity that is required to pay the individuals it employs the minimum
 wage prescribed by section 6 of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29
 U.S.C. 206) (or would be required to pay such wage but for the dollar volume
 standards prescribed in section 3(s) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 203(s)) or the
 exemptions prescribed in section 13(a) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 213(a)); and
 `(ii) any State or political subdivision thereof, or any agency or
 instrumentality thereof;
but such term does not include the Federal Government or a subdivision thereof.
 `(B) OWNER-OPERATORS- An owner-operator of a business shall be considered
 to be both an employer and employee with respect to himself or herself if
 the owner-operator has one or more other employees.
 `(C) SMALL AND MEDIUM-SIZED EMPLOYERS- The term `small employer' means, with
 respect to a calendar year, an employer that normally employs fewer than
 25 employees during the calendar year, and the term `medium-sized employer'
 means, with respect to a calendar year, an employer that normally employs 25
 or more employees, but not more than 100 employees, during the calendar year.
 `(D) APPLICATION OF CONTROLLED GROUP RULES- Section 607(4) of the Employee
 Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1167(4)) shall apply
 in the determination under this part of whether an employer is a small
 or medium-sized employer and the number of employees an employer normally
 employs.
 `(E) FAMILY FARMERS-
 `(i) PRICE SUPPORT GREATER THAN 70 PERCENT OF PARITY- The term `employer'
 shall not include the owner or operator of a family farm unless the level
 of agricultural prices, or the minimum level of agricultural price support
 provided by the Secretary of Agriculture for loans and purchases, for the
 major commodity produced on the farm is equal to or greater than 70 percent
 of the parity price of the commodity as maintained by the Secretary during
 the preceding 2 crop years.
 `(ii) PRICE SUPPORT LESS THAN 70 PERCENT OF PARITY- Owners and operators
 of a family farm who do not receive minimum agricultural price support
 through loans and purchases that is equal to or greater than 70 percent
 of parity for the major commodity produced on the farm from the Secretary
 of Agriculture for the preceding crop year shall be included within the
 definition of the term `employer' only if, based on a national referendum
 conducted by the Secretary of Agriculture, a majority of the owners and
 operators vote in favor of mandatory participation in the small business
 insurance program provided by part C and the HealthAmerica Act.
 `(iii) NO COVERED EMPLOYEES- Owners and operators of family farms with no
 employees required to be enrolled in health benefit plans under this part,
 shall be included in the definition of `employee' under this part if,
 based on a national referendum conducted by the Secretary of Agriculture,
 a majority of farmers in the commodity group vote in favor of mandatory
 participation in the small business insurance program provided by part C
 and the HealthAmerica Act.
 `(iv) DEFINITION OF FAMILY FARM- As used in this subparagraph, the term
 `family farm' means a farm with respect to which--
 `(I) the operator or the family of the operator, or both (or, if the
 operator is a cooperative, corporation, partnership, or joint operation,
 the members, stockholders, partners, or joint operators, respectively)
 devote a substantial amount of time daily to the management or operation
 of the farm;
 `(II) a majority of the hours of labor required annually for the (farm and
 nonfarm) enterprise of the farm is provided by the operator or the family of
 the operator, or both (or, if the operator is a cooperative, corporation,
 partnership, or joint operation, by the members, stockholders, partners,
 or joint operators, respectively, and the families of such individuals); and
 `(III) the value of the gross annual sales of agricultural commodities
 produced on the farm is not more than $750,000.
 `(4) FAMILY AND FAMILY MEMBER- The terms `family' and `family member'
 mean, with respect to an employee, the spouse and children of the employee.
 `(5) HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN- The term `health benefit plan' means an employee
 welfare benefit plan (as defined in section 3(1) of the Employee Retirement
 Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(1)) that--
 `(A) provides medical care to participants or beneficiaries directly or
 through insurance, reimbursement, or otherwise; and
 `(B) meets the requirements of section 2721.
 `(6) INSURER- The term `insurer' means an entity qualified under the laws
 of a State to offer insurance or provide health benefits in that State.
 `(7) MANAGED CARE-
 `(A) MANAGED CARE ENTITY- The term `managed care entity' means an insurer,
 health maintenance organization, preferred provider organization, dental
 plan organization, or other entity licensed to do business in a State,
 that markets managed care plans to groups or individuals or an employer,
 labor union or other State licensed entity that provides managed care
 plans for its employees or members.
 `(B) MANAGED CARE PLAN- The term `managed care plan' means a health
 benefit plan--
 `(i) in which the insurer--
 `(I) utilizes explicit standards for the selection and recertification of
 participating providers;
 `(II) has organizational arrangements, established in accordance with
 regulations of the Secretary, for an ongoing quality assurance program
 for its health services, which program (aa) stresses health outcomes, and
 (bb) provides review by physicians and other health professionals of the
 process followed in the provision of health services; and
 `(III) contains significant incentives to use the participating providers
 and procedures provided for by the plan; and
 `(ii) which, if it limits coverage of services to those provided by
 participating providers or permits deductibles and coinsurance with respect
 to basic health services provided by persons who are not participating
 providers which are in excess of those permitted under health benefit plans--
 `(I) has a sufficient number and distribution of participating providers
 to assure that all covered items and services are (aa) available and
 accessible to each enrollee, within the area served by the plan, with
 reasonable promptness and in a manner which assures continuity, and (bb)
 when medically necessary, available and accessible twenty-four hours a
 day and seven days a week; and
 `(II) provides benefits for covered items and services not furnished by
 participating providers if the items and services are medically necessary and
 immediately required because of an unforeseen illness, injury, or condition.
 `(C) PARTICIPATING PROVIDER- The term `participating provider' means a
 physician, hospital, health maintenance organization, pharmacy, laboratory,
 or other appropriately licensed provider of health care services or supplies,
 that has entered into an agreement with a managed care entity to provide
 such services or supplies to a patient enrolled in a managed care plan.
 `(D) UTILIZATION REVIEW- The term `utilization review' means a program
 for reviewing the necessity and appropriateness of health care services
 provided or proposed to be provided to a patient.
 `(8) MENTAL DISORDER- The term `mental disorder' has the same meaning given
 such term in the International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision,
 Clinical Modification.
 `(9) NONGOVERNMENTAL EMPLOYER- The term `nongovernmental employer' means
 an employer not described in paragraph (3)(A)(ii).
 `(10) PHYSICIAN SERVICES- The term `physician services' means professional
 medical services lawfully provided by a physician under State medical
 practice acts, and includes professional services provided by a dentist,
 licensed advanced-practice nurse, optometrist, podiatrist, or chiropractor
 acting within the scope of their practices (as determined under State law)
 if such services would be treated as physician services if furnished by
 a physician, except as provided in section 2722(e).
 `(11) STATE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `State' means each of the several States and
 the District of Columbia.
 `(B) ELECTION- If the Governor of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or of
 any territory of the United States certifies to the President that Puerto
 Rico or such territory has enacted legislation stating that Puerto Rico or
 such territory desires to be included under the provisions of this Act,
 Puerto Rico or such territory shall be included under the definition of
 State for the purposes of this part beginning with January 1 of the first
 calendar year which begins later than 90 days after the President receives
 such notification.
`Subpart 2--Requirements for Health Benefit Plans
`SEC. 2721. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS; PERMITTING ACTUARIALLY EQUIVALENT PLANS.
 `(a) GENERAL REQUIREMENTS- Subject to subsections (b) and (c), in order
 for a health benefit plan to meet the requirements of this section, such
 plan shall--
 `(1) provide benefits for items and services in accordance with section 2722;
 `(2) provide coverage of employees and family enrolled in the plan in
 accordance with section 2723; and
 `(3) provide for premiums, deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance in
 accordance with section 2724.
 `(b) ACTUARIALLY EQUIVALENT PLANS PERMITTED-
 `(1) VARIATIONS IN PREMIUMS, DEDUCTIBLES, AND COST-SHARING- A health benefit
 plan shall meet the requirements of this section, notwithstanding that
 such plan does not meet one or more of the requirements of section 2724
 (relating to premiums, deductibles, copayments, coinsurance, and limit on
 out-of-pocket expenses) if the actuarial value of benefits provided under
 the plan (as defined in paragraph (8)) is not less than the equivalent of
 the actuarial value of benefits provided under the plan that would have
 applied if the plan met the requirements described in subsection (a).
 `(2) MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS- Nothing in this subsection shall be construed
 as not requiring each plan--
 `(A) to meet the requirements of section 2723; or
 `(B) to establish a limit on out-of-pocket expenses under section 2724(d),
 except that this subparagraph shall not be construed to require the
 establishment of the out-of-pocket limit described in section 2724(d)(5)(B).
 `(3) MENTAL HEALTH BENEFITS- Notwithstanding any other provision of this part
 or of the HealthAmerica Act, a health benefit plan may meet the requirements
 of section 2722(a)(6) by including payment for any reasonable combination
 of benefits described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of such section if the
 plan includes payment for--
 `(A) benefits the value of which is at least actuarially equivalent to
 the value of the benefits for which payment is otherwise required under
 such subparagraphs; and
 `(B) both types of benefits described in each such subparagraph.
 `(4) ADVISORY BOARD-
 `(A) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary shall establish an Advisory Board to
 provide advice to the Secretary concerning the development of actuarial
 equivalency standards and such other matters relating to the administration
 of this part as the Secretary or the Board considers appropriate.
 `(B) MEMBERSHIP- The Advisory Board shall consist of 15 members appointed
 by the Secretary, of whom--
 `(i) four members shall be representatives of employers, who shall be
 experienced in the administration of and knowledgeable about health
 insurance and actively engaged in the management or design of health
 insurance programs, of which--
 `(I) two members shall be representatives of large businesses, as determined
 by the Secretary; and
 `(II) two members shall be representatives of small and medium-sized
 businesses;
 `(ii) two members shall be representatives of labor organizations, who
 shall possess qualifications of the type required for representatives
 under clause (i);
 `(iii) four members shall be representatives of the insurance industry,
 at least one of whom shall be knowledgeable about small group policies;
 `(iv) two members shall be actuaries, who shall be experienced in the
 administration of and knowledgeable about health insurance programs; and
 `(v) three members shall be representatives of consumers not described in
 clauses (i) through (iv).
 `(C) TERMS- Each member of the Advisory Board shall serve for a term of 4
 years, except that members initially appointed shall serve for staggered
 terms, as designated by the Secretary. A member may serve on the Board
 after the expiration of the term of the member until a successor has taken
 office as a member of the Board.
 `(D) COMPENSATION- The members of the Advisory Board may be allowed travel
 expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by
 section 5703 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes
 or regular places of business, for each day (including travel time) during
 which they are attending meetings or conferences of the Advisory Board or
 otherwise engaged in the business of the Board.
 `(E) DEVELOPMENT OF ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENCY VARIATIONS- Not later than 6
 months before the effective date of this part, the Advisory Board shall
 develop and transmit to the Secretary--
 `(i) at least three model health plans each with an actuarial value of
 benefits that is equivalent to the actuarial value of benefits of a basic
 plan (as defined in paragraph (9));
 `(ii) a table of actuarial equivalency describing permitted expansions
 in covered services and variations in copayments, deductibles, limits on
 out-of-pocket expenses, and an employer's share of the premium or premiums
 under a health plan, as a percentage increase or decrease in the actuarial
 value of the basic plan, with the table describing as many expansions
 and variations as practicable in order to facilitate compliance with this
 section; and
 `(iii) recommendations for procedures to facilitate the process by which
 an employer may certify actuarial equivalency for plan variations not
 provided in the model health plans or the table of actuarial equivalency
 and for the certification of multiple plans offered by the same employer.
 `(F) REVIEW OF CHANGES- The Advisory Board shall review proposed changes to
 the basic benefit package required of health benefit plans and transmit a
 cost benefit analysis of such changes, along with recommendations, to the
 appropriate committees of Congress and the Secretary.
 `(5) TABLE OF ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENCY- The Secretary shall publish, at least
 3 months prior to the effective date of this part, a table that specifies
 the percentage increase or decrease in the actuarial value of benefits
 under a health benefit plan providing only the required benefits that
 would result from variations in covered services, copayments, deductibles,
 limits on out-of-pocket expenses, an employer's share of the premium or
 premiums under a health benefit plan, or any combination thereof. The table
 shall describe as many variations as feasible. In developing the table,
 the Secretary shall consider the recommendations of the Advisory Board
 established under paragraph (4).
 `(6) COMPLIANCE WITH FIDUCIARY DUTIES- In the case of health benefit plan
 variations for which relative actuarial values are not expressly provided
 for in the table published under paragraph (5) or in the case of variations
 in which one or more elements of covered services, copayments, deductibles,
 and limits on out-of-pocket expenses are given a relative actuarial value by
 the plan administrator that is different from that provided by such table,
 the plan shall not be considered out of compliance with this section--
 `(A) if, under a process consistent with the duties of a fiduciary under
 part 4 of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974,
 it is established that, and an actuary meeting credentials established by
 the American Academy of Actuaries or by the Secretary has certified that,
 the actuarial value of the benefits of the plan is at least equivalent to
 the actuarial value of the benefits of a basic plan; and
 `(B) until and unless the Secretary has determined that such variations
 are not in compliance with the requirements of this section.
 `(7) MULTIPLE PLANS- In the case of an employer that has a health benefit
 plan that meets the requirements of paragraph (6)(A) or is otherwise
 determined to have an actuarial value of benefits that is at least equivalent
 to the actuarial value of a basic plan, the Secretary shall establish by
 regulation streamlined procedures for the approval of additional health
 benefit plans the actuarial value of the benefits of which is at least
 equivalent to the actuarial value of the benefits of the approved health
 benefit plan.
 `(8) ACTUARIAL VALUE OF BENEFITS DEFINED- For purposes of this subsection,
 the `actuarial value of benefits' of a plan is the amount by which the
 total of the amounts payable as benefits under the plan exceeds the amount
 of the premiums, deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance payable by the
 employee under the plan, as determined on an actuarial basis per enrollee
 for a plan year.
 `(9) BASIC PLAN DEFINED- For purposes of this subsection, the term `basic
 plan' means a health benefit plan that only provides the basic benefits
 required under this part.
`SEC. 2722. REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO COVERED ITEMS AND SERVICES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this section, a health
 benefit plan shall include payment for--
 `(1) inpatient and outpatient hospital care, except that treatment for a
 mental disorder is subject to the special limitations described in paragraph
 (6)(A);
 `(2) inpatient and outpatient physician services, except that psychotherapy
 or counseling for a mental disorder is subject to the special limitations
 described in paragraph (6)(B);
 `(3) diagnostic tests;
 `(4) prenatal care and well-baby care provided to children who are 1 year
 of age or younger;
 `(5) preventive services, limited to--
 `(A) well child care;
 `(B) pap smears; and
 `(C) mammograms; and
 `(6)(A) inpatient hospital care for a mental disorder for not less than 45
 days per year, except that days of partial hospitalization or residential
 care may be substituted for days of inpatient care according to a ratio
 established by the Secretary; and
 `(B) outpatient psychotherapy and counseling for a mental disorder for not
 less than 20 visits per year provided by a provider who is acting within
 the scope of State law and who--
 `(i) is a physician; or
 `(ii) meets the standards of subsection (g)(2)(B) and is a duly licensed or
 certified clinical psychologist or a duly licensed or certified clinical
 social worker, a duly licensed or certified equivalent mental health
 professional, or a clinic or center providing duly licensed or certified
 mental health services.
 `(b) EXCEPTIONS- Subsection (a) shall not be construed as requiring a plan
 to include payment for--
 `(1) items and services that are not medically necessary;
 `(2) routine physical examinations or preventive care (other than care
 and services described in paragraphs (4) and (5) of subsection (a); or
 `(3) experimental services and procedures, except that this paragraph
 shall not apply to routine medical costs associated with peer-reviewed and
 approved protocols conducted in connection with peer-reviewed and approved
 research programs, pursuant to standards established by the Secretary.
 `(c) AMOUNT, SCOPE, AND DURATION OF CERTAIN BENEFITS- Except as provided in
 subsection (b), a health benefit plan shall place no limits on the amount,
 scope, or duration of benefits described in paragraphs (1) through (3)
 of subsection (a).
 `(d) AMOUNT, SCOPE, AND DURATION OF PREVENTIVE SERVICES- A health benefit
 plan may limit the amount, scope, and duration of preventive services
 described in subsection (a)(5) pursuant to regulations of the Secretary
 specifying the amount, scope, and duration of such care. The Secretary shall
 develop such regulations after consultation with appropriate medical experts.
 `(e) Limitations-
 `(1) PANELS AND MANAGED CARE SYSTEMS- Nothing in this title or the
 HealthAmerica Act, shall prohibit a health benefit plan from providing
 benefits for the items and services described in this section through a
 managed care system, and from selecting particular health care providers
 or types, classes, or categories of health care providers to participate
 in such managed care system. Such managed care system shall provide, in
 accordance with regulations issued by the Secretary, reasonable access to
 care by plan enrollees.
 `(2) DIFFERENT LEVELS OF PAYMENTS- Nothing in this title or the HealthAmerica
 Act, shall prohibit a health benefit plan from establishing a different
 level of payments for reimbursement for different health care providers
 furnishing the benefits for the items and services described in this section.
 `(3) HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS- Nothing in this title or the HealthAmerica Act,
 shall be construed to require a health benefit plan to utilize any health
 care provider (or type, class, or category of health care provider) to
 provide benefits for the items and services described in this section that
 were provided by the plan before the effective date of this part, other than
 the health care providers being utilized by the health benefit plan on such
 effective date, except that this paragraph shall not apply to duly licensed
 or certified clinical psychologists (acting within the scope of State law)
 after the end of the 5-year period beginning on the effective date of this
 part. This paragraph shall not apply to plans offered under part C.
 `(4) DENIAL OF PAYMENT TO EXCLUDED PROVIDERS- Nothing in this title or the
 HealthAmerica Act, shall require a health benefit plan to make payment
 to any health care provider that is excluded from participation in any
 Federal health care program.
 `(f) BASIS OF PAYMENT MAY DIFFER FROM ACTUAL CHARGES- The requirement
 of payment for services described in subsection (a) shall not prevent an
 employer from establishing a fee schedule or other basis of payment that
 is different from actual charges, but only if such fee schedule or other
 basis provides, pursuant to regulations of the Secretary, for payment at
 a level sufficient to achieve adequate access to services covered by the
 plan without additional out-of-pocket expenses for the covered service
 (but for copayments and deductibles permitted under section 2724).
 `(g) MENTAL HEALTH CARE-
 `(1) INPATIENT CARE- Subject to the provisions of subsection (e), inpatient
 hospital care described in subsection (a)(6)(A) shall include reimbursement
 for professional care provided to the individual while the individual is
 receiving such inpatient care, by a physician or duly licensed or certified
 clinical psychologist operating within the scope of practice of the physician
 or psychologist, as determined appropriate under State law. Nothing in this
 subsection shall be construed to modify hospital practices with regard to
 scope of practice, admitting privileges, or billing arrangements.
 `(2) OUTPATIENT CARE-
 `(A) USE OF PROVIDERS- Subject to the provisions of subsection (e), a health
 benefit plan that provided benefits with respect to outpatient psychotherapy
 described in subsection (a)(6)(B) prior to January 1, 1991, shall not
 be required under such subsection to provide benefits for outpatient
 psychotherapy provided by any health care provider (or type, class, or
 category of health care provider) described in subsection (a)(6)(B)(ii),
 other than duly licensed or certified clinical psychologists and health care
 providers being utilized by the plan on January 1, 1991. This subparagraph
 shall not apply to plans offered under part C.
 `(B) STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PROVIDERS- The Secretary shall establish
 standards that providers referred to in subsection (a)(6)(B)(ii) must meet
 to be eligible for payment under a health benefit plan and such standards
 shall require that such providers have training and education equivalent
 to a licensed clinical social worker (as defined in title XVIII of the
 Social Security Act).
 `(h) STUDIES-
 `(1) SERVICES- The Secretary shall periodically review the appropriateness
 of the preventive services required to be covered under this section and
 prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report
 concerning any recommendations for changes in the list of such services
 that are required to be covered.
 `(2) COVERAGE FOR CERTAIN SERVICES- Not later than 1 year after the date
 of enactment of this part, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the
 appropriate committees of Congress a report concerning the cost-effectiveness
 and desirability of coverage of colorectal cancer screening, prostate
 cancer screening, osteoporosis screening, and outpatient prescription drugs.
`SEC. 2723. REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO TIMING OF COVERAGE AND PROHIBITION OF
PREEXISTING CONDITION LIMITATIONS.
 `(a) DATE OF INITIAL COVERAGE- In the case of an employee (and family
 members) enrolled under a health benefit plan provided by an employer,
 the coverage under the plan shall begin not later than the latest of
 the following:
 `(1) 30 days after the date on which the employee first performs an hour
 of service as an employee of that employer, or in a case where an employer
 does not provide immediate coverage under the plan, on the day on which an
 employee who has performed an hour of service for the employer agrees to pay
 100 percent of the normal employer and employee premium for the period prior
 to the normal beginning of coverage under the plan. The employer shall notify
 the employee on the first day on which the employee first performs an hour of
 service for the employer of the rights of the employee under this subsection.
 `(2) The first day on which the employer is required to meet the requirements
 of this part.
 `(3) In the case of an employer described in section 2713(a)(2)(C)--
 `(A) 90 days after the date on which the employee first performs an hour
 of plan-covered service as an employee of the employer, except that if the
 initial waiting period is greater than 30 days, coverage under the plan shall
 continue for an equivalent period after the last day on which the employee
 performs an hour of plan-covered service as an employee of the employer; or
 `(B) 180 days after the date on which the employee first performs an
 hour of plan-covered service, except that if the initial waiting period
 is greater than 30 days, coverage under the plan shall continue for an
 equivalent period after the last day on which the employee performs an
 hour of plan-covered service.
 `(4) Subject to section 2712(b), in the case of a child, coverage applies
 for any period during which the employee, who is the parent of the child,
 is covered.
 `(b) PROHIBITION OF PREEXISTING CONDITION PROVISIONS- A health benefit plan
 shall not exclude or otherwise limit any individual from coverage under
 the plan on the basis that the individual has (or at any time has had)
 any disease, disorder, or condition.
 `(c) RIGHT TO WAIVE ENROLLMENT-
 `(1) LESS-THAN-FULL-TIME OR PART-TIME EMPLOYEES WITH INCREASED PREMIUMS- In
 the case of a less-than-full-time or part-time employee who is subject to,
 and is charged, an increased premium under section 2724(b)(5), the employee
 may, notwithstanding any other provision of this part, waive enrollment
 under this part. Such waiver shall be exercised in such form and manner as
 the Secretary shall specify and shall terminate on the date the employee
 is no longer being subject to, and charged, such an increased premium.
 `(2) EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTION TO PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN- In the case
 of a less-than-full-time or part-time employee who waives enrollment under
 paragraph (1), the employer shall, in a manner required by the Secretary,
 make a payment under title V of the HealthAmerica Act equal to the minimum
 amount the employer would have made towards the actuarial cost of coverage
 of the employee if the employee had not waived such enrollment.
 `(d) CONTINUED COVERAGE- If an employee's coverage or coverage for the
 family members of an employee would normally terminate during a period of
 hospitalization, such coverage shall continue until the employee or family
 member is discharged from the hospital.
`SEC. 2724. REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO PREMIUMS, DEDUCTIBLES, COPAYMENTS,
COINSURANCE, AND LIMIT ON OUT-OF-POCKET EXPENSES.
 `(a) ENROLLEE COST-SHARING PERMITTED- A health benefit plan may require
 an enrollee to pay for premiums, deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance
 amounts for coverage under the plan, but only if such premiums, deductibles,
 copayments, and coinsurance do not exceed the limitations imposed under
 this section.
 `(b) LIMITATION ON PREMIUMS-
 `(1) MONTHLY PREMIUM LIMITED TO 20 PERCENT OF ACTUARIAL RATE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), a health benefit plan
 shall not require an employee to pay a premium--
 `(i) for coverage for a period of longer than one month; or
 `(ii) the amount of which on a monthly basis exceeds 20 percent of the
 monthly actuarial rate defined under subparagraph (B).
 `(B) MONTHLY ACTUARIAL RATE DEFINED- For purposes of this subsection,
 the term `monthly actuarial rate' means, with respect to a health benefit
 plan in a plan year, the average monthly per enrollee amount that the
 employer providing the plan estimates, based on actuarial calculations
 conducted in conformity with requirements established by the Secretary,
 for enrollees under the plan during the year, would be necessary to pay
 for the total benefits required under the plan (including administrative
 costs for the provision of such benefits and an appropriate amount for a
 contingency margin) during the year.
 `(C) APPLICATION ON BASIS OF FAMILY STATUS- For purposes of this paragraph,
 a health benefits plan may provide for the premium to be applied, and the
 monthly actuarial rate to be computed--
 `(i) separately for employees who have family members covered under the plan
 and for employees who do not have family members covered under the plan; and
 `(ii) with respect to employees with such covered family members,
 separately--
 `(I) for employees who have a covered spouse and one or more covered
 children;
 `(II) for employees who have a covered spouse but no covered children; and
 `(III) for employees who do not have a covered spouse but have one or more
 covered children.
 `(D) ADJUSTMENT FOR COVERED SPOUSE WITH OTHER COVERAGE- For purposes of
 this paragraph, if a health benefit plan charges an employee for a share
 of the premium, the plan shall establish a separate premium category (or
 categories) for family coverage in the case of a covered spouse who is
 receiving primary health insurance coverage from another health benefit
 plan. The premium for such categories shall be established based on actual
 or projected plan experience or according to a formula established by the
 Secretary, and shall take into account the reduction in health insurance
 costs resulting from such coverage.
 `(E) ADJUSTMENT OF PREMIUMS FOR EMPLOYED RETIREES UNDER HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS-
 If an employer provides a health benefit plan with respect to retirees
 and the plan charges a retiree for a share of the premium of the plan, in
 the case of such a retiree who is enrolled as an employee (or dependent)
 under another health benefit plan under this part, the health benefit plan
 with respect to the retiree shall provide for an adjustment of the amount
 of the premium paid by the retiree to take into account the reduction in
 health insurance costs resulting from such coverage.
 `(2) PAYMENT OF PREMIUMS- An employee enrolled under a health benefit plan
 is liable for payment of premiums required under that plan in accordance
 with this subsection.
 `(3) WITHHOLDING PERMITTED- No provision of State law shall prevent an
 employer of an employee enrolled under a health benefit plan established
 under this part from withholding the amount of any premium due by the
 employee from the payroll of the employee.
 `(4) SPECIAL RULE FOR LESS-THAN-FULL-TIME EMPLOYEES- In the case of a
 less-than-full-time employee (as defined in section 2713(3)(D)), a health
 benefit plan may require the employee to pay a premium the amount of which
 (on a monthly basis) does not exceed--
 `(A) 100 percent, minus
 `(B) 80 percent, multiplied by the ratio of--
 `(i) the average number of hours per week the employee is normally employed
 by the employer in the calendar quarter; to
 `(ii) 25,
of the monthly actuarial rate (as defined in paragraph (1)(B)).
 `(5) PART-TIME EMPLOYEES- In the case of a part-time employee, a health
 benefit plan may require the employee to pay a premium amount that does not
 exceed 50 percent of the monthly actuarial rate (as defined in paragraph
 (1)(B)).
 `(c) LIMITATION ON DEDUCTIBLES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as permitted under paragraph (2), a health benefit
 plan shall not provide, for benefits provided in any plan year, for a
 deductible amount that exceeds--
 `(A) with respect to benefits payable for items and services furnished
 to any employee with no family member enrolled under the plan, for a plan
 year beginning in--
 `(i) the first calendar year that begins more than 1 year after the
 effective date of this Act, $250; or
 `(ii) for a subsequent calendar year, the limitation of deductions
 specified in this subparagraph for the previous calendar year increased by
 the percentage increase in the consumer price index for all urban consumers
 (United States city average, as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics)
 for the 12-month period ending on September 30 of the preceding calendar
 year; and
 `(B) with respect to benefits payable for items and services furnished to
 any employee with a family member enrolled under the plan, for a plan year
 beginning in--
 `(i) the first calendar year that begins more than 1 year after the
 effective date of this part, $250 per family member and $500 per family; or
 `(ii) for a subsequent calendar year, the limitation of deductions
 specified in this subparagraph for the previous calendar year increased by
 the percentage increase in the consumer price index for all urban consumers
 (United States city average, as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics)
 for the 12-month period ending on September 30 of the preceding calendar
 year.
If the limitation of deductions computed under subparagraph (A)(ii) or
(B)(ii) is not a multiple of $10, it shall be rounded to the next highest
multiple of $10.
 `(2) WAGE-RELATED DEDUCTIBLE- A health benefit plan may provide for any
 other deductible amount instead of the limitations under--
 `(A) paragraph (1)(A), if such amount does not exceed (on an annualized
 basis) 1 percent of the total wages paid to the employee in the plan year; or
 `(B) paragraph (1)(B), if such amount does not exceed (on an annualized
 basis) 1 percent per family member or 2 percent per family of the total
 wages paid to the employee in the plan year.
 `(d) LIMITATION ON COPAYMENTS AND COINSURANCE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraphs (2) through (4), a health benefit
 plan shall not--
 `(A) require the payment of any copayment or coinsurance for an item or
 service for which coverage is required by this part in an amount that
 exceeds 20 percent of the cost of the item or service; or
 `(B) require the payment of any copayment or coinsurance for items and
 services required under section 2722 to be furnished in a plan year for an
 employee after the employee has incurred out-of-pocket expenses under the
 plan that are equal to the out-of-pocket limit (as defined in paragraph
 (5)(B)).
 `(2) EXCEPTION FOR PREFERRED PROVIDERS- If a health benefit plan establishes
 reasonable classifications of participating and nonparticipating providers
 of items and services, the plan may require payments in excess of the
 amount permitted under paragraph (1) in the case of items and services
 furnished by nonparticipating providers.
 `(3) EXCEPTION FOR IMPROPER UTILIZATION- A health benefit plan may provide
 for copayment or coinsurance in excess of the amount permitted under
 paragraph (1) for any item or service that an individual obtains without
 complying with any reasonable procedures established by the plan to ensure
 the efficient and appropriate utilization of covered services.
 `(4) MENTAL HEALTH CARE- In the case of care provided under section
 2722(a)(6)(B), a health benefit plan shall not require payment of any
 copayment or coinsurance for an item or service for which coverage is
 required by this part in an amount that exceeds 50 percent of the cost of
 the item or service.
 `(5) LIMIT ON OUT-OF-POCKET EXPENSES-
 `(A) OUT-OF-POCKET EXPENSES DEFINED- As used in this section, the term
 `out-of-pocket expenses' means, with respect to an employee in a plan year,
 amounts payable under the plan as deductibles and coinsurance with respect
 to items and services provided under the plan and furnished in the plan
 year on behalf of the employee and family covered under the plan.
 `(B) OUT-OF-POCKET LIMIT DEFINED- As used in this section and except as
 provided in subparagraph (C), the term `out-of-pocket limit' means for a
 plan year beginning in--
 `(i) the first calendar year that begins more than 1 year after the
 effective date of this part, $3,000; or
 `(ii) for a subsequent calendar year, the out-of-pocket limit specified in
 this subparagraph for the previous calendar year increased by the percentage
 increase in the consumer price index for all urban consumers (United
 States city average, as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics) for
 the 12-month period ending on September 30 of the preceding calendar year.
If the out-of-pocket limit computed under clause (ii) is not a multiple of
$10, it shall be rounded to the next highest multiple of $10.
 `(C) ALTERNATIVE OUT-OF-POCKET LIMIT- A health benefit plan may provide
 for an out-of-pocket limit other than that defined in subparagraph (B) if,
 for a plan year with respect to an employee and the family of the employee,
 the limit does not exceed (on an annualized basis) 10 percent of the total
 wages paid to the employee in the plan year.
`SEC. 2725. ENROLLEE PROTECTION.
 `(a) ADMINISTRATION-
 `(1) INSURANCE COMMISSIONER- The requirements and standards established
 under this section shall be administered in a State by the insurance
 commissioner of that State, or by any other State agency, as designated
 by the chief executive officer of the State.
 `(2) NONCOMPLIANCE- If the State fails to comply with the requirements of
 paragraph (1), or, in the judgment of the Secretary, fails to adequately
 perform the administrative functions required under such paragraph, the
 Secretary shall assume the administrative responsibilities and duties
 required under such paragraph in that State.
 `(b) INFORMATIONAL REQUIREMENT-
 `(1) SUMMARY OF HEALTH PLAN-
 `(A) REQUIREMENT- Not later than 30 days after the date on which the
 coverage of an employee under a health benefit plan under this part begins,
 the employer of such employee shall provide the employee with a copy of
 the health benefit plan and a summary of such plan in accordance with
 subparagraph (B).
 `(B) CONTENTS- The plan and summary provided under subparagraph (A) shall
 be written in a manner reasonably assumed to be understandable by the
 average individual. Such summary and plan shall be sufficiently accurate
 and comprehensive to reasonably apprise individuals of their rights and
 obligations under the plan.
 `(2) AVAILABILITY OF SUBSIDY- Not later than 30 days after the date on
 which coverage of an employee under a health benefit plan under this part
 begins, the employer shall notify the employee of the availability of
 low-income subsidies for employees, through the public health insurance
 plan established under title XXI of the Social Security Act, to cover all
 or part of the cost of the employee's share of the premium for such health
 benefit plan and of any cost-sharing under such plan. Such notification
 shall be provided in such form as the Secretary shall require.
 `(3) CHANGES IN PLAN- An employee shall be notified in writing of any
 changes in the terms of their health benefit plan, not less than 30 days
 in advance of the implementation of such changes.
 `(4) FAILURE TO PAY PREMIUMS- With respect to a health benefit plan, the
 insurer issuing such plan shall notify the employee and the Secretary of
 the failure of the employer to make timely premium payments on behalf of the
 employee and the employee's family members as required under such plan. Such
 notification shall be provided not less that 30 days prior to any termination
 of coverage by the insurer as the result of such nonpayment of premiums.
 `(5) FINANCIAL STATEMENT- An employee shall be entitled to receive, on
 request, a copy of the most recent financial statement prepared for the
 health benefit plan under which such employee is covered. An employee
 shall be entitled to no more than one such request during each 1-year period.
 `(6) AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION-
 `(A) FILING WITH SECRETARY AND PROVISION TO STATES- A copy of each health
 benefit plan provided under this part, and any additional information
 prepared under this subsection concerning such plans, shall be filed with the
 Secretary who shall make such information available to the State or States
 in which the employees eligible for benefits under such plans are employed.
 `(B) PROVISION TO EMPLOYEES- Employees not receiving the information required
 under this subsection may request such information from the State, or, if the
 program in such State is administered by the Secretary, from the Secretary.
 `(c) STANDARDS AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE-
 `(1) MODEL PLANS AND SUMMARIES- Not later than 9 months after the date of
 enactment of this part, the Secretary shall establish and make available
 model language for health benefit plans and the summaries of such plans.
 `(2) PLAN INFORMATION- Not later than 9 months after the date of enactment
 of this part, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations that describe
 the health benefit plan information that shall be provided to employees
 under this section, that shall include--
 `(A) the name and address of the administrator of the plan;
 `(B) the requirements of the plan with respect to eligibility;
 `(C) the benefits to be provided under the plan;
 `(D) the procedures for filing claims for benefits under the plan;
 `(E) the procedures for appealing the denial of any claim filed under the
 plan; and
 `(F) other information determined appropriate by the Secretary.
 `(d) RIGHT TO ASSISTANCE-
 `(1) DESIGNATION OF INDIVIDUAL- Each health benefit plan provided under this
 part shall designate an appropriate individual or individuals who shall
 be available to answer questions concerning the plan or the applicable
 plan requirements.
 `(2) TIMELY RESPONSE- Employees shall have the right to receive a timely
 written response to any questions that such employees may submit concerning
 their rights under the health benefits plan. Employees shall be able to
 rely on such written responses.
 `(3) ASSISTANCE BY ADMINISTERING AUTHORITY- The authority designated under
 subsection (a) shall provide assistance to employees in that State with
 respect to their rights under such plans and under Federal or State law.
 `(e) RIGHT TO REVIEW DENIED CLAIMS-
 `(1) NOTICE- An administrator under a health benefit plan under this part
 shall provide an employee with written notice concerning the denial of a
 claim submitted by such employee. Such notice shall include the reasons
 for such denial.
 `(2) PROCESS FOR REVIEW- Each health benefit plan provided under this part
 shall utilize a fair process for the timely review of claims denied under
 such plan.
 `(3) CLAIM FOR CARE NEEDED FOR LIFE-THREATENING ILLNESS- In cases in which
 the failure to provide health care promptly would be life-threatening or
 result in a risk of permanent disability, the beneficiary under the health
 benefit plan shall be entitled to a decision as to whether care will be
 provided under such plan not later than 1 day after supplying the insurer
 with all requested information. In the event of a denial of coverage for
 such care, the beneficiary shall be entitled to an expedited review of an
 appeal of such denial within 5 days.
 `(4) APPEALS- Individuals shall be entitled to appeal the denial of a
 claim submitted by such individual to the authority administering the
 requirements and standards under subsection (a). The Secretary shall
 promulgate regulations establishing procedures to be utilized for appealing
 denials of claims under a health benefit plan under this part that are
 similar to the procedures established under title XVIII of the Social
 Security Act for appealing denials of claims under such title XVIII,
 including the right to a trial de novo.
 `(f) RIGHT TO CHOICE-
 `(1) NONMANAGED CARE PLANS- An employer may offer its employees a nonmanaged
 care plan that meets the requirements of this part as well as a managed
 care plan.
 `(2) USE OF PROVIDERS- If a nonmanaged care plan is not offered by an
 employer, the managed care plan or plans offered by such employer shall
 permit the utilization of providers not participating in the plan for
 services otherwise covered under the plan. If an employee elects to utilize
 such out-of-plan providers, the plan may provide for cost sharing that
 shall not exceed 200 percent of the normal cost-sharing imposed under the
 plan or 200 percent of the cost-sharing permitted under the minimum plan
 established under this part, whichever is greater.
 `(g) RIGHT TO CONFIDENTIALITY OF MEDICAL RECORDS- Health benefit plans
 under this title shall provide for the confidentiality of any medical
 records released under such plan.
`Subpart 3--Regulations and Enforcement
`SEC. 2731. REGULATIONS.
 `(a) PROPOSED RULES- Not later than 4 months after the date of enactment
 of this part, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register a notice
 of proposed rulemaking to carry out this part.
 `(b) FINAL RULES- Not later than 9 months after the date of enactment of
 this part, the Secretary shall promulgate final rules to carry out this
 part. Such notice and final rules shall be made in accordance with section
 553 of title 5, United States Code.
 `(c) EFFECT OF FAILURE TO PROMULGATE RULES- The failure of the Secretary
 to promulgate final rules under this part shall not relieve any person
 or entity to which the provisions of this part apply of any obligations
 under this part.
`SEC. 2732. ENFORCEMENT.
 `(a) CIVIL MONEY PENALTY AGAINST PRIVATE EMPLOYERS-
 `(1) 15 PERCENT OF TOTAL WAGES- Any employer that does not comply with
 section 2712(c) or the requirements of section 2701(a) in any calendar year
 shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than 15 percent of the
 total amount of the expenditures of the employer for wages for employees
 in that year.
 `(2) INVESTIGATIONS- The Secretary may conduct investigation under this
 section. In conducting such investigations, the Secretary--
 `(A) shall have reasonable access to examine evidence of any person or
 entity being investigated; and
 `(B) may, if necessary, compel by subpoena the attendance of witnesses
 and the production of evidence at any designated place.
 `(3) ASSESSMENT PROCEDURE- A civil money penalty under this subsection
 shall be assessed by the Secretary and collected in a civil action brought
 by the United States in a United States district court. The Secretary shall
 not assess such a penalty on an employer until the employer has been given
 notice and an opportunity for a hearing on such charge.
 `(4) AMOUNT OF PENALTY- In determining the amount of the penalty, or the
 amount agreed on in settlement, the Secretary shall consider the gravity
 of the noncompliance and the demonstrated good faith of the employer
 charged in attempting to achieve rapid compliance after notification of
 noncompliance by the Secretary.
 `(5) JUDICIAL REVIEW- In any civil action brought to review the assessment
 of such a penalty or to collect such a penalty, the court shall, at the
 request of any party to such action, hold a trial de novo on the assessment
 of the penalty, unless in a prior action such a trial de novo was held on
 the assessment.
 `(6) USE OF AMOUNTS COLLECTED- Civil money penalties collected under this
 subsection shall be credited to the account maintained to provide health
 benefits under the program established under title XXI of the Social
 Security Act.
 `(b) LIABILITY TO INDIVIDUALS FOR DAMAGES- Any employer that knowingly does
 not comply with section 2712(c) or the requirements of section 2701(a) shall
 be liable for damages (including health care costs incurred) to the employee
 or the family of the employee resulting from such failure to comply. Such
 an employee or family member may bring a civil action to recover damages
 resulting from an employers failure to comply with such requirements.'.
TITLE III--SPECIAL ASSISTANCE FOR SMALL AND MEDIUM-SIZED BUSINESSES
SEC. 301. PREEMPTION OF STATE MANDATED BENEFIT LAWS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 514(b)(2) of the Employee Retirement Income Security
 Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1144(b)(2)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking out `subparagraph (B)' and inserting
 in lieu thereof `subparagraphs (B) and (C)'; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph:
 `(C) Nothing in subparagraph (A) shall be construed to exempt from subsection
 (a) any provision of the law of any State to the extent that such provision
 regulates, or otherwise provides any requirement relating to, the benefits
 to be provided under contracts or policies of insurance issued to or under
 a health benefit plan under part B of title XXVII of the Public Health
 Service Act.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Paragraph (1) of section 3 of such Act (29
 U.S.C. 1002(1)) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new sentence: `Such terms include a health benefit plan established in
 accordance with part B of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act.'.
Subtitle A--Reform of Small Group Insurance
SEC. 311. GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE STANDARDS.
 (a) PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT- Title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act
 (as added under section 101 and amended by section 201) is further amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new part:
`Part C--Group Health Insurance Standards
`Subpart 1--General Standards; Definitions
`SEC. 2741. APPLICATION OF REQUIREMENTS TO HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS.
 `(a) PLAN UNDER STATE REGULATORY PROGRAM OR CERTIFIED BY THE SECRETARY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- No health benefit plan may be issued in a State on or
 after the effective date specified in subsection (c) (and no new contract
 may be offered under such plan with respect to any small employer beginning
 on or after such effective date) unless--
 `(A) the Secretary determines that the State has established a regulatory
 program that provides for the application and enforcement of the applicable
 standards established under section 2742 (to carry out the requirements
 of this part) and that meets the requirements of section 2742(b) by such
 effective date, or
 `(B) if the State has not established such a program, the plan has been
 certified by the Secretary (in accordance with such procedures as the
 Secretary establishes) as meeting the applicable standards established
 under section 2742 by such effective date.
 `(2) PLAN DISAPPROVED UNDER LOOK-BEHIND AUTHORITY- If the Secretary
 determines, under section 2742(c), that a health benefit plan does not meet
 the applicable requirements of this part on or after such effective date,
 regardless of whether or not the State has taken any action with respect
 to such noncompliance, no new contracts may be offered to small employers
 under the plan on or after the date of the determination.
 `(b) SANCTIONS-
 `(1) COMPLAINTS AND INVESTIGATIONS- The Secretary shall establish
 procedures--
 `(A) for individuals and entities to file written, signed complaints with the
 Secretary respecting potential violations of the requirements of this part;
 `(B) for the investigation of those complaints which have a substantial
 probability of validity; and
 `(C) for the investigation of such other violations of the requirements
 of this part as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
 `(2) AUTHORITY IN INVESTIGATIONS- In conducting investigations and hearings
 under this subsection--
 `(A) agents of the Secretary and administrative law judges shall have
 reasonable access to examine evidence of any person or entity being
 investigated; and
 `(B) administrative law judges, may, if necessary, compel by subpoena the
 attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence at any designated
 place or hearing.
In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena lawfully issued under this
subsection and upon application of the Secretary, an appropriate district
court of the United States may issue an order requiring compliance with such
subpoena and any failure to obey such order may be punished by such court
as a contempt thereof.
 `(3) HEARING-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Before imposing an order described in paragraph (4) against
 a carrier under this subsection for a violation of the requirements of this
 part, the Secretary shall provide the carrier with notice and, upon request
 made within a reasonable time (of not less than 30 days, as established by
 the Secretary) of the date of the notice, a hearing respecting the violation.
 `(B) CONDUCT OF HEARING- Any hearing so requested shall be conducted before
 an administrative law judge. If no hearing is so requested, the Secretary's
 imposition of the order shall constitute a final and unappealable order.
 `(C) ISSUANCE OF ORDERS- If the administrative law judge determines, upon
 the preponderance of the evidence received, that a carrier named in the
 complaint has violated the requirements of this part, the administrative
 law judge shall state the findings of fact and issue and cause to be served
 on such carrier an order described in paragraph (4).
 `(4) Enforcement and civil money penalty-
 `(A) ENFORCEMENT- Subject to the provisions of this paragraph, an order
 issued under this subsection--
 `(i) shall require the carrier--
 `(I) to cease and desist from such violations; and
 `(II) to pay a civil penalty as required in paragraph (9); and
 `(ii) may require the carrier to take such other corrective action as
 is appropriate.
 `(B) CORRECTIONS WITHIN 30 DAYS- No order shall be imposed under this
 subsection by reason of any violation if the carrier establishes to the
 satisfaction of the Secretary that--
 `(i) such violation was due to reasonable cause and not to willful
 neglect; and
 `(ii) such violation is corrected within the 30-day period beginning on
 earliest date the carrier knew, or exercising reasonable diligence could
 have known, that such a violation was occurring.
 `(C) WAIVER BY SECRETARY- In the case of a violation which is due to
 reasonable cause and not to willful neglect, the Secretary may waive part
 or all of the civil money penalty imposed by paragraph (9) to the extent
 that payment of such penalty would be grossly excessive relative to the
 violation involved and to the need for deterrence of violations.
 `(5) ADMINISTRATIVE APPELLATE REVIEW- The decision and order of an
 administrative law judge under this subsection shall become the final agency
 decision and order of the Secretary unless, within 30 days, the Secretary
 modifies or vacates the decision and order, in which case the decision
 and order of the Secretary shall become a final order under this subsection.
 `(6) JUDICIAL REVIEW- A carrier adversely affected by a final order issued
 under this subsection may, within 45 days after the date the final order
 is issued, file a petition in the Court of Appeals for the appropriate
 circuit for review of the order.
 `(7) ENFORCEMENT OF ORDERS- If a carrier fails to comply with a final order
 issued under this section against the carrier, the Secretary shall file a
 suit to seek compliance with the order in any appropriate district court
 of the United States. In any such suit, the validity and appropriateness
 of the final order shall not be subject to review.
 `(8) USE OF AMOUNTS COLLECTED- Civil money penalties collected under this
 subsection shall be credited to the AmeriCare Trust Fund.
 `(9) AMOUNT OF CIVIL MONEY PENALTY- The amount of any civil money penalty
 imposed under this subsection shall not exceed $25,000 for each carrier
 with respect to which a violation occurs. Such amount may take into account
 the penalties imposed by a State with respect to the same such violation.
 `(10) NOTICE TO CARRIER IN THE CASE OF INSURED PLANS- As part of any
 order issued under this subsection in the case of a health benefit plan,
 the order shall require that notice be provided to the carrier of the
 findings in the order.
 `(11) LOSS OF STATUS AS A HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN- If a carrier is not in
 compliance with subsection (a) and is not determined to have come into
 compliance with the applicable standards within 30 days after the date
 of the initial determination of such a violation, such carrier shall be
 subject to the provisions of this subsection.
 `(c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The effective date specified in this subsection
 is January 1 of the third full year that begins after the date of the
 enactment of this subpart.
`SEC. 2742. ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS-
 `(1) NAIC- The Secretary shall request the NAIC--
 `(A) to develop specific standards, in the form of a model Act and model
 regulations, to implement the requirements of this part; and
 `(B) to report to the Secretary on such development;
by not later than October 1 of the year following the year in which this part
is enacted. If the NAIC develops such standards within such period and the
Secretary finds that such standards implement the requirements of this part,
such standards shall be the standards applied under section 2741.
 `(2) SECRETARY- If the NAIC fails to develop and report on such standards
 by such date or the Secretary finds that such standards do not implement
 the requirements of this part, the Secretary shall develop and publish,
 by not later than November 15 of the year following the year in which
 this part is enacted, such standards. Such standards shall then be the
 standards applied under section 2741.
 `(b) Additional Elements of Regulatory Programs-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A State regulatory program shall include the following:
 `(A) The enforcement under the program--
 `(i) shall be designed in a manner so as to secure compliance with the
 standards within 30 days after the date of a finding of noncompliance with
 such standards; and
 `(ii) shall provide for notice to the Secretary in cases where such
 compliance is not secured within such 30-day period.
 `(B) A toll-free telephone number which provides--
 `(i) for a system for the receipt and disposition of consumer complaints or
 inquiries regarding compliance of health benefit plans with the requirements
 of this part; and
 `(ii) information to small employers and consumers about carriers that
 offer health benefit plans in the area covered by the regulatory authority.
Such system shall provide for the recording of consumer complaints in
accordance with a uniform methodology developed by the NAIC and recognized
by the Secretary.
 `(2) SECRETARIAL AUTHORITY- In the case of a State without a regulatory
 program approved under subsection (a), the Secretary shall provide for the
 establishment of the toll-free telephone information and complaint system
 described in paragraph (1).
 `(c) SECRETARIAL REVIEW-
 `(1) PERIODIC REVIEW OF STATE REGULATORY PROGRAMS- The Secretary periodically
 shall review State regulatory programs to determine if they continue to
 meet the standards referred to in subsection (a) and the requirements of
 subsection (b). If the Secretary finds that a State regulatory program
 no longer meets such standards and requirements, before making a final
 determination, the Secretary shall provide the State an opportunity to adopt
 such a plan of correction as would permit the program to continue to meet
 such standards and requirements. If the Secretary makes a final determination
 that the State regulatory program, after such an opportunity, fails to meet
 such standards and requirements, the Secretary shall assume responsibility
 under section 2741(a)(1)(B) with respect to plans in the State.
 `(2) LOOK-BEHIND AUTHORITY- In the case of a State with a regulatory program
 found by the Secretary to meet the standards and requirements under this
 part, the Secretary nonetheless is authorized to determine whether or not
 health benefit plans offered by carriers in the State have failed to comply
 with the applicable requirements of this part.
 `(d) GAO AUDITS- The Comptroller General shall conduct periodic audits on
 a sample of State regulatory programs to determine their compliance with
 the requirements of this section. The Comptroller General shall report to
 the Secretary and Congress on the findings in such audits.
`SEC. 2743. TRANSITIONAL REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS
ISSUED TO SMALL EMPLOYERS.
 `(a) APPLICATION- The requirements of this section shall apply only to
 health benefit plans offered to small employers during the period that
 begins on the effective date of this part and ends in the case of a small
 employer, on the date that begins the fifth full year after the date of
 enactment of this part.
 `(b) NO DISCRIMINATION BASED ON HEALTH STATUS FOR CERTAIN SERVICES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided under paragraph (2), health benefit plans
 offered to small employers by carriers may not deny, limit, or condition
 the coverage under (or benefits of) the plan with respect to basic health
 services based on the health status, claims experience, receipt of health
 care, medical history, or lack of evidence of insurability, of an individual.
 `(2) TREATMENT OF PREEXISTING CONDITION EXCLUSIONS FOR ALL SERVICES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this paragraph,
 health benefit plans provided to small employers by carriers may exclude
 coverage with respect to services related to treatment of a preexisting
 condition, but the period of such exclusion may not exceed 6 months.
 `(B) NONAPPLICATION TO NEWBORNS AND SUNSET OF PREEXISTING CONDITION
 EXCLUSIONS FOR BASIC HEALTH SERVICES- The exclusion of coverage permitted
 under subparagraph (A) shall not apply to--
 `(i) services furnished to newborns, or
 `(ii) basic health services furnished on or after July 1 of the sixth full
 year beginning after the date of the enactment of this part.
 `(C) CREDITING OF PREVIOUS COVERAGE-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- A health benefit plan issued to a small employer by
 a carrier shall provide that if an individual under such plan is in a
 period of continuous coverage (as defined in clause (ii)(I)) with respect
 to particular services as of the date of initial coverage under such plan,
 any period of exclusion of coverage with respect to a preexisting condition
 for such services or type of services shall be reduced by 1 month for each
 month in the period of continuous coverage.
 `(ii) DEFINITIONS- As used in this subparagraph:
 `(I) PERIOD OF CONTINUOUS COVERAGE- The term `period of continuous coverage'
 means, with respect to particular services, the period beginning on the
 date an individual is enrolled under a health benefit plan issued to
 a small employer by a carrier which provides the same or substantially
 similar benefits with respect to such services and ends on the date the
 individual is not so enrolled for a continuous period of more than 3 months.
 `(II) PREEXISTING CONDITION- The term `preexisting condition' means, with
 respect to coverage under a health benefit plan issued to a small employer
 by a carrier, a condition which has been diagnosed or treated during the
 3-month period ending on the day before the first date of such coverage,
 except that such term does not include a condition which was first diagnosed
 or treated during a period of continuous coverage.
 `(iii) STANDARDS FOR SIMILAR BENEFITS- The standards established under
 section 2742 shall establish such criteria for determining if benefits
 are substantially similar as may be necessary to carry out this subparagraph.
 `(c) PERMITTING COVERAGE DURING WAITING PERIOD-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- If a health benefit plan issued to a small employer by
 a carrier imposes a waiting period before an eligible individual may be
 covered under the plan, the plan--
 `(A) must make available to the individual coverage (including coverage
 of dependents) equivalent to the coverage available to the employee upon
 the completion of any applicable waiting period; and
 `(B) may not impose for such coverage charges that exceed the cost under
 the plan of providing such coverage with respect to the employee if such
 waiting period did not apply.
Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as requiring a health benefit
plan issued to a small employer by a carrier to make coverage available to
an individual who no longer has an employment relationship (or who is the
spouse or dependent of such an individual) with respect to the plan.
 `(2) ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL DEFINED- In paragraph (1), the term `eligible
 individual' means, with respect to a health benefit plan, an individual
 who, but for a waiting period, would be eligible for immediate coverage
 under the plan.
`SEC. 2744. DEFINITIONS.
 `(a) HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN AND OTHER DEFINITIONS RELATING TO HEALTH PLANS-
 As used in this part:
 `(1) HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN- The term `health benefit plan' means any
 hospital or medical expense incurred policy or certificate, hospital or
 medical service plan contract, health maintenance subscriber contract,
 other employee welfare plan (as defined in the Employee Retirement Income
 Security Act of 1964), or any other health insurance arrangement, and
 includes an employment-related reinsurance plan (as defined in paragraph
 (3)), but does not include--
 `(A) accident-only, credit, dental, or disability income insurance,
 `(B) coverage issued as a supplement to liability insurance,
 `(C) worker's compensation or similar insurance, or
 `(D) automobile medical-payment insurance;
that is offered by a carrier.
 `(2) SMALL EMPLOYER- The term `small employer' means, with respect to a
 calendar year, an employer that normally employs fewer than 100 employees
 on during the calendar year.
 `(3) MANAGED CARE PLAN- The term `managed care plan' has the same meaning
 given such term by section 2713(7).
 `(4) REINSURANCE PLAN- The term `reinsurance plan' means any reinsurance
 or similar mechanism that underwrites a portion of the risk for a health
 benefit plan, if the mechanism is offered directly to a small employer.
 `(5) SELF-INSURED HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN- The term `self-insured health
 benefit plan' means a health benefit plan in which the small employer
 or employment-related group assumes the underwriting risk for the plan
 (whether or not there is any reinsurance or similar mechanism to underwrite
 a portion of that risk).
 `(b) CARRIER; HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION; AND OTHER DEFINITIONS
 RELATING TO CARRIERS- As used in this part:
 `(1) CARRIER- The term `carrier' means any person that offers a health
 benefit plan, whether through insurance or otherwise, including a licensed
 insurance company, a prepaid hospital or medical service plan, a health
 maintenance organization, a self-insurer carrier, a reinsurance carrier,
 and a multiple small employer welfare arrangement (a combination of small
 employers associated for the purpose of providing health benefit plan
 coverage for their employees).
 `(2) EMPLOYER CARRIER- The term `employer carrier'--
 `(A) means any carrier which offers health benefit plans, and
 `(B) includes (unless the context otherwise requires)--
 `(i) a self-insurer carrier offering such a plan, or
 `(ii) a reinsurance carrier offering an health benefit plan that is an
 reinsurance plan.
 `(3) HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION- The term `health maintenance
 organization' has the meaning given the term `eligible organization'
 in section 1876(b) of the Social Security Act.
 `(4) REINSURANCE CARRIER- The term `reinsurance carrier' means the entity
 assuming responsibility for underwriting under an employment-related
 reinsurance plan, but does not include a carrier insofar as it directly
 offers a health benefit plan.
 `(5) SELF-INSURER CARRIER- The term `self-insurer carrier' means a carrier
 that is not a licensed insurance company, a prepaid hospital or medical
 service plan, or a health maintenance organization, that offers a health
 benefit plan directly with respect to an employment-related group.
 `(c) GENERAL DEFINITIONS- As used in this part:
 `(1) APPLICABLE REGULATORY AUTHORITY- The term `applicable regulatory
 authority' means, with respect to a health benefit plan offered in a
 State, the State commissioner or superintendent of insurance or other
 State authority responsible for regulation of health insurance, or, if the
 Secretary is exercising authority under section 2741(a)(1)(B) in the State,
 the Secretary.
 `(2) BLOCK OF BUSINESS- The term `block of business' means all, or a distinct
 grouping of, small employers as shown on the records of the small employer
 carrier, if established consistent with section 2752(b)(3).
 `(3) COMMUNITY- The term `community' means a geographic area designated
 by the Secretary as--
 `(A) encompassing one or more adjacent metropolitan statistical areas; or
 `(B) the remaining area within each State (that is not designated within
 any community under subparagraph (A));
except that the Secretary may designate an entire State as a community if such
a designation would better carry out the purposes of this part. The Secretary
from time to time may change the boundaries of communities designated under
subparagraph (A) or (B) for such purposes. There shall be no administrative
or judicial review of the designation of communities under this subsection.
 `(4) FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE- The term `full-time employee' means, with respect
 to an employer, an employee who normally performs on a monthly basis at
 least 25 hours of service per week for that employer.
 `(5) NAIC- The term `NAIC' means the National Association of Insurance
 Commissioners.
 `(6) REFERENCE PREMIUM RATE- The term `reference premium rate' means,
 for each block of business for a rating period in a community, the lowest
 premium rate charged or which could have been charged by the small employer
 carrier to small employers in that block under a rating system for that
 block of business in the community for health benefit plans with the same
 or similar coverage. The reference premium rate is determined without
 regard to any adjustment for age or sex described in section 2752(c)
 and without regard to any adjustment effected under section 2752(d).
 `(7) STATE- The term `State' means the 50 States and the District of
 Columbia.
`Subpart 2--Small Employer Health Insurance Reform
`SEC. 2751. ENROLLMENT PRACTICE AND GUARANTEED RENEWABILITY REQUIREMENTS
FOR HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS ISSUED TO SMALL EMPLOYERS.
 `(a) REGISTRATION WITH APPLICABLE REGULATORY AUTHORITY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each carrier (as defined in section 2744(b)(1)) shall
 register with the applicable regulatory authority for each State in which
 it issues or offers a health benefit plans to small employers.
 `(2) NO PREEMPTION OF STATE INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS- Nothing in paragraph
 (1) shall be construed as preventing the applicable regulatory authority
 from requiring, in the case of carriers that are not self-insurance
 carriers, such additional information in conjunction with, or apart from,
 the registration required under paragraph (1) as the applicable regulatory
 authority may be authorized to require under State law.
 `(b) GUARANTEED ISSUE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this subsection,
 a carrier that offers a health benefit plan (including a reinsurance plan)
 to small employers located in a community must offer the same plan to any
 other small employer located in the community.
 `(2) TREATMENT OF HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS-
 `(A) GEOGRAPHIC LIMITATIONS- A health maintenance organization may deny
 coverage under a health benefit plan to a small employer whose employees
 are located outside the service area of the organization, but only if such
 denial is applied uniformly without regard to health status or insurability.
 `(B) SIZE LIMITS- A health maintenance organization may apply to the
 applicable regulatory authority to cease enrolling new small employer groups
 in its health benefit plan (or in a geographic area served by the plan) if
 it can demonstrate that its financial or administrative capacity to serve
 previously enrolled groups and individuals (and additional individuals
 who will be expected to enroll because of affiliation with such previously
 enrolled groups) will be impaired if it is required to enroll new groups.
 `(3) GROUNDS FOR REFUSAL TO ISSUE OR RENEW-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- A carrier may refuse to issue or renew or terminate a
 health benefit plan under this part only for--
 `(i) nonpayment of premiums,
 `(ii) fraud or misrepresentation, and
 `(iii) failure to meet minimum participation rates (consistent with
 subparagraph (B)).
 `(B) MINIMUM PARTICIPATION RATES- A carrier may require, within the
 transition period described in section 2743(a), with respect to a health
 benefit plan, that a minimum percentage of full-time, permanent employees
 eligible to enroll under the plan be enrolled, so long as such percentage
 is enforced uniformly for all employment groups of comparable size.
 `(c) MINIMUM PLAN PERIOD- A carrier may not offer to, or issue with
 respect to, a small employer a health benefit plan with a term of less
 than 12 months.
 `(d) GUARANTEED RENEWABILITY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL-
 `(A) GENERAL RULE- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this subsection, a
 carrier shall ensure that a health benefit plan issued to a small employer be
 renewed, at the option of the small employer, unless the plan is terminated
 for the reasons specified in subsection (a)(3)(A) or under subparagraph (B).
 `(B) TERMINATION OF BLOCK OF BUSINESS- A carrier need not renew a health
 benefit plan with respect to such a small employer if the carrier--
 `(i) is terminating the block of business that includes the plan; and
 `(ii) provides notice to the small employer covered under the plan of such
 termination at least 90 days before the date of expiration of the plan.
In the case of such a termination, the carrier may not provide for issuance
of any health benefit plan in any block of business during the 5-year period
beginning on the date of termination of such block of business.
 `(C) CONSTRUCTION RESPECTING ADDITIONAL STATE DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS-
 Subparagraph (B)(ii) shall not be construed as preventing the applicable
 regulatory authority from specifying the information to be included in the
 notice under such subparagraph or in requiring such notice to be provided
 at an earlier date.
 `(2) NOTICE AND SPECIFICATION OF RATES AND ADMINISTRATIVE CHANGES-
 `(A) NOTICE- A carrier offering health benefit plans to small employers
 shall provide for notice, at least 30 days before the date of expiration
 of the health benefit plan, of the terms for renewal of the plan. Except
 with respect to rates and administrative changes, the terms of renewal
 (including benefits) shall be the same as the terms of issuance.
 `(B) RENEWAL RATES SAME AS ISSUANCE RATES- The carrier may change the
 terms for such renewal, but the premium rates charged with respect to such
 renewal shall be the same as that for a new issue.
 `(C) RATES CANNOT CHANGE MORE OFTEN THAN MONTHLY-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- A carrier may not change the premium rates established
 with respect to health benefit plans offered for any block of business
 more often than monthly.
 `(ii) APPLICATION OF NEW RATES- A carrier that offers health benefit plans
 to small employers which becomes effective in a month, shall ensure that
 the premium rates established under clause (i) for that month shall apply
 to all months during the 12-month period beginning with that month. In the
 case of a plan renewal which is effective for a 12-month period beginning
 with a month, the premium rates established under clause (i) with respect
 to that month shall apply to all months during 12-month renewal period.
 `(3) PERIOD OF RENEWAL- The period of renewal of each health benefit plan
 offered by a carrier to a small employer shall be for a period of not less
 than 12 months.
`SEC. 2752. RATING PRACTICES FOR HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS OFFERED TO SMALL
EMPLOYERS.
 `(a) COHESIVE RATING SYSTEM AND ACTURIAL CERTIFICATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The premiums (including reference premium rate, as defined
 in section 2744(c)(6), age adjustments under subsection (c), and reductions
 provided under subsection (d)) for all health benefit plans offered to
 small employers by carriers shall--
 `(A) be established based on a single cohesive rating system which is
 applied consistently for all small employer groups and is designed not to
 treat groups, after the second effective year (as defined in subsection
 (f)), differently based on health status or risk status; and
 `(B) be actuarially certified annually.
 `(2) ACTUARIAL CERTIFIED DEFINED- For purposes of paragraph (1)(B), a
 health benefit plan is considered to be `actuarially certified' if there
 is a written statement, by a member of the American Academy of Actuaries
 or other individual acceptable to the applicable regulatory authority that
 a carrier is in compliance with this section, based upon the individual's
 examination, including a review of the appropriate records and of the
 actuarial assumptions and methods utilized by the carrier in establishing
 premium rates for applicable health benefit plans.
 `(b) USE OF COMMUNITY-RATING-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2) and subsection (c):
 `(A) COMMUNITY RATING WITHIN A BLOCK OF BUSINESS- The reference premium
 rate charged for health benefit plans offered with similar benefits to
 small employers in a community within a block of business for a type of
 family enrollment (described in subsection (e)) shall be the same for all
 small employers.
 `(B) LIMITING VARIATION ON REFERENCE PREMIUM RATES AMONG BLOCKS OF BUSINESS-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in clause (iii), the reference premium
 rate charged for health benefit plans offered with similar benefits to
 small employers in any community for a type of family enrollment for the
 most expensive block of business shall not exceed 120 percent of such rate
 charged for such plan for the same type of family enrollment for the least
 expensive block of business.
 `(ii) ROLE OF REGULATORY AUTHORITY- An applicable regulatory authority
 that is a State may reduce or eliminate the percent variation otherwise
 permitted under clause (i).
 `(iii) EXCEPTION- Clause (i) shall not apply to health benefit plans
 offered by carriers to small employers in a block of business--
 `(I) if the block is one for which the carrier does not reject, and
 never has rejected, small employers included within the definition of
 small employers eligible for the block of business or otherwise eligible
 employees and dependents who enroll on a timely basis,
 `(II) the carrier does not involuntarily transfer, and never has
 involuntarily transferred, a health benefit plan into or out of the block
 of business, and
 `(III) that block of business was available for purchase as of the date
 of the enactment of this part.
 `(2) TRANSITION- Notwithstanding paragraph (1)--
 `(A) during the first effective year (as defined in subsection (f)),
 the premium rate under a health benefit plan issued by a carrier to any
 small employer may be as much as, but may not exceed, 150 percent of the
 reference premium rate for such plans in the same community for similar
 benefits in the same block of business; or
 `(B) during the second effective year, the premium rate under such a policy
 for any small employer may be as much as, but may not exceed, 122 percent
 of the reference premium rate for such plans in the same community for
 similar benefits in the same block of business.
 `(3) ESTABLISHMENT OF BLOCKS OF BUSINESS- For the purpose of establishing
 premiums for small employer health benefit plans with similar coverage,
 the carrier may establish blocks of business based only on one or more of
 the following characteristics:
 `(A) Plans that are marketed by clearly different sales forces.
 `(B) Plans that have been acquired from another carrier as a distinct group.
 `(C) Plans that are managed care plans.
 `(D) Plans within another distinct group, if the applicable regulatory
 authority finds that establishment of such a group will enhance the
 efficiency and fairness of the small employer insurance marketplace.
 `(c) ADJUSTMENTS TO COMMUNITY-RATING-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (2), a health benefit plan offered by
 a carrier to a small employer may provide for an adjustment to the reference
 premium rate based on the age and gender of covered individuals. Any such
 adjustment shall be applied by the carrier consistently to all small
 employers, except that gender adjustments may only be made during the
 transition period.
 `(2) LIMITATION ON ADJUSTMENT-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The adjustment under paragraph (1) may not result,
 with respect to health benefit plans with similar benefits offered by
 carriers to small employers in the same block of business in a community,
 in a premium rate for the most expensive age group exceeding the applicable
 percent (as defined in subparagraph (B)) of the premium rate for the least
 expensive age group.
 `(B) APPLICABLE PERCENT DEFINED- In subparagraph (A) but subject to
 subparagraph (C), the term `applicable percent' means--
 `(i) for the first effective year (as defined in subsection (f)), 200
 percent,
 `(ii) for the second effective year, 150 percent, and
 `(iii) for any subsequent year, 110 percent.
 `(C) ROLE OF REGULATORY AUTHORITY- An applicable regulatory authority that
 is a State may reduce or eliminate the applicable percent otherwise applied.
 `(d) ADJUSTMENT IN RATES PERMITTED IN CASE OF MEDICARE REIMBURSEMENT
 ELECTION- A health benefit plan offered by a carrier to a small employer
 may compute premiums based upon a percentage of the reference premium rate
 otherwise applicable if the small employer to which the plan is being
 offered makes the reimbursement election described in section 2744. Any
 such adjustment shall be applied consistently to all small employers.
 `(e) TYPES OF FAMILY ENROLLMENT- Each health benefit plan offered by a
 carrier to a small employer shall permit enrollment of (and shall compute
 premiums separately for) individuals based on each of the following
 beneficiary classes:
 `(1) 1 adult.
 `(2) A married couple without children.
 `(3) 1 adult and 1 child.
 `(4) A married couple with 1 or more children, or 1 adult with 2 or more
 children.
 `(f) EFFECTIVE YEARS DEFINED- In this section, the terms `first effective
 year' and `second effective year' mean the third and fourth full years
 beginning after the date of the enactment of this part.
 `(g) EXCEPTION FOR SELF-INSURED CARRIERS- The requirements of this section
 shall apply to reinsurance carriers and health benefit plans offered by
 such carriers to small employers.
`SEC. 2753. BASIC BENEFIT PACKAGE FOR HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS OFFERED TO SMALL
EMPLOYERS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL-
 `(1) BENEFITS AND COST-SHARING IN HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS- Except as provided
 in paragraph (2) and in section 2743(a), no health benefit plan offered
 by carriers to small employers may be issued to a small employer unless--
 `(A) the plan provides for benefits for all basic health services as
 defined in part B;
 `(B) the plan does not impose cost-sharing with respect to basic health
 services in excess of the deductibles and coinsurance permitted under part
 B respect to such services; and
 `(C) the carrier makes available to the small employer a health benefit
 plan that, subject to paragraph (2)(C), only provides the benefits for basic
 health services and the maximum cost-sharing consistent with subparagraphs
 (A) and (B).
 `(2) EXCEPTIONS-
 `(A) REQUIRED OFFERING DOES NOT APPLY TO HMO'S- Paragraph (1)(C) shall
 not apply to a health maintenance organization.
 `(B) ADDITIONAL, OPTIONAL MINIMUM SERVICES- In meeting the requirement of
 paragraph (1)(C), a health benefit plan offered by a carrier to a small
 employer may include such additional items and services as the carrier can
 demonstrate to the satisfaction of the applicable regulatory authority that
 inclusion of such items and services will facilitate appropriate hospital
 discharges or avoid unnecessary hospitalization.
 `(b) MANAGED CARE OPTION- If a carrier (other than a health maintenance
 organization or reinsurance carrier) offers health benefit plans to an
 employer that is not a small employer, in a community a health benefit
 plan that is a managed care plan, the carrier must make available to small
 employers in the community a health benefit plan that is such a managed
 care plan .
 `(c) EXCEPTION FOR REINSURANCE CARRIERS AND PLANS- The requirements of
 this section shall not apply to reinsurance carriers and reinsurance plans.
 `(d) STANDARDIZATION OF BENEFIT PACKAGES- The NAIC shall develop a model to
 standardize benefits to be made available under health benefit plans offered
 by carriers to small employers in order to promote consumer understanding
 and comparison among such plans.
`SEC. 2754. TIME-LIMITED MEDICARE REIMBURSEMENT OPTION FOR HEALTH BENEFIT
PLANS OFFERED TO SMALL EMPLOYERS NOT PREVIOUSLY OFFERING INSURANCE COVERAGE.
 `(a) OPTION MUST BE OFFERED- Each carrier offering a health benefit plan
 to small employers meeting the requirements of section 351(a) of the
 HealthAmerica Act shall offer the small employer the option of having
 payment under the plan made for basic health benefits at rates no higher
 than the payment rates established under part B for such services. The
 provisions of section 1848(g)(3) of the Social Security Act shall not be
 considered to apply under this subsection.
 `(b) APPLICATION OF MEDICARE BILLING LIMITATIONS- In the case of a small
 employer that elects the option offered under subsection (a) with respect
 to a health benefit plan, the limitations on charges that may be made
 under medicare shall apply to individuals receiving benefits under the plan.
 `(c) EXCEPTION FOR REINSURANCE PLAN- Subsection (a) shall not apply to
 reinsurance plans.
`SEC. 2755. MISCELLANEOUS DISCLOSURE AND RECORD-KEEPING REQUIREMENTS FOR
HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS OFFERED TO SMALL EMPLOYERS.
 `(a) DISCLOSURE-
 `(1) GENERAL DISCLOSURE- Each carrier offering health benefit plans to
 small employers shall disclose to each small employer before issuing such
 a plan the following:
 `(A) The availability (pursuant to the requirement of section 2753(a)(1)(C))
 of a plan including only basic benefits.
 `(B) Whether any plan that is a managed care plan or provides for a
 utilization review program, or both, is available, as required under
 section 2753(b).
 `(C) The option of electing the reimbursement rules, as required under
 section 2754.
 `(D) The limits, imposed under section 2752, on the premiums permitted to
 be charged for such plans.
 `(E) The rights of guaranteed issue and renewability provided under
 section 2751.
Such disclosure shall be in addition to any disclosure required generally
of health benefit plans under part B.
 `(2) SPECIFIC DISCLOSURE UPON REQUEST- Each carrier offering health benefit
 plans to small employers shall disclose to small employer, upon request,
 information concerning the blocks of business established with respect to
 such plans and the applicable premiums for such plans.
 `(3) STANDARD FORMAT- The disclosure under paragraph (1) shall be made
 in a uniform format established by the Secretary, after consultation with
 the NAIC.
 `(4) EXCEPTIONS- Paragraph (1) (other than subparagraphs (D) and (E))
 shall not apply to a reinsurance carrier with respect to a reinsurance plan.
 `(b) INFORMATION FILED WITH APPLICABLE REGULATORY AUTHORITY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each carrier offering health benefit plans to small
 employers shall disclose to the applicable regulatory authority, in a
 manner specified by the Secretary, information concerning--
 `(A) blocks of business established; and
 `(B) applicable premiums for health benefit plans.
 `(2) ADDITIONAL INFORMATION- Nothing in this subsection shall be construed
 as limiting the information which an applicable regulatory authority may
 require to be reported by carriers.
`SEC. 2756. NONAPPLICATION IN PUERTO RICO AND THE TERRITORIES.
 `This subpart shall not apply outside the 50 States or the District of
 Columbia.
`Subpart 3--Encouraging Development of Reinsurance Systems
`SEC. 2758. ENCOURAGING DEVELOPMENT OF REINSURANCE SYSTEMS.
 `(a) DEVELOPMENT OF MODELS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Not later than October 1 of the year following the year
 in which this part is enacted, the NAIC shall develop several models of
 legislation for the enactment of reinsurance systems that may be used by
 States with respect to health insurance policies (including health benefit
 plans offered to small employers).
 `(2) SPECIFIC MODELS- Such models shall include at least 1 of each of the
 following 3 models:
 `(A) A model providing for voluntary participation by insurers.
 `(B) A model providing for insurer participation on a retrospective basis.
 `(C) A model providing for the case management of services for individual
 claims or groups which are reinsured through the system.
 `(3) TERMS OF MODELS- Each of the models--
 `(A) shall be consistent with the provisions of this part (including those
 relating to community-rated premiums), and
 `(B) shall include deductibles and coinsurance which--
 `(i) limit the amount of risk ceded to the reinsurance system; and
 `(ii) encourage insurers to manage health care costs.
 `(b) PROTECTION OF HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS UNDER REINSURANCE
 SYSTEMS- No State may establish or enforce a reinsurance system with respect
 to health insurance policies unless the system provides for an adjustment in
 reinsurance premiums (or, in the event of losses to the system, assessments)
 charged to health maintenance organizations that takes into account--
 `(1) the higher premiums charged by such organizations due to the greater
 coverage provided by such organizations as required by law,
 `(2) the limitations under title XIII on the amount of risk which such an
 organization can reinsure, and
 `(3) the ability of such organizations to manage risk internally.
 `(c) EFFECTIVE DATE- This section shall take effect on the date of the
 enactment of this part.'.
 (b) SOCIAL SECURITY ACT- The Social Security Act is amended by inserting
 after title XII the following new title:
`TITLE XIII--GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE STANDARDS
`Part A--General Standards; Definitions
`APPLICATION OF REQUIREMENTS TO HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS
 `SEC. 1301. (a) PLAN UNDER STATE REGULATORY PROGRAM OR CERTIFIED BY THE
 SECRETARY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- No health benefit plan may be issued in a State on or
 after the effective date specified in subsection (c) (and no new contract
 may be offered under such plan with respect to any small employer beginning
 on or after such effective date) unless--
 `(A) the Secretary determines that the State has established a regulatory
 program that provides for the application and enforcement of the applicable
 standards established under section 1302 (to carry out the requirements
 of this title) and that meets the requirements of section 1302(b) by such
 effective date, or
 `(B) if the State has not established such a program, the plan has been
 certified by the Secretary (in accordance with such procedures as the
 Secretary establishes) as meeting the applicable standards established
 under section 1302 by such effective date.
 `(2) PLAN DISAPPROVED UNDER LOOK-BEHIND AUTHORITY- If the Secretary
 determines, under section 1302(c), that a health benefit plan does not meet
 the applicable requirements of this title on or after such effective date,
 regardless of whether or not the State has taken any action with respect
 to such noncompliance, no new contracts may be offered to small employers
 under the plan on or after the date of the determination.
 `(b) SANCTIONS-
 `(1) COMPLAINTS AND INVESTIGATIONS- The Secretary shall establish
 procedures--
 `(A) for individuals and entities to file written, signed complaints with the
 Secretary respecting potential violations of the requirements of this title;
 `(B) for the investigation of those complaints which have a substantial
 probability of validity; and
 `(C) for the investigation of such other violations of the requirements
 of this title as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
 `(2) AUTHORITY IN INVESTIGATIONS- In conducting investigations and hearings
 under this subsection--
 `(A) agents of the Secretary and administrative law judges shall have
 reasonable access to examine evidence of any person or entity being
 investigated; and
 `(B) administrative law judges, may, if necessary, compel by subpoena the
 attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence at any designated
 place or hearing.
In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena lawfully issued under this
subsection and upon application of the Secretary, an appropriate district
court of the United States may issue an order requiring compliance with such
subpoena and any failure to obey such order may be punished by such court
as a contempt thereof.
 `(3) HEARING-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Before imposing an order described in paragraph (4) against
 a carrier under this subsection for a violation of the requirements of this
 title, the Secretary shall provide the carrier with notice and, upon request
 made within a reasonable time (of not less than 30 days, as established by
 the Secretary) of the date of the notice, a hearing respecting the violation.
 `(B) CONDUCT OF HEARING- Any hearing so requested shall be conducted
 before an administrative law judge under section 201. If no hearing is
 so requested, the Secretary's imposition of the order shall constitute a
 final and unappealable order.
 `(C) ISSUANCE OF ORDERS- If the administrative law judge determines, upon
 the preponderance of the evidence received, that a carrier named in the
 complaint has violated the requirements of this title, the administrative
 law judge shall state the findings of fact and issue and cause to be served
 on such carrier an order described in paragraph (4).
 `(4) ENFORCEMENT AND CIVIL MONEY PENALTY-
 `(A) ENFORCEMENT- Subject to the provisions of this paragraph, an order
 issued under this subsection--
 `(i) shall require the carrier--
 `(I) to cease and desist from such violations; and
 `(II) to pay a civil penalty as required in paragraph (9); and
 `(ii) may require the carrier to take such other corrective action as
 is appropriate.
 `(B) CORRECTIONS WITHIN 30 DAYS- No order shall be imposed under this
 subsection by reason of any violation if the carrier establishes to the
 satisfaction of the Secretary that--
 `(i) such violation was due to reasonable cause and not to willful
 neglect; and
 `(ii) such violation is corrected within the 30-day period beginning on
 earliest date the carrier knew, or exercising reasonable diligence could
 have known, that such a violation was occurring.
 `(C) WAIVER BY SECRETARY- In the case of a violation which is due to
 reasonable cause and not to willful neglect, the Secretary may waive part
 or all of the civil money penalty imposed by paragraph (9) to the extent
 that payment of such penalty would be grossly excessive relative to the
 violation involved and to the need for deterrence of violations.
 `(5) ADMINISTRATIVE APPELLATE REVIEW- The decision and order of an
 administrative law judge under this subsection shall become the final agency
 decision and order of the Secretary unless, within 30 days, the Secretary
 modifies or vacates the decision and order, in which case the decision
 and order of the Secretary shall become a final order under this subsection.
 `(6) JUDICIAL REVIEW- A carrier adversely affected by a final order issued
 under this subsection may, within 45 days after the date the final order
 is issued, file a petition in the Court of Appeals for the appropriate
 circuit for review of the order.
 `(7) ENFORCEMENT OF ORDERS- If a carrier fails to comply with a final order
 issued under this section against the carrier, the Secretary shall file a
 suit to seek compliance with the order in any appropriate district court
 of the United States. In any such suit, the validity and appropriateness
 of the final order shall not be subject to review.
 `(8) USE OF AMOUNTS COLLECTED- Civil money penalties collected under this
 subsection shall be credited to the AmeriCare Trust Fund.
 `(9) AMOUNT OF CIVIL MONEY PENALTY- The amount of any civil money penalty
 imposed under this subsection shall not exceed $25,000 for each carrier
 with respect to which a violation occurs. Such amount may take into account
 the penalties imposed by a State with respect to the same such violation.
 `(10) NOTICE TO CARRIER IN THE CASE OF INSURED PLANS- As part of any
 order issued under this subsection in the case of a health benefit plan,
 the order shall require that notice be provided to the carrier of the
 findings in the order.
 `(11) LOSS OF STATUS AS A HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN- If a carrier is not in
 compliance with subsection (a) and is not determined to have come into
 compliance with the applicable standards within 6 months after the date
 of the initial determination of such a violation, such carrier shall be
 subject to the provision of this subsection.
 `(12) EXCISE TAX- A carrier that is not in compliance with subsection (a)
 shall be subject to the tax described in section 4980C of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986.
 `(c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The effective date specified in this subsection
 is January 1 of the third full year that begins after the date of the
 enactment of this part.
`ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS
 `SEC. 1302. (a) ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS-
 `(1) NAIC- The Secretary shall request the NAIC--
 `(A) to develop specific standards, in the form of a model Act and model
 regulations, to implement the requirements of this title; and
 `(B) to report to the Secretary on such development;
by not later than October 1 of the year following the year in which this
title is enacted. If the NAIC develops such standards within such period
and the Secretary finds that such standards implement the requirements of
this title, such standards shall be the standards applied under section 1301.
 `(2) SECRETARY- If the NAIC fails to develop and report on such standards
 by such date or the Secretary finds that such standards do not implement
 the requirements of this title, the Secretary shall develop and publish,
 by not later than November 15 of the year following the year in which
 this title is enacted, such standards. Such standards shall then be the
 standards applied under section 1301.
 `(b) Additional Elements of Regulatory Programs-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A State regulatory program shall include the following:
 `(A) The enforcement under the program--
 `(i) shall be designed in a manner so as to secure compliance with the
 standards within 30 days after the date of a finding of noncompliance with
 such standards; and
 `(ii) shall provide for notice to the Secretary in cases where such
 compliance is not secured within such 30-day period.
 `(B) A toll-free telephone number which provides--
 `(i) for a system for the receipt and disposition of consumer complaints or
 inquiries regarding compliance of health benefit plans with the requirements
 of this title; and
 `(ii) information to small employers and consumers about carriers that
 offer health benefit plans in the area covered by the regulatory authority.
Such system shall provide for the recording of consumer complaints in
accordance with a uniform methodology developed by the NAIC and recognized
by the Secretary.
 `(2) SECRETARIAL AUTHORITY- In the case of a State without a regulatory
 program approved under subsection (a), the Secretary shall provide for the
 establishment of the toll-free telephone information and complaint system
 described in paragraph (1).
 `(c) SECRETARIAL REVIEW-
 `(1) PERIODIC REVIEW OF STATE REGULATORY PROGRAMS- The Secretary periodically
 shall review State regulatory programs to determine if they continue to
 meet the standards referred to in subsection (a) and the requirements of
 subsection (b). If the Secretary finds that a State regulatory program
 no longer meets such standards and requirements, before making a final
 determination, the Secretary shall provide the State an opportunity to adopt
 such a plan of correction as would permit the program to continue to meet
 such standards and requirements. If the Secretary makes a final determination
 that the State regulatory program, after such an opportunity, fails to meet
 such standards and requirements, the Secretary shall assume responsibility
 under section 1301(a)(1)(B) with respect to plans in the State.
 `(2) LOOK-BEHIND AUTHORITY- In the case of a State with a regulatory program
 found by the Secretary to meet the standards and requirements under this
 title, the Secretary nonetheless is authorized to determine whether or
 not health benefit plans offered by carriers in the State have failed to
 comply with the applicable requirements of this title.
 `(d) GAO AUDITS- The Comptroller General shall conduct periodic audits on
 a sample of State regulatory programs to determine their compliance with
 the requirements of this section. The Comptroller General shall report to
 the Secretary and Congress on the findings in such audits.
`TRANSITIONAL REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS ISSUED TO
SMALL EMPLOYERS
 `SEC. 1303. (a) APPLICATION- The requirements of this section shall apply
 only to health benefit plans offered to small employers during the period
 that begins on the effective date of this title and ends in the case of
 a small employer, on the date that begins the fifth full year after the
 date of enactment of this title.
 `(b) NO DISCRIMINATION BASED ON HEALTH STATUS FOR CERTAIN SERVICES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided under paragraph (2), health benefit plans
 offered to small employers by carriers may not deny, limit, or condition
 the coverage under (or benefits of) the plan with respect to basic health
 services based on the health status, claims experience, receipt of health
 care, medical history, or lack of evidence of insurability, of an individual.
 `(2) TREATMENT OF PREEXISTING CONDITION EXCLUSIONS FOR ALL SERVICES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this paragraph,
 health benefit plans provided to small employers by carriers may exclude
 coverage with respect to services related to treatment of a preexisting
 condition, but the period of such exclusion may not exceed 6 months.
 `(B) NONAPPLICATION TO NEWBORNS AND SUNSET OF PREEXISTING CONDITION
 EXCLUSIONS FOR BASIC HEALTH SERVICES- The exclusion of coverage permitted
 under subparagraph (A) shall not apply to--
 `(i) services furnished to newborns, or
 `(ii) basic health services furnished on or after July 1 of the sixth full
 year beginning after the date of the enactment of this title.
 `(C) CREDITING OF PREVIOUS COVERAGE-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- A health benefit plan issued to a small employer by
 a carrier shall provide that if an individual under such plan is in a
 period of continuous coverage (as defined in clause (ii)(I)) with respect
 to particular services as of the date of initial coverage under such plan,
 any period of exclusion of coverage with respect to a preexisting condition
 for such services or type of services shall be reduced by 1 month for each
 month in the period of continuous coverage.
 `(ii) DEFINITIONS- As used in this subparagraph:
 `(I) PERIOD OF CONTINUOUS COVERAGE- The term `period of continuous coverage'
 means, with respect to particular services, the period beginning on the
 date an individual is enrolled under a health benefit plan issued to
 a small employer by a carrier which provides the same or substantially
 similar benefits with respect to such services and ends on the date the
 individual is not so enrolled for a continuous period of more than 3 months.
 `(II) PREEXISTING CONDITION- The term `preexisting condition' means, with
 respect to coverage under a health benefit plan issued to a small employer
 by a carrier, a condition which has been diagnosed or treated during the
 3-month period ending on the day before the first date of such coverage,
 except that such term does not include a condition which was first diagnosed
 or treated during a period of continuous coverage.
 `(iii) STANDARDS FOR SIMILAR BENEFITS- The standards established under
 section 1302 shall establish such criteria for determining if benefits
 are substantially similar as may be necessary to carry out this subparagraph.
 `(c) PERMITTING COVERAGE DURING WAITING PERIOD-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- If a health benefit plan issued to a small employer by
 a carrier imposes a waiting period before an eligible individual may be
 covered under the plan, the plan--
 `(A) must make available to the individual coverage (including coverage
 of dependents) equivalent to the coverage available to the employee upon
 the completion of any applicable waiting period; and
 `(B) may not impose for such coverage charges that exceed the cost under
 the plan of providing such coverage with respect to the employee if such
 waiting period did not apply.
Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as requiring a health benefit
plan issued to a small employer by a carrier to make coverage available to
an individual who no longer has an employment relationship (or who is the
spouse or dependent of such an individual) with respect to the plan.
 `(2) ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL DEFINED- In paragraph (1), the term `eligible
 individual' means, with respect to a health benefit plan, an individual
 who, but for a waiting period, would be eligible for immediate coverage
 under the plan.
`DEFINITIONS
 `SEC. 1304. (a) HEALTH PLAN AND OTHER DEFINITIONS RELATING TO HEALTH PLANS-
 As used in this title:
 `(1) HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN- The term `health benefit plan' means any
 hospital or medical expense incurred policy or certificate, hospital or
 medical service plan contract, health maintenance subscriber contract,
 other employee welfare plan (as defined in the Employee Retirement Income
 Security Act of 1964), or any other health insurance arrangement, and
 includes an employment-related reinsurance plan (as defined in paragraph
 (3)), but does not include--
 `(A) accident-only, credit, dental, or disability income insurance,
 `(B) coverage issued as a supplement to liability insurance,
 `(C) worker's compensation or similar insurance, or
 `(D) automobile medical-payment insurance;
that is offered by a carrier.
 `(2) SMALL EMPLOYER- The term `small employer' means, with respect to a
 calendar year, an employer that normally employs fewer than 100 employees
 on during the calendar year.
 `(3) MANAGED CARE PLAN- The term `managed care plan' has the same meaning
 given such term by section 2108(a)(6).
 `(4) REINSURANCE PLAN- The term `reinsurance plan' means any reinsurance
 or similar mechanism that underwrites a portion of the risk for a health
 benefit plan, if the mechanism is offered directly to a small employer.
 `(5) SELF-INSURED HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN- The term `self-insured health
 benefit plan' means a health benefit plan in which the small employer
 or employment-related group assumes the underwriting risk for the plan
 (whether or not there is any reinsurance or similar mechanism to underwrite
 a portion of that risk).
 `(b) CARRIER; HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION; AND OTHER DEFINITIONS
 RELATING TO CARRIERS- As used in this title:
 `(1) CARRIER- The term `carrier' means any person that offers a health
 benefit plan, whether through insurance or otherwise, including a licensed
 insurance company, a prepaid hospital or medical service plan, a health
 maintenance organization, a self-insurer carrier, a reinsurance carrier,
 and a multiple small employer welfare arrangement (a combination of small
 employers associated for the purpose of providing health benefit plan
 coverage for their employees).
 `(2) EMPLOYER CARRIER- The term `employer carrier'--
 `(A) means any carrier which offers health benefit plans, and
 `(B) includes (unless the context otherwise requires)--
 `(i) a self-insurer carrier offering such a plan, or
 `(ii) a reinsurance carrier offering an health benefit plan that is an
 reinsurance plan.
 `(3) HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION- The term `health maintenance
 organization' has the meaning given the term `eligible organization'
 in section 1876(b).
 `(4) REINSURANCE CARRIER- The term `reinsurance carrier' means the entity
 assuming responsibility for underwriting under an employment-related
 reinsurance plan, but does not include a carrier insofar as it directly
 offers a health benefit plan.
 `(5) SELF-INSURER CARRIER- The term `self-insurer carrier' means a carrier
 that is not a licensed insurance company, a prepaid hospital or medical
 service plan, or a health maintenance organization, that offers a health
 benefit plan directly with respect to an employment-related group.
 `(c) GENERAL DEFINITIONS- As used in this title:
 `(1) APPLICABLE REGULATORY AUTHORITY- The term `applicable regulatory
 authority' means, with respect to a health benefit plan offered in a
 State, the State commissioner or superintendent of insurance or other
 State authority responsible for regulation of health insurance, or, if the
 Secretary is exercising authority under section 1301(a)(1)(B) in the State,
 the Secretary.
 `(2) BLOCK OF BUSINESS- The term `block of business' means all, or a distinct
 grouping of, small employers as shown on the records of the small employer
 carrier, if established consistent with section 1312(b)(3).
 `(3) COMMUNITY- The term `community' means a geographic area designated
 by the Secretary as--
 `(A) encompassing one or more adjacent metropolitan statistical areas; or
 `(B) the remaining area within each State (that is not designated within
 any community under subparagraph (A));
except that the Secretary may designate an entire State as a community if such
a designation would better carry out the purposes of this title. The Secretary
from time to time may change the boundaries of communities designated under
subparagraph (A) or (B) for such purposes. There shall be no administrative
or judicial review of the designation of communities under this subsection.
 `(4) FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE- The term `full-time employee' means, with respect
 to an employer, an employee who normally performs on a monthly basis at
 least 25 hours of service per week for that employer.
 `(5) NAIC- The term `NAIC' means the National Association of Insurance
 Commissioners.
 `(6) REFERENCE PREMIUM RATE- The term `reference premium rate' means,
 for each block of business for a rating period in a community, the lowest
 premium rate charged or which could have been charged by the small employer
 carrier to small employers in that block under a rating system for that
 block of business in the community for health benefit plans with the same
 or similar coverage. The reference premium rate is determined without
 regard to any adjustment for age or sex described in section 1312(c)
 and without regard to any adjustment effected under section 1312(d).
 `(7) STATE- The term `State' means the 50 States and the District of
 Columbia.
`Part B--Small Employer Health Insurance Reform
`ENROLLMENT PRACTICE AND GUARANTEED RENEWABILITY REQUIREMENTS FOR HEALTH
BENEFIT PLANS ISSUED TO SMALL EMPLOYERS
 `SEC. 1311. (a) REGISTRATION WITH APPLICABLE REGULATORY AUTHORITY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each carrier (as defined in section 1304(b)(1)) shall
 register with the applicable regulatory authority for each State in which
 it issues or offers a health benefit plan to small employers.
 `(2) NO PREEMPTION OF STATE INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS- Nothing in paragraph
 (1) shall be construed as preventing the applicable regulatory authority
 from requiring, in the case of carriers that are not self-insurance
 carriers, such additional information in conjunction with, or apart from,
 the registration required under paragraph (1) as the applicable regulatory
 authority may be authorized to require under State law.
 `(b) GUARANTEED ISSUE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this subsection,
 a carrier that offers a health benefit plan (including a reinsurance plan)
 to small employers located in a community must offer the same plan to any
 other small employer located in the community.
 `(2) TREATMENT OF HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS-
 `(A) GEOGRAPHIC LIMITATIONS- A health maintenance organization may deny
 coverage under a health benefit plan to a small employer whose employees
 are located outside the service area of the organization, but only if such
 denial is applied uniformly without regard to health status or insurability.
 `(B) SIZE LIMITS- A health maintenance organization may apply to the
 applicable regulatory authority to cease enrolling new small employer groups
 in its health benefit plan (or in a geographic area served by the plan) if
 it can demonstrate that its financial or administrative capacity to serve
 previously enrolled groups and individuals (and additional individuals
 who will be expected to enroll because of affiliation with such previously
 enrolled groups) will be impaired if it is required to enroll new groups.
 `(3) GROUNDS FOR REFUSAL TO ISSUE OR RENEW-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- A carrier may refuse to issue or renew or terminate a
 health benefit plan under this part only for--
 `(i) nonpayment of premiums,
 `(ii) fraud or misrepresentation, and
 `(iii) failure to meet minimum participation rates (consistent with
 subparagraph (B)).
 `(B) MINIMUM PARTICIPATION RATES- A carrier may require, within the
 transition period described in section 1303(a), with respect to a health
 benefit plan, that a minimum percentage of full-time, permanent employees
 eligible to enroll under the plan be enrolled, so long as such percentage
 is enforced uniformly for all employment groups of comparable size.
 `(c) MINIMUM PLAN PERIOD- A carrier may not offer to, or issue with
 respect to, a small employer a health benefit plan with a term of less
 than 12 months.
 `(d) GUARANTEED RENEWABILITY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL-
 `(A) GENERAL RULE- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this subsection, a
 carrier shall ensure that a health benefit plan issued to a small employer be
 renewed, at the option of the small employer, unless the plan is terminated
 for the reasons specified in subsection (a)(3)(A) or under subparagraph (B).
 `(B) TERMINATION OF BLOCK OF BUSINESS- A carrier need not renew a health
 benefit plan with respect to such a small employer if the carrier--
 `(i) is terminating the block of business that includes the plan; and
 `(ii) provides notice to the small employer covered under the plan of such
 termination at least 90 days before the date of expiration of the plan.
In the case of such a termination, the carrier may not provide for issuance
of any health benefit plan in any block of business during the 5-year period
beginning on the date of termination of such block of business.
 `(C) CONSTRUCTION RESPECTING ADDITIONAL STATE DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS-
 Subparagraph (B)(ii) shall not be construed as preventing the applicable
 regulatory authority from specifying the information to be included in the
 notice under such subparagraph or in requiring such notice to be provided
 at an earlier date.
 `(2) NOTICE AND SPECIFICATION OF RATES AND ADMINISTRATIVE CHANGES-
 `(A) NOTICE- A carrier offering health benefit plans to small employers
 shall provide for notice, at least 30 days before the date of expiration
 of the health benefit plan, of the terms for renewal of the plan. Except
 with respect to rates and administrative changes, the terms of renewal
 (including benefits) shall be the same as the terms of issuance.
 `(B) RENEWAL RATES SAME AS ISSUANCE RATES- The carrier may change the
 terms for such renewal, but the premium rates charged with respect to such
 renewal shall be the same as that for a new issue.
 `(C) RATES CANNOT CHANGE MORE OFTEN THAN MONTHLY-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- A carrier may not change the premium rates established
 with respect to health benefit plans offered for any block of business
 more often than monthly.
 `(ii) APPLICATION OF NEW RATES- A carrier that offers health benefit plans
 to small employers which becomes effective in a month, shall ensure that
 the premium rates established under clause (i) for that month shall apply
 to all months during the 12-month period beginning with that month. In the
 case of a plan renewal which is effective for a 12-month period beginning
 with a month, the premium rates established under clause (i) with respect
 to that month shall apply to all months during 12-month renewal period.
 `(3) PERIOD OF RENEWAL- The period of renewal of each health benefit plan
 offered by a carrier to a small employer shall be for a period of not less
 than 12 months.
`RATING PRACTICES FOR HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS OFFERED TO SMALL EMPLOYERS
 `SEC. 1312. (a) COHESIVE RATING SYSTEM AND ACTURIAL CERTIFICATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The premiums (including reference premium rate, as defined
 in section 1304(c)(6), age adjustments under subsection (c), and reductions
 provided under subsection (d)) for all health benefit plans offered to
 small employers by carriers shall--
 `(A) be established based on a single cohesive rating system which is
 applied consistently for all small employer groups and is designed not to
 treat groups, after the second effective year (as defined in subsection
 (f)), differently based on health status or risk status; and
 `(B) be actuarially certified annually.
 `(2) ACTUARIAL CERTIFIED DEFINED- For purposes of paragraph (1)(B), a
 health benefit plan is considered to be `actuarially certified' if there
 is a written statement, by a member of the American Academy of Actuaries
 or other individual acceptable to the applicable regulatory authority that
 a carrier is in compliance with this section, based upon the individual's
 examination, including a review of the appropriate records and of the
 actuarial assumptions and methods utilized by the carrier in establishing
 premium rates for applicable health benefit plans.
 `(b) USE OF COMMUNITY-RATING-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2) and subsection (c):
 `(A) COMMUNITY RATING WITHIN A BLOCK OF BUSINESS- The reference premium
 rate charged for health benefit plans offered with similar benefits to
 small employers in a community within a block of business for a type of
 family enrollment (described in subsection (e)) shall be the same for all
 small employers.
 `(B) LIMITING VARIATION ON REFERENCE PREMIUM RATES AMONG BLOCKS OF BUSINESS-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in clause (iii), the reference premium
 rate charged for health benefit plans offered with similar benefits to
 small employers in any community for a type of family enrollment for the
 most expensive block of business shall not exceed 120 percent of such rate
 charged for such plan for the same type of family enrollment for the least
 expensive block of business.
 `(ii) ROLE OF REGULATORY AUTHORITY- An applicable regulatory authority
 that is a State may reduce or eliminate the percent variation otherwise
 permitted under clause (i).
 `(iii) EXCEPTION- Clause (i) shall not apply to health benefit plans
 offered by carriers to small employers in a block of business--
 `(I) if the block is one for which the carrier does not reject, and
 never has rejected, small employers included within the definition of
 small employers eligible for the block of business or otherwise eligible
 employees and dependents who enroll on a timely basis,
 `(II) the carrier does not involuntarily transfer, and never has
 involuntarily transferred, a health benefit plan into or out of the block
 of business, and
 `(III) that block of business was available for purchase as of the date
 of the enactment of this title.
 `(2) TRANSITION- Notwithstanding paragraph (1)--
 `(A) during the first effective year (as defined in subsection (f)),
 the premium rate under a health benefit plan issued by a carrier to any
 small employer may be as much as, but may not exceed, 150 percent of the
 reference premium rate for such plans in the same community for similar
 benefits in the same block of business; or
 `(B) during the second effective year, the premium rate under such a policy
 for any small employer may be as much as, but may not exceed, 122 percent
 of the reference premium rate for such plans in the same community for
 similar benefits in the same block of business.
 `(3) ESTABLISHMENT OF BLOCKS OF BUSINESS- For the purpose of establishing
 premiums for small employer health benefit plans with similar coverage,
 the carrier may establish blocks of business based only on one or more of
 the following characteristics:
 `(A) Plans that are marketed by clearly different sales forces.
 `(B) Plans that have been acquired from another carrier as a distinct group.
 `(C) Plans that are managed care plans.
 `(D) Plans within another distinct group, if the applicable regulatory
 authority finds that establishment of such a group will enhance the
 efficiency and fairness of the small employer insurance marketplace.
 `(c) ADJUSTMENTS TO COMMUNITY-RATING-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (2), a health benefit plan offered by a
 carrier to a small employer may provide for an adjustment to the reference
 premium rate based on the age and gender of covered individuals. Any
 such adjustment shall be applied by the carrier consistently to all small
 employers, except that adjustment based on gender may only be made during
 the transition period.
 `(2) LIMITATION ON ADJUSTMENT-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The adjustment under paragraph (1) may not result,
 with respect to health benefit plans with similar benefits offered by
 carriers to small employers in the same block of business in a community,
 in a premium rate for the most expensive age group exceeding the applicable
 percent (as defined in subparagraph (B)) of the premium rate for the least
 expensive age group.
 `(B) APPLICABLE PERCENT DEFINED- In subparagraph (A) but subject to
 subparagraph (C), the term `applicable percent' means--
 `(i) for the first effective year (as defined in subsection (f)) 200 percent,
 `(ii) for the second effective year, 150 percent, and
 `(iii) for any subsequent year, 110 percent.
 `(C) ROLE OF REGULATORY AUTHORITY- An applicable regulatory authority that
 is a State may reduce or eliminate the applicable percent otherwise applied.
 `(d) ADJUSTMENT IN RATES PERMITTED IN CASE OF MEDICARE REIMBURSEMENT
 ELECTION- A health benefit plan offered by a carrier to a small employer
 may compute premiums based upon a percentage of the reference premium rate
 otherwise applicable if the small employer to which the plan is being
 offered makes the reimbursement election described in section 1314. Any
 such adjustment shall be applied consistently to all small employers.
 `(e) TYPES OF FAMILY ENROLLMENT- Each health benefit plan offered by a
 carrier to a small employer shall permit enrollment of (and shall compute
 premiums separately for) individuals based on each of the following
 beneficiary classes:
 `(1) 1 adult.
 `(2) A married couple without children.
 `(3) 1 adult and 1 child.
 `(4) A married couple with 1 or more children, or 1 adult with 2 or more
 children.
 `(f) EFFECTIVE YEARS DEFINED- In this section, the terms `first effective
 year' and `second effective year' mean the third and fourth full years
 beginning after the date of the enactment of this part.
 `(g) EXCEPTION FOR SELF-INSURED CARRIERS- The requirements of this section
 shall apply to reinsurance carriers and health benefit plans offered by
 such carriers to small employers.
`BASIC BENEFIT PACKAGE FOR HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS OFFERED TO SMALL EMPLOYERS
 `SEC. 1313. (a) IN GENERAL-
 `(1) BENEFITS AND COST-SHARING IN HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS- Except as provided
 in paragraph (2) and in section 1303(a), no health benefit plan offered
 by carriers to small employers may be issued to a small employer unless--
 `(A) the plan provides for benefits for all basic health services as
 defined in section 1182(1);
 `(B) the plan does not impose cost-sharing with respect to basic health
 services in excess of the deductibles and coinsurance permitted under
 section 2103 with respect to such services; and
 `(C) the carrier makes available to the small employer a health benefit
 plan that, subject to paragraph (2)(C), only provides the benefits for basic
 health services and the maximum cost-sharing consistent with subparagraphs
 (A) and (B).
 `(2) EXCEPTIONS-
 `(A) REQUIRED OFFERING DOES NOT APPLY TO HMO'S- Paragraph (1)(C) shall
 not apply to a health maintenance organization.
 `(B) ADDITIONAL, OPTIONAL MINIMUM SERVICES- In meeting the requirement of
 paragraph (1)(C), a health benefit plan offered by a carrier to a small
 employer may include such additional items and services as the carrier can
 demonstrate to the satisfaction of the applicable regulatory authority that
 inclusion of such items and services will facilitate appropriate hospital
 discharges or avoid unnecessary hospitalization.
 `(b) MANAGED CARE OPTION- If a carrier (other than a health maintenance
 organization or reinsurance carrier) offers health benefit plans to employers
 that are not small employers, in a community a health benefit plan that
 is a managed care plan, the carrier must make available to small employers
 in the community a health benefit plan that is such a managed care plan.
 `(c) EXCEPTION FOR REINSURANCE CARRIERS AND PLANS- The requirements of
 this section shall not apply to reinsurance carriers and reinsurance plans.
 `(d) STANDARDIZATION OF BENEFIT PACKAGES- The NAIC shall develop a model to
 standardize benefits to be made available under health benefit plans offered
 by carriers to small employers in order to promote consumer understanding
 and comparison among such plans.
`TIME-LIMITED MEDICARE REIMBURSEMENT OPTION FOR HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS OFFERED
TO SMALL EMPLOYERS NOT PREVIOUSLY OFFERING INSURANCE COVERAGE
 `SEC. 1314. (a) OPTION MUST BE OFFERED- Each carrier offering a health
 benefit plan to small employers meeting the requirements of section 351(a)
 of the HealthAmerica Act shall offer the small employer the option of
 having payment under the plan made for basic health services at rates
 no higher than the payment rates established under title XVIII for such
 benefits. The provisions of section 1848(g)(3) shall not be considered to
 apply under this subsection.
 `(b) APPLICATION OF MEDICARE BILLING LIMITATIONS- In the case of a small
 employer that elects the option offered under subsection (a) with respect
 to a health benefit plan, the limitations on charges that may be made
 under medicare shall apply to individuals receiving benefits under the
 plan. The sanctions imposed under the medicare program (and title XI),
 including exclusion under such program and the imposition of civil money
 penalties for violations of such limitations, apply to violations of the
 limitations imposed under this subsection.
 `(c) EXCEPTION FOR REINSURANCE PLAN- Subsection (a) shall not apply to
 reinsurance plans.
`MISCELLANEOUS DISCLOSURE AND RECORD-KEEPING REQUIREMENTS FOR HEALTH BENEFIT
PLANS OFFERED TO SMALL EMPLOYERS
 `SEC. 1315. (a) DISCLOSURE-
 `(1) GENERAL DISCLOSURE- Each carrier offering health benefit plans to
 small employers shall disclose to each small employer before issuing such
 a plan the following:
 `(A) The availability (pursuant to the requirement of section 1313(a)(1)(C))
 of a plan including only basic benefits.
 `(B) Whether any plan that is a managed care plan or provides for a
 utilization review program, or both, is available, as required under
 section 1313(b).
 `(C) The option of electing the reimbursement rules, as required under
 section 1314.
 `(D) The limits, imposed under section 1312, on the premiums permitted to
 be charged for such plans.
 `(E) The rights of guaranteed issue and renewability provided under
 section 1311.
Such disclosure shall be in addition to any disclosure required generally
of health benefit plans under section 2725 of the Public Health Service Act.
 `(2) SPECIFIC DISCLOSURE UPON REQUEST- Each carrier offering health benefit
 plans to small employers shall disclose to small employer, upon request,
 information concerning the blocks of business established with respect to
 such plans and the applicable premiums for such plans.
 `(3) STANDARD FORMAT- The disclosure under paragraph (1) shall be made
 in a uniform format established by the Secretary, after consultation with
 the NAIC.
 `(4) EXCEPTIONS- Paragraph (1) (other than subparagraphs (D) and (E))
 shall not apply to a reinsurance carrier with respect to a reinsurance plan.
 `(b) INFORMATION FILED WITH APPLICABLE REGULATORY AUTHORITY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each carrier offering health benefit plans to small
 employers shall disclose to the applicable regulatory authority, in a
 manner specified by the Secretary, information concerning--
 `(A) blocks of business established; and
 `(B) applicable premiums for health benefit plans.
 `(2) ADDITIONAL INFORMATION- Nothing in this subsection shall be construed
 as limiting the information which an applicable regulatory authority may
 require to be reported by carriers.
`NONAPPLICATION IN PUERTO RICO AND THE TERRITORIES
 `SEC. 1316. This part shall not apply outside the 50 States or the District
 of Columbia.
`Part C--Encouraging Development of Reinsurance Systems
`ENCOURAGING DEVELOPMENT OF REINSURANCE SYSTEMS
 `SEC. 1321. (a) DEVELOPMENT OF MODELS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Not later than October 1 of the year following the year
 in which this title is enacted, the NAIC shall develop several models of
 legislation for the enactment of reinsurance systems that may be used by
 States with respect to health insurance policies (including health benefit
 plans offered to small employers).
 `(2) SPECIFIC MODELS- Such models shall include at least 1 of each of the
 following 3 models:
 `(A) A model providing for voluntary participation by insurers.
 `(B) A model providing for insurer participation on a retrospective basis.
 `(C) A model providing for the case management of services for individual
 claims or groups which are reinsured through the system.
 `(3) TERMS OF MODELS- Each of the models--
 `(A) shall be consistent with the provisions of this title (including
 those relating to community-rated premiums), and
 `(B) shall include deductibles and coinsurance which--
 `(i) limit the amount of risk ceded to the reinsurance system; and
 `(ii) encourage insurers to manage health care costs.
 `(b) PROTECTION OF HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS UNDER REINSURANCE
 SYSTEMS- No State may establish or enforce a reinsurance system with respect
 to health insurance policies unless the system provides for an adjustment in
 reinsurance premiums (or, in the event of losses to the system, assessments)
 charged to health maintenance organizations that takes into account--
 `(1) the higher premiums charged by such organizations due to the greater
 coverage provided by such organizations as required by law,
 `(2) the limitations under title XIII of the Public Health Service Act on
 the amount of risk which such an organization can reinsure, and
 `(3) the ability of such organizations to manage risk internally.
 `(c) EFFECTIVE DATE- This section shall take effect on the date of the
 enactment of this title.'.
Subtitle B--Tax Equity for Small and Medium-Sized Business
SEC. 321. DEDUCTIBLE HEALTH COVERAGE PROVISIONS.
 (a) INCREASE IN DEDUCTIBLE HEALTH INSURANCE COSTS FOR SELF-EMPLOYED
 INDIVIDUALS WITHOUT EMPLOYEES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Paragraph (1) of section 162(l) of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (relating to special rules for health insurance costs of
 self-employed individuals) is amended by striking out `25 percent' and
 all that follows and inserting in lieu thereof `100 percent of--
 `(A) the cost of the lowest cost plan meeting the requirements of the
 subtitle A of title III of the HealthAmerica Act available in the geographic
 area in which the individual resides or conducts business, or
 `(B) if such individual is enrolled in AmeriCare, the cost of AmeriCare,
paid during the taxable year for the taxpayer, his spouse, and dependents.'.
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by this subsection shall apply to
 taxable years beginning in the third full calendar year after the date of
 enactment of this Act.
 (b) DEDUCTION ALLOWABLE FOR CERTAIN GROUP HEALTH PLAN CONTRIBUTIONS BY
 SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 162 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating
 to trade or business expenses) is amended by redesignating subsection
 (m) as subsection (n) and by inserting after subsection (l) (relating to
 special rules for health insurance costs of self-employed individuals)
 the following new subsection:
 `(m) DEDUCTION ALLOWABLE FOR CERTAIN GROUP HEALTH PLAN CONTRIBUTIONS FOR
 THE BENEFIT OF SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this section and sections 212, 104,
 105, and 106, in the case of a qualified group health plan which provides
 medical care benefits for any self-employed individual--
 `(A) such individual shall be treated as an employee,
 `(B) the employer of such individual shall be the person treated as the
 employer under section 301(c)(4), and
 `(C) contributions to such plan for medical benefits for such individual
 shall be treated as meeting the requirements of subsection (a) and section
 212 to the extent such contributions during the taxable year do not exceed
 the lowest per employee contribution for employees working 25 hours a week
 or more to the plan made by the employer during such year.
 `(2) DEDUCTION CANNOT EXCEED TAXABLE INCOME FROM ACTIVITY- The deduction
 allowed to any individual by reason of this subsection for any taxable
 year shall not exceed the portion of the taxable income of such individual
 (determined without regard to this subsection) for such year which is
 allocable or apportionable to such individual's interest in the employer.
 `(3) QUALIFIED GROUP HEALTH PLAN-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified
 group health plan' means, with respect to any self-employed individual,
 any group health plan (as defined in section 5000(b)(1)) of an employer if--
 `(i) such plan is not a self-insured plan, and
 `(ii) such plan meets the requirements of subparagraphs (B) and (C).
 `(B) ONE-HALF OF PARTICIPANTS MUST BE EMPLOYEES WHO ARE NOT SELF-EMPLOYED
 INDIVIDUALS OR EMPLOYEE FAMILY MEMBERS OF SUCH INDIVIDUALS-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- A plan meets the requirements of this subparagraph
 with respect to any self-employed individual only if at least half of
 the participants in the plan (on each day of the taxable year of such
 individual) are employees who are not--
 `(I) self-employed individuals to whom a deduction is allowable by reason
 of this subsection with respect to contributions to such plan, or
 `(II) family members of any self-employed individual described in subclause
 (I).
 `(ii) FAMILY MEMBER- For purposes of clause (i), the term `family member'
 means, with respect to an individual, such individual's brothers and
 sisters (whether by the whole or half blood), spouse, ancestors, and
 lineal descendants.
 `(C) SELF-INSURED PLAN- The term `self-insured plan' means any plan under
 which medical care benefits are not provided under a policy of accident
 and health insurance.
 `(4) LOWEST PER EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTION-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this subsection, the term `lowest per
 employee contribution' means, with respect to any taxable year of a
 self-employed individual, the smallest contribution made by the employer
 during such taxable year to the plan with respect to any employee--
 `(i) who is not a self-employed individual,
 `(ii) with respect to whom a contribution to the plan was made during such
 year, and
 `(iii) who is in the same category of coverage as the self-employed
 individual.
 `(B) CATEGORIES OF COVERAGE- For purposes of subparagraph (A), the categories
 of coverage are--
 `(i) self only, and
 `(ii) self and family.
 `(C) SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE PARTICIPANTS FOR LESS THAN ENTIRE
 TAXABLE YEAR- In the case of a self-employed individual who is a participant
 in the plan for less than the entire taxable year, the lowest per employee
 contribution applicable to such individual shall be the same portion of
 amount determined under subparagraph (A) as the portion of the taxable
 year during which such individual was a participant in the plan bears to
 the entire taxable year.
 `(D) SPECIAL RULES- For purposes of subparagraph (A)--
 `(i) only contributions for coverage during the taxable year shall be
 taken into account, and
 `(ii) the contributions with respect to any employee who is not a
 participant in the plan for the entire taxable year shall be determined
 on an annualized basis.
 `(5) OTHER DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this subsection--
 `(A) SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUAL- The term `self-employed individual' has
 the meaning given such term by section 301(c)(1)(B).
 `(B) MEDICAL CARE BENEFITS- The term `medical care benefits' means, with
 respect to any self-employed individual, compensation for the medical care
 (as defined in section 213(d)) of such individual, the spouse of such
 individual, and dependents of such individual.
 `(C) DEPENDENT- The term `dependent' has the meaning given such term by
 section 152. Any child to whom section 152(e) applies shall be treated as
 a dependent of both parents.
 `(6) SPECIAL RULES-
 `(A) COORDINATION WITH SECTION 213- Any amount allowed as a deduction
 by reason of this subsection shall not be treated as an amount paid for
 medical care under section 213.
 `(B) AGGREGATION OF EMPLOYER PLANS- If any self-employed individual is
 a participant in 2 or more qualified group health plans of the employer,
 all such plans shall be treated as 1 plan for purposes of this subsection.'.
 (2) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- Subsection (g) of section 105 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to self-employed individual not considered
 an employee) is amended by striking out `For purposes of this section'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `Except as provided in section 162(m)(1),
 for purposes of this section'.
 (3) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to
 taxable years beginning in the third full year after the date of enactment
 of this Act.
SEC. 322. EXCISE TAX FOR VIOLATION OF HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Chapter 43 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating
 to qualified pension, etc., plans) is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following new section:
`SEC. 4980C. VIOLATION OF HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
 `(a) IMPOSITION OF TAX- There is hereby imposed a tax on an entity's
 violation of subsection (a) of section 1301 of the Social Security Act. The
 determination of whether there has been such a violation shall be made by
 the Secretary of Health and Human Services under such section.
 `(b) AMOUNT OF TAX- The tax imposed by subsection (a) shall be equal to
 25 percent of the amounts received by the entity (during the period such
 a violation persists) for providing any health plan for all blocks of
 business in all communities.
 `(c) LIABILITY FOR TAX- The tax imposed by this section shall be paid by
 the entity.
 `(d) EXCEPTIONS-
 `(1) CORRECTIONS WITHIN 30 DAYS- No tax shall be imposed by subsection
 (a) by reason of any violation if--
 `(A) such violation was due to reasonable cause and not to willful
 neglect, and
 `(B) such violation is corrected within the 30-day period beginning on
 earliest date the entity knew, or exercising reasonable diligence could
 have known, that such a violation was occurring.
 `(2) WAIVER BY SECRETARY- In the case of a violation which is due to
 reasonable cause and not to willful neglect, the Secretary may waive part
 or all of the tax imposed by subsection (a) to the extent that payment of
 such tax would be excessive relative to the violation involved.
 `(e) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section, the definitions in title
 XXIII of the Social Security Act shall apply under this section.'.
 (2) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for chapter 43 of such Code
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`Sec. 4980C. Violation of health plan requirements.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsection (a) shall become
 effective on January 1 of the 4th year beginning after the date of the
 enactment of this Act.
Subtitle C--Opportunity for Voluntary Provision of Coverage
SEC. 331. MEDIUM-SIZED EMPLOYERS.
 (a) EMPLOYERS WITH BETWEEN 25 AND 100 EMPLOYEES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- No medium-sized employer shall be required to provide a
 health benefit plan under section 2701 of the Public Health Service Act
 or make a contribution in lieu of coverage under title V of this Act until
 the fifth calendar year after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (2) APPLICATION OF REQUIREMENTS- If, during the fourth calendar year after
 the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary finds that the total
 number of employees, excluding part-time employees, of all such employers
 that have no employment-based health insurance coverage provided through
 the employers of such employees has been reduced to 25 percent or less of
 the number of such uninsured employees that existed during the calendar
 year in which this Act was enacted, the requirement to provide coverage
 or make a contribution under title V shall apply to employers described
 in paragraph (1).
 (3) PERCENTAGES DURING SUBSEQUENT YEARS- An employer described in paragraph
 (1) shall provide the health benefits coverage under this Act, or an
 amendment made by this Act, or make a contribution under title V if the
 percentage of the uninsured employees during the fifth calendar year or
 any subsequent calendar year after the date of the enactment of this Act
 is more than the 25 percent level described in paragraph (2).
 (b) UNINSURED EMPLOYEES-
 (1) YEAR OF ENACTMENT- For purposes of subsection (a), employees shall
 be considered uninsured during the calendar year in which this Act is
 enacted if such employees are not covered under any employment-based health
 insurance coverage provided through their employer.
 (2) FOURTH YEAR- For purposes of subsection (a), employees shall be
 considered uninsured during the fourth calendar year after the date of
 the enactment of this Act if such employees are not covered under any
 employment-based health insurance coverage provided through their employer
 that meets the requirements of this Act and the amendments made by this Act.
SEC. 332. MEASUREMENT SURVEYS.
 (a) ANNOUNCEMENT- Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this
 Act, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register an announcement of
 the survey or surveys to be used by such Secretary in the coverage level
 of employees described in section 331, and the criteria that will be used
 to determine such level.
 (b) CRITERIA- The announcement of criteria under subsection (a) shall
 include a determination, based on the availability of the most reliable
 survey data available, as to whether the determination of the coverage
 level shall be based on a measurement of insurance coverage at a point in
 time or during the course of all or part of a calendar year.
 (c) APPLICATION OF ACT- If the percentage of uninsured employees in
 the fourth calendar year after the date of the enactment of this Act is
 equal to or less than the 25 percent level described in section 331(a),
 the Secretary shall repeat the measurement of such coverage level annually
 and if, in any calendar year, the Secretary does not find that the number
 of employees who do not have employer provided health insurance coverage
 is equal to or less than such 25 percent level, the requirements of this
 Act or section 2701 of the Public Health Service Act shall apply to all
 employers described in section 331(a).
SEC. 333. SMALL EMPLOYERS.
 Sections 331 and 332 shall apply to small employers, except that
 the requirement to provide coverage or make a contribution in lieu of
 coverage under title V shall not be applied until the sixth calendar year
 after the date of enactment of this Act, and the Secretary shall make the
 determinations required under such sections to be made in the fourth calendar
 year, in the fifth calendar year after the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 334. FAILURE TO MAKE SURVEYS.
 The failure of the Secretary to make the surveys required under this
 subtitle shall not relieve an employer of the obligation of such employer
 to provide coverage or make a contribution in lieu of coverage absent a
 finding by the Secretary that the coverage target has been met.
Subtitle D--Small Business Tax Credit
SEC. 341. ALLOWANCE OF A CREDIT FOR SMALL AND MEDIUM-SIZED BUSINESS GROUP
HEALTH PLAN EXPENDITURES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business related credits)
 is amended by inserting at the end thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 45. SMALL BUSINESS GROUP HEALTH PLAN EXPENDITURES.
 `(a) ALLOWANCE OF CREDIT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of section 38, in the case of an eligible
 small business, the amount of the qualified group health plan credit for
 the taxable year shall be an amount equal to the applicable percentage of
 the qualified group health plan expenditures for such taxable year.
 `(2) APPLICABLE PERCENTAGE DEFINED-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `applicable
 percentage' means 25 percent reduced (but not below 0 percent) by 5
 percent for--
 `(i) each employee of the eligible small business in excess of 40, or
 `(ii) each .1 by which the expanded profit ratio of such business exceeds 1.
 `(B) COORDINATION OF MULTIPLE PHASEOUTS- If an eligible small business
 is subject to subparagraphs (A)(i) and (A)(ii), the applicable percentage
 shall be determined by multiplying the resulting applicable percentage under
 subparagraph (A)(i) (expressed as a percentage of the credit remaining)
 by such applicable percentage under subparagraph (A)(ii).
 `(C) EXPANDED PROFIT RATIO-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this paragraph, the term `expanded profit
 ratio' means the expanded profit of the eligible small business for the
 taxable year divided by the qualified group health plan expenditures of
 such business for such year.
 `(ii) EXPANDED PROFIT- For purposes of clause (i), the term `expanded
 profit' means the sum of--
 `(I) the taxable income of the eligible small business,
 `(II) the amount of earned income exceeding the applicable contribution
 base (as defined in section 3121(x)(1)) for each 5-percent owner of such
 business, plus
 `(III) the total amount of interest and dividends distributed to all owners
 of such business.
 `(b) QUALIFIED GROUP HEALTH PLAN EXPENDITURES; ELIGIBLE SMALL BUSINESS-
 For purposes of this section--
 `(1) QUALIFIED GROUP HEALTH PLAN EXPENDITURES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `qualified group health plan expenditures' means
 the aggregate amount of expenditures paid or incurred by the eligible small
 business for the taxable year for coverage of its employees under a group
 health plan (as defined in section 5000(b)(1)) which is a health benefit plan
 (as defined in section 2713(a)(5)) of the Public Health Service Act to the
 extent such expenditures do not exceed $3,000 for each employee, reduced
 (but not below zero) by 5 percent for each $250 (or fraction thereof)
 by which the amount of wages paid to such employee by the eligible small
 business in such taxable year exceeds $15,000.
 `(B) LIMIT INDEXED- In the case of any taxable year beginning in a
 calendar year after the effective date of this section, the $3,000 amount
 in subparagraph (A) shall be increased by an amount equal to
 `(i) such amount, multiplied by
 `(ii) the increase (if any) in the wage index for such calendar year.
 `(2) ELIGIBLE SMALL BUSINESS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `eligible small business' means any person which,
 on an average business day during the preceding taxable year, had no more
 than 60 employees.
 `(B) AGGREGATION RULES- All members of the same controlled group of
 corporations (within the meaning of section 52(a)) and all persons under
 common control (within the meaning of section 52(b)) shall be treated as
 1 person.
 `(C) EMPLOYEE- The term `employee'--
 `(i) shall include a self-employed individual as defined in section
 401(c)(1), but
 `(ii) shall not include an employee who works less than 25 hours per week.
 `(c) COORDINATION WITH DEDUCTION- Any deduction allowable under this chapter
 for any qualified group health plan expenditures shall be in addition to
 any credit under section 38 attributable to such expenditures.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Section 38(b) of such Code is amended--
 (A) by striking `plus' at the end of paragraph (6),
 (B) by striking `plus' at the end of paragraph (7), and inserting a comma
 and `plus', and
 (C) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(8) the small business group health plan expenditures credit determined
 under section 45.'.
 (2) The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of
 chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to
 section 44 the following new item:
`Sec. 45. Small business group health plan expenditures.'
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning in the third full calendar year after the date of
 the enactment of this Act.
Subtitle E--Additional Assistance to Small and Medium-Sized Businesses
SEC. 351. OPPORTUNITY TO BUY COVERAGE AT MEDICARE RATES.
 (a) ELIGIBILITY- Businesses with fewer than 100 employees that have not
 provided coverage to their employees in the calendar year preceding the
 date of enactment of this Act shall be eligible to buy private health
 insurance coverage from a small or medium-sized business insurer under which
 providers of health care services are paid at rules based on Medicare rates
 as provided for in part C of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act and
 title XIII of the Social Security Act, for a period of not to exceed 5 years.
 (b) DEFINITION- As used in this section the term `not provided coverage
 in the calendar year preceding the date of enactment of this Act' means,
 with respect to a business, that less than 25 percent of employees working
 more than 17.5 hours per week for the business received coverage from the
 business in each of the years.
SEC. 352. SPECIAL PROVISION FOR NEW SMALL BUSINESSES.
 In the case of a small employer that normally employs 24 or fewer employees
 during a year, and that has been an employer for not more than 3 years,
 such employer shall not be required to provide coverage under this Act or
 the amendment made by this Act or make a contribution in lieu of coverage
 under title V for the first two years in which the employer has been an
 employer. Such employer shall be permitted to meet the requirements of part
 B of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act by making a contribution
 at a rate that is 1/2 of the rate that would otherwise be required to
 be paid under this Act.
SEC. 353. SMALL AND MEDIUM-SIZED BUSINESS ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary shall establish a small and medium-sized
 business advisory committee (hereafter referred to in this section as
 the `committee') that shall provide advice to such Secretary and to the
 appropriate committees of Congress concerning all provisions of this Act
 that relate to small and medium-sized businesses.
 (b) MEMBERSHIP-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall jointly appoint individuals to serve
 on the committee, of which--
 (A) seven individuals shall be representatives of small or medium-sized
 businesses;
 (B) two individuals shall be representatives of employees of small or
 medium-sized businesses;
 (C) two individuals shall be knowledgeable concerning the small and
 medium-sized business insurance market; and
 (D) two individuals shall be members of the general public.
 (2) SMALL AND MEDIUM-SIZED BUSINESS REPRESENTATIVES- Individuals appointed
 under paragraph (1)(A) shall--
 (A) be selected from geographically diverse regions of the country;
 (B) include at least one representative of small or medium-sized businesses
 that are located in rural areas and one representative of small or
 medium-sized businesses located in urban areas;
 (C) include at least one individual who represents the concerns of minority
 businesses; and
 (D) represent a diversity of businesses.
 (3) CHAIRPERSON- The members of the committee shall elect an individual
 to serve as chairperson.
 (4) COMPENSATION AND REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES- Members of the committee
 appointed under paragraph (1) shall receive compensation for each day
 (including travel time) engaged in carrying out the duties of the
 committee. Such compensation may not be in an amount in excess of the
 maximum rate of basic pay payable for GS-18 of the General Schedule.
 (5) STAFF- The Secretary shall provide to the committee such staff,
 information, and other assistance as may be necessary to carry out the
 duties of the committee.
 (6) REGULATIONS- The Secretary shall promulgate regulations that prescribe
 the terms to be served by the members of the committee, the procedure
 for filling vacancies on the committee, and the procedure for holding and
 administering meetings.
 (c) DUTIES- The committee shall--
 (1) perform the advisory functions as described in subsection (a);
 (2) analyze the impact of the implementation of this Act and the
 amendments made by this Act on small and medium-sized businesses and make
 recommendations to the Secretary and the appropriate committees of Congress
 concerning appropriate modifications to such Act;
 (3) review and provide comments concerning the regulations promulgated
 pursuant to this Act that impact on small and medium-sized businesses;
 (4) monitor the effectiveness of the small insurer reform program established
 under subtitle A, and make recommendations to the Secretary and the
 appropriate committees of Congress concerning appropriate modifications
 in such program;
 (5) serve as a channel of communication between the Secretary and the
 small and medium-sized business communities; and
 (6) perform such other functions as the Secretary considers appropriate.
 (d) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.
TITLE IV--REDUCING HEALTH CARE COST INFLATION
Subtitle A--Outcomes Research and Practice Guideline Development and
Dissemination
SEC. 401. INITIAL GUIDELINES AND STANDARDS.
 Subsection (d) of section 912 of the Public Health Service Act (as added
 by section 6103(a) of Public Law 101-239) is amended to read as follows:
 `(d) INITIAL GUIDELINES AND STANDARDS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Not later than January 1, 1992, the Administrator shall
 assure the development of an initial set of guidelines as described in
 subsection (a)(1) that shall include not less than three clinical treatments
 or conditions that--
 `(A) account for a significant portion of national health expenditures;
 `(B) have a significant variation in the frequency or the type of treatment
 provided; or
 `(C) otherwise meet the needs and priorities described in this section.
 `(2) MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES- The Administrator, in consultation with
 the National Institute of Mental Health and mental health providers,
 shall develop outcomes research and practice parameters for mental health
 services, including at least the diagnosis and treatment of childhood
 attention deficit disorders and manic depression.'.
SEC. 402. AMENDMENTS TO THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT.
 Section 1142(i) of the Social Security Act (as added by section 6103(b)
 of Public Law 101-239) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), to read as follows:
 `(1) IN GENERAL- There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out
 this section--
 `(A) $125,000,000 for fiscal year 1991;
 `(B) $175,000,000 for fiscal year 1992;
 `(C) $225,000,000 for fiscal year 1993; and
 `(D) $275,000,000 for fiscal year 1994.'; and
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking out `75 percent' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `50 percent'.
Subtitle B--Federal Health Expenditure Board
SEC. 411. FEDERAL HEALTH EXPENDITURE BOARD.
 (a) PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT- Title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act
 (as added under section 101 and amended by section 201 and 311) is further
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new part:
`Part D--Federal Health Expenditure Board
`SEC. 2761. ESTABLISHMENT AND MEMBERSHIP.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is established as an independent agency in the
 executive branch a Federal Health Expenditure Board (hereafter referred
 to in this part as the `Board').
 `(b) MEMBERSHIP-
 `(1) IN GENERAL-
 `(A) APPOINTMENT- The Board shall be composed of 11 members to be appointed
 by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
 `(B) EX OFFICIO MEMBERS- The Secretary, the Chairman of the Prospective
 Payment Assessment Commission and the Chairman of the Physician Payment
 Review Commission shall serve as ex officio members of the Board.
 `(2) REPRESENTATION- In appointing members to the Board under paragraph
 (1)(A), the President shall ensure that--
 `(A) the interests of health care providers and purchasers are fairly
 represented; and
 `(B) a majority of the members of the Board are experts in health care
 issues and fairly represent the interests of the general public in having
 access to quality and affordable health care.
 `(3) CHAIRPERSON- The President shall appoint a member appointed under
 paragraph (1)(A) to serve as the Chairperson of the Board.
 `(4) TERMS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the members of
 the Board appointed under paragraph (1)(A) shall serve for terms of 7
 years. Such members may be reappointed.
 `(B) INITIAL MEMBERS- Of the initial members of the Board appointed under
 paragraph (1)(A)--
 `(i) three shall be appointed for a term of 2 years;
 `(ii) three shall be appointed for a term of 4 years;
 `(iii) three shall be appointed for a term of 6 years; and
 `(iv) two shall be appointed for a term of 7 years;
as designated by the President at the time of appointment.
 `(5) VACANCIES- Any vacancy in the membership of the Board shall be filled
 in the same manner in which the original appointment was made. Any member
 appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term of
 office for which such member's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed
 only for the remainder of such term.
 `(6) QUORUM- Six members of the Board appointed under paragraph (1)(A)
 shall constitute a quorum for purposes of conducting the business of the
 Board, but a lesser number may meet to hold hearings.
 `(7) MEETINGS- The Board shall meet at the call of the Chairperson, or
 upon motion by not less than six of the members of the Board appointed
 under paragraph (1)(A), to conduct the business of the Board.
`SEC. 2762. FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Board shall--
 `(1) develop national health care expenditure, access and quality goals;
 `(2) convene and oversee negotiations between health care providers and
 purchasers to develop payment rates and perform other activities necessary
 to achieve expenditure goals developed under paragraph (1);
 `(3) establish recommended payment levels and other recommended measures that
 may include increased utilization of managed care, increased utilization
 of alternatives to institutionalization, and procedures for the allocation
 and limitation of capital investment necessary to achieve health care
 expenditure, quality and access targets subsequent to the conclusion of
 required negotiations;
 `(4) develop goals for States and regions that are consistent with national
 goals established under paragraph (1);
 `(5) prepare and submit, to the President, the appropriate committees
 of Congress and to the general public, an annual report concerning the
 success in achieving the goals established under paragraph (1), together
 with such recommendations as the Board considers appropriate to further
 the objectives of providing access to affordable, quality health care;
 `(6) establish uniform billing and claim forms and mandatory reporting
 requirements to--
 `(A) measure the success in meeting the goals established under paragraph
 (1);
 `(B) permit the Board, to the extent practicable, to analyze data acquired
 under such reporting requirements for individual providers to assist
 purchasers and consumers in evaluating the quality and cost of care offered
 by different providers; and
 `(C) reduce the administrative cost of the health care system;
 `(7) recommend rates, budgets and such other measures as may be appropriate
 and consistent with expenditure goals developed by negotiators or the Board
 under this part to assure access to quality affordable health care under
 Federal health insurance programs and programs under which the Federal
 Government enters into contracts for the delivery of health care;
 `(8) conduct studies, issue reports, and gather and disseminate data to
 the Congress, the President and the general public, to contribute to the
 objective of providing access to high-quality affordable health care;
 `(9) cooperate with State-based consortium established under section
 2781; and
 `(10) carry out any other activities determined by the Board to be
 necessary to further the goal of making available affordable, accessible,
 high quality health care in the United States.
 `(b) PERSONNEL, SERVICES, REGULATIONS- The Board may, for the purpose of
 performing its duties and carrying out its functions under this part--
 `(1) employ such personnel as it considers necessary to perform
 administrative, clerical, technical and other duties;
 `(2) procure the temporary and intermittent services of experts and
 consultants to the extent authorized by section 3109(b) of title 5, United
 States Code, at rates the Board determines to be reasonable; and
 `(3) prescribe regulations necessary to carry out the functions and duties
 of the Board under this part.
`SEC. 2763. DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL HEALTH CARE EXPENDITURE, ACCESS, AND
QUALITY GOALS.
 `(a) EXPENDITURE GOALS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall, to the extent practicable, develop national
 expenditure goals under section 2762(a)(1) applicable to the total amount to
 be expended in the United States for health care. To the extent practicable,
 such goals shall contain a separate expenditure breakdown for--
 `(A) hospital services;
 `(B) physician services;
 `(C) laboratory services;
 `(D) pharmaceutical products;
 `(E) durable medical equipment; and
 `(F) such other health services or sectors, including subdivisions of the
 sectors described in this paragraph, other than long-term care services,
 as the Board determines appropriate.
 `(2) CONSIDERATIONS- In developing expenditure goals under paragraph (1),
 the Board shall take into consideration--
 `(A) the aging of the population and such other factors as may affect the
 demand for health care in the future;
 `(B) general inflation factors and the costs related to inflation in labor
 and other inputs used to produce health services;
 `(C) technological advances that may increase or decrease health care costs;
 `(D) appropriate improvements in health care productivity;
 `(E) feasible reductions in unnecessary health care;
 `(F) the need to assure that all sectors of the population have adequate
 access to health care services;
 `(G) the impact and availability of such goals on the quality of health
 care; and
 `(H) such other factors as the Board determines appropriate.
 `(b) QUALITY GOALS-
 `(1) DEVELOPMENT- The Board shall, to the extent practicable, develop
 national goals under section 2762(a)(1) for improving the quality of
 the health care system of the United States. Such goals shall include
 recommendations for improving the quality of health care provided in the
 United States and establish a system of measuring the progress made in
 achieving such goals.
 `(2) DATA AND STUDIES- The Board shall collect such data and conduct such
 studies as may be necessary to carry out paragraph (1).
 `(c) ACCESS GOALS-
 `(1) DEVELOPMENT- The Board shall, to the extent practicable, develop
 national goals under section 2762(a)(1) for improving access to the health
 care system for all Americans. Such goals shall include recommendations
 for achieving such goals and establish a system of measuring progress made
 in achieving such goals.
 `(2) DATA AND STUDIES- The Board shall collect such data and conduct such
 studies as may be necessary to carry out paragraph (1).
 `(d) STATE AND REGIONAL GOALS- In carrying out its functions under this
 section, the Board shall develop separate goals for each State and region,
 based on an adjustment of the national goals, to reflect the demographic
 characteristics and other relevant characteristics of such States and
 regions.
 `(e) TIMING- The Board shall, not later than June 30 of each year, develop
 preliminary goals under this section and, not later than December 1 of
 each year, develop final goals and the recommended payment rates and other
 measures necessary to achieve such goals.
`SEC. 2764. HEALTH CARE PROVIDER AND PURCHASER NEGOTIATIONS.
 `(a) REQUIREMENT OF NEGOTIATIONS TO ACHIEVE GOALS- The Board shall convene
 appropriate representatives of health care providers and purchasers
 recognized or appointed as negotiators under section 2765 to negotiate
 concerning terms and conditions related to the provision of health care to
 achieve the expenditure goals developed under section 2763(a). The Board
 shall adopt a negotiating process that shall be followed by such negotiators.
 `(b) OBLIGATION TO BARGAIN IN GOOD FAITH- It shall be the obligation of
 negotiators participating in negotiations under subsection (a) to bargain
 in good faith and consistent with the processes established by the Board.
 `(c) TIME FOR NEGOTIATIONS- The negotiations required under subsection
 (a) shall be commenced not later than July 1, and shall be completed not
 later than September 31, of each year unless such time period is extended
 by the Board.
 `(d) SECTORS FOR NEGOTIATIONS- The Board shall require negotiations under
 subsection (a) for the achievement of the expenditure goals for physician
 and hospital care. The Board may require that negotiations also be convened
 under such subsection concerning other health care sectors of the type
 referred to in section 2763(a)(1), including subdivisions of sectors,
 to the extent determined to be appropriate and feasible by the Board.
 `(e) CONTENT OF NEGOTIATIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Negotiators participating in negotiations under subsection
 (a) shall attempt to agree on recommendations to be submitted to the Board
 concerning a health care payment system and uniform payment rates, together
 with other appropriate recommendations for achieving the expenditure goals
 developed under section 2763(a).
 `(2) ACHIEVEMENT OF GOALS- In developing recommendations under paragraph
 (1), the negotiators shall attempt to ensure that such recommended payment
 system, payment rates, and other recommended measures will, if implemented,
 will result in the achievement of the expenditure goals developed under
 section 2763(a).
`SEC. 2765. NEGOTIATION REQUIREMENTS.
 `(a) NEGOTIATION BY SECTOR- In each sector selected by the Board under
 section 2764(d) as a sector in which negotiations shall be conducted,
 negotiators representing providers of health care and purchasers of health
 care shall be selected in accordance with this section. The Board shall
 determine which individuals, organizations, and institutions are eligible
 for representation as providers or purchasers in each sector.
 `(b) HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL-
 `(A) PETITION- An organization (through a representative of such
 organization) or an individual that desires to be a negotiator on behalf of
 health care providers under this section shall submit a petition requesting
 such to the Board. Such petition shall include any authorizations of
 representation that such organization or individual has received on behalf
 of health care providers, in such form and meeting such requirements as
 the Board may require.
 `(B) GENERAL APPROVAL- An organization or individual submitting a petition
 under subparagraph (A) that contains authorizations of representation
 from not less than 25 percent of the health care providers in a sector,
 as determined by the Board, shall be approved by the Board as a negotiator
 for providers with respect to that sector.
 `(C) EXCLUSIVE NEGOTIATOR- An organization or individual submitting
 a petition under subparagraph (A) that contains authorizations of
 representation from not less than 50 percent of the health care providers
 in a sector, as determined by the Board, shall be approved by the Board
 as the exclusive negotiator for providers with respect to that sector.
 `(D) APPOINTMENT- If no organization or individual submits a petition under
 subparagraph (A) that contains authorizations of representation from 25
 percent or more of the health care providers in a sector, as determined
 by the Board, the Board shall--
 `(i) appoint a negotiator or negotiators to represent such providers; or
 `(ii) establish an election procedure for the election of a negotiator or
 negotiators for such providers.
 `(2) INSTITUTIONAL SECTORS- In the case of a health care sector in which
 health care services are delivered primarily through institutions or
 organizations, the Board shall establish a procedure to select negotiators
 to represent such institutions and organizations that is based on a weighted
 designation of all such institutions and organizations after consideration
 of the revenues or number of patients served by such institutions or
 organizations or based on such other measure as the Board determines
 appropriate.
 `(c) PURCHASERS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL-
 `(A) PETITION- An organization (through a representative of such
 organization) or an individual that desires to be a negotiator on behalf
 of health care purchasers under this section shall submit a petition
 requesting such to the Board. Such petition shall include any authorizations
 of representation that such organization or individual has received on
 behalf of health care purchasers.
 `(B) GENERAL APPROVAL- An organization or individual submitting a petition
 under subparagraph (A) that contains authorizations of representation
 from not less than 25 percent of the health care purchasers in a sector,
 as determined by the Board, shall be approved by the Board as a negotiator
 for purchasers with respect to that sector.
 `(C) EXCLUSIVE NEGOTIATOR- An organization or individual submitting
 a petition under subparagraph (A) that contains authorizations of
 representation from not less than 50 percent of the health care purchasers
 in a sector, as determined by the Board, shall be approved by the Board
 as the exclusive negotiator for purchasers with respect to that sector.
 `(D) APPOINTMENT- If no organization or individual submits a petition under
 subparagraph (A) that contains authorizations of representation from 25
 percent or more of the health care purchasers in a sector, as determined
 by the Board, the Board shall--
 `(i) appoint a negotiator or negotiators to represent such purchasers; or
 `(ii) establish an election procedure for the election of a negotiator or
 negotiators for such purchasers.
 `(2) DETERMINATIONS- If the Board designates employment-based health
 benefit plans as all or some of the purchasers entitled to be represented
 in negotiations for a sector, the Board shall establish a procedure for
 determining whether the 25 percent or 50 percent requirements are met for
 purposes of subparagraphs (B) and (C) of paragraph (1), based on a weighted
 designation that considers the number of individuals covered by the health
 benefits plan of the purchaser, the total expenditures under such plans,
 or such other measure as the Board determines appropriate. In the case of
 health benefit plans provided pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement,
 for purposes of the weighted designation, 50 percent of the costs of or
 individuals covered under such plan shall be assigned to the union and 50
 percent to the appropriate employer or employers. If the Board designates
 other categories of purchasers, a similar procedure shall be utilized.
 `(d) CONTINUED APPROVAL AS NEGOTIATORS, LIMITATION-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT OF PROCEDURES- The Board shall establish procedures
 for the withdrawal of approvals granted to organizations or individuals
 under subsections (b)(1) or (c)(1).
 `(2) EXCLUSIVE NEGOTIATORS-
 `(A) PETITION FOR INITIATION OF PROCEDURES- The Board may initiate procedures
 under paragraph (1) to withdraw the approval of an exclusive negotiator
 under subsection (b)(1)(C) or (c)(1)(C), if not less than 30 percent of
 the health care providers or purchasers in the appropriate sector file a
 petition with the Board for such withdrawal.
 `(B) VOTE ON WITHDRAWAL- If the Board determines that a petition received
 under subparagraph (A) is valid, the Board shall arrange for a vote to
 take place among the appropriate purchasers or providers to determine
 whether to withdraw the approval that is the subject of such petition. If
 in excess of 50 percent of such providers or purchasers vote to withdraw
 such approval, the Board shall certify that such approval is withdrawn
 and initiate procedures to select a new negotiator or negotiators.
 `(3) LIMITATION AND ELECTION-
 `(A) LIMITATION- With respect to a sector in which no exclusive negotiator
 has been approved under subsection (b)(1)(C) or (c)(1)(C), the Board may
 not grant approvals to organizations and individuals under paragraph (1)(B)
 of each such subsection, as applicable, in a manner that would result in
 the approval of individuals and organizations representing in excess of
 100 percent of the purchasers or providers.
 `(B) ELECTION- In the event that petitions are received (whether or not
 approvals have previously been granted) under subsection (b)(1)(B) or
 (c)(1)(C), from organizations or individuals cumulatively representing in
 excess of 100 percent of the purchasers or providers in a sector the Board
 shall conduct an election among such qualified organizations or individuals
 to determine which such organizations and individuals will be approved or
 have their approval continued.
 `(4) PERIOD OF DESIGNATION- No organization or individual shall be
 a negotiator or an exclusive negotiator for more than a 5-year period
 without being recertified as a negotiator or exclusive negotiator in the
 same manner as the original designation was made under this section.
 `(5) TIMING- Any vote or election held under this subsection to determine
 the negotiators for a particular year, shall be completed prior to June
 30 of that year. Votes or elections completed after such date shall apply
 to the negotiations for the following year.
`SEC. 2766. REQUIREMENTS FOR RECOMMENDED PAYMENT SYSTEMS AND RATES.
 `(a) HOSPITALS-
 `(1) NEGOTIATED AGREEMENT- A payment system for hospitals that is recommended
 in an agreement negotiated pursuant to section 2767 shall be based on
 the hospital payment system established under title XVIII of the Social
 Security Act, except that the Board may approve or adopt an alternative
 payment system.
 `(2) ALTERNATIVE PAYMENT SYSTEM- An alternative payment system approved or
 adopted under paragraph (1) shall provide for the adjustment of payment rates
 to reflect the differences in costs between different types of hospitals
 to the extent that such costs represent appropriate differences in the
 costs of delivering care efficiently and effectively in different types
 of hospitals or are necessary to achieve other public policy objectives,
 as determined by the Board. Such a payment system shall reflect geographic
 differences in labor and to the extent feasible, other input costs, capital
 and other needs to maintain adequate access to care and quality of care. To
 the extent desirable and feasible, the negotiators shall recommend, and
 the Board shall approve, special treatment for managed care programs.
 `(b) PHYSICIANS-
 `(1) NEGOTIATED AGREEMENT- A payment system for physicians that is
 recommended in an agreement negotiated pursuant to section 2767 shall be
 based on the physician payment system established under title XVIII of
 the Social Security Act, except that the Board may approve or adopt an
 alternative payment system.
 `(2) ALTERNATIVE PAYMENT SYSTEM- An alternative payment system approved
 or adopted under paragraph (1) shall reflect geographic differences in
 practice costs insofar as those differences reflect the cost of economical
 and efficient provision of quality care, and shall promote an appropriate
 distribution of primary and specialty care. To the extent desirable and
 feasible, the negotiators shall recommend, and the Board shall approve,
 special treatment for managed care programs.
`SEC. 2767. OUTCOME OF NEGOTIATIONS, AGREEMENTS.
 `(a) AGREEMENT- If a majority of the negotiators (in the case of multiple
 negotiators) for the providers and a majority of the negotiators (in the
 case of multiple negotiators) for the purchasers, for a particular sector,
 agree to recommend a proposal under this part to the Board, such proposal
 shall be considered to have been agreed to by the negotiators.
 `(b) BINDING NATURE OF AGREEMENTS- If a negotiated agreement is reached,
 pursuant to subsection (a), concerning a health services rate structure,
 or concerning any other matter that would lead to the achievement of
 the goals developed by the Board under section 2763, or an alternative
 goal accepted by the Board under subsection (c), and such agreement, in
 the judgment of the Board, will lead to the achievement of such goals,
 the Board shall promulgate regulations implementing such rates and other
 matters and such rates and other matters shall be binding on providers
 and purchasers in the sector to which such agreement applies.
 `(c) AGREEMENT ON DIFFERENT GOAL- If the negotiators reach an agreement,
 pursuant to subsection (a), concerning a goal that is different than a
 goal that has been developed by the Board under section 2763, the Board
 shall adopt such agreed upon goal if the Board determines that it would be
 in the best interest of the general public to adopt such goal. The Board,
 on a rejection of such alternative agreed upon goal, may request that the
 negotiators attempt to reach a negotiated agreement concerning the original
 goal under section 2763, and such other measures to achieve such original
 goal, and may promulgate regulations recommending rates and other matters
 to achieve the original goal.
 `(d) EFFECT OF NO AGREEMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- If the negotiators for a particular sector fail to reach
 a negotiated agreement, pursuant to subsection (a), concerning a goal
 established under section 2763, the Board shall promulgate regulations
 recommending advisory rates and other matters necessary to achieve such
 goals. Such advisory rates and other matters shall not be binding on health
 care providers and purchasers.
 `(2) CONSTRUCTION- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, health
 care purchasers may combine for the purpose of agreeing to pay health
 care providers for services at rates recommended pursuant to paragraph
 (1). Notwithstanding any other provision of law, health care providers
 may combine for the purpose of agreeing to charge for services at rates
 recommended pursuant to paragraph (1).
 `(e) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE- The Board shall provide technical assistance
 to negotiators, including estimates of the effect on expenditure goals
 of alternative proposals and estimates of utilization changes that can be
 expected under different proposals. The Board may recommend a proposal to
 achieve expenditure goals for the consideration of the negotiators. The
 Board may make available professional mediation and conciliation services
 to the negotiators.
`SEC. 2768. ENFORCEMENT.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- A health care provider assessing rates other than those
 required under regulations promulgated by the Board under this part,
 or failing to comply in any other manner with such regulations, or a
 health care purchaser paying rates other than those required under such
 regulations, except in the case of an alternative rate or method established
 under subsections (a)(2) and (b)(2) of section 2766, shall--
 `(1) be ineligible for any assistance under this Act; and
 `(2) be liable to the United States for a civil penalty for such failure in
 an amount not to exceed $50,000 in the case of an individual and $500,000
 in the case of an organization, as provided for in subsection (b).
 `(b) CIVIL ACTIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A civil penalty under subsection (a)(2) shall be assessed
 by the Board on a health care provider or purchaser by an order made on the
 record after an opportunity for a hearing on any disputed issues of material
 fact and the amount of the penalty. In the course of any investigation or
 hearing under this paragraph, the Board or its designees may administer
 oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses, receive evidence, and issue
 subpoenas requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
 production of evidence that relates to the matter under investigation.
 `(2) AMOUNT- In determining the amount of a civil penalty under paragraph
 (1), the Board shall take into account the nature, circumstances, extent,
 and gravity of the act subject to penalty, the ability to pay, the effect
 on the ability to continue to do business, any history of prior, similar
 acts, and such other matters as the Board determines appropriate.
 `(3) LIMITATION ON ACTIONS- The Board may not initiate an action under
 this subsection with respect to any noncompliance described in subsection
 (a) that occurred before the date of the enactment of this section.
 `(c) INJUNCTIVE RELIEF- The Board shall have the power, upon the initiation
 of an action regarding noncompliance with a provision of this part, to
 petition any United States district court, within any district wherein
 such noncompliance is alleged to have occurred, for appropriate temporary
 injunctive relief. Upon the filing of any such petition, the court shall
 cause notice thereof to be served upon such person, and thereupon shall
 have jurisdiction to grant the Board such temporary injunctive relief as
 the court determines to be appropriate.
 `(d) JUDICIAL REVIEW- Any health care provider or purchaser that is the
 subject of an adverse decision under subsection (b)(1) or subsection (c)
 may obtain a review of such decision by the United States Court of Appeals
 for the District of Columbia or for the circuit in which the provider or
 purchaser resides, by filing in such court (within 60 days following the
 date the purchaser or provider is notified of the decision of the Board)
 a petition requesting that the decision be modified or set aside.
`SEC. 2769. OTHER GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS.
 `The Board shall promulgate regulations recommending advisory rates and
 other matters necessary to achieve the goals established under section
 1172 for all Federal programs (other than the program under titles XVIII,
 XIX and XXI of the Social Security Act) that reimburse providers on a fee,
 charge, or cost basis or charge third-party providers on such basis. Such
 nonbinding rates shall be consistent with the rates promulgated by the
 Board under sections 1176 and 1178, except that Federal payments resulting
 from such rates shall be no greater than such payments would have been if
 determined without regard to this section through the fifth full fiscal
 year after the date of enactment of this section.
`SEC. 2770. ROLE OF STATES.
 `(a) ALTERNATIVE SYSTEMS, ETC- A State consortia established under section
 2781 may, with the approval of the Board, establish an alternative payment
 system, rates, and methods for achieving goals developed by the Board
 under section 2763.
 `(b) APPROVAL- The Board shall approve alternative payment systems,
 rates, and methods under subsection (a) if Board determines that such
 alternative systems, rates, or methods would result in a level of health
 care expenditures in the State that achieves the national goals developed
 under section 2763, adjusted to the State level. If the Board determines that
 such national goals would not be achieved through the proposed alternative
 systems, rates or methods, the rates or other matters that apply to the
 State under regulations promulgated by the Board shall remain binding in
 the State. Such Board approval is only necessary where binding payment
 systems, rates and methods are not promulgated under a negotiated agreement.
 `(c) STANDARD FOR DETERMINATION- In making a determination under subsection
 (b), the Board shall consider the effect of the alternative systems, rates
 or methods, with respect to the goals established under section 2763, on the
 State as a whole rather than on particular health care sectors in the State.
`SEC. 2771. UNIFORM BILLING AND MANDATORY REPORTING.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Board shall establish a system of uniform billing and
 reporting, as required under subsection (c), that will enable the Board to
 determine the progress made in meeting the goals established under section
 2763, to provide information for health care providers and purchasers to
 assist such providers and purchasers in providing and obtaining efficiently
 provided quality health care, and to reduce administrative costs of the
 health care system.
 `(b) GENERAL REPORTING AND DATA REQUIREMENTS- The Board shall--
 `(1) develop a computerized system for the collection, analysis, and
 dissemination of data required to be collected under this part;
 `(2) establish one or more uniform claims and billing form as required in
 subsection (c)(2) to be utilized by all data sources and providers;
 `(3) audit information provided by health care providers on a sample basis
 or in situations where there exists reasonable cause for such an audit; and
 `(4) issue public reports concerning health care costs and the effectiveness
 of the health care provided by health care providers.
 `(c) DATA COLLECTION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Data sources shall submit to the Board, on the request of
 the Board, all data required to be submitted under this part in accordance
 with the uniform submission formats, coding systems, and other technical
 specifications established by the Board to assure that such incoming data
 is substantially valid, consistent, compatible and manageable.
 `(2) UNIFORM CLAIMS AND BILLING FORMS- Data shall be collected by the
 Board through the use of one or more Federal Uniform Claims and Billing
 Forms developed by the Board and utilized by providers and purchasers of
 health care that shall, at a minimum, include--
 `(A) a uniform patient identifier;
 `(B) the date of birth of the patient;
 `(C) the gender of the patient;
 `(D) the ZIP Code of the patient;
 `(E) the date of admission of the patient for inpatient hospital services;
 `(F) the date of discharge of the patient referred to in subparagraph (E);
 `(G) the principal and secondary diagnoses of the patient;
 `(H) the principal and secondary procedures to be followed in treating
 the patient;
 `(I) a uniform health care facility identifier;
 `(J) uniform identifiers of physicians and treating the patient;
 `(K) for services provided in an inpatient setting, the total charges
 of the health care facility treating the patient, segregated into major
 categories determined appropriate by the Board;
 `(L) the amounts of actual payments made to the treating health care
 facility;
 `(M) the amounts of the charges of each physician or professional rendering
 service to the patient;
 `(N) the services provided in an inpatient setting;
 `(O) the amounts of actual payments made to each physician or professional
 rendering service to the patient;
 `(P) a uniform identifier of the primary payor;
 `(Q) the ZIP Code of the facility where service is rendered to the patient;
 `(R) the patient discharge status; and
 `(S) such other material as the Board determines necessary or useful to
 carry out the duties of the Board or to provide adequate information to
 purchasers of health care to assist such purchasers in appropriately paying
 for services.
 `(3) MEASURE OF SERVICE EFFECTIVENESS-
 `(A) DEVELOPMENT OF METHODOLOGY- To the extent practical and as rapidly
 as feasible, the Secretary shall develop and implement a methodology
 or methodologies that will measure the effectiveness of the health care
 service provided by health care providers.
 `(B) INCLUSION IN UNIFORM BILLING FORM- To the extent practical and as
 rapidly as feasible, the Secretary shall include in the uniform claims
 and billing forms or in other data collection instruments established
 under subsection (b) data necessary to provide the Secretary with
 information concerning each service provided by health care providers
 that is sufficient to enable the Secretary to analyze the quality, cost,
 and service effectiveness of the provider.
 `(4) ADDITIONAL DATA- The Board may collect additional data, including
 audited annual financial reports of all hospitals and ambulatory service
 facilities, medicare cost reports, information on capital expenditures,
 and any other data that the Board determines necessary to carry out its
 responsibilities under this part.
 `(5) RECOMMENDATIONS- The Board shall make recommendations to the committees
 of Congress, the President, and the insurance industry concerning methods to
 reduce the cost and burden of duplication or excessive reporting requirements
 imposed on health care providers.
 `(d) REPORTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Board, not less than once each calendar year, shall
 for every health care provider for which sufficient data is available,
 prepare and make available reports that shall, to the extent practicable
 and scientifically valid, contain data in a form that will provide the
 most useful information to purchasers of health care services regarding
 such providers to enable such purchasers to compare providers on the basis
 of cost and quality.
 `(2) AVAILABILITY- The Secretary shall advertise and make available all
 reports prepared under paragraph (1) to the general public, including any
 dissents submitted by health care providers.
 `(3) RECOMMENDATIONS- The Board shall make recommendations to the appropriate
 committees of Congress, the President, and the insurance industry concerning
 methods to reduce the cost and burden of duplicative or excessive reporting
 requirements imposed on health care providers.
 `(e) DEFINITION- As used in this section, the term `data sources' means
 classes of entities and individuals that the Board designates as data
 sources.
`SEC. 2772. ANNUAL REPORTS.
 `Not later than June 30 of each year, the Board shall prepare and submit
 to the President, the appropriate committees of Congress and the general
 public, a report concerning the success in attaining expenditure, access, and
 quality goals developed under section 2763, and containing recommendations
 for additional measures, if any, that the Board determines are necessary
 to achieve such goals.
`SEC. 2773. DEFINITIONS.
 `As used in this part:
 `(1) PROVIDER- The term `provider' means a physician, hospital, health
 maintenance organization, pharmacy, laboratory, or other provider of health
 care services or supplies, that has entered into an agreement with a managed
 care entity to provide such services or supplies to a patient enrolled in
 a managed care plan.
 `(2) PURCHASER- The term `purchaser' means an entity the pays for the
 services of providers, including in the case of a health benefit plan
 provided pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement, the labor union
 that has negotiated for such plan on behalf of employees shall be considered
 to be a purchaser.
`SEC. 2774. EFFECTIVE DATES.
 `The Board shall develop the goals under section 2763 for each calendar year
 beginning not later than the second full calendar year after the date of
 enactment of this part. The Board shall establish the negotiating procedures
 required under section 2714(a) for each calendar year beginning not later
 than the third calendar year after the date of enactment of this part.'.
 (b) SOCIAL SECURITY ACT- Title XI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1301
 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new part:
`Part C--Federal Health Expenditure Board
`FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF THE FEDERAL HEALTH EXPENDITURE BOARD
 `SEC. 1171. (a) IN GENERAL- The Federal Health Expenditure Board (hereafter
 in this part referred to as the `Board') shall--
 `(1) develop national health care expenditure, access and quality goals;
 `(2) convene and oversee negotiations between health care providers and
 purchasers to develop payment rates and perform other activities necessary
 to achieve expenditure goals developed under paragraph (1);
 `(3) establish recommended payment levels and other recommended measures that
 may include increased utilization of managed care, increased utilization
 of alternatives to institutionalization, and procedures for the allocation
 and limitation of capital investment necessary to achieve health care
 expenditure, quality, and access targets subsequent to the conclusion of
 required negotiations;
 `(4) develop goals for States and regions that are consistent with national
 goals established under paragraph (1);
 `(5) prepare and submit, to the President, the appropriate committees
 of Congress and to the general public, an annual report concerning the
 success in achieving the goals established under paragraph (1), together
 with such recommendations as the Board considers appropriate to further
 the objectives of providing access to affordable, quality health care;
 `(6) establish uniform billing and claims forms and mandatory reporting
 requirements to--
 `(A) measure the success in meeting the goals established under paragraph
 (1);
 `(B) permit the Board, to the extent practicable, to analyze data acquired
 under such reporting requirements for individual providers to assist
 purchasers and consumers in evaluating the quality and cost of care offered
 by different providers; and
 `(C) reduce the administrative cost of the health care system;
 `(7) recommend rates, budgets, and such other measures as may be appropriate
 and consistent with expenditure goals developed by negotiators or the Board
 under this part to assure access to quality affordable health care under
 Federal health insurance programs and programs under which the Federal
 Government enters into contracts for the delivery of health care;
 `(8) conduct studies, issue reports, and gather and disseminate data to
 the Congress, the President, and the general public, to contribute to the
 objective of providing access to high-quality affordable health care;
 `(9) cooperate with State-based consortium described under part D of this
 title; and
 `(10) carry out any other activities determined by the Board to be
 necessary to further the goal of making available affordable, accessible,
 high quality health care in the United States.
 `(b) PERSONNEL, SERVICES, REGULATIONS- The Board may, for the purpose of
 performing its duties and carrying out its functions under this part--
 `(1) employ such personnel as it considers necessary to perform
 administrative, clerical, technical and other duties;
 `(2) procure the temporary and intermittent services of experts and
 consultants to the extent authorized by section 3109(b) of title 5, United
 States Code, at rates the Board determines to be reasonable; and
 `(3) prescribe regulations necessary to carry out the functions and duties
 of the Board under this part.
`DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL HEALTH CARE EXPENDITURE, ACCESS, AND QUALITY GOALS
 `SEC. 1172. (a) EXPENDITURE GOALS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall, to the extent practicable, develop national
 expenditure goals under section 1171(a)(1) applicable to the total amount to
 be expended in the United States for health care. To the extent practicable,
 such goals shall contain a separate expenditure breakdown for--
 `(A) hospital services;
 `(B) physician services;
 `(C) laboratory services;
 `(D) pharmaceutical products;
 `(E) durable medical equipment; and
 `(F) such other health services or sectors, including subdivisions of the
 sectors described in this paragraph, other than long-term care services,
 as the Board determines appropriate.
 `(2) CONSIDERATIONS- In developing expenditure goals under paragraph (1),
 the Board shall take into consideration--
 `(A) the aging of the population and such other factors as may affect the
 demand for health care in the future;
 `(B) general inflation factors and the costs related to inflation in labor
 and other inputs used to produce health services;
 `(C) technological advances that may increase or decrease health care costs;
 `(D) appropriate improvements in health care productivity;
 `(E) feasible reductions in unnecessary health care;
 `(F) the need to assure that all sectors of the population have adequate
 access to health care services;
 `(G) the impact of such goals on the quality and availability of health
 care; and
 `(E) such other factors as the Board determines appropriate.
 `(b) QUALITY GOALS-
 `(1) DEVELOPMENT- The Board shall, to the extent practicable, develop
 national goals under section 1171(a)(1) for improving the quality of
 the health care system of the United States. Such goals shall include
 recommendations for improving the quality of health care provided in the
 United States and establish a system of measuring the progress made in
 achieving such goals.
 `(2) DATA AND STUDIES- The Board shall collect such data and conduct such
 studies as may be necessary to carry out paragraph (1).
 `(c) ACCESS GOALS-
 `(1) DEVELOPMENT- The Board shall, to the extent practicable, develop
 national goals under section 1171(a)(1) for improving access to the health
 care system for all Americans. Such goals shall include recommendations
 for achieving such goals and establish a system of measuring progress made
 in achieving such goals.
 `(2) DATA AND STUDIES- The Board shall collect such data and conduct such
 studies as may be necessary to carry out paragraph (1).
 `(d) STATE AND REGIONAL GOALS- In carrying out its functions under this
 section, the Board shall develop separate goals for each State and region,
 based on an adjustment of the national goals, to reflect the demographic
 characteristics and other relevant characteristics of such States and
 regions.
 `(e) TIMING- The Board shall, not later than June 30 of each year, develop
 preliminary goals under this section and, not later than December 1 of
 each year, develop final goals and the recommended payment rates and other
 measures necessary to achieve such goals.
`HEALTH CARE PROVIDER AND PURCHASER NEGOTIATIONS
 `SEC. 1173. (a) REQUIREMENT OF NEGOTIATIONS TO ACHIEVE GOALS- The Board shall
 convene appropriate representatives of health care providers and purchasers
 recognized or appointed as negotiators under section 1174 to negotiate
 concerning terms and conditions related to the provision of health care to
 achieve the expenditure goals developed under section 1172(a). The Board
 shall adopt a negotiating process that shall be followed by such negotiators.
 `(b) OBLIGATION TO BARGAIN IN GOOD FAITH- It shall be the obligation of
 negotiators participating in negotiations under subsection (a) to bargain
 in good faith and consistent with the processes established by the Board.
 `(c) TIME FOR NEGOTIATIONS- The negotiations required under subsection
 (a) shall be commenced not later than July 1, and shall be completed not
 later than September 31, of each year unless such time period is extended
 by the Board.
 `(d) SECTORS FOR NEGOTIATIONS- The Board shall require negotiations under
 subsection (a) for the achievement of the expenditure goals for physician
 and hospital care. The Board may require that negotiations also be convened
 under such subsection concerning other health care sectors of the type
 referred to in section 1172(a)(1), including subdivisions of sectors,
 to the extent determined to be appropriate and feasible by the Board.
 `(e) CONTENT OF NEGOTIATIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Negotiators participating in negotiations under subsection
 (a) shall attempt to agree on recommendations to be submitted to the Board
 concerning a health care payment system and uniform payment rates, together
 with other appropriate recommendations for achieving the expenditure goals
 developed under section 1172(a).
 `(2) ACHIEVEMENT OF GOALS- In developing recommendations under paragraph (1),
 the negotiators shall attempt to ensure that such recommended payment system,
 payment rates, and other recommended measures will, if implemented, result
 in the achievement of the expenditure goals developed under section 1172(a).
`NEGOTIATION REQUIREMENTS
 `SEC. 1174. (a) NEGOTIATION BY SECTOR- In each sector selected by the Board
 under section 1173(d) as a sector in which negotiations shall be conducted,
 negotiators representing providers of health care and purchasers of health
 care shall be selected in accordance with this section. The Board shall
 determine which individuals, organizations, and institutions are eligible
 for representation as providers or purchasers in each sector.
 `(b) HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL-
 `(A) PETITION- An organization (through a representative of such
 organization) or an individual that desires to be a negotiator on behalf of
 health care providers under this section shall submit a petition requesting
 such to the Board. Such petition shall include any authorizations of
 representation that such organization or individual has received on behalf
 of health care providers, in such form and meeting such requirements as
 the Board may require.
 `(B) GENERAL APPROVAL- An organization or individual submitting a petition
 under subparagraph (A) that contains authorizations of representation
 from not less than 25 percent of the health care providers in a sector,
 as determined by the Board, shall be approved by the Board as a negotiator
 for providers with respect to that sector.
 `(C) EXCLUSIVE NEGOTIATOR- An organization or individual submitting
 a petition under subparagraph (A) that contains authorizations of
 representation from not less than 50 percent of the health care providers
 in a sector, as determined by the Board, shall be approved by the Board
 as the exclusive negotiator for providers with respect to that sector.
 `(D) APPOINTMENT- If no organization or individual submits a petition under
 subparagraph (A) that contains authorizations of representation from 25
 percent or more of the health care providers in a sector, as determined
 by the Board, the Board shall--
 `(i) appoint a negotiator or negotiators to represent such providers; or
 `(ii) establish an election procedure for the election of a negotiator or
 negotiators for such providers.
 `(2) INSTITUTIONAL SECTORS- In the case of a health care sector in which
 health care services are delivered primarily through institutions or
 organizations, the Board shall establish a procedure to select negotiators
 to represent such institutions and organizations that is based on a weighted
 designation of all such institutions and organizations after consideration
 of the revenues or number of patients served by such institutions or
 organizations or based on such other measure as the Board determines
 appropriate.
 `(c) PURCHASERS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL-
 `(A) PETITION- An organization (through a representative of such
 organization) or an individual that desires to be a negotiator on behalf
 of health care purchasers under this section shall submit a petition
 requesting such to the Board. Such petition shall include any authorizations
 of representation that such organization or individual has received on
 behalf of health care purchasers.
 `(B) GENERAL APPROVAL- An organization or individual submitting a petition
 under subparagraph (A) that contains authorizations of representation
 from not less than 25 percent of the health care purchasers in a sector,
 as determined by the Board, shall be approved by the Board as a negotiator
 for purchasers with respect to that sector.
 `(C) EXCLUSIVE NEGOTIATOR- An organization or individual submitting
 a petition under subparagraph (A) that contains authorizations of
 representation from not less than 50 percent of the health care purchasers
 in a sector, as determined by the Board, shall be approved by the Board
 as the exclusive negotiator for purchasers with respect to that sector.
 `(D) APPOINTMENT- If no organization or individual submits a petition under
 subparagraph (A) that contains authorizations of representation from 25
 percent or more of the health care purchasers in a sector, as determined
 by the Board, the Board shall--
 `(i) appoint a negotiator or negotiators to represent such purchasers; or
 `(ii) establish an election procedure for the election of a negotiator or
 negotiators for such purchasers.
 `(2) DETERMINATIONS- If the Board designates employment-based health
 benefit plans as all or some of the purchasers entitled to be represented
 in negotiations for a sector, the Board shall establish a procedure for
 determining whether the 25 percent or 50 percent requirements are met for
 purposes of subparagraphs (B) and (C) of paragraph (1), based on a weighted
 designation that considers the number of individuals covered by the health
 benefits plan of the purchaser, the total expenditures under such plans,
 or such other measure as the Boards determines appropriate. In the case of
 health benefit plans provided pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement,
 for purposes of the weighted designation, 50 percent of the costs of or
 individuals covered under such plan shall be assigned to the union and 50
 percent to the appropriate employer or employers. If the Board designates
 other categories of purchasers, a similar procedure shall be utilized.
 `(d) CONTINUED APPROVAL AS NEGOTIATORS, LIMITATION-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT OF PROCEDURES- The Board shall establish procedures
 for the withdrawal of approvals granted to organizations or individuals
 under subsections (b)(1) or (c)(1).
 `(2) EXCLUSIVE NEGOTIATORS-
 `(A) PETITION FOR INITIATION OF PROCEDURES- The Board may initiate procedures
 under paragraph (1) to withdraw the approval of an exclusive negotiator
 under subsection (b)(1)(C) or (c)(1)(C), if not less than 30 percent of
 the health care providers or purchasers in the appropriate sector file a
 petition with the Board for such withdrawal.
 `(B) VOTE ON WITHDRAWAL- If the Board determines that a petition received
 under subparagraph (A) is valid, the Board shall arrange for a vote to
 take place among the appropriate purchasers or providers to determine
 whether to withdraw the approval that is the subject of such petition. If
 in excess of 50 percent of such providers or purchasers vote to withdraw
 such approval, the Board shall certify that such approval is withdrawn
 and initiate procedures to select a new negotiator or negotiators.
 `(3) LIMITATION AND ELECTION-
 `(A) LIMITATION- With respect to a sector in which no exclusive negotiator
 has been approved under subsection (b)(1)(C) or (c)(1)(C), the Board may
 not grant approvals to organizations and individuals under paragraph (1)(B)
 of each such subsection, as applicable, in a manner that would result in
 the approval of individuals and organizations representing in excess of
 100 percent of the purchasers or providers.
 `(B) ELECTION- In the event that petitions are received (whether or not
 approvals have previously been granted) under subsection (b)(1)(B) or
 (c)(1)(C), from organizations or individuals cumulatively representing in
 excess of 100 percent of the purchasers or providers in a sector the Board
 shall conduct an election among such qualified organizations or individuals
 to determine which such organizations and individuals will be approved or
 have their approval continued.
 `(4) PERIOD OF DESIGNATION- No organization or individual shall be
 a negotiator or an exclusive negotiator for more than a 5-year period
 without being recertified as a negotiator or exclusive negotiator in the
 same manner as the original designation was made under this section.
 `(5) TIMING- Any vote or election held under this subsection to determine
 the negotiators for a particular year, shall be completed prior to June
 30 of that year. Votes or elections completed after such date shall apply
 to the negotiations for the following year.
`REQUIREMENTS FOR RECOMMENDED PAYMENT SYSTEMS AND RATES
 `SEC. 1175. (a) HOSPITALS-
 `(1) NEGOTIATED AGREEMENT- A payment system for hospitals that is recommended
 in an agreement negotiated pursuant to section 1176 shall be based on
 the hospital payment system established under title XVIII of this Act,
 except that the Board may approve or adopt an alternative payment system.
 `(2) ALTERNATIVE PAYMENT SYSTEM- An alternative payment system approved or
 adopted under paragraph (1) shall provide for the adjustment of payment rates
 to reflect the differences in costs between different types of hospitals
 to the extent that such costs represent appropriate differences in the
 costs of delivering care efficiently and effectively in different types
 of hospitals or are necessary to achieve other public policy objectives,
 as determined by the Board. Such a payment system shall reflect geographic
 differences in labor and to the extent feasible, other input costs, capital
 and other needs to maintain adequate access to care and quality of care. To
 the extent desirable and feasible, the negotiators shall recommend, and
 the Board shall approve, special treatment for managed care programs.
 `(b) PHYSICIANS-
 `(1) NEGOTIATED AGREEMENT- A payment system for physicians that is
 recommended in an agreement negotiated pursuant to section 1176 shall
 be based on the physician payment system established under title XVIII
 of this Act, except that the Board may approve or adopt an alternative
 payment system.
 `(2) ALTERNATIVE PAYMENT SYSTEM- An alternative payment system approved
 or adopted under paragraph (1) shall reflect geographic differences in
 practice costs insofar as those differences reflect the cost of economical
 and efficient provision of quality care, and shall promote an appropriate
 distribution of primary and specialty care. To the extent desirable and
 feasible, the negotiators shall recommend, and the Board shall approve,
 special treatment for managed care programs.
`OUTCOME OF NEGOTIATIONS, AGREEMENTS
 `SEC. 1176. (a) AGREEMENT- If a majority of the negotiators (in the case of
 multiple negotiators) for the providers and a majority of the negotiators
 (in the case of multiple negotiators) for the purchasers, for a particular
 sector, agree to recommend a proposal under this part to the Board, such
 proposal shall be considered to have been agreed to by the negotiators.
 `(b) BINDING NATURE OF AGREEMENTS- If a negotiated agreement is reached,
 pursuant to subsection (a), concerning a health services rate structure,
 or concerning any other matter that would lead to the achievement of
 the goals developed by the Board under section 1172, or an alternative
 goal accepted by the Board under subsection (c), and such agreement, in
 the judgment of the Board, will lead to the achievement of such goals,
 the Board shall promulgate regulations implementing such rates and other
 matters and such rates and other matters shall be binding on providers
 and purchasers in the sector to which such agreement applies.
 `(c) AGREEMENT ON DIFFERENT GOAL- If the negotiators reach an agreement,
 pursuant to subsection (a), concerning a goal that is different than a
 goal that has been developed by the Board under section 1172, the Board
 shall adopt such agreed upon goal if the Board determines that it would be
 in the best interest of the general public to adopt such goal. The Board,
 on a rejection of such alternative agreed upon goal, may request that the
 negotiators attempt to reach a negotiated agreement concerning the original
 goal under section 1172, and such other measures to achieve such original
 goal, and may promulgate regulations recommending rates and other matters
 to achieve the original goal.
 `(d) EFFECT OF NO AGREEMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- If the negotiators for a particular sector fail to reach
 a negotiated agreement, pursuant to subsection (a), concerning a goal
 established under section 1172, the Board shall promulgate regulations
 recommending advisory rates and other matters necessary to achieve such
 goals. Such advisory rates and other matters shall not be binding on health
 care providers and purchasers.
 `(2) CONSTRUCTION- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, health
 care purchasers may combine for the purpose of agreeing to pay health care
 providers for services at rates recommended pursuant to paragraph (1).
 `(e) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE- The Board shall provide technical assistance
 to negotiators, including estimates of the effect on expenditure goals
 of alternative proposals and estimates of utilization changes that can be
 expected under different proposals. The Board may recommend a proposal to
 achieve expenditure goals for the consideration of the negotiators. The
 Board may make available professional mediation and conciliation services
 to the negotiators.
`ENFORCEMENT
 `SEC. 1177. (a) IN GENERAL- A health care provider assessing rates other
 than those required under regulations promulgated by the Board under this
 part, or failing to comply in any other manner with such regulations,
 or a health care purchaser paying rates other than those required under
 such regulations, except in the case of an alternative rate or method
 established under subsections (a)(2) and (b)(2) of section 1175, shall--
 `(1) be ineligible for any assistance under this Act; and
 `(2) be liable to the United States for a civil penalty for such failure in
 an amount not to exceed $50,000 in the case of an individual and $500,000
 in the case of an organization, as provided for in subsection (b).
 `(b) CIVIL ACTIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A civil penalty under subsection (a)(2) shall be assessed
 by the Board on a health care provider or purchaser by an order made
 on the record after an opportunity for a Board hearing on any disputed
 issues of material fact and the amount of the penalty. In the course of any
 investigation or hearing under this paragraph, the Board or its designees
 may administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses, receive evidence,
 and issue subpoenas requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and
 the production of evidence that relates to the matter under investigation.
 `(2) AMOUNT- In determining the amount of a civil penalty under paragraph
 (1), the Board shall take into account the nature, circumstances, extent,
 and gravity of the act subject to penalty, the ability to pay, the effect
 on the ability to continue to do business, any history of prior, similar
 acts, and such other matters as the Board determines appropriate.
 `(3) LIMITATION ON ACTIONS- The Board may not initiate an action under
 this subsection with respect to any noncompliance described in subsection
 (a) that occurred before the date of the enactment of this section.
 `(c) INJUNCTIVE RELIEF- The Board shall have the power, upon the initiation
 of an action regarding noncompliance with a provision of this part, to
 petition any United States district court, within any district wherein
 such noncompliance is alleged to have occurred, for appropriate temporary
 injunctive relief. Upon the filing of any such petition, the court shall
 cause notice thereof to be served upon such person, and thereupon shall
 have jurisdiction to grant the Board such temporary injunctive relief as
 the court determines to be appropriate.
 `(d) JUDICIAL REVIEW- Any health care provider or purchaser that is the
 subject of an adverse decision under subsection (b)(1) or subsection (c)
 may obtain a review of such decision by the United States Court of Appeals
 for the District of Columbia or for the circuit in which the provider or
 purchaser resides, by filing in such court (within 60 days following the
 date the purchaser or provider is notified of the decision of the Board)
 a petition requesting that the decision be modified or set aside.
`ROLE OF STATES
 `SEC. 1178. (a) ALTERNATIVE SYSTEMS, ETC- A State consortia described
 in part D of this title may, with the approval of the Board, establish
 an alternative payment system, rates, and methods for achieving goals
 developed by the Board under section 1172.
 `(b) APPROVAL- The Board shall approve alternative payment systems,
 rates, and methods under subsection (a) if Board determines that such
 alternative systems, rates, or methods would result in a level of health
 care expenditures in the State that achieves the national goals developed
 under section 1172, adjusted to the State level. If the Board determines that
 such national goals would not be achieved through the proposed alternative
 systems, rates or methods, the rates or other matters that apply to the
 State under regulations promulgated by the Board shall remain binding in
 the State. Such Board approval is only necessary where binding payment
 systems, rates and methods are not promulgated under a negotiated agreement.
 `(c) STANDARD FOR DETERMINATION- In making a determination under subsection
 (b), the Board shall consider the effect of the alternative systems, rates
 or methods, with respect to the goals established under section 1172, on the
 State as a whole rather than on particular health care sectors in the State.
`OTHER GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS
 `SEC. 1179. The Board shall promulgate regulations recommending advisory
 rates and other matters necessary to achieve the goals established under
 section 1172 for all Federal programs (other than the program under title
 XVIII of this Act) that reimburse providers on a fee, charge, or cost basis
 or charge third-party providers on such basis. Such nonbinding rates shall
 be consistent with the rates promulgated by the Board under sections 1176
 and 1178, except that Federal payments resulting from such rates shall
 be no greater than such payments would have been if determined without
 regard to this section through the fifth full fiscal year after the date
 of enactment of this section.
`UNIFORM BILLING AND MANDATORY REPORTING
 `SEC. 1180. (a) IN GENERAL- The Board shall establish a system of uniform
 billing and reporting, as required under subsection (c), that will enable
 the Board to determine the progress made in meeting the goals established
 under section 1172, to provide information for health care providers
 and purchasers to assist such providers and purchasers in providing
 and obtaining efficiently provided quality health care, and to reduce
 administrative costs of the health care system.
 `(b) GENERAL REPORTING AND DATA REQUIREMENTS- The Board shall--
 `(1) develop a computerized system for the collection, analysis, and
 dissemination of data required to be collected under this part;
 `(2) establish one or more uniform claims and billing form as required in
 subsection (c)(2) to be utilized by all data sources and providers;
 `(3) audit information provided by health care providers on a sample basis
 or in situations where there exists reasonable cause for such an audit; and
 `(4) issue public reports concerning health care costs and the effectiveness
 of the health care provided by health care providers.
 `(c) DATA COLLECTION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Data sources shall submit to the Board, on the request of
 the Board, all data required to be submitted under this part in accordance
 with the uniform submission formats, coding systems, and other technical
 specifications established by the Board to assure that such incoming data
 is substantially valid, consistent, compatible and manageable.
 `(2) UNIFORM CLAIMS AND BILLING FORMS- Data shall be collected by the
 Board through the use of one or more Federal Uniform Claims and Billing
 Forms developed by the Board and utilized by providers and purchasers of
 health care that shall, at a minimum, include--
 `(A) a uniform patient identifier;
 `(B) the date of birth of the patient;
 `(C) the gender of the patient;
 `(D) the ZIP Code of the patient;
 `(E) the date of admission of the patient for inpatient hospital services;
 `(F) the date of discharge of the patient referred to in subparagraph (E);
 `(G) the principal and secondary diagnoses of the patient;
 `(H) the principal and secondary procedures to be followed in treating
 the patient;
 `(I) a uniform health care facility identifier;
 `(J) uniform identifiers of physicians treating the patient;
 `(K) for services provided in an inpatient setting, the total charges
 of the health care facility treating the patient, segregated into major
 categories determined appropriate by the Board;
 `(L) the amounts of actual payments made to the treating health care
 facility;
 `(M) the amounts of the charges of each physician or professional rendering
 service to the patient;
 `(N) the services provided in an inpatient setting;
 `(O) the amounts of actual payments made to each physician or professional
 rendering service to the patient;
 `(P) a uniform identifier of the primary payor;
 `(Q) the ZIP Code of the facility where service is rendered to the patient;
 `(R) the patient discharge status; and
 `(S) such other material as the Board determines necessary or useful to
 carry out the duties of the Board or to provide adequate information to
 purchasers of health care to assist such purchasers in appropriately paying
 for services.
 `(3) MEASURE OF SERVICE EFFECTIVENESS-
 `(A) DEVELOPMENT OF METHODOLOGY- To the extent practical and as rapidly
 as feasible, the Secretary shall develop and implement a methodology
 or methodologies that will measure the effectiveness of the health care
 service provided by health care providers.
 `(B) INCLUSION IN UNIFORM BILLING FORM- To the extent practical and as
 rapidly as feasible, the Secretary shall include in the uniform claims
 and billing forms or in other data collection instruments established
 under subsection (b) data necessary to provide the Secretary with
 information concerning each service provided by health care providers
 that is sufficient to enable the Secretary to analyze the quality, cost,
 and service effectiveness of the provider.
 `(4) ADDITIONAL DATA- The Board may collect additional data, including
 audited annual financial reports of all hospitals and ambulatory service
 facilities, medicare cost reports, information on capital expenditures,
 and any other data that the Board determines necessary to carry out its
 responsibilities under this part.
 `(5) RECOMMENDATIONS- The Board shall make recommendations to the committees
 of Congress, the President, and the insurance industry concerning methods to
 reduce the cost and burden of duplication or excessive reporting requirements
 imposed on health care providers.
 `(d) REPORTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Board, not less than once each calendar year, shall
 for every health care provider for which sufficient data is available,
 prepare and make available reports that shall, to the extent practicable
 and scientifically valid, contain data in a form that will provide the
 most useful information to purchasers of health care services regarding
 such providers to enable such purchasers to compare providers on the basis
 of cost and quality.
 `(2) AVAILABILITY- The Secretary shall advertise and make available all
 reports prepared under paragraph (1) to the general public, including any
 dissents submitted by health care providers.
 `(3) RECOMMENDATIONS- The Board shall make recommendations to the appropriate
 committees of Congress, the President, and the insurance industry concerning
 methods to reduce the cost and burden of duplicative or excessive reporting
 requirements imposed on health care providers.
 `(e) DEFINITION- As used in this section, the term `data sources' means
 classes of entities and individuals that the Board designates as data
 sources.
`ANNUAL REPORTS
 `SEC. 1181. Not later than June 30 of each year, the Board shall prepare
 and submit to the President, the appropriate committees of Congress and the
 general public, a report concerning the success in attaining expenditure,
 access, and quality goals developed under section 1172, and containing
 recommendations for additional measures, if any, that the Board determines
 are necessary to achieve such goals.
`DEFINITIONS
 `SEC. 1182. As used in this part:
 `(1) HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN- The term `health benefit plan' means an employee
 welfare benefit plan (as defined in section 3(1) of the Employee Retirement
 Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(1)) that--
 `(A) provides medical care to participants or beneficiaries directly or
 through insurance, reimbursement, or otherwise; and
 `(B) meets the requirements of section 2721 of the Public Health Service Act.
Such term shall include a small business health benefits plan, as defined
in section 2713(11) of such Act.
 `(2) MANAGED CARE PLAN- The term `managed care plan' has the meaning given
 such term by section 2108(a)(6).
 `(3) PROVIDER- The term `provider' means a physician, hospital, health
 maintenance organization, pharmacy, laboratory, or other appropriately
 licensed provider of health care services or supplies, that has entered
 into an agreement with a managed care entity to provide such services or
 supplies to a patient enrolled in a managed care plan.
 `(4) PURCHASER- The term `purchaser' means an entity that pays for services
 of providers, including in the case of a health benefit plan provided
 pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement, the labor union that has
 negotiated for such plan on behalf of employees shall be considered to be
 a purchaser.
`EFFECTIVE DATES
 `SEC. 1183. The Board shall develop the goals under section 1172 for each
 calendar year beginning not later than the second full calendar year after
 the date of the enactment of this part. The Board shall establish the
 negotiating procedures required under section 1173(a) for each calendar
 year beginning not later than the third calendar year after the date of
 the enactment of this part.'.
 (c) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) COMPENSATION, LEVEL III- Section 5314 of title 5, United States Code,
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `Members, Federal Health Expenditure Board.'.
 (2) COMPENSATION, LEVEL IV- Section 5315 of title 5, United States Code,
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `Members, Federal Health Expenditure Board.'.
 (d) MEDICARE- Title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et
 seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new section:
`FEDERAL HEALTH EXPENDITURE BOARD
 `SEC. 1893. (a) HOSPITAL SERVICES- Notwithstanding any other provision of
 this title, in the second full fiscal year after the date of enactment
 of this section and annually thereafter, the Federal Health Expenditure
 Board (hereafter in this section referred to as the `Board') shall, with
 due regard to the recommendations of the Prospective Payment Assessment
 Commission, recommend--
 `(1) the update factor for the DRG prospective payment rates provided in
 section 1886(d);
 `(2) the DRG recalibration;
 `(3) the update factor for excluded hospitals; and
 `(4) such other matters relating to reimbursement under this title as the
 Board shall elect.
In making such recommendations to the Congress, the Board shall also make
recommendations for modifications of the prospective payment system under this
title. In recommending the update factor for DRG prospective payment rates and
for excluded hospitals, the Board shall seek to maintain parity in increases
in payment rates with other purchasers of health care services, and, shall
over time, seek to achieve comparability in such rates. Such recommendations
shall not result in Federal payments greater than such payments would have
been if determined without regard to this section through the fifth full
fiscal year after the date of enactment of this section.
 `(b) PHYSICIAN SERVICES- Notwithstanding any other provision of this
 title, in the second full fiscal year after the date of enactment of this
 section and annually thereafter, the Board shall, with due regard to the
 recommendations of the Physician Payment Review Commission, recommend--
 `(1) appropriate modifications of the resource based relative value schedule
 provided for in section 1848;
 `(2) volume performance standards provided for in section 1848(f);
 `(3) updates in the conversion factor, consistent with the volume performance
 standards, provided in section 1848(d);
 `(4) revisions of the geographical adjustment factors provided in section
 1848(e); and
 `(5) such other matters relating to reimbursement under this title as the
 Board shall elect.
 In making such recommendations to the Congress, the Board shall also make
 recommendations for modifications of the physician payment system under
 this title. In making the recommendations described in paragraphs (1),
 (2), (3), and (4), the Board shall seek to maintain parity in increases
 in payment rates with other purchasers of health care services, and shall,
 over time, seek to achieve comparability in such rates. Such recommendations
 shall not result in Federal payments greater than such payments would have
 been if determined without regard to this section through the fifth full
 fiscal year after the date of enactment of this section.'.
Subtitle C--State Purchasing Consortia
SEC. 421. STATE PURCHASING CONSORTIA
 (a) PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT- Title XXVII of the Public Health Service
 Act (as added by section 101 and amended by sections 201, 311 and 411)
 is further amended by adding at the end thereof the following new part:
`Part E--State Purchasing Consortia
`SEC. 2781. STATE PURCHASING CONSORTIA.
 `(a) REQUIREMENT-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT BY STATE- Not later than 1 year after the date of
 enactment of this part, or the first day of the first calendar year beginning
 after the close of the first regular session of the State legislature that
 begins after the date of enactment of this part, whichever is later, the
 State shall establish a State Consortium (hereafter referred to in this
 section as the `consortium') which may be a public or nonprofit private
 entity, or be a member of a Regional Consortium in accordance with subsection
 (f), that shall carry out the activities described in subsection (d).
 `(2) ESTABLISHMENT BY SECRETARY- If a State fails to establish a State
 consortium as required under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall develop
 and implement a State consortium for such State.
 `(b) BOARD OF DIRECTORS AND MEMBERSHIP-
 `(1) BOARD OF DIRECTORS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- A consortium shall be managed by a board of directors who
 shall be appointed and serve in accordance with guidelines and regulations
 developed by the State.
 `(B) MANDATORY FUNCTIONS- The guidelines and regulations developed under
 subparagraph (A) shall ensure that, for purposes of carrying out the
 mandatory functions under subsection (d)(1), the board of directors will
 be composed of insurers, providers and consumers.
 `(C) OPTIONAL FUNCTIONS- The guidelines and regulations developed under
 subparagraph (A) shall ensure that, for purposes of carrying out the optional
 functions under subsection (d)(2), the board of directors will be composed of
 individuals who represent the balanced interests of all interested parties.
 `(2) MEMBERSHIP IN CONSORTIUM- All providers and purchasers of health
 insurance and health care in the State, including business, labor,
 and consumer organizations, shall be eligible to become members of the
 consortium in such State.
 `(c) APPLICATION AND PLAN, GRANTS AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE-
 `(1) APPLICATION AND PLAN-
 `(A) REQUIREMENT- Prior to the establishment of the State consortium, the
 State shall prepare and submit to the Secretary for approval, an application
 in such form and containing such information as the Secretary may require,
 including the plan described in subparagraph (B).
 `(B) PLAN- As part of the application submitted under subparagraph (A),
 the State shall prepare a plan that shall outline the form of the State
 consortium and that shall include a description--
 `(i) of the guidelines applicable to the appointment and service of the
 board of directors of the consortium;
 `(ii) of the manner in which the State will solicit membership for the
 consortium;
 `(iii) of the manner in which the consortium will perform the mandatory
 functions under subsection (d)(1);
 `(iv) of the optional functions that the consortium will perform under
 subsection (d)(2); and
 `(v) of any other information that the Secretary determines appropriate.
 `(2) GRANTS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall award a grant to each State to assist
 the State in paying the costs associated with the establishment and initial
 operation of the State consortium.
 `(B) AMOUNTS- Not less than $150,000 shall be provided to each State under a
 grant awarded under this subparagraph (A), except that additional amounts may
 be provided to a State if the Secretary determines, based on an application
 that is submitted by the State for such amounts, that such amounts are
 needed to help defray the costs associated with optional functions provided
 by the consortium under the State plan submitted under paragraph (1)(B).
 `(C) PLANNING FUNCTIONS- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), amounts
 provided under grants awarded under this paragraph shall be utilized for
 planning functions only.
 `(3) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE- The Secretary shall provide technical assistance
 to States in setting up the State consortia.
 `(d) FUNCTIONS OF CONSORTIUM-
 `(1) MANDATORY FUNCTIONS- The State consortium shall--
 `(A) enroll all small share health insurance companies in the State as
 members of the consortium for insurers, purchasers and providers;
 `(B) establish a claim payment fund and procedures for the payment, by
 the consortium on behalf of its enrollees, of valid claims submitted by
 providers or enrollees to the consortium, such fund to be capitalized
 through public and private contributions and assessments made by the
 consortium on such enrollees to reflect amounts paid from such fund on
 behalf of each such enrollee;
 `(C) develop, in consultation and with the assistance of the Secretary and
 consistent with the program established under part D, and employ uniform
 billing and claim form and procedures for providers of health services
 covered by enrollees, and for individuals submitting claims directly to
 the consortium;
 `(D) further attempt to reduce administrative costs and burdens on enrollees
 and providers of health services, through--
 `(i) the maintenance of a staff to explain claims procedures (that shall
 be consistent with claims procedures adopted under title XVIII of the
 Social Security Act) to providers and enrollees and to provide such other
 services as may assist providers in receiving reimbursement promptly and
 at the lowest possible cost;
 `(ii) establish, to the maximum extent practicable, a paperless processing
 system to permit providers to submit claims electronically to the consortium;
 `(iii) establish, to the maximum extent practicable, the use of `smart
 cards' or other electronic methods for immediate verification by providers
 of an individuals's health insurance coverage;
 `(iv) encouraging providers to submit claims directly to the consortium
 on behalf of enrollees; and
 `(v) the conduct of appropriate utilization reviews;
 `(E) carry out any other activities determined appropriate by the Secretary;
 and
 `(F) cooperate with the Federal Health Expenditure Board established under
 part D.
 `(2) OPTIONAL FUNCTIONS- The State consortium may--
 `(A) permit insurers with a large share of the market in a State to
 participate in the consortium;
 `(B) convene negotiations with health care providers and purchasers
 and others, as appropriate, concerning the availability of health care
 services, coverage and reimbursement levels for such services, and claim
 submission and payment procedures (activities undertaken as a result of
 such negotiations shall be exempt from Federal anti-trust laws if such
 activities are authorized by the State);
 `(C) develop procedures for--
 `(i) the allocation of capital among health care providers to encourage
 an adequate and efficient level and distribution of health care resources;
 `(ii) encouraging a rational distribution of health care providers; and
 `(iii) encouraging the development of managed care;
 `(D) the collection and dissemination of data through a Statewide data
 organization that is accessible to all interested parties in the State in
 order to facilitate appropriate decisions by consumers and to encourage
 efficient behavior by providers;
 `(E) coordinate with entities responsible for assuring the quality of
 health care provided within the State; and
 `(F) carry out any other activities that are contained within the State plan
 and approved by the Secretary and that are designed to improve the quality
 of health care, access to such care, and to control the costs of such care.
 `(3) APPLICABILITY OF CONSUMER PROTECTION LAWS- Notwithstanding any other
 provision of law, the provisions of the Consumer Product Safety Act and
 other Federal consumer protection laws shall apply to the functions carried
 out under paragraph (1).
 `(4) MANAGED CARE- This subsection shall not be construed as limiting the
 ability of a managed care plan to select providers eligible to perform
 services under the plan, or to establish reasonable procedures to be
 followed by providers participating in the plan, to assure the provision
 of cost-effective, quality services.
 `(5) SMALL SHARE HEALTH INSURANCE COMPANIES- As used in this subsection,
 the term `small share health insurance companies' shall include entities
 determined appropriate by the Secretary. In making such determination,
 the Secretary shall seek to minimize the number of sources reimbursing
 providers directly in the State but shall permit insurers with a market
 share that is large enough to sufficiently achieve the economies of scale
 sought through the consortium, to remain independent of the consortium,
 to the extent that permitting such separate payment sources would not
 dilute the purpose of the consortium.
 `(e) DATA AND INFORMATION- A State consortium shall collect or provide for
 the collection of data and information concerning the operations of the
 consortium and shall provide such data and information to the Secretary
 on an annual basis.
 `(f) REGIONAL CONSORTIUM- States may enter into an agreement for the
 establishment of a regional consortium that shall have jurisdiction over
 all States that are parties to such agreement and that shall be subject
 to the provisions of this section as if such consortium were established
 by a single State.
 `(g) ENFORCEMENT- A State that fails to comply with the requirements of
 this section shall be ineligible to receive assistance made available
 under this Act.
 `(h) STUDY- Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of this
 part, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the appropriate committees
 of Congress, a report that shall contain the results of a study conducted
 by the Secretary concerning the State consortia system established under
 this section, and whether such consortia are effective in containing
 health care costs, in expanding the availability of access to such care,
 and in protecting and enhancing the quality of such care.
 `(i) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.'.
 (b) SOCIAL SECURITY ACT- Title XI of the Social Security Act (as amended by
 section 411) is further amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new part:
`Part D--State Purchasing Consortia
`STATE PURCHASING CONSORTIA
 `SEC. 1191. (a) MEMBERSHIP IN CONSORTIUM-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A State may, with the approval of the Secretary, require
 that the providers operating under the programs conducted under titles
 XVIII, XIX, and XXI of this Act in the State, participate in the State
 consortium for purposes of claims processing and for such other purposes
 as the Secretary may approve, in the least restrictive manner practicable.
 `(2) WAIVERS- With respect to a State requirement under paragraph (1)
 that providers under titles XVIII, XIX, and XXI of this Act participate in
 the consortium, the Secretary may waive such requirement on the request of
 such a provider, if the Secretary determines, on a budget neutral basis,
 that such waiver is necessary to protect the access of the beneficiaries
 of such provider to care provided by such provider, and that such waiver
 will promote the cost effective delivery of services.
 `(b) FUNCTIONS OF CONSORTIUM-
 `(1) MANDATORY FUNCTIONS- The State consortium shall--
 `(A) enroll all small share health insurance companies in the State as
 members of the consortium for insurers, purchasers and providers;
 `(B) establish a claim payment fund and procedures for the payment, by
 the consortium on behalf of it's enrollees, of valid claims submitted by
 providers or enrollees to the consortium, such fund to be capitalized
 through public and private contributions and assessments made by the
 consortium on such enrollees to reflect amounts paid from such fund on
 behalf of each such enrollee;
 `(C) develop, in consultation and with the assistance of the Secretary and
 consistent with the program established under part C, and employ uniform
 billing claim forms and procedures for providers of health services
 covered by enrollees, and for individuals submitting claims directly to
 the consortium;
 `(D) further attempt to reduce administrative costs and burdens on enrollees
 and providers of health services, through--
 `(i) the maintenance of a staff to explain claims procedures (that shall
 be consistent with claims procedures adopted under title XVIII of this
 Act) to providers and enrollees and to provide such other services as may
 assist providers in receiving reimbursement promptly and at the lowest
 possible cost;
 `(ii) establish, to the maximum extent practicable, a paperless processing
 system to permit providers to submit claims electronically to the consortium;
 `(iii) establish, to the maximum extent practicable, the use of `smart
 cards' or other electronic methods for immediate verification by providers
 of an individuals's health insurance coverage;
 `(iv) encouraging providers to submit claims directly to the consortium
 on behalf of enrollees; and
 `(v) the conduct of appropriate utilization reviews;
 `(E) carry out any other activities determined appropriate by the Secretary;
 and
 `(F) cooperate with the Federal Health Expenditure Board.
 `(2) OPTIONAL FUNCTIONS- The State consortium may--
 `(A) permit insurers with a large share of the market in a State to
 participate in the consortium;
 `(B) convene negotiations with health care providers and purchasers
 and others, as appropriate, concerning the availability of health care
 services, coverage and reimbursement levels for such services, and claim
 submission and payment procedures (activities undertaken as a result of
 such negotiations shall be exempt from Federal anti-trust laws if such
 activities are authorized by the State);
 `(C) develop procedures for--
 `(i) the allocation of capital among health care providers to encourage
 an adequate and efficient level and distribution of health care resources;
 `(ii) encouraging a rational distribution of health care providers; and
 `(iii) encouraging the development of managed care;
 `(D) the collection and dissemination of data through a Statewide data
 organization that is accessible to all interested parties in the State in
 order to facilitate appropriate decisions by consumers and to encourage
 efficient behavior by providers;
 `(E) coordinate with entities responsible for assuring the quality of
 health care provided within the State; and
 `(F) carry out any other activities that are contained within the State plan
 and approved by the Secretary and that are designed to improve the quality
 of health care, access to such care, and to control the costs of such care.
 `(3) APPLICABILITY OF CONSUMER PROTECTION LAWS- Notwithstanding any other
 provision of law, the provisions of the Consumer Product Safety Act and
 other Federal consumer protection laws shall apply to the functions carried
 out under paragraph (1).
 `(4) MANAGED CARE- This subsection shall not be construed as limiting the
 ability of a managed care plan to select providers eligible to perform
 services under the plan, or to establish reasonable procedures to be
 followed by providers participating in the plan, to assure the provision
 of cost-effective, quality services.
 `(5) SMALL SHARE HEALTH INSURANCE COMPANIES- As used in this subsection,
 the term `small share health insurance companies' shall include entities
 determined appropriate by the Secretary. In making such determination,
 the Secretary shall seek to minimize the number of sources reimbursing
 providers directly in the State but shall permit insurers with a market
 share that is large enough to sufficiently achieve the economies of scale
 sought through the consortium, to remain independent of the consortium,
 to the extent that permitting such separate payment sources would not
 dilute the purpose of the consortium.
 `(c) DATA AND INFORMATION- A State consortium shall collect or provide for
 the collection of data and information concerning the operations of the
 consortium and shall provide such data and information to the Secretary
 on an annual basis.
 `(d) REGIONAL CONSORTIUM- States may enter into an agreement for the
 establishment of a regional consortium that shall have jurisdiction over
 all States that are parties to such agreement and that shall be subject
 to the provisions of this section as if such consortium were established
 by a single State.
 `(e) ENFORCEMENT- A State that fails to comply with the requirements of
 this section shall be ineligible to receive payments under section 2109
 of this Act.'.
Subtitle D--Cost Control Grant Program
SEC. 431. COST CONTROL GRANT PROGRAM.
 Part A of title IX of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 299 et
 seq.) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 905. COST CONTROL GRANT PROGRAM.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Administrator may award grants and enter into contracts
 with States, public entities, insurers, health plan administrators,
 businesses, labor unions, non-profit organizations, and researchers for
 the development, demonstration, and evaluation of innovative methods for
 reducing health care costs.
 `(b) APPLICATION- To be eligible for a grant or contract under subsection
 (a), an entity of the type described in such subsection shall prepare and
 submit, to the Administrator, an application at such time, in such form,
 and containing such information as the Administrator shall require.
 `(c) PREFERENCES- In awarding grants or entering into contracts under
 subsection (a), the Administrator shall give a preference to entities
 submitting applications under subsection (b) that propose to implement
 projects, with assistance provided under this section, with the potential
 to develop programs that could have a significant impact on overall national
 health care costs.
 `(d) CLEARINGHOUSE-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT- The Administrator shall establish a clearinghouse,
 and undertake such other activities as may be necessary, to disseminate
 information concerning successful health care cost control methods and to
 provide technical assistance in the implementation of such methods.
 `(2) OPERATION- The Administrator may reserve not to exceed 10 percent
 of the amount appropriated under subsection (g) in each fiscal year for
 the operation of the clearinghouse, the dissemination of information,
 and the provision of technical assistance under paragraph (1).
 `(e) CONSULTATION- In developing the procedures for awarding grants
 under this section, the Secretary shall consult with the Federal Health
 Expenditure Board established under part D of title XXVII.
 `(f) MATCHING REQUIREMENT- In the case of a grant awarded for the conduct of
 a demonstration program that will provide a direct benefit to the grantee,
 the Administrator shall not award such grant unless the grantee agrees
 to provide additional amounts for such program equal to not less than 25
 percent of the amount of the grant. Such additional amounts may be in cash
 or in kind.
 `(g) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 to carry out this section, such sums as may be necessary in each of the
 fiscal years 1992 through 1994.'.
Subtitle E--Malpractice Reform
SEC. 441. MALPRACTICE REFORM.
 Part A of title IX of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 299 et
 seq.) as amended by section 431 is further amended by adding at the end
 thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 906. MALPRACTICE REFORM.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Administrator may award grants to States for
 the development and implementation of programs for medical malpractice
 reforms. Programs receiving such grants shall include efforts to develop
 alternative methods to resolve liability disputes that fairly protect the
 interests of all parties involved and may include an appropriate role for
 the use of medical practice guidelines. No grant shall be awarded that is
 inconsistent with the goal of--
 `(1) reducing excessive health care costs;
 `(2) reducing unnecessary or ineffective medical care;
 `(3) improving access to quality health care;
 `(4) ensuring fair and adequate compensation for and review of injuries
 arising from medical negligence;
 `(5) ensuring reasonable insurance rating and premium setting practices; and
 `(6) improving patient protections, disciplinary standards for health care
 professionals, and the effectiveness of State medical boards.
 `(b) TYPES OF GRANTS- A grant awarded under subsection (a) shall be either--
 `(1) a planning grant, to assist the grantee in the development of a program
 under this section that shall be for a period of not to exceed two years; or
 `(2) an operational grant, to assist the grantee in operation and evaluation
 of the new program referred to in paragraph (1), that shall be for a period
 of not to exceed five years.
 `(c) REQUIREMENT- An operational grant under subsection (b)(2) shall
 include a requirement that an evaluation, approved by the Administrator
 as being adequate, is conducted to determine the effectiveness of the
 program for which the grant is utilized. A final report on the results of
 the evaluation shall be prepared and submitted to the Administrator.
 `(d) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.'.
SEC. 442. STUDY OF MEDICAL MALPRACTICE.
 (a) CONTRACT- The Secretary shall enter into a contract with the Institute
 of Medicine, or with a similar independent entity, for the collection and
 analysis of data and issues, by a group of representatives of interested
 parties and experts, related to--
 (1) ineffective or unnecessary medical testing and practices;
 (2) the occurrence of malpractice and malpractice awards (including the
 number of claims filed and the number of findings of negligence);
 (3) the adequacy of existing health care provider licensing and disciplining
 procedures in preventing malpractice;
 (4) the reasonableness of malpractice insurance premiums and rate-setting
 practices; and
 (5) any other issues relevant to the adequacy of current medical practices,
 of compensation for injuries resulting from medical malpractice, and the
 impact of legal liability on medical practices.
 (b) RECOMMENDATIONS- Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of
 this Act, the Institute or entity referred to in subsection (a) shall make
 available to the Secretary, the appropriate committees of Congress, the
 appropriate State officials, and to the general public, a report containing
 the recommendations of the Institute or entity for any desirable medical
 malpractice reforms.
 (c) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.
Subtitle F--Reducing the Administrative Cost of Assuring Appropriate
Utilization of Health Care Services and Improving the Quality of Health
Care Services
SEC. 451. ESTABLISHMENT OF A QUALITY IMPROVEMENT BOARD.
 (a) PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT- Title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act
 (as added by section 101 and amended by sections 201, 311, 411, and 421)
 is further amended by adding at the end thereof the following new part:
`Part F--Establishment of a Quality Improvement Board
`SEC. 2785. ESTABLISHMENT OF A QUALITY IMPROVEMENT BOARD.
 `(a) CONTRACT- The Secretary shall enter into a contract with an entity
 in each State (such entity shall hereafter be referred to in this section
 as the `quality improvement board') to review the quality of health care
 provided by health care professionals and institutions in each such State
 and to establish mechanisms to encourage continuous quality improvement.
 `(b) BOARD OF DIRECTORS-
 `(1) REQUIREMENT- The quality improvement board shall, in accordance with
 Federal guidelines and regulations and in accordance with the requirements
 of the contract entered into under subsection (a), be managed by a board
 of directors.
 `(2) MEMBERSHIP- The board of directors required under paragraph (1)
 shall consist of 15 members, of whom--
 `(A) seven members shall be representatives of health care providers,
 including individuals of recognized excellence in the development,
 application, and evaluation of health care services, procedures, and
 technologies;
 `(B) four members shall be representatives of insurers and purchasers of
 health care services; and
 `(C) four members shall be health care service researchers and consumers.
 `(3) DUTIES- The board of directors shall adopt policies for the quality
 improvement board, approve the budget of the quality improvement board,
 appoint the executive director of the quality improvement board, and shall
 assume such other duties as the Secretary may prescribe or the board of
 directors shall determine to be necessary to the proper functioning of
 the quality improvement board.
 `(c) DUTIES OF THE QUALITY IMPROVEMENT BOARD-
 `(1) GUIDELINES-
 `(A) REQUIREMENT- The quality improvement board shall adopt guidelines for
 appropriate medical practice and for recommended measures to be taken by
 providers to improve the quality of care.
 `(B) CONTENTS- Guidelines adopted under subparagraph (A) shall include
 those of the type developed under the authority of section 912 and such
 guidelines as the Secretary may specify, and may include additional
 guidelines developed by professional societies or other appropriately
 qualified bodies or individuals.
 `(2) RECOMMENDED MEASURES- In cooperation with appropriate professional
 bodies, associations, and the Joint Commission on Accreditation of
 Hospitals, the quality improvement board shall recommend measures for
 continuous quality improvement to be adopted by health care professionals
 and institutions. Such measures shall include measures specified by the
 Secretary, appropriate continuing medical education and, for health care
 institutions, internal quality improvement procedures.
 `(3) CERTIFICATION OF PROVIDERS- The quality improvement board shall
 periodically review the performance of health care service providers and,
 based on--
 `(A) the conformity of the practice of the provider with the guidelines
 developed by the board;
 `(B) such measures of health care outcomes as may be scientifically valid
 and adopted by the board;
 `(C) adoption by the provider of the measures for continuous quality
 improvement recommended by the board; and
 `(D) such other factors as the board or the Secretary may prescribe; and
may certify a health care provider as an outstanding provider for the purpose
of this section.
 `(4) LIMITATION ON CERTIFICATION- A certification under paragraph (3) shall
 be examined periodically by the quality improvement board to determine if
 continued certification is appropriate. The quality improvement board may
 suspend the certification of a provider at any time. At the request of a
 health plan, insurance company or State agency, the board must reconsider
 the certification of a provider.
 `(5) DATA COLLECTION- The quality improvement board shall collect and
 review such data and conduct such inspections and evaluations as are
 necessary to enable the board to carry out its duties. At the request of
 the board, insurers shall provide the board with any data collected in the
 normal course of business as the board determines necessary to perform its
 duties. The data collected by the Federal Health Expenditure Board under
 part D and the data collected by the State consortia under part E shall
 be made available to the board.
 `(d) RESTRICTION ON LIMITATION OF PAYMENT FOR SERVICES PERFORMED BY
 OUTSTANDING PROVIDERS- A health benefit plan may not deny payment for
 any service performed or ordered by a provider certified as outstanding
 under subsection (c)(3) during the period of such certification for any
 reason other than noncoverage of the provided service under the plan. The
 plan may not deny coverage on the basis that the service is not medically
 necessary. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit a
 plan from paying for services performed or ordered by such provider at
 its normal reimbursement rates.
 `(e) RECERTIFICATION AND SUSPENSION OF CERTIFICATION- A provider certified
 as outstanding under subsection (c)(3) shall be recertified periodically
 by the quality improvement board unless the board acts to suspend such
 certification. Such suspensions, at the request of the provider shall
 be reconsidered.
 `(f) EXCEPTION FOR MANAGED CARE PLANS- Nothing in this section shall be
 construed to limit the ability of a managed care plan to choose providers
 eligible to perform services under the plan or to establish reasonable
 procedures to be followed by providers participating in the plan in order
 to assure cost-effective, quality services.
 `(g) PLANNING GRANTS- To facilitate the establishment of a quality
 improvement board in each State, the Secretary may award planning grants, in
 amounts that shall not exceed $200,000 for each State, to private, non-profit
 or public entities, for the planning, development and implementation of
 the board and the programs undertaken by the board.
 `(h) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be
 appropriated, such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.'.
 (b) SOCIAL SECURITY ACT- Title XI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1301
 et seq.) as amended by sections 411 and 421, is further amended by adding
 at the end thereof the following new part:
`Part E--Establishment of a Quality Improvement Board
`ESTABLISHMENT OF A QUALITY IMPROVEMENT BOARD
 `SEC. 1195. (a) DUTIES OF THE QUALITY IMPROVEMENT BOARD-
 `(1) GUIDELINES-
 `(A) REQUIREMENT- The quality improvement board for a State established
 under section 451(a) of the HealthAmerica Act (hereafter referred to as
 the `quality improvement board') shall adopt guidelines for appropriate
 medical practice and for recommended measures to be taken by providers to
 improve the quality of care.
 `(B) CONTENTS- Guidelines adopted under subparagraph (A) shall include
 such guidelines as the Secretary may specify, and may include additional
 guidelines developed by professional societies or other appropriately
 qualified bodies or individuals.
 `(2) RECOMMENDED MEASURES- In cooperation with appropriate professional
 bodies, associations, and the Joint Commission on Accreditation of
 Hospitals, the quality improvement board shall recommend measures for
 continuous quality improvement to be adopted by health care professionals
 and institutions. Such measures shall include measures specified by the
 Secretary, appropriate continuing medical education and, for health care
 institutions, internal quality improvement procedures.
 `(3) CERTIFICATION OF PROVIDERS- The quality improvement board shall
 periodically review the performance of health care service providers and,
 based on--
 `(A) the conformity of the practice of the provider with the guidelines
 developed by the board;
 `(B) such measures of health care outcomes as may be scientifically valid
 and adopted by the board;
 `(C) adoption by the provider of the measures for continuous quality
 improvement recommended by the board; and
 `(D) such other factors as the board or the Secretary may prescribe; and
may certify a health care provider as an outstanding provider for the purpose
of this section.
 `(4) LIMITATION ON CERTIFICATION- A certification under paragraph (3) shall
 be examined periodically by the quality improvement board to determine if
 continued certification is appropriate. The quality improvement board may
 suspend the certification of a provider at any time. At the request of a
 health plan, insurance company or State agency, the board must reconsider
 the certification of a provider.
 `(5) DATA COLLECTION- The quality improvement board shall collect and
 review such data and conduct such inspections and evaluations as are
 necessary to enable the board to carry out its duties. At the request of
 the board, insurers shall provide the board with any data collected in the
 normal course of business as the board determines necessary to perform
 its duties. The data collected by the Federal Health Expenditure Board
 under part C and the data collected by the State consortium under part D
 of title XI shall be made available to the board.
 `(b) RESTRICTION ON LIMITATION OF PAYMENT FOR SERVICES PERFORMED BY
 OUTSTANDING PROVIDERS- A health benefit plan may not deny payment for
 any service performed or ordered by a provider certified as outstanding
 under subsection (a)(3) during the period of such certification for any
 reason other than noncoverage of the provided service under the plan. The
 plan may not deny coverage on the basis that the service is not medically
 necessary. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit a
 plan from paying for services performed or ordered by such provider at
 its normal reimbursement rates.
 `(c) RECERTIFICATION AND SUSPENSION OF CERTIFICATION- A provider certified
 as outstanding under subsection (a)(3) shall be recertified periodically
 by the quality improvement board unless the board acts to suspend such
 certification. Such suspensions, at the request of a provider, shall
 be reconsidered.
 `(d) EXCEPTION FOR MANAGED CARE PLANS- Nothing in this section shall be
 construed to limit the ability of a managed care plan to choose providers
 eligible to perform services under the plan or to establish reasonable
 procedures to be followed by providers participating in the plan in order
 to assure cost-effective, quality services.
 `(e) PLANNING GRANTS- To facilitate the establishment of a quality
 improvement board in each State, the Secretary may award planning grants, in
 amounts that shall not exceed $200,000 for each State, to private, non-profit
 or public entities, for the planning, development and implementation of
 the board and the programs undertaken by the board.
 `(f) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be
 appropriated, such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.'.
Subtitle G--Use of Practice Guidelines in Federal Health Insurance and
Service Programs
SEC. 461. USE OF PRACTICE GUIDELINES IN FEDERAL HEALTH INSURANCE AND SERVICE
PROGRAMS.
 Guidelines developed under the authority of section 912 of the Public
 Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 299b-1) shall, to the extent practical and
 effective, be utilized in Federal health insurance programs as utilization
 review screens and as practice guidelines in Federal programs providing
 health care services either directly or through grantees.
Subtitle H--National Standards for the Promotion of Managed Care
SEC. 471. NATIONAL STANDARDS FOR THE PROMOTION OF MANAGED CARE.
 Title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act (as added by section 101
 and amended by sections 201, 311, 411, 421 and 451) is further amended by
 adding at the end thereof the following new part:
`Part G--National Standards for the Promotion of Managed Care
`SEC. 2791. NATIONAL STANDARDS.
 `(a) PROHIBITIONS- No requirement of any State insurance, health care or
 any other law or regulation shall--
 `(1) prohibit a managed care plan from freely selecting the health care
 providers, or the type of health care providers in a locale, as the
 participating providers; or
 `(2) limit the ability of a managed care entity to negotiate, enter
 into contracts or establish alternative rates or forms of payment for
 participating providers, or to require or provide incentives that promote
 the use of participating providers.
 `(b) UTILIZATION REVIEW SERVICES- Notwithstanding any State law, an insurer
 or other person or entity may offer utilization review services in any
 State if such insurer, person or entity has established--
 `(1) a procedure that adequately evaluates the necessity and appropriateness
 of the proposed or delivered health care services;
 `(2) a procedure that permits patients and providers to appeal any adverse
 decisions by the person or entity performing the utilization review services,
 as provided for in section 2725;
 `(3) a procedure that ensures that the person or entity providing the
 utilization review services is reasonably accessible (five days each week
 during normal business hours and, where necessary, at other appropriate
 times) to patients and providers; and
 `(4) a procedure that ensures that all applicable Federal and State laws
 that are designed to protect the confidentiality of individual medical
 records are followed.
`SEC. 2792. FAVORABLE TREATMENT OF MANAGED CARE PLANS.
 `(a) MANAGED CARE PLAN DEFINED-
 `(1) DEFINED- As used in this part, the term `managed care plan' has the
 same meaning given such term in section 2713(7).
 `(2) DETERMINATION OF MANAGED CARE PLANS- In the case of a health benefit
 plan that is offered by an entity, that is not a self-insured entity,
 that is subject to regulation by an applicable regulatory authority (as
 defined in section 2744(c)), consistent with procedures established by the
 Secretary in consultation with such authorities, such authorities shall
 be responsible for certifying for purposes of this part and the Social
 Security Act whether the health benefit plan is a managed care plan. In
 the case of self-insured entities, the Secretary shall be responsible for
 providing such certification.
 `(b) CONDITION OF STATE FUNDING-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- No amounts shall be made available under this Act to a
 State in any fiscal year (beginning with the first fiscal year beginning
 after the date of the enactment of this section) unless the State is in
 compliance with subsection (a).
 `(2) DEEMED ELECTION; IMPLIED PREEMPTION-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- A State is deemed to have elected subsection (a) to be
 in effect in the State as of the beginning of a fiscal year, unless the
 chief executive officer of a State indicates in writing that the State
 will not comply with this section. Such an election shall have the effect
 of preempting the establishment or enforcement of any State law that is
 in violation of subsection (a).
 `(B) CHANGES- A State is deemed not to have such an election in effect as
 of the date the Secretary determines that the State is enforcing any law
 or regulation in violation of subsection (a).
 `(c) LIMITATION ON RESTRICTIONS ON MANAGED CARE PLANS- In order to comply
 with the requirements of this subsection, a State may not by law or
 regulation prohibit or unreasonably limit any of the following:
 `(1) A State may not prohibit or limit a managed care plan from including
 incentives for enrollees to use the services of participating providers.
 `(2) A State may not prohibit or limit a managed care plan from limiting
 coverage of services to those provided by a participating provider.
 `(3)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), a State may not prohibit or limit the
 negotiation of rates and forms of payments for providers under a managed
 care plan.
 `(B) Subparagraph (A) shall not apply where the amount of payments with
 respect to a block of services or providers is established under a Statewide
 system applicable to all non-Federal payors with respect to such services
 or providers.
 `(4) A State may not prohibit or limit a managed care plan from limiting
 the number of participating providers.
 `(5) A State may not prohibit or limit a managed care plan from requiring
 that services be provided (or authorized) by a primary care physician
 selected by the enrollee from a list of available participating providers.
 `(d) ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS- In this part, the definitions contained in
 section 2713 shall also apply.
`SEC. 2793. FAVORABLE TREATMENT OF UTILIZATION REVIEW PROGRAMS.
 `(a) PREEMPTION OF STATE LAWS RESTRICTING UTILIZATION REVIEW PROGRAMS THAT
 MEET FEDERAL STANDARDS- In the case of a health benefit plan that includes
 a utilization review program, no State law or regulation shall prohibit
 or regulate activities under such program, except insofar as such law or
 regulation is consistent with the standards established under subsection (b).
 `(b) ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS FOR UTILIZATION REVIEW PROGRAMS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall provide, by regulation, for the
 establishment of Federal standards for utilization review programs of health
 benefit plans. Such standards shall be designed to assure, within a plan,
 the cost-effective and medically appropriate use of services.
 `(2) CONTENTS OF STANDARDS- Such standards shall be established with respect
 to at least each of the following aspects of utilization review programs:
 `(A) The qualification of those who may perform utilization review
 activities.
 `(B) The standards to be applied in performing utilization review.
 `(C) The timeliness in which utilization review determinations are to
 be made.
 `(D) An appeals process which provides a fair opportunity for individuals
 adversely affected by a utilization review determination to have such a
 determination reviewed.
 `(E) Protection for the confidentiality of individually-identifiable
 information used in the process.
 `(3) USE OF GUIDELINES- Such standards shall, to the maximum extent feasible,
 be consistent with practice guidelines developed by the Agency for Health
 Care Policy and Research.
 `(4) DEADLINE- Standards shall first be established under this subsection
 by not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this part. The
 Secretary may revise the standards from time to time as required to assure,
 within health benefit plans, the cost-effective and medically appropriate
 use of services.
 `(c) UTILIZATION REVIEW PROGRAM DEFINED- In this section, the term
 `utilization review program' means a system of reviewing the medical
 necessity and appropriateness of patient services (which may include
 inpatient and outpatient services) using specified guidelines. Such a
 system may include preadmission certification, the application of practice
 guidelines, continued stay review, discharge planning, preauthorization
 of ambulatory procedures, and retrospective review.'.
Subtitle I--Expansion of Technology Assessment
SEC. 481. EXPANSION OF TECHNOLOGY ASSESSMENT.
 Section 904 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 299a-2) is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new subsections:
 `(e) EXPANSION OF EFFORTS- In carrying out section 901(b) through subsection
 (a), the Administrator shall focus on expanding and applying appropriate
 assessments of existing health care technologies. Such expansion shall
 be achieved in part, through an evaluation of health services provided to
 individuals through publicly and privately funded sources.
 `(f) PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM- The Administrator shall establish a program
 under which the Administrator shall enter into contracts or cooperative
 agreements with eligible entities for the establishment of public-private
 partnerships to undertake technology assessment and related activities in
 the private sector.
 `(2) ELIGIBLE ENTITIES- Entities eligible to receive a contract or
 agreement under paragraph (1), shall include academic medical centers,
 research institutions, or a consortia of appropriate entities established
 for the purposes of conducting technology assessment.
 `(3) APPLICATION- To be eligible to receive a contract or agreement under
 paragraph (1), an entity shall prepare and submit to the Administrator an
 application, at such time, in such form, and containing such information
 as the Administrator may require.'.
TITLE V--CONTRIBUTION BY EMPLOYERS NOT PROVIDING PRIVATE HEALTH COVERAGE
SEC. 501. CONTRIBUTION BY EMPLOYERS NOT PROVIDING PRIVATE HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subtitle C of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new chapter:
`CHAPTER 26--CONTRIBUTION BY EMPLOYERS NOT PROVIDING PRIVATE HEALTH BENEFIT
PLANS
`Sec. 3601. Contribution by employers not providing private health benefit
plans.
`SEC. 3601. CONTRIBUTION BY EMPLOYERS NOT PROVIDING PRIVATE HEALTH BENEFIT
PLANS.
 `(a) CONTRIBUTION- If an employer to whom part B of title XXVII or section
 2701(a) of the Public Health Service Act applies elects to have this chapter
 apply, there is hereby imposed on such employer for each payroll period
 a contribution requirement in the amount determined under subsection (b).
 `(b) AMOUNT OF CONTRIBUTION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The amount of the contribution required by subsection (a)
 for any payroll period shall be equal to the applicable percentage of wages
 (50 percent of wages in the case of an employer described in section 352 of
 the HealthAmerica Act) paid during such period to employees with respect
 to whom the employer is required (without regard to the election under
 this section) to provide health insurance coverage under part B of title
 XXVII of the Public Health Service Act.
 `(2) APPLICABLE PERCENTAGE- For purposes of paragraph (1)--
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The applicable percentage for any calendar year shall be
 the percentage established under this paragraph for such calendar year by
 the Secretary of Health and Human Services at the lowest level consistent
 with maintaining a fair balance between public and private health insurance
 coverage for employees employed by employers not currently offering health
 insurance coverage.
 `(B) FAIR BALANCE- For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `fair balance'
 means, with respect to a year, a balance calculated based on the estimated
 cost of a fully implemented health insurance plan in that year, and would,
 if such plan were fully implemented and in effect, result in a ratio between
 coverage of such employees under the public health insurance plan under title
 XXI of the Social Security Act and under a health benefit plan under part
 B of title II of the Public Health Service Act that is not disproportionate.
 `(C) NOT DISPROPORTIONATE- For purposes of subparagraph (B), the term
 `not disproportionate' means a ratio of not greater than 65 percent to 35
 percent in comparing coverage under such public health insurance plan to
 such health benefit plans for a year.
 `(3) WAGES- For purposes of this subsection, the term `wages' has the meaning
 given such term by section 3121(a), without regard to any limitation by
 reference to the contribution and benefit base under section 230 of the
 Social Security Act.
 `(c) PAYROLL PERIOD- For purposes of this section, the term `payroll period'
 has the meaning given such term by section 3401(b).
 `(d) ADMINISTRATION- For purposes of this title, the contribution required
 by subsection (a) shall be treated in the same manner as the tax imposed
 by section 3111(a).'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- The table of chapters for subtitle C of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new item:
`Chapter 26. Contribution in lieu of employer coverage.'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 payroll periods beginning on or after the effective date of this Act.
TITLE VI--ASSURING PROVISION OF HEALTH BENEFITS TO ALL AMERICANS
SEC. 601. ESTABLISHMENT OF AMERICARE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 301 et seq.) is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new title:
`TITLE XXI--AMERICARE
`TABLE OF CONTENTS OF TITLE
`Sec. 2101. State requirements for participation in AmeriCare.
`Sec. 2102. Basic health benefits.
`Sec. 2103. Cost-sharing provisions.
`Sec. 2104. Supplemental payments.
`Sec. 2105. Health care providers.
`Sec. 2106. Quality and cost-effective care measures.
`Sec. 2107. Administration.
`Sec. 2108. Definitions and special rules.
`Sec. 2109. Payments to States.
`Sec. 2110. AmeriCare trust fund.
`STATE REQUIREMENTS FOR PARTICIPATION IN AMERICARE
 `SEC. 2101. (a) IN GENERAL- A State must--
 `(1) provide either for the establishment or designation of a single State
 agency (other than the agency established or designated under section 1902
 of this Act) to administer or supervise the administration of AmeriCare;
 `(2) provide basic health benefits described in section 2102, subject to
 cost-sharing provisions under section 2103--
 `(A) to any child or pregnant woman who is not otherwise covered under a
 nongovernmental health insurance policy, plan, or program beginning on the
 first day of the second full calendar year after the date of the enactment
 of this title;
 `(B) to any employee or family member with respect to whom an employer
 makes a contribution under title V of the HealthAmerica Act beginning
 on the first day of the second full calendar year after the date of the
 enactment of this title; and
 `(C) to any individual not covered under a health benefit plan under title
 II of such Act, beginning on the first day of the fifth full calendar year
 after the effective date described in subparagraph (A);
 `(3) provide at least monthly supplemental payments for premiums,
 deductibles, and other cost-sharing charged to individuals and families
 as provided under section 2104;
 `(4) provide a clear, simple explanation of the basic health benefits and
 supplemental payments available under AmeriCare through public announcements,
 mailings, and any other suitable means;
 `(5) provide enrollment in AmeriCare as described in subsection (b);
 `(6) to the extent required by the Secretary, provide basic health benefits
 or supplemental payments under AmeriCare to individuals who are--
 `(A) residents of the State but are absent therefrom,
 `(B) temporarily located in the State but are not permanent residents of
 any State; or
 `(C) formerly residents of the State but are currently United States citizens
 permanently residing in a country which has reciprocity agreements with
 the United States;
 `(7) provide to any individual covered under a health benefit plan under
 title II of the HealthAmerica Act, or any employer of such individual,
 the opportunity to purchase (or have purchased for such individual by the
 individual's employer) AmeriCare benefits described in section 2102(a)(7)
 at a separate actuarial premium rate determined by the State and subject
 to such other cost-sharing provisions as the plan under such title II
 provides for other benefits under such plan;
 `(8) provide for granting an opportunity for a fair hearing before the
 State agency to any individual whose claim for coverage under AmeriCare
 is denied or is not acted upon with reasonable promptness, under rules
 described in section 2107(b);
 `(9) meet the requirements of--
 `(A) paragraphs (4), (6), (7), (11), (19), (27), (45), (46), (48), and
 (49) of section 1902(a),
 `(B) subsections (b) and (g) of section 1902, and
 `(C) section 1907,
in the same manner as they apply to title XIX of this Act;
 `(10) meet the requirements of section 2105 and 2106(c);
 `(11) provide that AmeriCare shall be in effect in all political subdivisions
 of the State, and if administered by such subdivisions, be mandatory upon
 such subdivisions;
 `(12) provide for financial participation by the State equal to the
 non-Federal share of the expenditures under AmeriCare with respect to
 which payments under section 2109 are authorized by this title;
 `(13) meet any other requirements of this title; and
 `(14) in order to insure compliance with this title and to receive the
 Federal share under section 2109, submit to the Secretary a plan that
 meets the requirements of this subsection and is subject to rules similar
 to the rules of section 1904.
 `(b) ELIGIBILITY FOR BASIC HEALTH BENEFITS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to the provisions of paragraphs (2) and (6)
 of subsection (a), each individual not otherwise covered under a health
 benefit plan under title II of the HealthAmerica Act is entitled to basic
 health benefits under AmeriCare.
 `(2) PERIOD OF COVERAGE-
 `(A) GENERAL RULE- Upon notification of the approval of an application
 submitted by any individual (or a guardian or representative of such
 individual), AmeriCare coverage of the applicant begins on the date of
 such application.
 `(B) FAILURE TO MAKE TIMELY NOTIFICATION- If the State fails to notify the
 applicant of the applicant's ineligibility within 1 month of the date of
 the application, AmeriCare coverage shall apply during the period beginning
 on the date the individual submitted the application and ending on the
 date the State notifies such individual of such ineligibility.
 `(C) EMPLOYER'S CONTINUATION COVERAGE- Coverage under AmeriCare shall not
 apply for services provided during a period of hospitalization that begins
 prior to the date specified in subparagraph (A) or (B) with respect to an
 individual whose enrollment in an employer-based health plan terminated
 during such period of hospitalization.
 `(D) GUARANTEED MINIMUM ELIGIBILITY PERIOD- An individual who is determined
 in a month to be eligible for benefits under AmeriCare shall remain eligible
 for coverage for a period of not less than 1 year, unless otherwise covered
 under a health benefit plan under title II of the HealthAmerica Act.
 `(3) APPLICATION FORMS- Each State plan shall use a standard Federal
 application which shall be as simple in form as possible and understandable
 to the average individual and require attachment of such documentation as
 deemed necessary by the Secretary in order to insure eligibility.
 `(4) ENROLLMENT PROCESS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Each State shall provide for the receipt of AmeriCare
 applications--
 `(i) by mail; and
 `(ii) at locations broadly available to the general public, including
 locations that serve large numbers of indigent individuals (as defined
 and determined by the Secretary).
 `(B) EMPLOYER ASSISTANCE-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Any employer who contributes under title V of the
 HealthAmerica Act in lieu of providing a health benefit plan under title
 II of such Act shall notify the State of the identities of all employees
 of that State and shall provide such employees with AmeriCare applications.
 `(ii) CHANGE IN STATUS NOTIFICATION- Any employer shall notify the State of--
 `(I) the identities of any employees of that State who become eligible
 for AmeriCare as the result of changes in employment status; and
 `(II) the identities of any individuals (including members of the families
 of such individuals) who become covered under a health benefit plan under
 title II of the HealthAmerica Act and who were covered under AmeriCare in
 such State.
Each employer shall provide employees described in subclause (I) with
AmeriCare applications.
 `(iii) COLLECTION OF PREMIUMS-
 `(I) IN GENERAL- Each State may require that employers collect AmeriCare
 premiums on behalf of the employees of such employer.
 `(II) FAILURE TO PAY PREMIUMS- If a State plan includes the requirement
 described in subclause (I), the State shall notify the employee and the
 Secretary of the failure of the employer to make timely premium payments
 on behalf of the employee and the employee's family members as required
 under such plan. Such notification shall be provided not less than 30 days
 prior to any termination of coverage by the State as the result of such
 nonpayment of premiums.
 `(5) ENROLLMENT PERIODS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this paragraph, any individual may
 enroll in AmeriCare--
 `(i) during an annual open enrollment period (of not less than 1 month)
 established by the Secretary; and
 `(ii) during such other periods (including upon loss of coverage under
 a health benefit plan under title II of the HealthAmerica Act) as the
 Secretary shall require in regulations.
 `(B) FOR UNDER-POVERTY FAMILIES- In the case of an individual who is
 determined to be a member of an under-poverty family, the individual may
 enroll in AmeriCare at any time.
 `(C) PHASE-IN PERIODS- In the case of any individual who first becomes
 eligible for benefits under AmeriCare in a calendar year described in
 subsection (a)(2), the period of enrollment shall continue for the entire
 calendar year.
 `(6) AMERICARE CARD- The State shall issue an AmeriCare card which may
 be used for purposes of identification and processing of claims under
 AmeriCare. AmeriCare cards shall identify (as appropriate) if the individual
 is eligible for special eligibility benefits.
`BASIC HEALTH BENEFITS
 `SEC. 2102. (a) GENERAL BENEFITS- Benefits under this section with respect
 to all individuals shall include--
 `(1) inpatient and outpatient hospital care, except that treatment for a
 mental disorder is subject to the special limitations described in paragraph
 (6)(A);
 `(2) inpatient and outpatient physician services, except that psychotherapy
 or counseling for a mental disorder is subject to the special limitations
 described in paragraph (6)(B);
 `(3) diagnostic tests;
 `(4) prenatal care and well-baby care provided to children who are 1 year
 of age or younger;
 `(5) preventive services, limited to--
 `(A) well child care;
 `(B) pap smears; and
 `(C) mammograms; and
 `(6)(A) inpatient hospital care for a mental disorder for not less than 45
 days per year, except that days of partial hospitalization or residential
 care may be substituted for days of inpatient care according to a ratio
 established by the Secretary; and
 `(B) outpatient psychotherapy and counseling for a mental disorder for not
 less than 20 visits per year provided by a provider who is acting within
 the scope of State law and who--
 `(i) is a physician; or
 `(ii) meets the standards of subsection (e)(2) and is a duly licensed or
 certified clinical psychologist or a duly licensed or certified clinical
 social worker, a duly licensed or certified equivalent mental health
 professional, or a clinic or center providing duly licensed or certified
 mental health services; and
 `(7) items and services described in section 1905(a)(4)(B) (relating to
 early and periodic screening, diagnosis, and treatment for children under
 the age of 21).
 (b) EXCEPTIONS- Subsection (a) shall not be construed as requiring a plan
 for AmeriCare to include payment for--
 (1) items and services that are not medically necessary as determined
 under rules similar to rules under title XVIII of this Act;
 (2) routine physical examinations or preventive care (other than care and
 services described in paragraphs (4), (5), and (7) of subsection (a); or
 (3) experimental services and procedures as determined under rules similar
 to rules under title XVIII of this Act.
 (c) AMOUNT, SCOPE, AND DURATION OF CERTAIN BENEFITS- Except as provided in
 subsection (b), AmeriCare shall place no limits on the amount, scope, or
 duration of benefits described in paragraphs (1) through (3) of subsection
 (a).
 (d) AMOUNT, SCOPE, AND DURATION OF PREVENTIVE SERVICES- AmeriCare may
 limit the preventive services described in subsection (a)(5) pursuant to
 regulations of the Secretary specifying the content and periodicity of such
 care. The Secretary shall develop such regulations after consultation with
 appropriate medical experts.
 (e) MENTAL HEALTH CARE-
 (1) INPATIENT CARE- Inpatient hospital care described in subsection (a)(6)(A)
 shall include reimbursement for professional care provided to the individual
 while the individual is receiving such inpatient care, by a physician or
 duly licensed or certified clinical psychologist operating within the scope
 of practice of the physician or psychologist, as determined appropriate
 under State law. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to modify
 hospital practices with regard to scope of practice, admitting privileges,
 or billing arrangements.
 (2) STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PROVIDERS OF OUTPATIENT CARE- The Secretary shall
 establish standards that providers referred to in subsection (a)(6)(B)(ii)
 must meet to be eligible for payment under AmeriCare.
 `(f) ENHANCED BENEFITS- Basic health benefits under this section with respect
 to special eligibility individuals shall include medical assistance, not
 otherwise described in subsection (a), in the State's plan under title XIX
 of this Act, other than medical assistance described in paragraphs (4)(A),
 (7), (14), and (18) of section 1905(a).
 `(g) ADDITIONAL BENEFITS- As part of AmeriCare, a State may provide for
 the coverage of health benefits in addition to the basic health benefits
 described in the preceding subsections of this section, on the condition that
 the State shall not receive any Federal payment for such additional coverage.
`COST-SHARING PROVISIONS
 `SEC. 2103. (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b), each
 State that provides AmeriCare shall provide for cost-sharing as follows:
 `(1) UNDER-POVERTY FAMILIES- With respect to an individual who is a
 member of an under-poverty family, AmeriCare may not impose any premiums,
 deductibles or other cost-sharing on such individual.
 `(2) NEAR-POVERTY FAMILIES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to subparagraph (C), with respect to an individual
 who is a member of a near-poverty family that receives benefits under
 AmeriCare, the amount of the monthly AmeriCare premium for such individual
 shall be the applicable percentage of the monthly actuarial rate of
 such State.
 `(B) APPLICABLE PERCENTAGE- For the purposes of this paragraph, the term
 `applicable percentage' means 2 percentage points for each 10 percentage
 point bracket (or any portion thereof) such family's income equals or
 exceeds the income official poverty line (as defined by the Office of
 Management and Budget, and revised annually in accordance with section
 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981) applicable to a
 family of the size involved.
 `(C) LIMITATION- The aggregate amount of any AmeriCare premiums imposed
 on the family of the individual under this paragraph for any calendar year
 shall not exceed an amount equal to 3 percent of the family income.
 `(D) ADDITIONAL COST SHARING LIMITATION-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- With respect to any individual who is a member of a
 near-poverty family that receives benefits under AmeriCare, such individual
 shall, in addition to the AmeriCare premium described in this paragraph, pay
 the applicable percentage of any AmeriCare deductible or other cost-sharing.
 `(ii) APPLICABLE PERCENTAGE- For purposes of this subparagraph, the term
 `applicable percentage' means 10 percentage points for each 10 percentage
 point bracket (or any portion thereof) such family's income equals or
 exceeds 110 percent of such income official poverty line.
 `(3) OTHER FAMILIES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to subparagraph (C), with respect to an individual
 who is a member of a family that receives benefits under AmeriCare and
 whose income equals or exceeds an income level that is 200 percent of
 the income official poverty line (as described in paragraph (2)(B)), the
 amount of the monthly AmeriCare premium for such individual shall be the
 monthly actuarial rate of such State.
 `(B) LIMITATION- The aggregate amount of any AmeriCare premiums imposed
 on the family of the individual under this paragraph for any calendar year
 shall not exceed an amount equal to--
 `(i) in the case of a family whose income equals or exceeds 200 percent
 of such income official poverty line but is less than 250 percent of such
 income official poverty line, 3.5 percent of the family income,
 `(ii) in the case of a family whose income equals or exceeds 250 percent
 of such income official poverty line but is less than 325 percent of such
 income official poverty line, 4 percent of the family income, and
 `(ii) in the case of a family whose income equals or exceeds 325 percent
 of such income official poverty line but is less than 400 percent of such
 income official poverty line, 5 percent of the family income.
 `(C) With respect to any individual who is a member of a family described
 in this paragraph that receives benefits under AmeriCare, such individual
 shall, in addition to the AmeriCare premium described in this paragraph,
 pay 100 percent of any AmeriCare deductible or other cost-sharing.
 `(4) PHASE-IN COVERAGE FOR CHILDREN- With respect to any family described in
 this subsection, the children of which are the only individuals eligible
 for coverage under AmeriCare, the percentages described in paragraphs
 (2)(C) and (3)(B) shall be reduced by two-thirds.
 `(b) MONTHLY AMERICARE PREMIUM FOR EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), a State plan for
 AmeriCare shall require an individual whose employer makes a contribution
 under title V of the HealthAmerica Act in lieu of providing a health benefit
 plan under title II of such Act to pay an AmeriCare premium equal to the
 lesser of--
 `(A) coverage under AmeriCare for such individual for a period of one
 month; or
 `(B) 20 percent of the monthly actuarial rate of such State.
 `(2) With respect to any part-time employee who is a member of a family
 that receives benefits under AmeriCare and whose income equals or exceeds
 an income level that is 200 percent of the income official poverty line (as
 described in subsection (a)(2)(B)) and whose employer makes a contribution
 under title V of the HealthAmerica Act, the amount of any AmeriCare premium
 imposed on such employee shall be 50 percent of the amount determined
 under paragraph (1).
 `(c) DEFINITIONS AND SPECIAL RULES-
 `(1) MONTHLY ACTUARIAL RATE DEFINED-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this section, the term `monthly actuarial
 rate' means, with respect to AmeriCare in a plan year, the average monthly
 per enrollee amount that the State estimates, based on actuarial calculations
 conducted in conformity with requirements established by the Secretary,
 for enrollees under AmeriCare during the year, would be necessary to
 pay for the total benefits required under the State plan for AmeriCare
 (including administrative costs for the provision of such benefits and an
 appropriate amount for a contingency margin) during the year.
 `(B) SPECIAL RULE- With respect to any State plan for AmeriCare, for any
 period ending before the date described in section 2101(a)(2)(C), the
 monthly actuarial rate shall be calculated as if all eligible children in
 such State participate in such plan.
 `(2) APPLICATION ON BASIS OF FAMILY STATUS- For purposes of this section,
 a State plan for AmeriCare may provide for the AmeriCare premium to be
 applied, and the monthly actuarial rate to be computed--
 `(A) separately for individuals who have family members covered under
 AmeriCare and for individuals who do not have family members covered under
 the AmeriCare; and
 `(B) with respect to individuals with such covered family members,
 separately--
 `(i) for individuals who have a covered spouse and one or more covered
 children;
 `(ii) for individuals who have a covered spouse but no covered children; and
 `(iii) for individuals who do not have a covered spouse but have one or
 more covered children.
 `(3) ADJUSTMENT FOR COVERED SPOUSE WITH OTHER COVERAGE- For purposes of this
 section, if a State plan for AmeriCare charges an individual for a share
 of the AmeriCare premium, the plan shall establish a separate AmeriCare
 premium category (or categories) for family coverage in the case of a
 covered spouse who is receiving primary health insurance coverage from
 another health benefit plan. The AmeriCare premium for such categories
 shall be established based on actual or projected plan experience or
 according to a formula established by the Secretary, and shall take into
 account the reduction in health insurance costs resulting from such coverage.
 `(d) AMERICARE DEDUCTIBLE OR OTHER COST-SHARING-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this title, the term `AmeriCare deductible
 or other cost-sharing' means any deductible, copayment, or coinsurance
 established by the State plan for AmeriCare as determined under paragraphs
 (2) and (3) of this subsection.
 `(2) LIMITATION ON DEDUCTIBLES- A State plan for AmeriCare shall not
 provide, for benefits provided in any plan year, for a deductible amount
 that exceeds--
 `(A) with respect to benefits payable for items and services furnished to
 any individual with no family member enrolled under AmeriCare, for a plan
 year beginning in--
 `(i) the first calendar year that begins more than 1 year after the
 effective date of this title, $250; or
 `(ii) for a subsequent calendar year, the limitation of deductions specified
 in clause (i) for the previous calendar year increased by the percentage
 increase in the consumer price index for all urban consumers (United States
 city average, as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics) for the
 12-month period ending on September 30 of the preceding calendar year; and
 `(B) with respect to benefits payable for items and services furnished to
 any individual with a family member enrolled under AmeriCare, for a plan
 year beginning in--
 `(i) the first calendar year that begins more than 1 year after the
 effective date of this title, $250 per family member and $500 per family; or
 `(ii) for a subsequent calendar year, the limitation of deductions specified
 in clause (i) for the previous calendar year increased by the percentage
 increase in the consumer price index for all urban consumers (United
 States city average, as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics) for
 the 12-month period ending on September 30 of the preceding calendar year.
If the limitation of deductions computed under subparagraph (A)(ii) or
(B)(ii) is not a multiple of $10, it shall be rounded to the next highest
multiple of $10.
 `(3) LIMITATION ON COPAYMENTS AND COINSURANCE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to subparagraphs (B) through (D), a State plan
 for AmeriCare shall not--
 `(i) require the payment of any copayment or coinsurance for an item or
 service for which coverage is provided under section 2102(g) in an amount
 that exceeds 20 percent of the cost of the item or service; or
 `(ii) require the payment of any copayment or coinsurance for items
 and services required under section 2102 (other than subsection (g))
 to be furnished in a plan year for an individual after the individual
 has incurred out-of-pocket expenses under the plan that are equal to the
 out-of-pocket limit (as defined in subparagraph (E)(ii)).
 `(B) EXCEPTION FOR PREFERRED PROVIDERS- If a State plan for AmeriCare
 establishes reasonable classifications of participating and nonparticipating
 providers of items and services, the plan may require payments in excess
 of the amount permitted under subparagraph (A) in the case of items and
 services furnished by nonparticipating providers.
 `(C) EXCEPTION FOR IMPROPER UTILIZATION- A State plan for AmeriCare may
 provide for copayment or coinsurance in excess of the amount permitted
 under subparagraph (A) for any item or service that an individual obtains
 without complying with any reasonable procedures established by the plan
 to ensure the efficient and appropriate utilization of covered services.
 `(D) MENTAL HEALTH CARE- In the case of care provided under section
 2102(a)(6)(B), a State plan for AmeriCare shall not require payment of
 any copayment or coinsurance for an item or service for which coverage is
 required by this title in an amount that exceeds 50 percent of the cost
 of the item or service.
 `(E) LIMIT ON OUT-OF-POCKET EXPENSES-
 `(i) OUT-OF-POCKET EXPENSES DEFINED- For purposes of this paragraph, the
 term `out-of-pocket expenses' means, with respect to an individual in a
 plan year, amounts payable under AmeriCare as deductibles and coinsurance
 with respect to items and services provided under AmeriCare and furnished in
 the plan year on behalf of the individual and family covered under AmeriCare.
 `(ii) OUT-OF-POCKET LIMIT DEFINED- For purposes of this paragraph, the term
 `out-of-pocket limit' means for a plan year beginning in--
 `(I) the first calendar year that begins more than 1 year after the
 effective date of this title, $3,000; or
 `(II) for a subsequent calendar year, the out-of-pocket limit specified in
 subclause (I) for the previous calendar year increased by the percentage
 increase in the consumer price index for all urban consumers (United
 States city average, as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics) for
 the 12-month period ending on September 30 of the preceding calendar year.
If the out-of-pocket limit computed under subclause (II) is not a multiple
of $10, it shall be rounded to the next highest multiple of $10.
`SUPPLEMENTAL PAYMENTS
 `SEC. 2104. (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this section, an individual
 who is enrolled in a health benefit plan under title II of the HealthAmerica
 Act is not entitled to benefits under AmeriCare.
 `(b) ASSISTANCE FOR UNDER-POVERTY FAMILIES- In the case of an individual
 described in subsection (a) or an individual whose employer makes a
 contribution under title V of the HealthAmerica Act in lieu of providing
 a health benefit plan under title II of such Act, who is a member of an
 under-poverty family, AmeriCare shall provide for payment of--
 `(1) any premiums charged the individual for the applicable category of
 coverage under the employer's health benefit plan or AmeriCare in which
 the individual is enrolled, except that AmeriCare is not required to pay
 for such amount of a premium as exceeds the lowest premium which would
 be charged the individual for the applicable category of coverage under
 any health benefit plan offered the individual under title II of the
 HealthAmerica Act or AmeriCare, as the case may be; and
 `(2) deductibles and other cost-sharing imposed on the individual under
 the employer's health benefit plan or AmeriCare, but only with respect
 to the basic benefits required under such a plan under such title II or
 AmeriCare, as the case may be.
 `(c) ASSISTANCE FOR NEAR-POVERTY FAMILIES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In the case of an individual described in subsection (a)
 or an individual whose employer makes a contribution under title V of the
 HealthAmerica Act in lieu of providing a health benefit plan under title
 II of such Act, who is a member of a near-poverty family, AmeriCare shall
 provide for payment of the applicable premium percentage of any premiums
 charged the individual for the applicable category of coverage under the
 employer's health benefit plan or AmeriCare in which the individual is
 enrolled, except that AmeriCare is not required to pay for such amount
 of a premium as exceeds the lowest premium which would be charged the
 individual for the applicable category of coverage under any health benefit
 plan offered the individual under title II of the HealthAmerica Act or
 AmeriCare, as the case may be.
 `(2) APPLICABLE PREMIUM PERCENTAGE- For purposes of paragraph (1)(A),
 the term `applicable premium percentage' means 20 percent reduced (but
 not below 2 percent) by 2 percentage points for each 10 percentage point
 bracket (or portion thereof) such family's income equals or exceeds 110
 percent of the income official poverty line (as defined by the Office of
 Management and Budget, and revised annually in accordance with section
 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981) applicable to a
 family of the size involved.
 `(d) APPLICATION FOR ASSISTANCE- The State plan for AmeriCare shall use a
 standard Federal application which shall be as simple in form as possible
 and understandable to the average individual and require attachment
 of such documentation as deemed necessary by the Secretary in order to
 insure eligibility. Such application shall be available to any employee as
 provided in section 2107(b), may by filed at any time, and shall initiate
 coverage under the rules similar to the rules of subparagraphs (A) and
 (B) of section 2101(b)(2).
 `(e) PAYMENT OF PREMIUMS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The State plan shall provide that upon the initiation of
 coverage under this section, an individual shall receive advanced payment
 of supplemental premium payments for the calendar year from AmeriCare,
 or in the case of an individual enrolled in AmeriCare, a reduction in the
 annual AmeriCare premium.
 `(2) REQUIREMENT FOR FILING OF INCOME STATEMENT- In the case of a family
 which is receiving supplemental premium payments (or a reduction in AmeriCare
 premiums) under this section for any month in a year, a member of the family
 shall file with the State, by not later than April 15 of the following
 year, a statement that verifies the family's total family income for the
 taxable year ending during the previous year. Such a statement shall provide
 information necessary to determine the family income during the year and
 the number of family members in the family as of the last day of the year.
 `(3) RECONCILIATION OF PREMIUM ASSISTANCE BASED ON ACTUAL INCOME- Based
 on and using the income reported in the statement filed under paragraph
 (2) with respect to a family or individual, the State shall compute the
 amount of assistance that should have been provided under this section with
 respect to premiums for the family in the year involved. If the amount of
 such assistance computed is--
 `(A) greater than the amount of premium assistance provided, the State
 shall provide for payment (directly or through a credit against future
 premiums owed) to the family or individual involved of an amount equal to
 the amount of the deficit, or
 `(B) less than the amount of assistance provided, the State shall require
 the family or individual to pay (directly or through an increase in future
 premiums owed) to the State (to the credit of the program under this title)
 an amount equal to the amount of the excess payment.
 `(4) DISQUALIFICATION FOR FAILURE TO FILE- In the case of any family that
 is required to file an information statement under paragraph (2) in a year
 and that fails to file such a statement by the deadline specified in such
 paragraph, no member of the family shall be eligible for assistance under
 this section after May 1 of such year. The State shall waive the application
 of this paragraph if the family establishes, to the satisfaction of the
 State, good cause for the failure to file the statement on a timely basis.
 `(5) PENALTIES FOR FALSE INFORMATION- Any individual that provides false
 information in a statement under paragraph (2) is subject to a criminal
 penalty to the same extent as a criminal penalty may be imposed under section
 1128B(a) with respect to a person described in clause (ii) of such section.
 `(6) NOTICE OF REQUIREMENT- The State shall provide for written notice,
 in March of each year, of the requirement of paragraph (2) to each family
 which received assistance under this section in any month during the
 preceding year and to which such requirement applies.
 `(7) TRANSMITTAL OF INFORMATION- The Secretary of the Treasury shall transmit
 annually to the State such information relating to the total income of
 individuals for the taxable year ending in the previous year as may be
 necessary to verify the reconciliation of assistance under this subsection.
 `(f) PAYMENT OF OTHER COST-SHARING CLAIMS- The State plan shall provide
 that each individual subject to coverage under this section or the health
 care provider rendering the service shall file claims for the supplemental
 payment of deductibles and other cost-sharing imposed on such individual
 under the employer's health benefit plan or Americare, and the State shall
 make such payments at the option of the individual, to such individual or
 the health care provider.
`HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS
 `SEC. 2105. (a) USE OF MEDICARE PAYMENT RULES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c)--
 `(A) payment of benefits under the State plan for AmeriCare shall be made
 in the same amounts and on the same basis as payment may be made with
 respect to such benefits under title XVIII of this Act, and
 `(B) the provisions of sections 1814, 1815, 1833, 1834(c) (other than
 paragraphs (1)(A)(2)), 1835, 1842, 1848, 1886, 1887 shall apply to payment
 of benefits (and provision of services and charges thereon) under this
 title in the same manner as such provisions apply to benefits, services,
 and charges under title XVIII of this Act.
 `(2) IDENTIFICATION OF COMPARABLE PAYMENT METHODS FOR NEW SERVICES- In the
 case of services for which there is not a payment basis established under
 title XVIII of this Act, the Secretary shall establish payment rules that
 are similar to the payment rules for similar services under such title.
 `(3) ADJUSTMENT OF MEDICARE PAYMENT RATES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- For purposes of payment for inpatient hospital services,
 physicians' services, and other services under this title for which payment
 rates are established under title XVIII of this Act, the Secretary shall
 adjust the payment rates otherwise established under such title XVIII to take
 into account differences between the population served under that title and
 the population served by the State plan or enrolled under health benefit
 plans under title II of the HealthAmerica Act and such other appropriate
 factors (such as the special circumstances of hospitals the inpatients of
 which are predominantly children) as the Secretary deems appropriate.
 `(B) CONSULTATION- In making adjustments under subparagraph (A), the
 Secretary shall consult with the Prospective Payment Assessment Commission
 with respect to inpatient hospital services and with the Physician Payment
 Review Commission with respect to physicians' services.
 `(b) ALTERNATIVE METHODS- In issuing regulations to establish national
 reimbursement levels under this section, a State may provide for alternative
 payment systems that apply rates and methodologies that are not employed in
 the Federal guidelines described in subsection (a) if such State meets in
 the aggregate for all health care providers in such State the requirements
 for national reimbursement levels described in this section.
 `(c) PHASE-IN OF MEDICARE RATES- In lieu of the rates established under the
 rules described in subsection (a) or (b), the payment of benefits under the
 State plan for AmeriCare shall be made in the same amounts and on the same
 basis as payment may be made with respect to comparable medical assistance
 under title XIX of this Act, and the provisions of such title shall apply
 to payment of benefits (and provision of services and charges thereon)
 under this title in the same manner as such provisions apply to payment of
 comparable medical assistance under title XIX of this Act, except as follows:
 `(1) With respect to prenatal and child delivery benefits and infant
 care benefits--
 `(A) 50 percent of the rate differential beginning on the first day of
 the third full calendar year after the date of the enactment of this title.
 `(B) 100 percent of the rate differential beginning on the first day of
 the fourth full calendar year after the date of the enactment of this title.
 `(2) With respect to benefits described in section 2102(a)(7) and children
 outpatient and pediatric hospitalization benefits--
 `(A) 50 percent of the rate differential beginning on the first day of
 the fifth full calendar year after the date of the enactment of this title.
 `(B) 100 percent of the rate differential beginning on the first day of
 the sixth full calendar year after the date of the enactment of this title.
 `(3) With respect to all other benefits described in section 2102--
 `(A) 50 percent of the rate differential beginning on the first day of
 the seventh full calendar year after the date of the enactment of this title.
 `(B) 100 percent of the rate differential beginning on the first day of
 the eighth full calendar year after the date of the enactment of this title.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `rate differential' means with
respect to each benefit the difference between the reimbursement rate
as determined under subsection (a) or (b) and the reimbursement rate for
comparable medical assistance determined under subsection (c).
 `(d) NO JUDICIAL OR ADMINISTRATION REVIEW- There shall be no administrative
 or judicial review of the payment rates or rules under this section
 (including adjustments made under this section).
 `(e) UNIFORM CLAIMS AND BILLING FORM- Each State plan shall require the use
 of any Federal Uniform Claims and Billing Form developed by the Federal
 Health Expenditure Board under section 1180(b). Additional information
 may be required by the State plan if approved by the Secretary.
 `(f) UNIFORM IDENTIFICATION SYSTEM- Each State plan shall require each health
 care provider to use the identification number (if any) such provider uses
 in furnishing services for which payment is made under title XVIII of this
 Act or such other identification number specified by the Secretary.
 `(g) MULTI-STATE PROVIDERS- Each State plan shall allow health care
 providers participating in AmeriCare to participate under any other State
 plan for AmeriCare.
`QUALITY AND COST-EFFECTIVE CARE MEASURES
 `SEC. 2106. (a) APPLICATION OF PEER REVIEW ORGANIZATIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall ensure that the quality control and
 peer review activities described in section 1165 are conducted in the
 manner prescribed in such section.
 `(2) ADDITIONAL CRITERIA- The Administrator of the Agency for Health Care
 Policy and Research shall, on an annual basis, and as otherwise determined
 by the Secretary, advise the Secretary concerning the incorporation of
 patient outcome measures and practice parameters with respect to care and
 services furnished under this title in conjunction with the quality control
 and peer review activities described in paragraph (1) of this subsection.
 `(b) ALTERNATIVE DELIVERY AND ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEMS- A State may enter
 into a contract with a private entity or insurer or a State consortium
 (described under part D of title XI of this Act) to design and implement
 innovative systems of health care delivery and administrative systems that
 meet the standards of this title.
 `(c) MANAGED CARE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each State plan shall, as part of AmeriCare, provide for
 managed care plans in accordance with the requirements of this subsection.
 `(2) REQUIREMENTS- In providing for managed care plans under this subsection,
 a State shall ensure that--
 `(A) managed care plans are, to the extent practicable, selected through
 a competitive selection process;
 `(B) an eligible individual under this title has an option to enroll in any
 of the managed care plans selected by the State offered by any qualified
 health care provider (as defined and determined by the Secretary);
 `(C) an eligible individual who is receiving benefits under a managed care
 plan, may, not less often than annually, and without cause, exercise the
 option to discontinue receiving benefits under the managed care plan and
 receive coverage under an alternative plan under AmeriCare;
 `(D) any arrangements for incentive payments for physicians under a managed
 care plan must comply with requirements for the provision of quality care
 that the Secretary shall prescribe by regulation, taking into account,
 at a minimum, quality care guidelines under title XVIII of this Act; and
 `(E) a managed care plan shall provide for a system of rate assessment and
 adjustment that minimizes risk selection and segmentation (as defined and
 determined by the Secretary).
 `(3) REGULATIONS- The Secretary shall, not more than 180 days after the
 date of the enactment of this title, develop and establish by regulation,
 standards to ensure the quality of care under managed care plans under
 AmeriCare.
 `(e) COST CONTAINMENT DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall establish various demonstration
 projects to enable the States that submit an approved application, to
 implement cost management initiatives that promote the effective furnishing
 of care under this title. Such cost management initiatives shall include:
 `(A) Programs for contracting with community-based providers (as defined
 by the Secretary).
 `(B) Financial incentives to encourage the delivery of high quality, cost
 effective managed care under subsection (d) of this section, including
 enhanced payment rates to States with a high percentage of individuals
 enrolled in managed care plans, to the degree such enrollment results in
 reduced Federal expenditures.
 `(C) Case management, including case finding and the coordination of social
 and support services.
 `(D) Financial incentives to encourage outreach programs.
 `(E) Financial incentives to encourage the use of cost-effective services.
 `(F) Measures to encourage an awareness of the costs associated with medical
 care, including nominal copayments (as determined by the Secretary) and
 the advantages of preventive care and other cost-effective types of care.
The Secretary shall require each State that submits an approved application to
develop plans for conducting a demonstration project under this paragraph, in
accordance with requirements that the Secretary shall establish by regulation.
 `(2) ENHANCED COVERAGE DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS- The Secretary may by waiver
 provide that a State plan for AmeriCare may include as benefits under such
 plan payment for all or part of the cost of services described in section
 1915(c) (other than paragraph (3) thereof).
`ADMINISTRATION
 `SEC. 2107. (a) ADMINISTRATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (3), each State shall provide
 for administration of this title in the same manner as it provides for
 administration of the plan established under section 1902(a) of this Act. In
 the administration of this title, the State agency designated under section
 2101(a)(1) may delegate or contract with other public or private entities
 for the administration of the plan for AmeriCare.
 `(2) NOTIFICATION OF AMERICARE; APPLICATION PROCESSING- Any State that
 submits an application approved by the Secretary may contract with private
 entities or a State agency other than the agency designated under section
 2101(a)(1) to provide notification of AmeriCare to the residents of the State
 and process and review applications as required under section 2101(a)(6),
 and sections 2101(b) and 2104(d), respectively.
 `(3) ELECTION- A State, with such notice to the Secretary as the Secretary
 may require, may elect to have this title (insofar as it provides benefits
 with respect to individuals under section 2101(a)(2)) administered with
 respect to that State by the Secretary (or by such agent as the Secretary
 may designate). The Secretary may not accept such an election unless the
 State provides assurances satisfactory to the Secretary that the State
 will make payments to the Secretary toward the cost of implementing this
 title in the same amounts and at the same time as the State would make
 payments under this title but for the fact of such an election.
 `(4) MULTI-STATE PROGRAMS- Subject to the approval of the Secretary, any
 State may submit a joint plan for AmeriCare along with 1 or more other
 States to implement a regional administration of 1 plan for AmeriCare.
 `(5) DATA COLLECTION- Each State shall submit to the Secretary (in such
 form and manner as the Secretary determines) for collection and analysis--
 `(A) aggregate and per enrollee expenditures for each benefit covered under
 AmeriCare, including categorization by age, race, sex, and income level; and
 `(B) uniform claims collection (by computer) that provide data to assist
 in the assessment of the amount, type, quality, and location of health
 care furnished through AmeriCare.
 `(b) RIGHT TO REVIEW DENIED CLAIMS-
 `(1) NOTICE- Each State plan for AmeriCare shall require that the State
 agency shall provide an individual with written notice concerning the
 denial of a claim submitted by such individual. Such notice shall include
 the reasons for such denial.
 `(2) PROCESS FOR REVIEW- Each State plan for AmeriCare shall utilize a
 fair process for the timely review of claims denied under such plan.
 `(3) CLAIM FOR CARE NEEDED FOR LIFE-THREATENING ILLNESS- In cases in which
 the failure to provide health care promptly would be life-threatening
 or result in a risk of permanent disability, the AmeriCare beneficiary
 shall be entitled to a decision as to whether care will be provided
 under AmeriCare not later than 1 day after supplying the State with all
 requested information. In the event of a denial of coverage for such care,
 the beneficiary shall be entitled to an expedited review of an appeal of
 such denial within 5 days.
 `(4) APPEALS- Individuals shall be entitled to appeal the denial of a
 claim submitted by such individual to the State agency. The Secretary
 shall promulgate regulations establishing procedures to be utilized
 for appealing denials of claims under AmeriCare that are similar to the
 procedures established under title XVIII of this Act for appealing denials
 of claims under such title XVIII, including the right to a trial de novo.
 `(c) ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS-
 `(1) INCOME DETERMINATION- The Secretary and the States shall develop and
 promulgate by regulation a system for the certifying of income and the
 reporting of changes of income by individuals within an appropriate period
 of time for the purposes of determining the amount of any premiums and
 copayments under section 2103 and the eligibility for supplemental payments
 of deductibles and other cost-sharing under section 2104, including the
 use of the social security identification number in tracking such changes
 and verifying the information at least biannually. Such system shall include
 rules similar to the rules described in paragraphs (2) through (7) of section
 2104(e), including a method for making adjustments for any overpayments
 or underpayments of such premiums, copayments, and supplemental payments.
 `(2) NOTICE OF SUPPLEMENTAL PAYMENTS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of the
 Treasury, shall, by regulation, require that each employer--
 `(i) provide written notification forms to each employee outlining the
 availability of supplemental payments under AmeriCare in the State in
 which such employee resides as described in section 2104;
 `(ii) coordinate the distribution of standard Federal application forms
 described in section 2104(d) in conjunction with the provision of written
 notification under paragraph (1);
 `(iii) carry out the requirements of clauses (i) and (ii) without regard
 to the level of income of any employee.
 `(B) CONTENTS OF NOTICE- In promulgating the regulations described in
 subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall require the following information
 to be supplied in the written notification:
 `(i) Information relating to the availability of supplemental payments
 on the basis of family income and size (prepared to coordinate with tax
 filing units or census information).
 `(ii) Information concerning the amount of monthly supplemental payments.
 `(c) FAILURE TO PRESCRIBE REGULATIONS- The failure of the Secretary to
 prescribe any regulations under this title shall not relieve a State of
 any responsibility for complying with this title.
`DEFINITIONS AND SPECIAL RULES
 `SEC. 2108. (a) DEFINITIONS- As used in this title:
 `(1) CHILD- The term `child' means an individual who--
 `(A) is under 19 years of age;
 `(B) is under 23 years of age and a full-time student; or
 `(C) is, regardless of age, unmarried, dependent, and incapable of
 self-support as a result of a mental or physical disability that existed
 prior to the individual reaching 22 years of age.
 `(2) EMPLOYEE- The term `employee' has the meaning given such term under
 section 2713(a)(2) of the Public Health Service Act.
 `(3) EMPLOYER- The term `employer' has the meaning given such term under
 section 2713(a)(3) of the Public Health Service Act.
 `(4) FAMILY- The term `family' means an individual, and any spouse or
 child of an individual. In determining if any individual is a child of
 another individual, rules similar to the rules of section 152(b)(2) of
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall apply.
 `(5) HEALTH CARE PROVIDER- The term `health care provider' means any
 entity or person eligible to receive payments under titles XVIII and XIX
 of this Act.
 `(6) MANAGED CARE PLAN-
 `(A) MANAGED CARE PLAN- The term `managed care plan' means a health benefit
 plan (as defined in section 1182(1)--
 `(i) in which the insurer--
 `(I) utilizes explicit standards for the selection and recertification of
 participating providers;
 `(II) has organizational arrangements, established in accordance with
 regulations of the Secretary, for an ongoing quality assurance program
 for its health services, which program (aa) stresses health outcomes, and
 (bb) provides review by physicians and other health professionals of the
 process followed in the provision of health services; and
 `(III) contains significant incentives to use the participating providers
 and procedures provided for by the plan; and
 `(ii) which, if it limits coverage of services to those provided by
 participating providers or permits deductibles and coinsurance with respect
 to basic health services provided by persons who are not participating
 providers which are in excess of those permitted under health benefit plans--
 `(I) has a sufficient number and distribution of participating providers
 to assure that all covered items and services are (aa) available and
 accessible to each enrollee, within the area served by the plan, with
 reasonable promptness and in a manner which assures continuity, and (bb)
 when medically necessary, available and accessible twenty-four hours a
 day and seven days a week; and
 `(II) provides benefits for covered items and services not furnished by
 participating providers if the items and services are medically necessary and
 immediately required because of an unforeseen illness, injury, or condition.
 `(B) MANAGED CARE ENTITY- The term `managed care entity' means an insurer,
 health maintenance organization, preferred provider organization, dental
 plan organization, or other entity licensed to do business in a State,
 that markets managed care plans to groups or individuals or an employer,
 labor union, or other State licensed entity that provides managed care
 plans for its employees or members.
 `(C) PARTICIPATING PROVIDER- The term `participating provider' means a
 physician, hospital, health maintenance organization, pharmacy, laboratory,
 or other appropriately licensed provider of health care services or supplies,
 that has entered into an agreement with a managed care entity to provide
 such services or supplies to a patient enrolled in a managed care plan.
 `(D) UTILIZATION REVIEW- The term `utilization review' means a program
 for reviewing the necessity and appropriateness of health care services
 provided or proposed to be provided to a patient.
 `(7) MENTAL DISORDER- The term `mental disorder' has the same meaning given
 such term in the International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision,
 Clinical Modification.
 `(8) NEAR-POVERTY FAMILY- The term `near-poverty family' means a family
 whose income equals or exceeds 100 percent of the income official poverty
 line (as described in paragraph (1)), but is less than 200 percent of such
 income official poverty line.
 `(9) PART-TIME EMPLOYEE- The term `part-time employee' has the meaning
 given such term under section 2713(a)(2)(G) of the Public Health Service Act.
 `(10) SPECIAL ELIGIBILITY INDIVIDUALS- The term `special eligibility
 individual' means an individual who on the date of application for benefits
 under AmeriCare is--
 `(A) a member of an under-poverty family; or
 `(B) would have qualified for assistance under title IV of this Act or for
 medical assistance in the State of the individual's residence under title
 XIX of this Act (as in effect on the date of the enactment of this title);
 `(C) or both.
 `(11) STATE- The term `State' means the 50 States and the District of
 Columbia.
 `(12) UNDER-POVERTY FAMILY- The term `under-poverty family' means a family
 whose income is less than 100 percent of the income official poverty line
 (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget, and revised annually
 in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
 Act of 1981) applicable to a family of the size involved.
 `(b) DETERMINATIONS OF INCOME- For the purposes of this title--
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The term `income' means--
 `(A) adjusted gross income (as defined in section 62(a) of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986), determined without the application of paragraphs
 (6) and (7) of such section and without the application of section 162(l)
 of such Code, plus
 `(B) the amount of social security benefits (described in section 86(d)
 of such Code) which is not includable in gross income under section 86 of
 such Code.
 `(2) FAMILY INCOME- The term `family income' means, with respect to an
 individual, the sum of the income for the individual and all the other
 family members.
 `(3) FAMILY SIZE- The family size to be applied under this title, with
 respect to family income, is the number of individuals included in the
 family for purposes of coverage of basic health benefits under AmeriCare
 or under a health benefit plan (as the case may be).
 `(4) TIMING OF DETERMINATION- Income shall be determined in accordance
 with one of the following methods, at the option of the applicant, for
 coverage under this title:
 `(A) Multiplying by a factor of 4 the family income of the applicant for
 the 3-month period immediately preceding the month in which the application
 for coverage under this title is made.
 `(B) Determining the family income of the applicant for the month in which
 the application for such coverage is made.
`PAYMENT TO STATES
 `SEC. 2109. (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall pay to each State which
 has a plan approved under this title, for each quarter, beginning with
 the quarter commencing January 1, 1992--
 `(1) an amount equal to the Federal insurance assistance percentage of the
 total amount expended during such quarter for benefits and supplemental
 payments under the State plan; plus
 `(2) an amount equal to the administrative percentage of so much of the
 sums expended during such quarter as found necessary by the Secretary for
 the proper and efficient administration of the State plan.
 `(b) FEDERAL INSURANCE ASSISTANCE PERCENTAGE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of subsection (a)(1), the Federal insurance
 assistance percentage for any State shall be 100 percent less the State
 percentage.
 `(2) STATE PERCENTAGE- The State percentage for any State shall be equal to--
 `(A) the State percentage determined under section 1905(b), minus
 `(B) the applicable percentage of such State percentage.
 `(c) ADMINISTRATIVE PERCENTAGE- For purposes of subsection (a)(2), the
 administrative percentage for any State shall be--
 `(1) 50 percent, plus
 `(2) the applicable percentage of 50 percent.
 `(d) APPLICABLE PERCENTAGE- For purposes of this section, the term
 `applicable percentage' means in the case of each quarter in the following
 full calendar years beginning after the date of the enactment of this title,
 the following percentage:
Applicable
`Calendar year:
Percentage:
2nd
20
3rd
20
4th
15
5th
10
6th
5.
`AMERICARE TRUST FUND
 `SEC. 2110. (a) CREATION OF TRUST FUND- There is established in the Treasury
 of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `AmeriCare Trust Fund'
 (hereafter in this section referred to as the `Fund'), consisting of such
 gifts and bequests as may be made and such amounts as may be credited to
 the Fund under this section.
 `(b) TRANSFERS TO FUND-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- There are hereby appropriated to the Fund amounts equivalent
 to the net revenues received in the Treasury from--
 `(A) contributions required by section 3601 of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986,
 '(B) contributions made under section 2723(c)(2) of the Public Health
 Service Act,
 `(C) AmeriCare premiums (as defined in section 2104(6)) collected by
 employers on behalf of employees, and
 `(D) penalties collected under section 2732 of the Public Health Service Act.
 `(2) TRANSFERS BASED ON ESTIMATES- The amounts appropriated by subparagraphs
 (A), (B), and (C) shall be transferred from time to time (not less
 frequently than monthly) from the general fund in the Treasury to the Fund,
 such amounts to be determined on the basis of estimates by the Secretary
 of the Treasury of the amounts, specified in such subparagraphs, paid to
 or deposited into the Treasury; and proper adjustments shall be made in
 amounts subsequently transferred to the extent prior estimates were in
 excess of or were less than the amounts specified in such subparagraphs.
 `(c) APPROPRIATION OF ADDITIONAL SUMS- There are hereby authorized to be
 appropriated to the Fund such additional sums as may be required to make
 expenditures referred to in subsection (d).
 `(d) EXPENDITURES FROM FUND-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For the purpose of establishing a public program to provide
 health insurance coverage to be known as `AmeriCare', there are authorized
 and appropriated for each fiscal year from the Fund a sum sufficient to carry
 out the purpose of this title. The sums made available under this paragraph
 shall be used for making payments under section 2109 to States that have
 submitted, and had approved by the Secretary, a State plan for AmeriCare.
 `(2) ALLOCATIONS- Amounts described in subsection (b)(1) shall be allotted
 to each State under paragraph (1) on the basis of amounts received in the
 Fund with respect to employees residing in such State.
 `(3) ADDITIONAL FUNDS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES- Amounts in the Fund
 shall be available, as provided in appropriation Acts, for the expenses
 of the Health Care Financing Administration or any other Federal agency
 designated by the Secretary in administering the provisions of this title.
 `(e) INCORPORATION OF TRUST FUND PROVISIONS- The provisions of subsections
 (b) through (i) of section 1841, as in effect on the day before the date
 of the enactment of this title, shall apply to the Fund in the same manner
 as such provisions apply to the Federal Supplemental Medical Insurance
 Trust Fund, except that any reference to the Secretary of Health and Human
 Services or the Administrator of the Health Care Financing Administration
 shall be deemed a reference to the Secretary of Health and Human Services.'.
 (b) ADMINISTRATIVE AND JUDICIAL REVIEW OF CERTAIN ADMINISTRATIVE
 DETERMINATIONS- Section 1116 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1316)
 is amended--
 (1) by striking `or XIX' each place it appears and inserting `XIX, or
 XXI', and
 (2) by striking `or 1904' in subsection (a)(3) and inserting `1904,
 or 2101(a)(14)'.
 (c) UTILIZATION AND QUALITY CONTROL PEER REVIEW ORGANIZATIONS- Title XI
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1301 et seq.) is amended by adding
 at the end the following new section:
`REVIEW OF AMERICARE UNDER TITLE XXI
 `SEC. 1165. (a) REVIEW OF AMERICARE UNDER TITLE XXI- The Secretary shall
 provide, by regulation, for reviews of the programs under title XXI of
 this Act by utilization and quality control peer review organizations to
 be carried out in a similar manner as provided under this part for review
 of programs under title XVIII of this Act.
 `(b) CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES- In providing for the review of programs
 under title XXI of this Act as described in subsection (a), the Secretary
 shall, in consultation with recognized experts in the field of utilization
 and quality control review, ensure that, to the extent practicable, the
 reviews conducted under this section take into consideration clinical
 practice guidelines, (including guidelines for clinical practice and other
 standards developed by the Advisory Council for Health Care Policy, Research,
 and Evaluation pursuant to section 921 of the Public Health Service Act
 (42 U.S.C. 299b-1)).'.
 (d) CALCULATION OF FEDERAL INSURANCE ASSISTANCE PERCENTAGE APPLICABLE TO
 TITLE XXI-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of Health and Human Services (hereafter in
 this subsection referred to as the `Secretary'), in consultation with
 the chief executives of the States, shall develop recommendations for
 the calculation of a specific Federal insurance assistance percentage
 applicable to coverage furnished under title XXI of the Social Security Act
 (as added by this Act). In a recommended formula for the determination of
 such Federal insurance assistance percentage, the Secretary shall consider
 factors related to the following:
 (A) Levels of employment.
 (B) The population of individuals covered under AmeriCare under such
 title XXI.
 (C) Poverty levels.
 (D) Economic conditions.
 (E) The distribution of urban and rural populations.
 (F) Health indicators, such as infant mortality.
 (2) EMERGENCY FUND- The Secretary shall develop recommendations for the
 creation of an emergency fund to fund certain benefits under title XXI
 of the Social Security Act (as added by this Act) in the event a State
 experiences changes in economic conditions or other conditions that the
 Secretary determines to necessitate emergency funding.
 (3) REPORT- Upon completion of the recommendations described in paragraphs
 (1) and (2), the Secretary shall submit a report to the appropriate
 committees of the Congress that includes such recommendations.
 (e) REDUCTION IN PAYMENT FOR HOSPITALS RECEIVING A DISPROPORTIONATE SHARE
 ADJUSTMENT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary
 of Health and Human Services (hereafter in this subsection referred to as
 the `Secretary') shall for discharges occurring on or after the first day
 of the second full calendar year after the date of the enactment of this
 Act provide for a reduction in the payment of the disproportionate share
 adjustment percentage specified in section 1886(d)(5)(F) of the Social
 Security Act by 1/4 ( 1/2 , with respect to discharges occurring on or
 after the first day of the seventh such full calendar year) of what the
 payments to hospitals under such provision would have been but for the
 enactment of this subsection.
 (2) APPLICATION FOR EXCEPTION-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall, notwithstanding paragraph (1), provide
 for payment of the full disproportionate share adjustment percentage
 specified in section 1886(d)(5)(F) of the Social Security Act in any case
 in which a hospital applies to the Secretary for an exception from the
 reduction specified in paragraph (1) and it is determined by the Secretary
 that such hospital shall receive payments resulting from the enactment
 of title VI of this Act that are less than 200 percent of the amount of
 reduction of payments specified in paragraph (1) to such hospital.
 (B) DETERMINATION CRITERIA- In making a determination under subparagraph
 (A) the Secretary shall consider--
 (i) the number of patients served by a hospital that are underinsured
 or uninsured and the costs to the hospital of providing services to such
 patients in the first full calendar year after the date of the enactment
 of this Act; and
 (ii) such other relevant factors as the Secretary determines appropriate.
 (C) CONSIDERATION OF APPLICATION- In the case of a hospital that submits
 an application to the Secretary under this subsection at least 6 months
 before the first day of the second full calendar year after the date of
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall make a determination with
 regard to such application prior to such first day. With respect to all
 other applications submitted to the Secretary under this subsection the
 Secretary shall make a determination with respect to such application no
 later than 6 months after the date of receipt of such application.
 (D) APPEAL OF DETERMINATION- A hospital submitting an application to the
 Secretary under this subsection may appeal a determination by the Secretary
 to the Provider Reimbursement Review Board established under section 1878
 of the Social Security Act and the provisions of such section shall apply
 to any such appeal.
 (f) COORDINATION WITH TITLE XIX- Title XIX of the Social Security Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new section:
`COORDINATION WITH TITLE XXI
 `SEC. 1930. (a) The provision of medical assistance under this title shall
 not apply to any individual eligible for coverage under AmeriCare under
 title XXI of this Act.
 `(b) The Secretary shall, by regulation, provide for appropriate coordination
 of this title with title XXI of this Act.'.
 (g) INCREASE IN TITLE XIX CAP FOR TERRITORIES- Subsection (c) of section
 1108 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1308) is amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new flush sentence:
`Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, for each fiscal year beginning after
the date of the enactment of the HealthAmerica Act each amount under subclause
(C) of each clause of such sentence shall be increased by the AmeriCare
percentage increase for the preceding fiscal year. For purposes of the
preceding sentence, the AmeriCare percentage increase equals the percentage
increase (if any) in the total Federal program costs of title XXI of this
Act over such costs of title XIX of this Act (as determined in the fiscal
year preceding the effective date of the HealthAmerica Act) for all States.'.
 (h) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this title shall take effect on
 the first day of the second full calendar year beginning after the date
 of the enactment of this Act, without regard to whether regulations to
 implement such amendments are promulgated by such day.
TITLE VII--DEVELOPMENT OF HEALTH SERVICE CAPACITY
SEC. 701. GRANTS FOR EXPANSION OF AVAILABILITY OF PRIMARY CARE SERVICES.
 Part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254b et
 seq.) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subpart:
`Subpart V--Emergency Health Care Grant Programs
`SEC. 340D. GRANTS FOR EXPANSION OF AVAILABILITY OF PRIMARY CARE SERVICES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall award grants to eligible entities
 to expand the availability of comprehensive primary health services (as
 defined in section 330(b)(1)) in medically underserved areas.
 `(b) ELIGIBILITY- To be eligible to receive a grant under this section an
 entity shall--
 `(1) be--
 `(A) a migrant or community health center that receives assistance under
 section 329 or 330;
 `(B) be an entity that meets the requirements of section 329(a) of 330(a)
 for being a migrant or community health center, though not a recipient of
 a grant under either of such sections;
 `(C) be an entity that does not meet the requirements of section 329(a)
 or 330(a) for being a migrant or community health center, but that provides
 assurances satisfactory to the Secretary, including subsequent demonstrable
 evidence, that such entity will meet the requirements of either such
 section not later than 2 years after receiving a grant under this section; or
 `(D) be an entity that is eligible for a planning grant under sections
 329(c) or 330(c); and
 `(2) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time,
 in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
 `(c) REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS; PRIORITY-
 `(1) REVIEW- The Secretary shall develop a process and timetable for
 reviewing applications submitted under subsection (b)(2) to assure that,
 to the extent practicable, all amounts appropriated under this section
 are awarded not later than 180 days after the beginning of each fiscal year.
 `(2) PRIORITY- In awarding grants under this section, the Secretary shall
 give priority to--
 `(A) applicants that will use amounts received under such grant to provide
 services in areas with the greatest need for such services and in which the
 demand for such services can be expected to increase after the implementation
 of the HealthAmerica Act;
 `(B) applicants with a demonstrated ability to expand their operations in
 the most efficient manner;
 `(C) applicants that are migrant or community health centers receiving
 assistance under section 329 or 330, that propose to use amounts received
 under such grants to expand their operations, including expansion to
 new sites, to serve high impact areas (as defined in section 329(a)(5))
 or medically underserved populations (as defined in section 330(b)(3)),
 that are not currently being served;
 `(D) applicants that do not receive assistance under section 329 or section
 330, but that meet all requirements to receive funds under either of such
 sections, including, for the purpose of planning the establishment of new
 centers in areas of high need, entities eligible for planning grants under
 sections 329(c) and 330(c).
 `(3) SECONDARY PRIORITY- The Secretary shall give secondary priority in
 awarding grants under this section to applicants that--
 `(A) propose to meet the requirements of section 329 or 330 within 2 years
 after the date on which the application is submitted; and
 `(B) are serving or propose to serve such populations or areas that are
 not currently being served or have a proposal for such service pending.
 `(d) USE OF AMOUNTS- An entity receiving a grant under this section
 shall use amounts received under such grant to expand the availability of
 comprehensive primary health services (as defined in section 330(b)(1))
 in medically underserved or high impact areas.
 `(e) REIMBURSEMENT FROM OTHER SOURCES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- An entity receiving a grant under this section shall
 use any and all reimbursements received from other sources for services
 provided by such entity to--
 `(A) compensate for the unreimbursed costs of providing services to patients;
 `(B) expand the amounts and types of services furnished;
 `(C) serve additional patients or areas; or
 `(D) promote the recruitment, training, or retention of personnel.
 `(2) RETURN OF UNUSED AMOUNTS- Any amounts of the reimbursements referred
 to in paragraph (1) that are not used for the purposes described in
 such paragraph shall be returned to the Secretary, either directly or
 through adjustments in future grants, and shall be used by the Secretary
 to make additional or expanded grants under this section without regard
 to appropriations under subsection (h).
 `(f) FAILURE TO COMPLY-
 `(1) TERMINATION OF PAYMENTS- In the case of an entity that receives a grant
 under this section and fails to comply with the requirements of this section,
 the Secretary shall, after providing such entity with appropriate notice
 and an opportunity for a hearing, terminate the payment of amounts under
 such grant to such entity. The Secretary may terminate grants to entities
 that fail to demonstrate good faith efforts to meet the requirements of
 this section.
 `(2) ADDITIONAL POWERS OF THE SECRETARY- In addition to terminating payments
 under paragraph (1), the Secretary may--
 `(A) sell any property acquired by the entity with amounts received under
 the grant, or transfer such property to another entity receiving such a
 grant; and
 `(B) recoup (to the extent practicable) assistance previously provided to
 the entity under this section.
 `(3) INELIGIBILITY FOR FUTURE GRANTS- If an entity that is not in compliance
 with the requirements of this section may be granted a 2-year extension to
 meet such requirements. If at the end of such 2-year period the entity has
 failed to comply with such requirements, that entity shall be ineligible
 for further grants under this section.
 `(g) ADMINISTRATION- Not more than 10 percent of the amounts made available
 under this section may be used for administrative purposes. The costs of
 administration include--
 `(1) the cost of providing, either directly or by grant or contract to
 nonprofit private entities that represent the recipients of grants under
 this section, for the identification of areas and populations eligible
 for assistance under this section; and
 `(2) the provision of technical assistance to entities for the planning,
 development and operation of the service delivery systems supported under
 this section.
 `(h) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- There are authorized to be appropriated and there are
 appropriated to carry out this section--
 `(A) $58,000,000 for fiscal year 1992;
 `(B) $166,000,000 for fiscal year 1993;
 `(C) $266,000,000 for fiscal year 1994;
 `(D) $350,000,000 for fiscal year 1995; and
 `(E) $426,000,000 for fiscal year 1996.
 `(2) REPORT- Not later than September 30, 1995, the Secretary shall prepare
 and submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report concerning the
 need for further migrant and community health center primary care service
 capacity development and recommendations concerning the appropriate level
 of support needed for activities to address such capacity development.
 `(3) ADDITIONAL AMOUNTS- Amounts provided under this section shall be in
 addition to any amounts appropriated under sections 329 and 330.'.
TITLE VIII--EFFECTIVE DATE
SEC. 801. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Except as otherwise provided in this section, titles I
 and II of this Act shall take effect on January 1 of the second full year
 that begins after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) EXISTING PLANS- In the case of an employer that, on the date of the
 enactment of this Act, has in effect a health insurance plan covering the
 employees of such employer, the amendments made by titles I and II shall
 not apply to such employer until the date described in subsection (a)
 or the first day of the second full year after the date of the enactment
 of this Act, whichever is later.
 (c) STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS- In the case of an employer whose revenue is
 raised by a taxing authority, a health insurance plan covering the employees
 of such employer shall not be required to meet the requirements of part
 B of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act until the first day of
 the third full year after the date of the enactment of this Act. During
 the period beginning on the effective date prescribed under subsections
 (a) and (b) and ending on the first day of such third full plan year,
 employee participation in such plan shall be voluntary unless otherwise
 required by the plan.
SEC. 802. POLICY RESPECTING ADDITIONAL BENEFITS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- After the date of the enactment of this Act, no employer
 shall be required under part B of title XXVII of the Public Health Service
 Act to provide any health benefit in addition to the benefits required to
 be provided under section 2721(a) of such Act (as in effect on the date
 of the enactment of this Act) unless--
 (1) such additional health benefit is for a service that the AmeriCare plans
 (under title XXI of the Social Security Act) are required to cover; and
 (2) before the enactment of such requirement, the benefits and costs
 of requiring the provision of such additional health benefit have been
 analyzed and considered by Congress.
 (b) REPORTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- In carrying out subsection (a)(2) with respect to the
 consideration of a proposed additional health benefit, Congress shall
 request a report from the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy
 of Sciences or a public or nonprofit entity with expertise relating to
 health benefits. Any such report shall--
 (A) analyze and summarize such proposed additional health benefit; and
 (B) contain an estimate of the economic and health impacts of such proposed
 additional health benefit.
 (2) CONSULTATION- Any such report shall be prepared in consultation with
 interested members of the public and with individuals and entities having
 expertise with respect to such proposed additional health benefit.