S 687 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 687
To amend the Clean Water Act to expand authority for penalties for discharges
of oil and hazardous substances and to provide for an assessment of oil
spill contingency plans.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
April 4 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. BAUCUS (for himself, Mr. MITCHELL, and Mr. LAUTENBERG) introduced
the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on
Environment and Public Works
A BILL
To amend the Clean Water Act to expand authority for penalties for discharges
of oil and hazardous substances and to provide for an assessment of oil
spill contingency plans.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
 SECTION 1. PENALTIES- (a) Section 311(b)(6) of the Federal Water Pollution
 Control Act is amended by striking subparagraph (B) and inserting in lieu
 thereof the following:
 `(B) The Administrator, taking into account the gravity of the offense,
 and the standard of care manifested by the owner, operator, or person in
 charge, may commence a civil action against any such person subject to the
 penalty under subparagraph (A) of this paragraph to impose a penalty based
 on consideration of the size of the business of the owner or operator, the
 effect on the ability of the owner or operator to continue in business, the
 gravity of the violation, and the nature, extent, and degree of success of
 any efforts made by the owner, operator, or person in charge to minimize or
 mitigate the effects of such discharge of oil or hazardous substances. The
 amount of such penalty shall be not less than $50,000, but not exceeding an
 amount equal to $50 per barrel except where the United States can show that
 such discharge was the result of willful negligence or willful misconduct
 within the privity and knowledge of the owner, operator, or person in charge,
 such penalty shall be not less than $250,000, but not exceeding an amount
 equal to $250 per barrel. Each violation is a separate offense. Any action
 in this subparagraph may be brought in the district court of the United
 States for the district in which the defendant is located or resides or is
 doing business, and any such court shall have jurisdiction to assess such
 penalty. No action may be commenced under this clause where a penalty has
 been assessed under clause (A) of this paragraph.'.
 (b) Section 311(b)(6)(C) is amended by adding the words `oil or' following
 the words `for the discharge of' in the first sentence.
 SEC. 2. REPORT TO CONGRESS- Section 311(c) of the Federal Water Pollution
 Control Act is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new
 paragraph:
 `(3) The Administrator, in consultation with the Secretary of the
 Department in which the Coast Guard is operating, shall submit to the
 Congress within one year of the date of enactment of this paragraph and
 biennially thereafter a report assessing the adequacy of provisions of
 the National Contingency Plan, and any regulations pursuant to subsection
 (j), concerning discharges of oil. The report shall include a summary of
 discharges of oil prohibited pursuant to paragraph (b)(3) of this section,
 an assessment of the actions taken in response to such discharges, and any
 recommendations for needed improvements to existing statutes, regulations,
 or programs for preventing and responding to oil spills.'.