S 994 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 994
To amend the Clayton Act regarding interlocking directorates and officers.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
May 16 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. METZENBAUM (for himself, Mr. THURMOND, Mr. SIMON, Mr. DECONCINI,
Mr. LEAHY, and Mr. HATCH) introduced the following bill; which was read
twice and referred to the Committee on the Judiciary
A BILL
To amend the Clayton Act regarding interlocking directorates and officers.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That section 8 of the Clayton
 Act is amended to read as follows:
 `SEC. 8. (a)(1) No person at the same time shall be a director or officer
 of any two corporations, each of which has capital, surplus and undivided
 profits aggregating more than $10,000,000, as adjusted pursuant to this
 subsection, engaged in whole or in part in commerce, other than banks,
 banking associations, trust companies, and common carriers subject to
 subtitle IV of title 49, United States Code, if such corporations are by
 virtue of their business and location of operation, competitors so that
 the elimination of competition by agreement between them would constitute
 a violation of any of the provisions of any of the antitrust laws.
 `(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1), simultaneous service
 as a director or officer of two corporations shall not be prohibited by
 this section if (A) the aggregate competitive sales of either corporation
 are less than $1,000,000, as adjusted pursuant to this subsection, (B) the
 aggregate competitive sales of either corporation are less than 1 percent
 of that corporation's total sales, or (C) the aggregate competitive sales
 of each corporation are less than 4 percent of that corporation's total
 sales. For purposes of this paragraph, `aggregate competitive sales'
 means the aggregate gross revenues for all products and services sold by
 one corporation in competition with the other, determined on the basis
 of annual gross revenues for such products and services over the last
 completed fiscal year. For purposes of this section, `total sales' means
 the aggregate gross revenues for all products and services sold by one
 corporation over the last completed fiscal year.
 `(3) The eligibility of a director or officer under the provisions of
 paragraph (1) shall be determined by the capital, surplus and undivided
 profits of each corporation at the end of that corporation's last completed
 fiscal year.
 `(4) For purposes of this section, the term `officer' means an officer
 elected or chosen by the Board of Directors.
 `(5) For each fiscal year commencing after September 30, 1988, the
 $10,000,000 and $1,000,000 thresholds in this section shall be increased (or
 decreased) as of October 1 each year by an amount equal to the percentage
 increase (or decrease) in the Gross National Product, as published by the
 Department of Commerce or its successor, for the year then ended, over or
 under the level so established for the year ending September 30, 1987. At
 the beginning of October of each year, the Federal Trade Commission shall
 publish the adjusted amounts required by this paragraph.
 `(b) When any person elected or chosen as a director or officer of any
 corporation subject to the provisions of this Act is eligible at the time
 of his election or selection to act for such corporation in such capacity,
 his eligibility to act in such capacity shall not be affected and he shall
 not become or be deemed amenable to any of the provisions hereof by reason
 of any change in the capital, surplus and undivided profits, or affairs of
 such corporation from whatsoever cause, whether specifically excepted by
 any of the provisions hereof or not, until the expiration of one year from
 the date on which an event causing ineligibility occurred, or, if practical,
 the next regularly scheduled election of directors, whichever occurs first.'.