HR 5828 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5828
To amend the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 in order to reform private
enforcement of the Federal securities laws, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
August 11, 1992
Mr. TTAUZIN (for himself Mr. LENT, Mr. HALL, of Texas and Mr. RITTER)
introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the
Committee on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 in order to reform private
enforcement of the Federal securities laws, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION. 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Securities Private Enforcement Reform Act'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) excessive securities litigation is a serious burden on the national
 economy, diverting limited capital resources to less productive areas;
 (2) meritless lawsuits filed under Federal securities laws are making it
 harder for American companies to raise capital and attract experienced
 members to serve on their boards;
 (3) in the past 3 years, issuers of 1 out of every 12 stocks traded on
 the New York Stock Exchange have been sued for securities fraud;
 (4) in the securities fraud area, the civil justice system is being
 transformed into a nonmerit-based, unjust system, in which professional
 plaintiffs extract settlements from entrepreneurs, regardless of the merits
 of the cases filed;
 (5) such securities lawsuits impose additional costs on publicly traded
 companies, often force them into bankruptcy, and create job losses within
 the economy;
 (6) such securities fraud lawsuits stifle the development of future products
 by compelling investment bankers and accounting firms, whose assistance is
 essential for accessing capital markets, to resist working with new venture
 firms because of the higher risk of litigation associated with them; and
 (7) reform in the securities fraud laws are needed to ensure that the
 courts can properly hear and adjudicate securities fraud cases.
SEC. 3. PRIVATE CIVIL ACTION PROCEDURES.
 The Securities Exchange Act of 1934 is amended by inserting after section
 20A (15 U.S.C. 78u-1) the following new section:
`PRIVATE CIVIL ACTION PROCEDURES
 `SEC. 20B. (a) REQUIREMENT OF PROPORTIONATE LIABILITY-
 `(1) LIMITATION ON JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY- A defendant who is found
 liable for damages in an implied private action arising under a provision
 of this Act may be liable jointly and severally only if the trier of fact
 specifically determines that the defendant engaged in knowing securities
 fraud, as defined in paragraph (3).
 `(2) DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY- If the trier of fact does not find, pursuant
 to paragraph (1), that the defendant engaged in knowing securities fraud,
 the defendant's liability shall be determined as follows:
 `(A) The trier of fact shall determine the percentage of responsibility of
 the plaintiff, of each of the defendants and of each of the other persons
 or entities alleged by the parties to have caused or contributed to the harm
 alleged by the plaintiff. In determining the percentages of responsibility,
 the trier of fact shall consider both the nature of the conduct of each
 person and the nature and extent of the causal relationship between that
 conduct and the damage claimed by the plaintiff.
 `(B) For each defendant, the trier of fact shall then multiply the
 defendant's percentage of responsibility by the total amount of damage
 suffered by the plaintiff that was caused in whole or in part by that
 defendant and shall enter a verdict or judgment against the defendant
 in that amount. No defendant whose liability is determined under this
 subsection shall be jointly liable on any judgment entered against any
 other party to the action.
 `(C) Except where contractual relationship permits, no defendant whose
 liability is determined under this subsection shall have a right to recover
 from another defendant any portion of the judgment entered against him.
 `(3) DEFINITION- A defendant engages in `knowing securities fraud' only
 if he (A) makes a material representation with actual knowledge that the
 representation is false or omits to make a statement with actual knowledge
 that, as a result of the omission, one of his material representations
 is false; and (B) knows that other persons are likely to rely on that
 misrepresentation or omission. Reckless conduct by the defendant shall
 not constitute `knowing securities fraud'. The liability in damages, in
 any, of a defendant who acts in a reckless manner shall be determined in
 accordance with paragraph (3).
 `(4) COVERAGE OF PROVISION- This subsection relates only to the allocation
 of damages among defendants. Nothing herein shall affect the standards
 for liability under any implied private action arising under a provision
 of this Act.
 `(b) AWARDS OF ATTORNEY FEES-
 `(1) AUTHORITY TO AWARD FEES- If the court in any implied private action
 arising under this Act enters a final judgment against a party litigant on
 the basis of a motion to dismiss, motion for summary judgment, or a trial
 on the merits, the court shall, upon motion by the prevailing party, award
 the prevailing party reasonable fees and other expenses incurred by that
 party unless the court determines that the position of the losing party
 was substantially justified. If the court determines that the position
 of the losing party was substantially justified, it shall not award fees
 and other expenses to the prevailing party. The determination whether the
 position of the losing party was substantially justified shall be made on
 the basis of the record which is made in the civil action for which fees
 and other expenses are sought.
 `(2) APPLICATION FOR FEES- A party seeking an award of fees and other
 expenses shall, within 30 days of a final, nonappealable judgment in the
 action, submit to the court an application for fees and other expenses that
 verifies that the party is entitled to such an award under paragraph (1)
 and the amount sought, including an itemized statement from any attorney
 or expert witness representing or appearing on behalf of the party stating
 the actual time expended and the rate at which fees and other expenses
 are computed.
 `(3) ALLOCATION AND SIZE OF AWARD- The court, in its discretion, may--
 `(A) determine whether the amount to be awarded pursuant to this section
 shall be awarded against the unsuccessful party, its attorney, or both; and
 `(B) reduce the amount to be awarded pursuant to this section, or deny an
 award, to the extent that the prevailing party during the course of the
 proceedings engaged in conduct that unduly and unreasonably protracted
 the final resolution of the matter in controversy.
 `(4) AWARDS IN DISCOVERY PROCEEDINGS- In adjudicating any motion for an
 order compelling discovery or any motion for a protective order made in any
 implied private action arising under this Act, the court shall award the
 prevailing party reasonable fees and other expenses incurred by the party
 in bringing or defending against the motion, including reasonable attorney
 fees, unless the court finds that special circumstances make an award unjust.
 `(5) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this subsection--
 `(A) The term `fees and other expenses' includes the reasonable expenses of
 expert witnesses, the reasonable cost of any study, analysis, report, test,
 or project which is found by the court to be necessary for the preparation
 of the party's case, and reasonable attorney fees and expenses. The amount
 of fees awarded under this section shall be based upon prevailing market
 rates for the kind and quality of services furnished.
 `(B) The term `substantially justified' shall have the same meaning as in
 section 2412(d)(1) of title 28, United States Code.
 `(c) ABUSIVE PRACTICES.-
 `(1) SHARES OF AWARDS TO REPRESENTATIVE PLAINTIFFS- In any implied private
 action arising under this Act that is certified as a plaintiff class action
 pursuant to the Federal rules of civil procedures, the share of any final
 judgment or of any settlement that is awarded to any party serving as a
 representative plaintiff shall be calculated in the same manner as the
 shares of the final judgment or settlement awarded to all other members
 of the plaintiff class.
 `(2) REPRESENTATION OF CLASS ACTIONS- (A) In any implied private action
 arising under this Act that is certified as a plaintiff class action
 pursuant to the Federal rules of civil procedure, the plaintiff class may
 not be represented by (i) any attorney who directly or indirectly owned
 or otherwise had a beneficial interest in the securities that are the
 subject of the litigation, or (ii) any attorney affiliated with such an
 attorney. An attorney who knowingly violates this prohibition shall be
 barred from representing any party in any action arising under this Act
 or under the Securities Act of 1933.
 `(B) In any implied private action arising under this Act that is certified
 as a plaintiff class action, an attorney may not represent the plaintiff
 class if the attorney has paid or is obligated to pay a fee to a third
 party who assisted him in obtaining the representation of any party to
 the action. An attorney who knowingly violates this prohibition shall be
 barred from representing any party in any action arising under this Act
 or under the Securities Act of 1933.
 `(3) DISGORGED FUNDS- (A) Funds disgorged as a result of any action brought
 by the Commission in Federal court or of any Commission administrative
 action shall not be distributed as payment for attorney fees or expenses
 incurred by private parties seeking distribution of the disgorged funds.
 `(B) Any judgment awarded against any person in any implied private action
 arising under this Act shall be diminished by the amounts, if any, that
 such person has been or may be required to disgorge, pursuant to a court
 order obtained at the instance of the Commission in a proceeding brought
 under section 21(d) of this Act, or in connection with any Commission
 administrative action, relating to the same alleged misconduct.
 `(d) BURDEN OF PROOF- In any implied cause of action arising under this
 Act in which the plaintiff may recover money damages only if it proves
 that the defendant acted with scienter, the plaintiff must establish that
 element of his claim by clear and convincing evidence in order to establish
 a right to recover money damages.
 `(e) PLEADING REQUIREMENT- In any implied cause of action arising under
 this Act in which the plaintiff may recover money damages only if it proves
 that the defendant acted with scienter, the plaintiff must allege in its
 complaint facts suggesting that the defendant acted with that state of mind.
 `(f) AIDING AND ABETTING LIABILITY- In any implied cause of action arising
 under this Act in which the plaintiff may recover damages only if it proves
 that the defendant acted with scienter, a defendant may be held liable as an
 aider and abettor only if the plaintiff proves that the defendant knew that
 another party had violated a provision of this Act and that the defendant,
 acting with deliberate intent to deceive, manipulate, or defraud for the
 defendant's own direct pecuniary benefit, provided substantial assistance
 to the other party's violation. Direct pecuniary benefit shall not include
 ordinary compensation for services provided.'.
SEC. 4. TIME LIMITATION ON PRIVATE RIGHTS OF ACTION.
 The Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78a et seq.) is amended by
 adding at the end the following new section:
`SEC. 36. LIMITATION ON PRIVATE RIGHTS OF ACTION.
 `Except as otherwise provided in this Act, any private right of action
 arising from a violation of this Act shall be brought not later than the
 earlier of--
 `(1) 5 years after the date on which such violation occurred; or
 `(2) one year after the date on which the violation was discovered or
 should have been discovered through the exercise of reasonable diligence.'.
SEC. 5. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 The provisions of this Act shall apply to all actions commenced on or
 after the date of the enactment of this Act.