[Congressional Bills 109th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 3192 Introduced in House (IH)]

109th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 3192

 To provide for a paid family and medical leave insurance program, and 
 for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 June 30, 2005

Mr. Stark (for himself, Mr. George Miller of California, Mr. Owens, Ms. 
 Woolsey, and Mr. Lantos) introduced the following bill; which was 
 referred to the Committee on Education and the Workforce, and in 
 addition to the Committee on Ways and Means, for a period to be 
subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration 
 of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee 
 concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To provide for a paid family and medical leave insurance program, and 
 for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Paid Family and Medical Leave Act of 
2005''.

SEC. 2. CONGRESSIONAL FINDINGS.

 Congress finds the following:
 (1) Although family and medical leave laws have assisted 
 employees to balance the demands of the workplace with their 
 family responsibilities, more needs to be done to achieve the 
 goals of workforce stability and economic security.
 (2) All working Americans need to be able to take leave 
 from work, at times, to recover from their own serious illness, 
 to take care of a seriously ill family member, or to care for a 
 newborn or newly adopted child.
 (3) Americans who provide direct care for their family 
 members prevent the worsening of illnesses and promote strong 
 recovery. For example, when parents are able to attend to their 
 child in a hospital, the child's stay decreases by 31 percent, 
 enabling parents to make an expedited return to work.
 (4) For many workers, the promise of family or medical 
 leave is meaningless because they cannot afford to take leave 
 without pay.
 (5) Seventy-eight percent of eligible employees who need 
 but do not take family or medical leave do not take it because 
 they cannot afford to.
 (6) One in ten employees who receive less than full pay 
 while on leave are forced onto public assistance.
 (7) Forty-seven percent of women and men working in the 
 private sector lack any access to paid sick leave to help 
 compensate them if they become seriously ill. For those workers 
 who do have access to paid sick leave, few can use it to 
 receive a paycheck while caring for family members.
 (8) Family and medical leave benefits strengthen and 
 support the business sector through health care savings and 
 increased employee retention and productivity.
 (9) Organizations struggling to weather the current 
 economic downturn will have a bottom-line interest in 
 maintaining a stable workforce and retaining experienced 
 employees in whom they have already invested.
 (10) Demographic changes over the past few decades have 
 altered the face and needs of the work force. It is now common 
 for both parents to be in the workforce and many men and women 
 also find themselves as the primary caregiver for an elderly 
 spouse or parent.
 (11) Fifty-five percent of women with babies younger than 
 one are in the workforce, while 73 percent of women with 
 children one year or older are in the workforce.
 (12) Nearly two-thirds of Americans under the age of 60 
 expect to be responsible for the care of an elder relative in 
 the next ten years.

SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.

 (a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b) of this Act, 
the definitions provided by section 101 of the Family and Medical Leave 
Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 2611) shall apply for purposes of this Act.
 (b) Additional Definitions.--For purposes of this Act, the 
following additional definitions shall apply:
 (1) Board of trustees.--The term ``Board of Trustees'' 
 means the Board of Trustees of the Family and Medical Leave 
 Trust Fund.
 (2) Calendar quarter and quarter.--The terms ``calendar 
 quarter'' and ``quarter'' mean a period of three calendar 
 months ending on March 31, June 30, September 30, or December 
 31.
 (3) Covered agency.--The term ``covered agency'', when used 
 with respect to a State, means the State agency referred to in 
 paragraph (1) of section 101(b), or the Commissioner of the 
 Social Security Administration if the Commissioner is carrying 
 out the State Family and Medical Insurance Program in the State 
 under paragraph (2) of such section.
 (4) Commissioner.--The term ``Commissioner'' means the 
 Commissioner of the Social Security Administration.
 (5) Eligible employees.--Section 101(2) of the Family and 
 Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 2611(2)) shall not apply 
 for purposes of this Act, and the term ``eligible employee'' 
 means any of the following:
 (A) An employee who has earned at least $250 in 
 each of the four calendar quarters prior to filing an 
 application for benefits under this title.
 (B) A self-employed individual who has--
 (i) elected to participate in the program 
 under this title in accordance with such 
 regulations as the Secretary of Labor shall 
 prescribe;
 (ii) earned at least $250 of self-
 employment income in each of the four calendar 
 quarters prior to filing an application for 
 benefits under this title; and
 (iii) paid tax under section 1401(c) of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 with respect to 
 such self-employment income.
 (C) An employee who was covered by a voluntary 
 employer plan under section 101(d)(3) that has been 
 terminated or whose employer has eliminated such a 
 plan.
 (D) A Federal officer or employee covered under 
 subchapter V of chapter 63 of title 5, United States 
 Code.
 (6) Employer.--For purposes of this title, subparagraph (A) 
 of section 101(4) of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 
 (29 U.S.C. 2611(4)) shall be applied by substituting ``one'' 
 for ``50''.
 (7) Program.--The term ``Program'' means a State Family and 
 Medical Insurance Program established under section 101.
 (8) Managing trustee.--The term ``Managing Trustee'' means 
 the Managing Trustee of the the Board of Trustees of the Family 
 and Medical Leave Trust Fund.
 (9) Trust fund.--The term ``Trust Fund'' means the Family 
 and Medical Leave Trust Fund established under section 201.
 (10) Quarter of coverage.--The term ``quarter of coverage'' 
 means a period in which an individual earned wages or self-
 employment income of at least $250 in a quarter and paid taxes 
 on that income into the Family and Medical Leave Trust Fund.

 TITLE I--FAMILY AND MEDICAL INSURANCE PROGRAM

SEC. 101. ESTABLISHMENT.

 (a) Federal Program.--The Secretary of Labor shall establish a 
Family and Medical Insurance Program.
 (b) State Programs.--In carrying out the Federal Program, the 
Secretary may--
 (1) enter into a contract with a State under which--
 (A) the State agrees to establish, and provide the 
 benefits described under this title in that State 
 through a Family and Medical Insurance Program; and
 (B) the Secretary agrees to instruct the Managing 
 Trustee of the Family and Medical Leave Trust Fund, 
 established under section 201, to provide funds for 
 such benefits from the Fund; or
 (2) at the request of the Governor of a State, enter into 
 an interagency agreement with the Commissioner of the Social 
 Security Administration to establish, and provide the benefits 
 described under this title, through a State Family and Medical 
 Insurance Program directly in a State from funds provided to 
 the Commissioner by the managing trustee of the Fund.
 (c) State Application.--To be eligible to receive a contract under 
subsection (b)(1), a State shall submit an application to the Secretary 
at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the 
Secretary may require. At a minimum, the application shall include 
information identifying the State agency to carry out the State Family 
and Medical Insurance Program.

SEC. 102. BENEFITS.

 (a) Entitlement.--Under a State Family and Medical Insurance 
Program, an eligible employee shall be entitled to a family and medical 
insurance benefit for a total of 12 workweeks of leave during any 12 
month period for one or more of the following reasons, subject to a 
waiting period of 7 consecutive days during each family and medical 
insurance period where no benefits are payable within that period:
 (1) Because of the birth of a son or daughter of the 
 employee and in order to care for such a son or daughter.
 (2) Because of the placement of a son or daughter with the 
 employee for adoption or foster care.
 (3) In order to care for a child, parent, spouse, or other 
 persons who are members of the employee's household who have a 
 serious medical condition.
 (4) Because of a serious health condition that makes the 
 employee unable to perform the functions of the position of 
 such employee.
 (b) Benefit Amount.--
 (1) In general.--An eligible employee's paid family and 
 medical insurance benefit for any workday on which the employee 
 takes leave as described in subsection (a) shall be equal to 55 
 percent of the daily equivalent of the weekly basic earnings of 
 the eligible employee when the leave commenced, reduced by any 
 amount received by the eligible employee for the same period 
 from any other source for the reasons referred to in such 
 subparagraph.
 (2) Weekly basic earnings.--The weekly basic earnings of an 
 eligible employee for purposes of this title shall be equal to 
 the weekly basic earnings of the eligible employee up to the 
 maximum amount specified in this subsection for the calendar 
 year in which the leave commenced. Not later than November 1 
 preceding each calendar year, the Secretary shall publish in 
 the Federal Register the maximum weekly amount for leave for 
 such calendar year.
 (3) Calendar year 2008.--With respect to leave provided in 
 calendar year 2008, the maximum weekly amount under this 
 subparagraph shall be $1,350.
 (4) Subsequent calendar years.--With respect to leave 
 provided in any calendar year after 2008, the maximum weekly 
 basic earnings referred to in clause (ii) shall equal the 
 product of $1,350 and the quotient obtained by dividing--
 (A) the national average wage index (as defined in 
 section 209(k)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 409(k)(1))) for the second calendar year preceding the 
 calendar year for which the determination is made; by
 (B) the national average wage index (as so defined) 
 for calendar year 2008.
 (5) Rounding.--Each amount established under this 
 subsection for any calendar year shall be rounded to the 
 nearest $1, except that any amount so established that is a 
 multiple of $0.50 but not of $1 shall be rounded to the next 
 higher multiple of $1.
 (c) Application.--
 (1) In general.--To be eligible to receive a family and 
 medical insurance benefit under this title in a State, an 
 eligible employee shall submit an application to the covered 
 agency for the State at such time, in such manner, and 
 containing the information specified in paragraph (3) and such 
 additional information as the agency may require.
 (2) Irrevocability for self-employed individuals.--An 
 election by a self-employed individual to participate in the 
 Program shall be irrevocable.
 (3) Certification requirements.--The covered agency shall 
 require each of the following, as part of the application for 
 benefits under this section in connection with any leave:
 (A) A certification, submitted in a timely manner, 
 issued by the health care provider of the eligible 
 employee or of the child, spouse, parent, or member of 
 the employee's household, as appropriate, and meeting 
 the requirements of section 103(b) of the Family and 
 Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 2613(b)) in 
 connection with such leave.
 (B) In any case in which the covered agency has 
 reason to doubt the validity of the certification 
 provided under subparagraph (A), the Secretary may 
 require, at the expense of the covered agency, that the 
 eligible employee obtain the opinion of a second health 
 care provider designated or approved by the agency 
 concerning any information certified under subparagraph 
 (A).
 (C) In any case in which the second opinion 
 described in subparagraph (B) differs from the opinion 
 in the original certification provided under 
 subparagraph (A), the covered agency may require, at 
 the expense of the agency, that the employee obtain the 
 opinion of a third health care provider designated or 
 approved jointly by the agency and the employee 
 concerning the information certified under subparagraph 
 (A). The opinion of the third health care provider 
 concerning such information shall be considered to be 
 final and shall be binding on the agency and the 
 employee.
 (d) Payment of Benefits.--
 (1) Payment from trust fund.--Benefit payments required to 
 be made under this section shall be made only from the Trust 
 Fund.
 (2) Certification and payment.--On the final decision of a 
 covered agency or on the final judgment of any court of 
 competent jurisdiction pursuant to paragraph (3) that any 
 person is entitled to any payment under this section--
 (A) the covered agency shall certify to the 
 Managing Trustee of the Board of Trustees of the Trust 
 Fund the name and address of the person entitled to 
 receive such payment, the amount of such payment, and 
 the time at which such payment shall be made;
 (B) the Managing Trustee shall pay the certified 
 amount from the Trust Fund to the covered agency; and
 (C) the covered agency shall make the payment to 
 the person.
 (3) Review.--Any eligible employee dissatisfied with any 
 initial determination under this section shall be entitled to 
 reconsideration of the determination, and a hearing on the 
 determination, by the Secretary to the same extent as is 
 provided in section 205(b) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 405(b)) and to judicial review of the final decision 
 after such hearing as is provided in section 205(g) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 405(g)).
 (4) Withholding of certification.--In any case in which a 
 review of the covered agency's decision is or may be sought 
 under paragraph (3), the covered agency may withhold 
 certification of payment pending such review.
 (5) Other compensation.--Except as provided in section 105, 
 no employee shall be eligible to receive paid leave benefits 
 under this title for any period during which--
 (A) the employee is receiving worker's compensation 
 or compensation through unemployment insurance in 
 connection with the event for which the employee is 
 taking the leave; or
 (B) the employee is receiving paid leave benefits 
 from an employer under a voluntary employer plan 
 approved under paragraph (3).
 (e) Regulations.--The Secretary shall issue regulations to carry 
out this subsection, including the determination of benefits for leave 
taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule, or for leave taken 
by a part-time, seasonal, or intermittent employee.

SEC. 103. VOLUNTARY EMPLOYER PLAN.

 The Secretary shall approve any voluntary plan of an employer as 
to which the Secretary finds that there is at least one employee in 
employment and all of the following exist:
 (1) The rights afforded to the covered employees are equal 
 or greater than those provided in the relevant Program.
 (2) The plan has been made available to all of the 
 employees of the employer employed in the United States or to 
 all employees at any one distinct, separate establishment 
 maintained by the employer in the United States. As used in 
 this paragraph, the term ``employees'' includes those 
 individuals in partial or other forms of short-time employment 
 and employees not in employment as the Secretary shall 
 prescribe by regulation.
 (3) A majority of the employees of the employer employed in 
 the United States or a majority of the employees employed at 
 any one distinct, separate establishment maintained by the 
 employer in the United States have consented to the plan.
 (4) The plan provides for insurance to be issued by an 
 admitted disability insurer approved by the Secretary or 
 equivalent.
 (5) The employer has consented to the plan and has agreed 
 to make the payroll deductions required, if any, and transmit 
 the proceeds to the disability insurer, if any.
 (6) The plan provides for the inclusion of future 
 employees.
 (7) The plan will be in effect for a period of not less 
 than one year and, thereafter, continuously unless the 
 Secretary finds that the employer or a majority of its 
 employees employed in the United States or a majority of the 
 employees employed at any one distinct, separate establishment 
 maintained by the employer in the United States covered by the 
 plan have given notice of the termination of the plan and paid 
 a fee to the Secretary in such amount as the Secretary deems 
 adequate to cover family and medical insurance benefits under 
 this title to all employees of the employer for a period of at 
 least four calendar months, plus an amount to pay 
 administrative costs related to processing and paying such 
 benefits. The notice shall be filed in writing with the 
 Secretary and shall be effective only on the anniversary of the 
 effective date of the plan next following the filing of the 
 notice, but in any event not less than 30 days from the time of 
 the filing of the notice. Amounts received by the Secretary 
 under this subparagraph shall be deposited in the Trust Fund.
 (8) The amount of deductions from the wages of an employee 
 in effect for any plan shall not be increased on any date other 
 than on the date of an anniversary of the effective date of the 
 plan.

SEC. 104. ADDITIONAL BENEFITS.

 (a) Additional State Programs.--Any State that has a separate State 
family and medical insurance program or temporary disability program 
may pay an eligible employee benefits under such separate program in 
addition to the benefits under this title or use the separate State 
program to pay for additional weeks of benefits after the benefits 
available under this title are exhausted.
 (b) Additional Employer Benefits.--Nothing in this title disallows 
an employer who participates in a State Program from providing an 
employee additional benefits in addition to the family and medical 
insurance benefit provided under this title. These additional employer 
benefits shall not reduce the amount of the benefit that an employee 
collects from the family and medical insurance benefit under the State 
Program.
 (c) Collective Bargaining.--Nothing in this title shall interfere 
with the right of unions to bargain collectively with employers to 
provide benefits that are better than the family and medical insurance 
benefit provided under this title.

SEC. 105. PROHIBITED ACTS BY EMPLOYER.

 (a) Interference With Rights.--It shall be unlawful for any 
employer to interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of or the 
attempt to exercise, any right provided under this title.
 (b) Discrimination.--It shall be unlawful for any employer to 
discharge or in any other manner discriminate against any individual 
for opposing any practice made unlawful by this title.
 (c) Interference With Proceedings or Inquiries.--It shall be 
unlawful for any person to discharge or in any other manner 
discriminate against any individual because such individual--
 (1) has filed any charge, or has instituted or caused to be 
 instituted any proceeding, under or related to this title;
 (2) has given, or is about to give, any information in 
 connection with any inquiry or proceeding relating to any right 
 provided under this title; or
 (3) has testified, or is about to testify, in any inquiry 
 or proceeding relating to any right provided under this title.

SEC. 106. ENFORCEMENT.

 (a) Civil Action by Employees.--
 (1) Liability.--Any employer who violates section 106 shall 
 be liable to any eligible employee affected--
 (A) for damages equal to--
 (i) the amount of--
 (I) any wages, salary, employment 
 benefits, or other compensation denied 
 or lost to such employee by reason of 
 the violation; or
 (II) in a case in which wages, 
 salary, employment benefits, or other 
 compensation have not been denied or 
 lost to the employee, any actual 
 monetary losses sustained by the 
 employee as a direct result of the 
 violation, such as the cost of 
 providing care, up to a sum equal to 12 
 weeks of wages or salary for the 
 employee;
 (ii) the interest on the amount described 
 in clause (i) calculated at the prevailing 
 rate; and
 (iii) an additional amount as liquidated 
 damages equal to the sum of the amount 
 described in clause (i) and the interest 
 described in clause (ii), except that if an 
 employer who has violated section 106 proves to 
 the satisfaction of the court that the act or 
 omission which violated the such subsection was 
 in good faith and that the employer had 
 reasonable grounds for believing that the act 
 or omission was not a violation of such 
 subsection, such court may, in the discretion 
 of the court, reduce the amount of the 
 liability to the amount and interest determined 
 under clauses (i) and (ii), respectively; and
 (B) for such equitable relief as may be 
 appropriate, including employment, reinstatement, and 
 promotion.
 (2) Right of action.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B), an action to recover the damages or equitable 
 relief prescribed in paragraph (1) may be maintained 
 against any employer (including a public agency) in any 
 Federal or State court of competent jurisdiction by any 
 one or more employees for and on behalf of--
 (i) the employees; or
 (ii) the employees and other employees 
 similarly situated.
 (B) Limitation.--The right provided by subparagraph 
 (A) to bring an action by or on behalf of any employee 
 shall terminate--
 (i) on the filing of a complaint by the 
 Secretary in an action under subsection (b)(3) 
 in which restraint is sought of any further 
 delay in the payment of the amount described in 
 paragraph (1)(A) to such employee by an 
 employer responsible under paragraph (1) for 
 the payment; or
 (ii) on the filing of a complaint by the 
 Secretary in an action under paragraphs (1) or 
 (2) of subsection (b) in which a recovery is 
 sought of the damages described in paragraph 
 (1)(A) owing to an eligible employee by an 
 employer liable under paragraph (1),
 unless the action described in clauses (i) or (ii) is 
 dismissed without prejudice on motion of the Secretary.
 (3) Fees and costs.--The court in an action brought under 
 this subsection shall, in addition to any judgment awarded to 
 the plaintiff, allow a reasonable attorney's fee, reasonable 
 expert witness fees, and other costs of the action to be paid 
 by the defendant.
 (b) Actions by the Secretary.--
 (1) Administrative action.--The Secretary shall receive, 
 investigate, and attempt to resolve complaints of violations of 
 section 106 in the same manner that the Secretary receives, 
 investigates, and attempts to resolve complaints of violations 
 of sections 6 and 7 of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 
 U.S.C. 206 and 207).
 (2) Civil action.--
 (A) Right of action.--The Secretary may bring an 
 action in any court of competent jurisdiction to 
 recover the damages described in paragraph (1)(A).
 (B) Sums recovered.--Any sums recovered by the 
 Secretary pursuant to this paragraph shall be held in a 
 special deposit account and shall be paid, on order of 
 the Secretary, directly to each employee affected. Any 
 such sums not paid to an employee because of inability 
 to do so within a period of 3 years shall be deposited 
 into the Treasury of the United States as miscellaneous 
 receipts.
 (3) Action for injunction by the secretary.--The district 
 courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction, for cause 
 shown, in an action brought by the Secretary--
 (A) to restrain violations of prohibited acts 
 section, including the restraint of any withholding of 
 payment of wages, salary, employment benefits, or other 
 compensation, plus interest, found by the court to be 
 due to eligible employees; or
 (B) to award such other equitable relief as may be 
 appropriate, including employment, reinstatement, and 
 promotion.
 (4) Solicitor of labor.--The Solicitor of Labor may appear 
 for and represent the Secretary on any litigation brought under 
 this subsection.
 (c) Limitation.--
 (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), an action may be 
 brought under subsections (a) or (b) not later than 2 years 
 after the date of the last event constituting the alleged 
 violation for which the action is brought.
 (2) Willful violation.--In the case of such action brought 
 for a willful violation of section 106, such action may be 
 brought within 3 years of the date of the last event 
 constituting the alleged violation for which such action is 
 brought.
 (3) Commencement.--In determining when an action is 
 commenced for the purposes of this subsection, it shall be 
 considered to be commenced on the date when the complaint is 
 filed.
 (d) False Statements.--If the Secretary finds that any individual 
falsely certifies the medical condition of any person in order to 
obtain family and medical insurance benefits under this title with the 
intent to defraud, whether for the maker or for any other person, the 
Secretary shall assess a penalty against the individual in an amount up 
to 100 percent of the benefits paid as a result of the false 
certification. Penalties collected under this section shall be 
deposited in the Trust Fund, notwithstanding the provisions of title 
31, United States Code.
 (e) Investigative Authority.--
 (1) In general.--To ensure compliance with the provisions 
 of this title, or any regulation or order issued under this 
 title, the Secretary shall have, subject to paragraph (3), the 
 investigative authority provided under section 11(a) of the 
 Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 211(a)).
 (2) Obligation to keep and preserve records.--Any employer 
 shall make, keep, and preserve records pertaining to compliance 
 with this title in accordance with section 11(c) of the Fair 
 Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 211(c)) and in 
 accordance with regulations issued by the Secretary.
 (3) Required submissions generally limited to an annual 
 basis.--The Secretary shall not under the authority of this 
 subsection require any employer or any plan, fund, or program 
 to submit to the Secretary any books or records more than once 
 during any 12-month period, unless the Secretary has reasonable 
 cause to believe there may exist a violation of this title or 
 any regulation or order issued pursuant to this title, or is 
 investigating a charge pursuant to paragraph (2).
 (4) Subpoena power.--For the purposes of any investigation 
 provided for in this section, the Secretary shall have the 
 subpoena authority provided for under section 9 of the Fair 
 Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 209).

SEC. 107. CRIMINAL PENALTIES.

 Whoever--
 (1) makes or causes to be made any false statement in 
 support of an application for benefits under this title;
 (2) knowingly presents or causes to be presented any false 
 written or oral material statement in support of any claim for 
 benefits under this title;
 (3) knowingly solicits, receives, offers, pays, or accepts 
 any rebate, refund, commission, preference, patronage, 
 dividend, discount, or other consideration, whether in the form 
 of money or otherwise, as compensation or inducement for 
 soliciting a claimant to apply for benefits under this title, 
 except to the extent authorized by a law of the United States; 
 or
 (4) knowingly assists, abets, solicits, or conspires with 
 any person who engages in an act that is prohibited under 
 paragraph (1), (2), or (3),
shall be guilty of a felony and upon conviction shall be fined under 
title 18, United States Code, or imprisoned for not more than 5 years, 
or both.

SEC. 108. EDUCATION PROGRAMS.

 (a) Authority.--The Secretary shall develop and maintain a program 
of education concerning the paid family medical and insurance rights 
and benefits under this title.
 (b) Notice to Employers.--The Secretary shall provide to each 
employer of employees subject to this title a notice informing 
employees of their family and medical insurance rights and benefits 
under this title. The notice shall be given by every employer to each 
new employee hired, and to each employee leaving work under the allowed 
circumstances of this title.

SEC. 109. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 This title shall take effect on January 1, 2006, and shall apply to 
periods of leave that commence on or after January 1, 2008.

 TITLE II--FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE TRUST FUND

SEC. 201. ESTABLISHMENT.

 (a) In General.--There is created in the Treasury of the United 
States a trust fund to be known as the Family and Medical Leave Trust 
Fund. The Trust Fund shall consist of such amounts as may be deposited 
in, or appropriated to, such fund as provided in this section.
 (b) Appropriations to Trust Fund.--
 (1) Amounts appropriated.--There is appropriated to the 
 Trust Fund for fiscal year 2006 and each fiscal year 
 thereafter, out of any moneys in the Treasury not otherwise 
 appropriated, amounts equivalent to 100 percent of--
 (A) the taxes imposed by section 3111(c) of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 with respect to wages (as 
 defined in section 3121 of such Code) reported to the 
 Secretary of the Treasury or the Secretary's delegate 
 pursuant to subtitle F of such Code on or after January 
 1, 2006, as determined by the Secretary by applying the 
 applicable rates of tax under such sections to such 
 wages, which wages shall be certified by the 
 Commissioner of Social Security on the basis of the 
 records of wages established and maintained by the 
 Commissioner in accordance with such reports; and
 (B) the taxes imposed by section 1401(c) of such 
 Code with respect to self-employment income (as defined 
 in section 1402 of such Code) reported to the Secretary 
 of the Treasury or the Secretary's delegate on tax 
 returns under subtitle F of such Code, as determined by 
 the Secretary by applying the applicable rate of tax 
 under such section 1401(c) to such self-employment 
 income, which self-employment income shall be certified 
 by the Commissioner of Social Security on the basis of 
 the records of self-employment income established and 
 maintained by the Commissioner in accordance with such 
 returns.
 (2) Transfers.--Such appropriated amounts shall be 
 transferred from time to time from the general fund of the 
 Treasury to the Trust Fund. Such amounts shall be determined on 
 the basis of estimates by the Secretary of the Treasury of the 
 taxes, specified in paragraph (1), paid to or deposited into 
 the Treasury, and proper adjustments shall be made in amounts 
 subsequently transferred to the extent prior estimates were in 
 excess of or were less than such taxes.
 (3) Investments.--All amounts transferred to the Trust Fund 
 under paragraph (2) shall be invested by the Managing Trustee 
 referred to in section 202(c) in the same manner and to the 
 same extent as the other assets of the Trust Fund.

SEC. 202. BOARD OF TRUSTEES.

 (a) Establishment and Membership.--With respect to the Trust Fund, 
there is established a body to be known as the Board of Trustees of the 
Trust Fund which shall be composed of the Secretary of the Treasury, 
the Secretary of Labor, the Commissioner of Social Security, and the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services, all ex officio, and of two 
members of the public (both of whom may not be from the same political 
party), who shall be nominated by the President, by and with the advice 
and consent of the Senate.
 (b) Terms and Vacancies.--Members of the Board of Trustees shall 
serve for a period of 4 years. A member of the Board of Trustees 
nominated and confirmed as a member of the public to fill a vacancy 
occurring during a term shall be nominated and confirmed only for the 
remainder of such term. An individual nominated and confirmed as a 
member of the public may serve in such position after the expiration of 
such member's term until the earlier of the date on which the member's 
successor takes office or the date on which a report of the Board is 
first issued under paragraph (2) after the expiration of the member's 
term.
 (c) Managing Trustee and Secretary.--The Secretary of the Treasury 
shall be the Managing Trustee of the Board of Trustees. The Secretary 
of Labor shall serve as the Secretary of the Board of Trustees.
 (d) Basic Duties of the Board of Trustees.--The Board of Trustees 
shall meet not less frequently than once each calendar year. It shall 
be the duty of the Board of Trustees to--
 (1) hold the Trust Fund;
 (2) report to Congress not later than April 1 of each 
 year--
 (A) on the operation and status of the Trust Fund 
 during the fiscal year preceding the fiscal year in 
 which the report is made; and
 (B) on the expected operation and status of the 
 Trust Fund during the fiscal year in which the report 
 is made and the next two fiscal years;
 (3) report immediately to Congress whenever the Board is of 
 the opinion that the amount in the Trust Fund is unduly small; 
 and
 (4) review the general policies followed in managing the 
 Trust Fund, and recommend changes in such policies, including 
 necessary changes in the provisions of law that govern the way 
 in which the Trust Fund is to be managed.
 (e) Requirements Relating to Annual Report.--The report provided 
for in subsection (d)(2) shall include a statement of the assets of, 
and the disbursements made from, the Trust Fund during the fiscal year 
preceding the fiscal year in which the report is made, an estimate of 
the expected income to, and disbursements to be made from, the Trust 
Fund during the fiscal year in which the report is made and each of the 
next two fiscal years, and a statement of the actuarial status of the 
Trust Fund. Such report shall also include an actuarial opinion by an 
appropriate employee of the Department of Labor certifying that the 
techniques and methodologies used for the report are generally accepted 
within the actuarial profession and that the assumptions and cost 
estimates used for the report are reasonable. Such report shall be 
printed as a document of the House of Representatives for the session 
of the Congress to which the report is made.
 (f) Liability.--A person serving as a member of the Board of 
Trustees shall not be considered to be a fiduciary and shall not be 
personally liable for actions taken in such capacity with respect to 
the Trust Fund.

SEC. 203. INVESTMENT OF THE TRUST FUND.

 (a) Obligations.--It shall be the duty of the Managing Trustee to 
invest such portion of the Trust Fund as is not, in the trustee's 
judgment, required to meet current withdrawals. Such investments may be 
made only in interest-bearing obligations of the United States or in 
obligations guaranteed as to both principal and interest by the United 
States.
 (b) Acquisition.--The obligations referred to in subsection (a) may 
be acquired--
 (1) on original issue at the issue price; or
 (2) by purchase of outstanding obligations at the market 
 price.
 (c) Obligations Issued for Purchase by Trust Fund.--The purposes 
for which obligations of the United States may be issued under chapter 
31 of title 31, United States Code, are extended to authorize the 
issuance at par of public debt obligations for purchase by the Trust 
Fund. Such obligations issued for purchase by the Trust Fund shall have 
dates of maturity fixed with due regard for the needs of the Trust 
Fund. Such obligations shall bear interest at a rate equal to--
 (1) except as provided in paragraph (2), the average market 
 yield (computed by the Managing Trustee on the basis of market 
 quotations as of the end of the calendar month preceding the 
 date of such issue) on all marketable interest-bearing 
 obligations of the United States forming a part of the public 
 debt that are not due or callable until after the expiration of 
 four years from the end of such calendar month; or
 (2) in a case in which such average market yield is not a 
 multiple of 0.1 percent, the multiple of 0.1 percent nearest 
 such market yield.
 (d) Other Obligations.--The Managing Trustee may purchase interest-
bearing obligations of the United States that are not described in 
subsection (c) or obligations guaranteed as to both principal and 
interest by the United States, on original issue or at the market 
price, only in cases in which the trustee determines that the purchase 
of obligations described in this paragraph is in the public interest.
 (e) Disposition and Redemption of Obligations.--Any obligations 
acquired by the Trust Fund (except public debt obligations issued 
exclusively to the Trust Fund) may be sold by the Managing Trustee at 
the market price, and such public debt obligations may be redeemed at 
par plus accrued interest.
 (f) Crediting of Interest and Proceeds.--The interest on, and the 
proceeds from the sale or redemption of, any obligations held in the 
Trust Fund shall be credited to and form a part of the Trust Fund.

SEC. 204. PAYMENTS FROM TRUST FUND.

 The Managing Trustee shall pay from time to time from the Trust 
Fund such amounts as the Secretary of Labor certifies are necessary to 
make the payments provided for by section 102, and payments with 
respect to administrative expenses under section 205.

SEC. 205. ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES.

 (a) Availability of Trust Fund.--Under regulations that shall be 
prescribed by the Secretary of Labor, funds shall be made available 
from the Trust Fund in connection with the administration of this Act 
and the administration of related provisions of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 in the same manner and extent as funds are made available 
from the trust funds referred to in section 201(g) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 401(g)) in connection with the administration 
of the relevant provisions referred to in such section.
 (b) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
made available for expenditure, out of the Trust Fund, such amounts as 
Congress may determine to be appropriate to pay--
 (1) the costs of the part of the administration of this Act 
 for which the Secretary of Labor is responsible; and
 (2) the costs of carrying out the functions of the Social 
 Security Administration specified in section 232 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 432) (made applicable under subsection 
 (j)), that relate to the administration of provisions of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986, other than those costs excluded 
 under the regulations of the Secretary of Labor prescribed 
 pursuant to paragraph (1).
 (c) Gifts and Bequests.--The Managing Trustee may accept on behalf 
of the United States money gifts and bequests made unconditionally to 
the Trust Fund for the benefit of the Trust Fund or any activity 
financed through the Trust Fund and such gifts and bequests shall be 
deposited into the Trust Fund.
 (d) Processing of Tax Data.--Section 232 of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 432) shall apply with respect to this Act, in the same 
manner and to the same extent as such section applies with respect to 
title II of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 401 et seq.).

SEC. 206. AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1986.

 (a) Tax on Employers.--Section 3111 of such Code (relating to tax 
on employers) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(c) Family and Medical Insurance.--
 ``(1) In general.--In addition to the taxes imposed by 
 subsections (a) and (b), there is imposed on every employer an 
 excise tax, with respect to having individuals in such 
 employer's employ, equal to 0.4 percent of the wages paid by 
 such employer with respect to employment (as defined in section 
 3121(b)).
 ``(2) Exception for employers with equivalent or better 
 plan.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply with respect to a period 
 of employment by an employer during which the Secretary of 
 Labor determines the employer has in effect a plan which is 
 equivalent to or better than the Family and Medical Insurance 
 Program (established under the Family and Medical Insurance Act 
 of 2005). For purposes of the preceding sentence, the Secretary 
 of Labor shall prescribe such regulations as may be appropriate 
 or necessary, including regulations requiring documentation of 
 employer programs.''.
 (b) Self-Employment Tax.--Section 1401 of such Code is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(c) Family and Medical Insurance.--In addition to the taxes 
imposed by subsections (a) and (b), there is imposed for each taxable 
year, on the self-employment income of every individual who has elected 
to participate in the Family and Medical Insurance Program (established 
under the Family and Medical Insurance Act of 2005) a tax equal to 0.4 
percent of the amount of the self-employment income for such taxable 
year.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--
 (1) Employment taxes.--The amendments made by subsection 
 (a) shall apply to wages paid on or after January 1, 2006.
 (2) Self-employment tax.--The amendments made by subsection 
 (b) shall apply to taxable years beginning on or after January 
 1, 2006.
 <all>