HR 2687 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2687
To provide for the development of a water market in the United States,
and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
June 19, 1991
Mr. DANNEMEYER (for himself, Mr. CRANE, and Mr. ROHRABACHER) introduced
the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Interior and
Insular Affairs
A BILL
To provide for the development of a water market in the United States,
and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Abundant Water Act'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) water is a scarce and valuable commodity in interstate commerce;
 (2) Federal and State governments have failed to establish secure,
 enforceable, and freely transferable property rights in water resources
 and have substituted centralized political decision-making for a free
 market in water resources;
 (3)(A) the Bureau of Reclamation and similar State agencies allow farmers
 in certain Western states to obtain large quantities of water from
 taxpayer-subsidized projects at below market prices;
 (B) various Federal and State policies inhibit the farmers in these States
 from transferring water rights to other users;
 (C) these subsidies and transfer restrictions discourage water conservation
 among farmers and encourage them to apply an excessive amount of water on
 their crops and cause a number of environmental problems including soil
 leaching and salinization;
 (D) if farmers had secure, enforceable, and freely transferable private
 property rights to water, they would reduce their water consumption by
 employing more efficient irrigation techniques and changing their crop
 mix and profitability transfer their excess to other users;
 (E) since agriculture uses more than 2/3 of the water consumed in
 these States, even a small rise in agricultural water efficiency would
 substantially increase the availability of water for all other users;
 (4) the failure to establish secure, enforceable, and transferable private
 property rights to instream flows has discouraged the private provision
 of aesthetic, environmental, and recreation amenities; and
 (5) the failure to establish secure, enforceable, and transferable private
 property rights in groundwater has discouraged the conservation and efficient
 use of groundwater resources because the future value of groundwater is
 not captured solely by an individual who decides to conserve it but instead
 may be captured by anyone who decides to extract it.
 (b) PURPOSES- It is the purpose of this Act--
 (1) to remove all Federal legal and regulatory barriers that inhibit the
 operation of a free market in water rights;
 (2) to override State laws in certain Western States that (A) allow the
 private ownership only in the use of water but not water itself, and (B)
 prevent the owners of water rights from freely transferring them;
 (3) to authorize the private ownership of instream flows to promote the
 private provision of aesthetic, environmental, and recreational amenities;
 (4) to authorize the private ownership of groundwater resources and allow
 the unitization of aquifers to promote the conservation and efficient use
 of groundwater resources; and
 (5) to allow private business to construct and operate water projects as
 public utilities.
SEC. 3. SECRETARY.
 As used in this Act, the term `Secretary' means the Secretary of the
 Interior.
TITLE I--WATER CERTIFICATES
SEC. 101. WATER CERTIFICATES.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT OF SYSTEM- Not later than 1 year after the date of
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promulgate a book entry system
 for issuing, recording, and tracking water certificates. Such system
 shall specify all necessary procedures and requirements for an orderly
 and competitive functioning of a market for water certificates.
 (b) TYPES OF CERTIFICATES- The Secretary shall issue 4 types of water
 certificates, as follows:
 (1) Diversion and consumption of surface water.
 (2) Diversion and return of surface water.
 (3) Instream flow.
 (4) Groundwater.
 (c) TRANSFER RIGHTS- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the
 right to a diversion and consumptive use of surface water, diversion and
 return of surface water, instream flow, and groundwater may be transferred
 through the sale, exchange, donation, bequest, or other transfer of a water
 certificate. Such right is private property. Once a water certificate is
 issued, the right to the water represented by that certificate may not be
 lost by reason of failure to put such water right to a beneficial use.
 (d) THIRD PARTY IMPAIRMENT- The transfer of water rights shall be subject
 to reasonable restrictions under State law to protect the holders of
 water rights who are not party to a transfer from the impairment of their
 water rights.
 (e) QUANTIFICATION OF WATER RIGHTS- For the purposes of initiating the
 system established pursuant to subsection (a)--
 (1) the quantity and priority of surface water, whether diversion and
 consumption, diversion and return, or instream flow, to which a person
 held a right on the date of enactment of this Act shall be the quantity
 and priority of surface water eligible to be represented by the initial
 water certificate issued; and
 (2) the quantity of groundwater shall be determined in accordance with
 section 102.
 (f) CLAIMS TO WATER- The Secretary shall resolve all existing and potential
 claims to surface water, and the historical ranking of such claims, in
 accordance with the laws of the State in which such water is located;
 except that for claims made after the date of enactment of this Act--
 (1) each State shall recognize a water right in instream flows for aesthetic,
 environmental, navigational, or recreational purposes without regard to
 diversion or beneficial use; and
 (2) each State shall protect against third party impairment.
 (g) DEFINITIONS- (1) A water certificate under this Act is title to the
 use of water in the manner appropriate to that certificate.
 (2) As used in this title, the term `diversion' includes diversions of
 Federal and State irrigation project water.
SEC. 102. GROUNDWATER.
 (a) WATER CERTIFICATES- As part of the system promulgated pursuant to section
 3, the Secretary shall issue a water certificate for groundwater as follows:
 (1) a water certificate representing the proportional share of groundwater
 to the total amount of groundwater in an aquifer; and
 (2) a water certificate representing the proportional share of the average
 annual recharge flow into the basin, based on the proportional share of
 groundwater to the total amount of groundwater in an aquifer.
 (b) QUANTIFICATION- In determining the basis for distributing groundwater
 rights, the Secretary shall use one of the following methods in an aquifer
 determined appropriate by the Secretary:
 (1) The percentage which is the ratio that the average quantity of
 groundwater pumped by the party to receive a certificate from an aquifer
 during the 5-year period beginning on January 1, 1986, bears to the average
 total quantity of groundwater pumped by all parties to receive certificates
 in that aquifer during that period, as determined by the Secretary, shall be
 the share on which the water certificates issued pursuant to this section
 is based.
 (2) The percentage which is the proportion of the land of a groundwater
 user which overlies the aquifer to the total surface area of the land
 overlying that aquifer.
 (c) UNITIZATION- In accordance with regulations issued by the Secretary,
 holders of water certificates representing at least two-thirds of the total
 amount of water for an aquifer may elect to enter into a pooling arrangement
 for the management of the water in the entire aquifer. Such regulations
 shall consider the interests of those holders of water certificates who
 have not elected to participate in the pooling arrangement.
SEC. 103. REMOVAL OF DISCRETIONARY AUTHORITY OF BUREAU OF RECLAMATION TO
DISAPPROVE WATER RIGHTS TRANSFERS.
 Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary shall not have
 the authority to disapprove the transfer of a right to water from any
 Federal reclamation project.
SEC. 104. WATER CERTIFICATES HELD BY UNITED STATES.
 The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary or appropriate
 to record water certificates for the water rights held by the United States.
SEC. 105. DELIVERY OF WATER BY THE SECRETARY.
 To the extent practicable, the Secretary shall cooperate in delivering
 water transferred by a water certificate to appropriate locations. The
 Secretary may impose a fee for any additional cost incurred by the Secretary
 in delivering any such water so transferred.
SEC. 106. APPLICATION.
 (a) COVERED STATES- This title shall apply--
 (1) with respect to surface water, in the States of Arizona, California,
 Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah, Washington,
 and Wyoming; and
 (2) with respect to groundwater throughout the United States, including the
 several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of the Northern
 Mariana Islands, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, American Samoa, Guam,
 and the United States Virgin Islands.
 (b) ELECTION- Any State, territory, or possession of the United States
 not specified in subsection (a)(1) may make an election to be covered by
 this title with respect to surface water. Such election shall be made in
 the manner specified by the Secretary.
TITLE II--WATER UTILITY CORPORATIONS
SEC. 201. PREREQUISITE FOR CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- No person may construct, operate, or enlarge any water
 project authorized to be constructed by or through the Secretary of the
 Interior without first having obtained a certificate of authority from
 the Secretary authorizing such construction, operation, or enlargement.
 (b) PERSON- For the purpose of this title, the term `person' includes the
 Bureau of Reclamation of the Department of the Interior.
SEC. 202. CERTIFICATE OF AUTHORITY.
 Any person may apply to the Secretary for a certificate of authority to
 construct and operate a water project or to extend or enlarge a water project
 which has been authorized under Federal law. If the Secretary determines in
 writing, after notice and opportunity for a hearing, that the application
 is complete, the approval of the application is in the public interest, and
 that the applicant has complied with the provisions of this title, he shall
 approve the application, with or without modification. If the application is
 approved, the operator shall construct the water project. Upon completion
 of construction of the water project, the water project shall be kept at
 all times open for use by the public and made accessible to the public,
 upon payment of user fees, if any, established by the operator; except
 that portions of the water project may be partially or completely closed,
 temporarily, with the concurrence of the Secretary, to protect the public
 safety or for reasonable construction or maintenance procedures.
SEC. 203. APPLICATION.
 The Secretary may charge a reasonable application fee to cover the costs
 of processing, reviewing, and approving or denying the application. The
 application for a certificate of authority shall contain the following
 material and information:
 (1) The geographic area to be served by the water project and a topographic
 map indicating the area subject to the water project.
 (2) A list of the property owners whose property will be affected by the
 water project.
 (3) The method by which the operator will secure all property for the water
 project, including a description of the nature of the interest in the lands
 to be acquired, which shall provide, at a minimum, for permanent dedication
 for project purposes, except that in cases in which the Secretary would
 not have authority to condemn land because of the identity of the owner,
 the interest to be acquired shall be of the same type and duration as that
 which the Secretary would obtain under the circumstances.
 (4) The comprehensive plan or plans for the construction of the water
 project and an analysis which shows that the project conforms to these
 comprehensive plans. To the extent that the water project conforms to
 such plans, the fact that the operator is a public service corporation,
 as opposed to the United States, shall not affect the construction and
 operation of the water project.
 (5) The operator's plan for financing the proposed construction or
 enlargement of the water project, including proposed fees to be charged for
 use of the water project, projected amounts to be collected from such fees,
 anticipated use, and detailed plans for distribution of funds, including
 the priority in which necessary expenditures will be made.
 (6) The operator's plan for operation of the proposed water project or
 enlargement thereof.
 (7) A list of all permits and approval required for construction of the
 water project from local, State, or Federal agencies and a schedule for
 securing such approvals;
 (8) An overall description of the project and the project design.
 (9) A list of public utility facilities to be relocated and plans for such
 relocations of such facilities.
 (10) A certificate of the operator--
 (A) that the water project will be designed and constructed to meet standards
 of the Secretary and substantially in accordance with a proposed timetable
 which is agreeable to the Secretary, and
 (B) that the operator will enter into a design, review, and inspection
 agreement with the Secretary which shall provide that the Secretary
 shall authorize construction upon review and approval of the plans and
 specifications for the water project, and that it shall inspect periodically
 the progress of the construction work to ensure its compliance with the
 standards of the Secretary; and
 (11) Completion and performance bonds in a form and amounts satisfactory
 to the Secretary, which amounts shall be set after consultation with
 the Secretary.
SEC. 204. EMINENT DOMAIN AUTHORITY.
 In carrying out a water project approved under this Act, the operator
 shall have the authority to condemn land in accordance with the Act of
 August 1, 1888 (Ch. 728, 25 Stat. 357; 40 U.S.C. 257) as if the operator
 were a Federal entity.
SEC. 205. DUTIES OF THE SECRETARY.
 The Secretary shall have the power, and be charged with the duties of
 reviewing and approving or denying the application, of supervising and
 controlling the operator in the performance of its duties under this title,
 and of correcting any abuse in the performance of the operator's public
 duties. The Secretary shall require from the operator a verified report
 describing the nature of its contractual and other relationships with
 individuals or entities contracting with the operator for the provision
 of significant financial, construction, or maintenance services. The
 Secretary shall review the report and such other materials as it shall
 deem necessary for the purpose of determining improper or excessive costs,
 and shall exclude from the operator's costs any amounts which it finds
 are improper or excessive. The Secretary also shall have the duty and
 authority to approve or revise the fees charged by the operator. Initial
 fees shall be approved if they appear reasonable to the user in relation
 to the benefit obtained, not likely to materially discourage use of the
 water project, and provide the operator no more than a reasonable rate of
 return as determined by the Secretary. Thereafter, the Secretary, upon
 application, complaint, or its own initiative, and after investigation,
 may order substituted for any fee being charged by the operator, a fee
 which is set at a level which is reasonable to the user in relation to
 the benefit obtained and which will not materially discourage use of the
 project by the public and which will provide the operator no more than a
 reasonable return as determined by the Secretary.
SEC. 206. POWERS AND DUTIES OF OPERATOR.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The operator shall have the authority to operate the water
 project and charge fees for the use thereof, and shall pledge any revenue
 net of operational expenses realized from fees charged for the use of the
 water project in order to secure repayment of any obligations incurred
 for the construction, enlargement, or operation of such water project. The
 debts or obligations of the operator shall be limited to an amount not to
 exceed the cost of construction plus an amount for issuance cost and other
 financing expenses, and a reasonable amount for reserve funds. The Secretary
 shall not obligate the full faith and credit of the United States on any
 financing of the operator and assumption of operation of the project shall
 not obligate the Secretary to pay any obligation of the operator whether
 secured or otherwise, from sources other than fee revenue. In operating
 the water project, the operator may, with the consent of the Secretary,
 make and enforce reasonable regulations.
 (b) DUTIES- The operator shall have the following duties:
 (1) It shall file and maintain at all times with the Secretary an accurate
 schedule of fees charged to the public for use of all or any portion of
 the water project and it shall also file and maintain a statement that
 such fees will apply uniformly to all users within any such reasonable
 classification as the operator may elect to implement.
 (2) It shall construct and maintain the water project for anticipated use
 according to appropriate standards of the Secretary for water projects
 operated and maintained by the Secretary, and enlarge or expand the project
 when unsatisfied demand for use of the project makes it economically
 feasible to do so. The operator shall agree with the Secretary for
 inspection of construction work by the Secretary at appropriate times
 during any construction or enlargement.
SEC. 207. INSPECTION AGREEMENT.
 If approval of the project and project design is granted by the Secretary,
 the Secretary shall thereafter enter into a comprehensive agreement with
 the applicant which provides, among other things--
 (1) that the Secretary shall review and approve plans and specifications
 for the project if they conform to Federal practices;
 (2) that the Secretary will inspect and approve construction of the project
 if it conforms to the plans and specifications or Federal construction
 and engineering standards;
 (3) that the Secretary will, throughout the life of the project, monitor
 the maintenance practices of the operator and take such actions as are
 appropriate to ensure the performance of maintenance obligations; and
 (4) that the Secretary shall be reimbursed its direct project costs,
 by the operator, for the services performed by the Secretary.
The agreement shall also provide, among other things, that the operator will
establish and fund accounts which shall ensure that funds are available
to meet the obligations of the operator; including reasonable reserves
for contingencies and maintenance replacement activities. The approval of
plans and specifications, and construction may be undertaken in phases,
but no construction may commence until approval of plans including that
phase of construction. The services for which the Secretary shall be
reimbursed include project development costs, such as those attendant to
preparation and environmental impact statements, which are necessary for the
construction of the project by a private operator but have been performed by
the Secretary. The agreement may include a provision that the Secretary will
perform services necessary for project development on behalf of the operator,
and in such a case, the Secretary shall be fully reimbursed by the operator
for his direct costs.
SEC. 208. INSURANCE; SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY.
 Any operator who constructs, operates, or enlarges a water project pursuant
 to this title shall secure and maintain a policy or policies of public
 liability insurance in form and amount satisfactory to the Secretary and
 sufficient to insure coverage of tort liability to the public and employees,
 and to enable the continued operation of the water project. Proofs of
 coverage and copies of policies shall be filed with the Secretary. Nothing
 in this title shall be construed as or deemed a waiver of the sovereign
 immunity of the United States with respect to its participation or approval
 of all or any part of the project application or operation.
SEC. 209. LOCAL CONSULTATION.
 (a) INFORMATION- Prior to the issuance of a certificate of authority by the
 Secretary and contemporaneously with the filing of any application materials
 with the Secretary, the applicant shall provide the local governing body of
 each jurisdiction affected by the water project, as defined by State law,
 with the application information and materials required by section 203
 and an overall description of the project and its benefits. The governing
 body may participate in procedures conducted by the Secretary concerning
 the application.
 (b) PUBLIC LANDS- When the operator wishes to occupy lands owned by any
 State, county, city, town, or any agency or instrumentality of the Federal
 Government, it shall first obtain a franchise allowing such occupancy or
 it may obtain the necessary interests through grant or other appropriate
 conveyance to the operator for a period of time, in the case of a franchise,
 not to exceed the term of the certificate.
 (c) SURVEY- Prior to commencement of construction, the operator shall survey
 and plat the water project lands in accordance with local requirements.
SEC. 210. DEFAULT.
 In the event of material and continuing default in the performance
 of the operator's construction or operation duties or failure of the
 operator to comply with the terms of its agreement with the Secretary,
 or in the event that construction has not begun within 2 years of the
 issuance of a certificate, the Secretary, after a hearing in which
 the applicant or operator has notice and opportunity to participate,
 may revoke the certificate of authority for the water project, declare a
 default in the construction or operation of the water project, and make or
 cause to be made the appropriate claim or claims under any completion or
 performance bonds, or take such other action as it may deem appropriate,
 under the circumstances. The Secretary may participate in or initiate
 such proceedings. In case of revocation of a certificate, the applicant
 or operator shall thereafter be without any authority to construct or
 operate the water project, and the Secretary may take over construction
 and operation of the water project, and may proceed thereafter to take
 any steps which are in the public interest, including completion of
 construction or additions to the water project, closing the water project,
 or any intermediate step. The Secretary shall receive the full proceeds
 of any payments due to claims against bonding companies or sureties for
 this purpose. In addition, in such event, the operator shall grant to the
 Secretary all of its right, title, and interest in the assets of the public
 service corporation. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit
 the Secretary's exercise of the power of eminent domain. In either case,
 the operator may obtain compensation from the Secretary for such assets,
 except that the Secretary shall first deduct from the value of such assets
 all of its costs incurred in connection with completion or fulfillment
 of the unperformed obligations of the operator, and any other costs
 associated with the events contemplated in this section. The Secretary
 shall take into account moneys received from the proceeds of any payment
 or completion bond in calculating the amount due the operator.
SEC. 211. ADMINISTRATION OF WATER PROJECT.
 The laws of the State in which the water project subject to this title
 is located shall apply to all aspects of the administration of the water
 project.
SEC. 212. TERMINATION OF CERTIFICATE; DEDICATION OF ASSETS.
 Within 90 days of the completion and closing of the original permanent
 financing, the operator shall provide full details of the financing,
 including the terms of all bonds, to the Secretary and shall certify
 the date on which all debt will be retired. The Secretary may require
 that the operator provide copies of any relevant documents and shall
 review the financing and determine the date on which all bonds or other
 debt constituting the original permanent financing will be retired. After
 establishing this date, the Secretary shall enter an order terminating the
 operator's authority pursuant to the certificate of authority on a date
 which shall be 10 years from the date on which all of the original permanent
 financing will be completely retired. At the request of the operator or the
 Secretary, on his own initiative, the Secretary may revise its order to
 modify the date for termination of the certificate of authority in order
 to take into account any refinancing of the original permanent financing,
 where the refinancing or modification is in the public interest, or any
 refinancing for the purpose of expansion, or early retirement of the
 debt. Upon the termination of the certificate of authority, the authority
 and duties of the operator under this chapter shall cease, and the assets
 and improvements of the operator shall be dedicated to the United States
 for project purposes.
TITLE III--GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 301. PREEMPTION.
 The provisions of this Act, and the regulations issued pursuant to this
 Act, shall supersede and preempt any provision of State law to the extent
 that such State law is inconsistent with this Act.
SEC. 302. REGULATIONS.
 The Secretary shall issue such regulations as may be necessary to carry
 out this Act.
SEC. 303. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 Water in interstate commerce shall be subject to this Act beginning 1 year
 after the date of enactment of this Act.