[Congressional Bills 103th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]
[S. 2196 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

103d CONGRESS
 2d Session
 S. 2196

 To assure fairness and choice to patients and providers under managed 
 care health benefit plans, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 June 15 (legislative day, June 7), 1994

 Mr. Wellstone (for himself and Mr. Burns) introduced the following 
 bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Labor and 
 Human Resources

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To assure fairness and choice to patients and providers under managed 
 care health benefit plans, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Patient Protection Act of 1994''.

 TITLE I--PROTECTION OF CONSUMER CHOICE

SEC. 2. PROTECTION OF CONSUMER CHOICE.

 Nothing in this Act shall be construed as prohibiting--
 (1) an individual from purchasing any health care services 
 with the individual's own funds, whether such services are 
 covered within any benefits package otherwise available to the 
 individual; and
 (2) employers from providing coverage for benefits in 
 addition to any benefits package otherwise available to an 
 individual.

 TITLE II--CERTIFICATION OF MANAGED CARE PLANS AND UTILIZATION REVIEW 
 PROGRAMS

SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.

 For purposes of this title:
 (1) Qualified managed care plan.--The term ``qualified 
 managed care plan'' means a managed care plan that the 
 Secretary certifies, upon application by the program, as 
 meeting the requirements of section 4(b).
 (2) Qualified utilization review program.--The term 
 ``qualified utilization review program'' means a utilization 
 review program that the Secretary certifies, upon application 
 by the program, as meeting the requirements of section 4(c).
 (3) Utilization review program.--The term ``utilization 
 review program'' means a system of reviewing the medical 
 necessity, appropriateness, or quality of health care services 
 and supplies provided under a health insurance plan or a 
 managed care plan using specified guidelines. Such a system may 
 include preadmission certification, the application of practice 
 guidelines, continued stay review, discharge planning, 
 preauthorization of medical procedures, and retrospective 
 review.
 (4) Managed care plan.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``managed care plan'' 
 means a plan operated by a managed care entity (as 
 defined in subparagraph (B)), that provides for the 
 financing and delivery of health care services to 
 persons enrolled in such plan through--
 (i) arrangements with selected providers to 
 furnish health care services;
 (ii) explicit standards for the selection 
 of participating providers;
 (iii) organizational arrangements for 
 ongoing quality assurance, utilization review 
 programs, and dispute resolution; and
 (iv) financial incentives for persons 
 enrolled in the plan to use the participating 
 providers and procedures provided for by the 
 plan.
 (B) Managed care entity.--The term ``managed care 
 entity'' includes a licensed insurance company, 
 hospital or medical service plan, health maintenance 
 organization, an employer or employee organization, or 
 a managed care contractor (as defined in subparagraph 
 (C)), that operates a managed care plan.
 (C) Managed care contractor.--The term ``managed 
 care contractor'' means a person that--
 (i) establishes, operates, or maintains a 
 network of participating providers;
 (ii) conducts or arranges for utilization 
 review activities; and
 (iii) contracts with an insurance company, 
 a hospital or medical service plan, an 
 employer, an employee organization, or any 
 other entity providing coverage for health care 
 services to operate a managed care plan.
 (5) Participating provider.--The term ``participating 
 provider'' means a physician, hospital, pharmacy, laboratory, 
 or other appropriately authorized provider of health care 
 services or supplies, that has entered into an agreement with a 
 managed care entity to provide such services or supplies to a 
 patient enrolled in a managed care plan.
 (6) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.

SEC. 4. CERTIFICATION OF MANAGED CARE PLANS AND UTILIZATION REVIEW 
 PROGRAMS.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Certification.--The Secretary shall establish a process 
 for certification of managed care plans meeting the 
 requirements of subsection (b) and utilization review programs 
 meeting the requirements of subsection (c).
 (2) Review and recertification.--The Secretary shall 
 establish procedures for the periodic review and 
 recertification of qualified managed care plans and qualified 
 utilization review programs. Such procedures shall include 
 steps by which a health plan may remedy any deficiencies cited.
 (3) Termination of certification.--If the Secretary 
 determines that a qualified managed care plan or qualified 
 utilization review program no longer substantially meets the 
 applicable requirements for certification, the Secretary shall 
 establish procedures for terminating the certification of the 
 plan or program for reasons including the failure of remedies 
 for deficiencies referred to in paragraph (2). Prior to the 
 date a termination becomes effective, the Secretary shall 
 provide the plan notice and opportunity for a hearing on the 
 proposed termination.
 (4) Certification through alternative requirements.--
 (A) Certain organizations recognized.--An eligible 
 organization (as defined in section 1876(b) of the 
 Social Security Act), shall be deemed to meet the 
 requirements of subsection (b) for certification as a 
 qualified managed care plan.
 (B) Recognition of accreditation.--If the Secretary 
 finds that a State licensure program or a national 
 accreditation body establishes requirements for 
 accreditation of a managed care plan or utilization 
 review program that are at least equivalent to 
 requirements established under this section, the 
 Secretary may, to the extent appropriate, treat a 
 managed care plan or a utilization review program 
 accredited by such program or body as meeting the 
 applicable requirements of this section.
 (b) Requirements for Certification of Managed Care Plans.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish Federal 
 standards for the certification of managed care plans, 
 including standards which require managed care plans to meet 
 the requirements described in paragraphs (2) through (6).
 (2) Information on terms of plan.--Managed care plans shall 
 provide prospective enrollees information on the terms and 
 conditions of the plan so that the enrollees can make informed 
 decisions about accepting a certain system of health care 
 delivery. Easily understood, truthful, linguistically 
 appropriate and objective terms must be used in all oral and 
 written descriptions of a plan. Such descriptions shall be 
 consistent with standards developed for supplemental insurance 
 coverage under title XVIII of the Social Security Act. 
 Descriptions of plans under this paragraph must be standardized 
 so that customers can compare the attributes of the plans. 
 Specific items that must be included in a description of a plan 
 are--
 (A) coverage provisions, benefits, and any 
 exclusions by category of service, provider, or 
 physician, and if applicable, any exclusions by 
 specific service;
 (B) any and all prior authorization or other review 
 requirements including preauthorization review, 
 concurrent review, post-service review, post-payment 
 review and any procedures that may lead the patient to 
 be denied coverage for, or not be provided, a 
 particular service;
 (C) financial arrangements or contractual 
 provisions with hospitals, utilization review 
 organizations, physicians, or any other provider of 
 health care services that would limit the services 
 offered, restrict referral or treatment options, or 
 negatively affect a physician's fiduciary 
 responsibility to patients, including financial 
 incentives not to provide medical or other services;
 (D) an explanation of how plan limitations impact 
 enrollees, including information on enrollee financial 
 responsibility for payment for coinsurance or other 
 noncovered or out-of-plan services; 
 (E) the plan's loss ratios and an explanation that 
 they reflect the percentage of premiums expended for 
 health services; and
 (F) enrollee satisfaction statistics, including 
 reenrollment statistics and a description of enrollees' 
 reasons for leaving the plan.
 (3) Adequate access to physicians.--Managed care plans 
 shall be required to demonstrate that they have adequate access 
 to physicians and other providers so that all covered health 
 care services will be provided in a timely manner. This 
 requirement may not be waived and must be met in all areas 
 where the plan has enrollees, including rural areas.
 (4) Financial reserves.--Managed care plans shall be 
 required to meet financial reserve requirements that are 
 established to assure proper payment for health care services 
 provided under the plan. The Secretary shall establish a 
 mechanism to provide adequately for indemnification of plan 
 failures even when a plan has met the reserve requirements.
 (5) Provider input.--Managed care plans shall be required 
 to establish a mechanism under which physicians and other 
 providers participating in a plan have defined rights to 
 provide input into the plan's medical policy (including 
 coverage of new technology and procedures), utilization review 
 criteria and procedures, quality and credentialing criteria, 
 and medical management procedures.
 (6) Credentials for physicians.--
 (A) In general.--Managed care plans shall be 
 required to credential physicians furnishing health 
 care services under the plan. Any physicians within a 
 plan's geographic service area may apply for 
 credentials under the plan and at least once each year, 
 the plan shall notify such physicians of the 
 opportunity to apply for credentials.
 (B) Credentialing process.--
 (i) In general.--Each managed care plan 
 shall establish a credentialing process. Such 
 process shall begin upon application by a 
 physician to be included under the plan. Each 
 application by a physician shall be reviewed by 
 a credentialing committee with appropriate 
 representation of the applicant's medical 
 specialty.
 (ii) Standards.--Credentialing under a plan 
 shall be based on objective standards of 
 quality with input from physicians credentialed 
 by the plan. Credentialing standards shall be 
 available to applicants and enrollees.
 (iii) Economic considerations.--If economic 
 considerations, including practitioners' 
 patterns of expenditure per patient, are part 
 of a credentialing decision, objective criteria 
 must used in examining such considerations and 
 such criteria must be available to applicants, 
 participating physicians, and enrollees. Any 
 economic profiling of physicians must be 
 adjusted to recognize case mix, severity of 
 illness, age of patients and other features of 
 a physician's practice that may account for 
 higher or lower than expected costs. Economic 
 profiles must be made available to the 
 physicians profiled.
 (iv) Graduate medical education.--If 
 graduate medical education is a consideration 
 in credentialing, equal recognition will be 
 given to training programs accredited by the 
 Accrediting Council on Graduate Medical 
 Education and by the American Osteopathic 
 Association.
 (v) Recording decisions.--A record shall be 
 maintained of all decisions made under the 
 credentialing process and each applicant shall 
 be provided with reasons for an application 
 being denied or a contract not being renewed.
 (vi) Due process.--Prior to initiation of a 
 proceeding leading to termination of a 
 contract, the physician shall be provided 
 notice, an opportunity for discussion, and an 
 opportunity to enter into and complete a 
 corrective action plan, except in cases where 
 there is imminent harm to patient health or an 
 action by a State medical board or other 
 government agency that effectively impairs the 
 physician's ability to practice medicine.
 (vii) Reducing or withdrawing 
 credentials.--The same standards and procedures 
 used for an application for credentials shall 
 also be used in those cases where the plan 
 seeks to reduce or withdraw such credentials.
 (viii) Appeals.--There shall be allowed a 
 due process appeal from all adverse decisions 
 affecting practitioners with whom a plan has 
 contracted. The due process appeal mechanisms 
 shall be as set forth in the Health Care 
 Quality Improvement Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 
 11101-11152).
 (C) Discrimination against enrollees.--Managed care 
 plans shall be prohibited from discriminating against 
 enrollees based on health status or anticipated need 
 for medical services likely to lead to high expenses by 
 excluding practitioners with practices containing a 
 substantial number of such patients.
 (7) Confidentiality of records.--Managed care plans shall 
 be required to establish procedures to ensure that all 
 applicable Federal and State laws designed to protect the 
 confidentiality of provider and individual medical records are 
 followed.
 (c) Requirements for Certification of Utilization Review 
Programs.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish Federal 
 standards for the certification of utilization review programs, 
 including standards which require such programs to meet the 
 requirements described in paragraph (2).
 (2) Requirements.--Plans must have a medical director 
 responsible for all clinical decisions by the plan and provide 
 assurances that the medical review or utilization practices 
 used by the plans, and the medical review or utilization 
 practices of payers or reviewers with whom the plans contract, 
 comply with the following requirements:
 (A) Screening criteria used in the review process, 
 the methods by which they are applied, and their method 
 of development, must be released to physicians and the 
 public upon request.
 (B) Such criteria and methods must be based on 
 sound scientific principles and developed in 
 cooperation with practicing physicians and other 
 affected health care providers.
 (C) Any person who recommends denial of coverage or 
 payment, or determines that a service should not be 
 provided, based on medical necessity standards, must be 
 of the same medical branch (allopathic or osteopathic 
 medicine) and specialty (specialties as recognized by 
 the American Board of Medical Specialties or the 
 American Osteopathic Association) as the practitioner 
 who provided the service.
 (D) Each claimant or provider (upon assignment of a 
 claim) who has had a claim denied as not medically 
 necessary must be provided an opportunity for a due 
 process appeal to a medical consultant or peer review 
 group that is independent of the entity that performed 
 the initial review.
 (E) Any individual making a final, negative 
 judgment or recommendation about the necessity or 
 appropriateness of services or the site of service must 
 be a comparably qualified health care professional 
 licensed to practice in the jurisdiction from which the 
 claim arose.
 (F) Upon request, physicians and other 
 professionals will be provided the names and 
 credentials of all individuals conducting medical 
 necessity or appropriateness review, subject to 
 reasonable safeguards and standards.
 (G) Prior authorization shall not be required for 
 emergency care, and patient or physician requests for 
 prior authorization of a nonemergency service must be 
 answered within 24 hours and qualified personnel must 
 be available for same-day telephone responses to 
 inquiries about medical necessity, including 
 certification of continued length of stay. If review 
 personnel are not available, medical services provided 
 shall be considered approved.
 (H) Plans must ensure that enrollees, in plans 
 where prior authorization is a condition for coverage 
 of a service, are offered the opportunity to sign 
 medical information release consent forms upon 
 enrollment for use where services requiring prior 
 authorization are recommended or proposed by their 
 physician.
 (I) When prior approval for a service or other 
 covered item is obtained, the service shall be 
 considered to be covered unless there was fraud or 
 incorrect information provided at the time such prior 
 approval was obtained.
 (J) Plans must establish procedures for ensuring 
 that all applicable Federal and State laws designed to 
 protect the confidentiality of provider and individual 
 medical records are followed.
 (d) Considerations in Developing Standards.--In developing 
standards under subsections (b) and (c), the Secretary shall--
 (1) review standards in use by national private 
 accreditation organizations and State licensure programs;
 (2) recognize, to the extent appropriate, differences in 
 the organizational structure and operation of managed care 
 plans; and
 (3) establish procedures for the timely consideration of 
 applications for certification by managed care plans and 
 utilization review programs.
 (e) Timetable for Establishment of Standards.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 12 months after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act standards shall first be established 
 under this section.
 (2) Revision of standards.--The Secretary shall 
 periodically review the standards established under this 
 section, and may revise the standards from time to time to 
 assure that such standards continue to reflect appropriate 
 policies and practices for the cost-effective and medically 
 appropriate use of services within managed care plans and 
 utilization review programs.

 TITLE III--CHOICE OF HEALTH PLANS FOR ENROLLMENT

SEC. 5. CHOICE OF HEALTH PLANS FOR ENROLLMENT.

 (a) In General.--Each sponsor, including a self-insured sponsor, of 
a health benefit plan, who offers, provides, or makes available such 
plan must provide to each eligible enrollee a choice of health plans 
among available plans.
 (b) Offering of Plans.--Each sponsor referred to in subsection (a) 
shall include among its health plan offerings at least one of each of 
the following types of health benefit plans, where available:
 (1) A managed care plan, including a health maintenance 
 organization or preferred provider organization.
 (2) A traditional insurance plan (as defined in subsection 
 (c)(1)).
 (3) A benefit payment schedule plan (as defined in 
 subsection (c)(2)), pursuant to the following activities of the 
 Secretary:
 (A) Not later than 12 months after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall--
 (i) conduct a study on the projected impact 
 of benefit payment schedule plans on enrollees 
 and on the Nation's health care costs; and
 (ii) submit a report to Congress on the 
 results of such study.
 (B) The Secretary shall promulgate regulations to--
 (i) assure that benefit payment schedule 
 plans, if approved, are affordable for all 
 enrollees and contribute to health care cost 
 containment; and
 (ii) remedy any other significant 
 deficiencies identified by the study described 
 in subparagraph (A).
 (c) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
 (1) Traditional insurance plan.--The term ``traditional 
 insurance plan'' includes plans that offer a health benefits 
 package and that pay for medical services on a fee-for-service 
 basis using a usual, customary, or reasonable payment 
 methodology or a resource based relative value schedule, 
 usually linked to an annual deductible and/or coinsurance 
 payment on each allowed amount.
 (2) Benefit payment schedule plan.--The term ``benefit 
 payment schedule plan'' means a health plan that--
 (A) provides coverage for all items and services 
 included in a health benefits package that are 
 furnished by any health care provider licensed under 
 State law of the enrollee's choice;
 (B) makes payment for the services of a provider on 
 a fee-for-service basis without regard to whether or 
 not there is a contractual arrangement between the plan 
 and the provider;
 (C) provides a benefit payment schedule that 
 identifies covered services and the payment for each 
 service covered by the plan; and
 (D) applies no copayments or coinsurance.

SEC. 6. CHOICE REQUIREMENTS FOR POINT-OF-SERVICE PLANS.

 (a) In General.--Each sponsor, including a self-insured sponsor, of 
a health benefit plan that restricts access to providers, shall offer 
to all eligible enrollees the opportunity to obtain coverage for out-
of-network items or services through a point-of-service plan (as 
defined under subsection (e)(1)), at the time of enrollment and at 
least for a continuous one-month period annually thereafter.
 (b) Coinsurance.--A point-of-service plan may require payment of 
coinsurance for an out-of-network item or service, as follows:
 (1) The applicable coinsurance percentage shall not be 
 greater than 20 percent of payment for items and services.
 (2) The applicable coinsurance percentage may be applied 
 differentially with respect to out-of-network items and 
 services, subject to the requirements of paragraph (1).
 (c) Payment Disclosure Requirement.--All sponsors of point-of-
service plans and physicians and other professionals participating in 
such plans shall be required to disclose their fees, applicable payment 
schedules, coinsurance requirements, or any other financial 
requirements that affect patient payment levels.
 (d) Poverty Exclusion.--Any enrollee, including enrolled 
dependents, whose income does not exceed 200 percent of the established 
Federal poverty guideline for the applicable year, shall be charged no 
more than the amount allowed under applicable plan limits. Such amount 
shall be considered payment in full.
 (e) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
 (1) Point-of-service plan.--The term ``point-of-service 
 plan'' means a plan that offers services to enrollees through a 
 provider network (as defined in paragraph (2)) and also offers 
 additional services and/or access to care by network or non-
 network providers.
 (2) Provider network.--The term ``provider network'' means, 
 with respect to a health plan that restricts access, those 
 providers who have entered into a contract or agreement with 
 the plan under which such providers are obligated to provide 
 items and services under the plan to eligible individuals 
 enrolled in the plan, or have an agreement to provide services 
 on a fee-for-service basis.

 <all>

S 2196 IS----2
S 2196 IS----3