[Congressional Bills 105th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 3000 Introduced in House (IH)]

105th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 3000

 To amend the Comprehensive Environmental, Response, Compensation, and 
 Liability Act of 1980.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 November 9, 1997

Mr. Oxley (for himself, Mr. Condit, Mr. John, Mr. Bliley, Mr. Ford, Mr. 
 Upton, Mr. Greenwood, Mr. Klug, Mr. Martinez, Mr. Goodling, Mr. 
 Traficant, Mr. Tauzin, Mr. Peterson of Minnesota, Mr. Dan Schaefer of 
 Colorado, Mr. Stenholm, Mr. Gillmor, Mr. Bishop, Mr. Paxon, Mr. 
 Sisisky, Mr. Largent, Mr. Baesler, Mr. Buyer, Mr. Goode, Mr. 
 Frelinghuysen, Mr. Boyd, Mrs. Emerson, Mr. Cramer, Mr. Barrett of 
 Nebraska, Mr. Holden, Mr. Burr of North Carolina, Mr. Pickett, Mr. 
 Hefley, Mr. McIntyre, Mr. Duncan, Mr. Sandlin, Mr. Peterson of 
 Pennsylvania, and Mr. Rush) introduced the following bill; which was 
 referred to the Committee on Commerce, and in addition to the 
 Committees on Transportation and Infrastructure, and Ways and Means, 
for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case 
for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of 
 the committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To amend the Comprehensive Environmental, Response, Compensation, and 
 Liability Act of 1980.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Superfund Reform 
Act''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. References.
 TITLE I--REMEDY SELECTION

Sec. 101. Remedy selection.
Sec. 102. Objective risk assessment standards.
Sec. 103. Remedy updates and remedy review board.
Sec. 104. Public health authorities.
Sec. 105. Indian health provisions.
Sec. 106. Hazard ranking system.
Sec. 107. Removal actions.
Sec. 108. Hazardous substance property use.
Sec. 109. Effective date and transition rules.
 TITLE II--LIABILITY

Sec. 201. Parties not responsible for pollution.
Sec. 202. Clarifications of certain liability.
Sec. 203. Amendments to section 106.
Sec. 204. Civil proceedings.
Sec. 205. Limitations on contribution actions.
Sec. 206. Liability of response action contractors.
Sec. 207. Expedited final settlements.
Sec. 208. Allocations at multi-party facilities.
Sec. 209. Transition rules relating to certain nonliable parties.
Sec. 210. Recycling transactions.
 TITLE III--BROWNFIELDS

Sec. 301. Short title.
Sec. 302. Findings.
Sec. 303. Cleanups pursuant to State voluntary response program.
Sec. 304. Innocent landowners.
Sec. 305. Bona fide prospective purchaser liability.
Sec. 306. Contiguous properties.
 TITLE IV--NATURAL RESOURCE DAMAGES

Sec. 401. Natural resources defined.
Sec. 402. Consultation with natural resources trustees.
Sec. 403. Liability.
Sec. 404. Designation of trustees.
Sec. 405. Determination of causation.
Sec. 406. Measure of damages.
Sec. 407. Damage assessments.
Sec. 408. Selection of restoration alternatives.
Sec. 409. Use of sums recovered by trustees.
Sec. 410. Relation to other laws; damages occurring before December 11, 
 1980.
Sec. 411. Restoration.
Sec. 412. Use of mediation.
Sec. 413. Applicability.
 TITLE V--STATE ROLE

Sec. 501. State delegation at NPL facilities.
Sec. 502. State authorization at NPL facilities.
Sec. 503. Federal funding of State actions under State delegation or 
 State authorization.
Sec. 504. State cost share.
Sec. 505. Concurrence of governors required for additions to National 
 Priorities List.
Sec. 506. State and local reimbursement for response actions.
 TITLE VI--FEDERAL FACILITIES

Sec. 601. State role at Federal facilities.
Sec. 602. Innovative technologies for remedial action at Federal 
 facilities.
Sec. 605. Federal entities and facilities.
Sec. 607. Notification regarding uncontaminated property at Federal 
 facilities.
Sec. 608. Annual studies of priorities at Federal facilities.
Sec. 609. Judicial removals.
 TITLE VII--COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Sec. 701. Community involvement.
Sec. 702. Community assistance groups.
Sec. 703. Technical assistance grants.
 TITLE VIII--MISCELLANEOUS

Sec. 801. Definitions.
Sec. 802. Response claims procedures.
Sec. 803. Small business ombudsman.
Sec. 804. Consideration of local government cleanup priorities.
Sec. 805. Savings clause.
Sec. 806. Report and oversight requirements.
Sec. 807. Response authorities.
Sec. 808. Prioritization.
Sec. 809. Response management and worker protection standards.
Sec. 810. Actions relating to source, byproduct, and special nuclear 
 material.
 TITLE IX--FUNDING

 Subtitle A--Expenditures From the Hazardous Substance Superfund

Sec. 901. Expenditures from the Hazardous Substance Superfund.
Sec. 902. Authorization of appropriations from general revenues.
 Subtitle B--5-Year Extension of Hazardous Substance Superfund

Sec. 911. 5-year extension of Hazardous Substance Superfund.

SEC. 2. REFERENCES.

 Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an 
amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal 
of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to 
be made to a section or other provision of the Comprehensive 
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 
(commonly known as ``Superfund'') (42 U.S.C. 9601 and following).

 TITLE I--REMEDY SELECTION

SEC. 101. REMEDY SELECTION.

 Section 121 (42 U.S.C. 9621) is amended as follows:
 (1) In subsection (a), by striking ``and, to the extent 
 practicable, the national contingency plan''.
 (2) By amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
 ``(b) Remedy Selection.--
 ``(1) Health and environmental standards.--
 ``(A) In general.--Final remedies selected under 
 this Act shall protect human health and the environment 
 and provide long-term reliability at reasonable cost. 
 Such remedies should not seek to address unrealistic or 
 insignificant risks.
 ``(B) Certain carcinogens.--For nonthreshold 
 carcinogens, to the extent the President is using risk 
 measures based on the numeric risk of carcinogenic 
 effects, final remedies selected under this Act shall 
 limit cumulative, lifetime additional cancer risk from 
 exposure to hazardous substances from releases at the 
 facility to within the range of one in 10,000 to one in 
 1,000,000 for the affected population or subpopulation, 
as determined by the President.
 ``(C) Exposure information.--Exposure assessments 
 shall be consistent with the current and reasonably 
 anticipated uses of land, water, and other resources as 
 identified under paragraph (2). The President shall 
 consider and use, in selecting final remedies under 
 this Act, information made available to the President 
 on actual ingestion of, inhalation of, or dermal 
 contact with hazardous substances or pollutants or 
 contaminants, or blood lead levels at or near the site, 
 along with other relevant information. Where the 
 President uses predictive estimates, protective 
 exposure levels shall be based on a reasonable high-end 
 estimate of the scientifically objective exposure 
 distribution.
 ``(D) Plants and animals.--In determining what is 
 protective of plants and animals for purposes of this 
 section, the Administrator shall base such 
 determinations on the significance of impacts from a 
 release or releases of hazardous substances from a 
 facility to local populations or communities of plants 
 and animals or ecosystems. If a species is listed as 
 threatened or endangered under the Endangered Species 
 Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C 1531 et seq.) impacts to 
 individual plants or animals may be considered to be 
 impacts to populations of plants or animals.
 ``(2) Anticipated use of land, water, and other 
 resources.--(A) For purposes of selecting the method or methods 
 of remediation appropriate for a given facility, the President 
 shall identify the current and reasonably anticipated uses of 
 land, water, and other resources at and around the facility and 
 the timing of such uses.
 ``(B) Except as provided in subparagraphs (D), in 
 identifying such reasonably anticipated future uses, the 
 President shall consider relevant factors, which generally 
 shall include the following:
 ``(i) Any consensus recommendation of the Community 
 Assistance Group. With respect to a Federal facility 
 scheduled for closure or realignment, the President 
 shall consider any joint consensus recommendation of 
 the Community Assistance Group and a redevelopment 
 authority which has been established for such facility.
 ``(ii) The current uses of the facility and 
 surrounding properties, recent development patterns in 
 the area where the facility is located, and population 
 projections for that area.
 ``(iii) Federal or State land use designations, 
 including Federal facilities and national parks, State 
 ground water or surface water recharge areas 
 established under a State's comprehensive protection 
 plan for ground water or surface water, and 
 recreational areas.
 ``(iv) The current land use zoning and future land 
 use plans of the local government with land use 
 regulatory authority.
 ``(v) Current plans for the facility by the 
 property owner or owners.
 ``(vi) The availability of alternative sources of 
 drinking water.
 ``(vii) Current or anticipated plans for livestock 
 watering or irrigation.
 ``(viii) Current and anticipated plans of local 
 water suppliers.
 ``(C) In developing its recommendation, the Community 
 Assistance Group shall consider factors listed in subparagraph 
 (B).
 ``(D) In identifying current and reasonably anticipated 
 future ground water uses for purposes of this section, the 
 President shall defer to State determinations regarding such 
 uses where the State has made such a determination on a 
 facility-specific basis.
 ``(E) Unless the State has made a specific determination 
 otherwise under subparagraph (D), a current or reasonably 
 anticipated future use of ground water shall not be identified 
 as drinking water for ground water (i) containing more than 
 10,000 milligrams per liter total dissolved solids, (ii) that 
 is so contaminated by naturally occurring conditions or by the 
 effects of broad-scale human activity unrelated to a specific 
 activity that restoration of drinking water quality is 
 impracticable, or (iii) if the potential source of drinking 
 water is physically incapable of yielding a quantity of 150 
 gallons per day of water to a well or spring without adverse 
 environmental consequences.
 ``(F) All information considered by the President in 
 evaluating current and reasonably anticipated future land uses 
 under this subsection shall be included in the administrative 
 record under section 113(k).
 ``(3) Site-specific risk assessment.--The President shall 
 use site-specific risk assessment that meets the requirements 
 of the principles set forth in section 127(a) to--
 ``(A) determine the nature and extent of risk to 
 human health and the environment;
 ``(B) identify groups which are currently or would 
 be highly exposed or highly susceptible (i) to 
 contamination from the site based on current and 
 reasonably anticipated uses of land, water, and other 
 resources at or around the site, or (ii) to risks 
 arising from implementation of a remedial option;
 ``(C) assist in establishing remedial objectives 
 for the facility respecting releases or threatened 
 releases, and in identifying geographic areas or 
 exposure pathways of concern; and
 ``(D) evaluate alternative remedial actions for the 
 facility to determine their risk reduction benefits and 
 assist in selecting the remedial action for the 
 facility that meets the criteria of paragraph (1).
 ``(4) Appropriate remedial action.--
 ``(A) Alternatives considered and factors 
 balanced.--For purposes of selecting final remedies 
 under this Act, the President shall identify an 
 appropriate mix of technically practicable remedial 
 options (including those provided by interested 
 parties) which are designed to meet the standards set 
 forth in this section considering reasonable points of 
 compliance. Appropriate remedies shall be based on 
 consideration of the current and reasonably anticipated 
 future uses of land, water, and other resources, as 
 identified under paragraph (2), and the timing of such 
 uses. The President shall select from among such 
 options a protective, cost-effective, cost-reasonable, 
 and otherwise appropriate remedy by an overall 
 balancing of the relative advantages and disadvantages 
 of the remedial options, considering the following 
 factors:
 ``(i) The effectiveness of the remedial 
 options in reducing risks (including risks 
 posed by the spread of contamination to ground 
 water or surface water).
 ``(ii) Effectiveness in promoting source 
 control (including appropriate management or 
 treatment of hot spots).
 ``(iii) The long-term reliability of the 
 remedial option.
 ``(iv) Risks to the affected community, to 
 those engaged in the remedial effort, and to 
 the environment arising from the potential 
 implementation of a remedial option and any 
 offsite transportation and subsequent 
 management of the hazardous substances.
 ``(v) The acceptability of the remedial 
 option to the affected community (including 
 Indian Tribes, as appropriate) and the affected 
 local government.
 ``(vi) The reasonableness of the 
 differences in costs between one remedial 
 option and the other remedial options.
 ``(B) In the case of contaminated ground water for 
 which the current or reasonably anticipated future use 
 is drinking water, final remedies shall seek to 
 remediate otherwise usable ground water to beneficial 
 use, to the extent practical and consistent with 
 subparagraph (A), within a timeframe that is reasonable 
 given the circumstances at the site. This subparagraph 
 does not apply to ground water in source management 
 areas and allows for the use of natural attenuation, 
 where appropriate.''.
 ``(C) In the case of uncontaminated ground water 
 for which the current or reasonably anticipated future 
 use is drinking water, final remedies shall provide for 
 the protection of such current or future use, to the 
 extent practicable and consistent with subparagraph 
 (A), considering the timing of such use. This 
 subparagraph shall not prohibit the use of reasonable 
 source management areas for ground water and allows for 
 the use of natural attenuation, where appropriate.''.
 ``(D) Ground water monitoring.--The President shall 
 provide for the long-term monitoring of ground water 
 where appropriate (including any information needed for 
 purpose of review under section 121(c)).
 ``(E) Compliance.--The President shall, consistent 
 with the protection of human health and the 
 environment, establish the timing of compliance, 
 reasonable points of compliance, and specific method of 
compliance for any standards applicable under this section.
 ``(F) Hot spots.--For purposes of this paragraph, a 
 `hot spot' is a discrete area (not including areas in 
 landfills or at mining or related sites) which contain 
 highly toxic material which poses a substantial risk to 
 health or the environment considering current and 
 reasonably anticipated uses of land, water, and other 
 resources.''.
 (3) Subsection (c) is amended by striking in the first 
 sentence ``the initiation of'' and inserting ``construction and 
 installation of equipment and structures to be used for'' and 
 by adding the following after the first sentence: ``The 
 President shall review the effectiveness of and compliance with 
 any institutional controls related to the remedial action 
 during the review.''.
 (4) By striking so much of subsection (d) as precedes 
 paragraph (3) and inserting the following:
 ``(d) Other Standards.--(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), 
for any facility to which they apply, the standards set forth in this 
section shall govern the level or standard of control for remedies, 
remedy selection, and on-site management of hazardous substances in 
lieu of any other Federal, State, or local standards where such action 
is selected and carried out in compliance with this section.
 ``(2)(A) Point source discharges or emissions of hazardous 
substances into the waters of the United States or the ambient air that 
result from remediation technology used in the conduct of the remedy 
shall comply with State and Federal standards respecting such 
discharges or emissions.
 ``(B) Remedies selected under this Act shall attain a level or 
standard of control which meets promulgated State standards for 
protection that are applicable to remedial actions in the State unless 
the President makes a finding under paragraph (4) of this subsection. 
Any waivers or adjustments of State standards for protection that are 
applicable under State law shall also apply for purposes of selecting 
remedial actions under this section.
 ``(C) If the current or reasonably anticipated use (as determined 
under subsection (b)(2)) of ground water is drinking water, final 
remedies selected under this Act shall require a level or standard of 
control which meets maximum contaminant levels established under the 
Safe Drinking Water Act at reasonable points of compliance, as 
appropriate under the circumstances of the release, considering the 
nature and timing of such use of the ground water. At a minimum such 
remedies shall prevent or eliminate any actual human ingestion of 
drinking water containing any hazardous substance, pollutant, or 
contaminant at levels in excess of such maximum contaminant level, 
including, as appropriate, the provision of an alternate water supply.
 ``(D) Compliance with promulgated State standards for protection 
under subparagraph (B) shall not be required unless such laws and 
standards are (i) of general applicability, (ii) consistently applied, 
and (iii) identified to the President in a timely fashion.
 ``(E) Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that a 
final remedial action selected under this Act reduce concentrations of 
contaminants below background levels or that any such remedy comply 
with zero discharge standards.
 ``(F) Compliance with subparagraphs (A) and (B) shall not be 
required with respect to return, replacement, or disposal of 
contaminated media or residuals of contaminated media into the same 
medium in or very near existing areas of contamination on-site.''.
 (5) In paragraph (3) of subsection (d), by striking ``, or 
 constituent'' and inserting ``or hazardous levels of 
 constituents'' in subparagraph (A) and by adding the following 
 before the period at the end of the first sentence of such 
 paragraph: ``unless the President determines that such 
 substance or pollutant or contaminant can be managed in another 
 location in a manner that will protect human health and the 
 environment''.
 (6) By striking so much of paragraph (4) of subsection (d) 
 as precedes subparagraph (A) and inserting the following:
 ``(4) The President may waive any requirement of subparagraphs (A) 
through (C) of paragraph (2) of this subsection if the President finds 
that--''.
 (7) By adding the following new paragraph after paragraph 
 (4) of subsection (d):
 ``(5) For purposes of subparagraph (C) of paragraph (4) the 
President shall make findings of technical impracticability from an 
engineering perspective on the basis of projections, modeling, or other 
analysis on a site-specific basis (including the consideration of 
information presented by responsible parties at such facility) without 
a requirement that the remedial measure for which a finding of 
technical impracticability is under consideration be first constructed 
or installed and operated and its performance over time reviewed, 
unless such projection, modeling, or other analysis is insufficient or 
inadequate to make such a finding.''.
 (8) By adding the following new subsections after 
 subsection (f):
 ``(g) Early Evaluation and Phased Remedial Action.--(1) The 
President shall consider new procedures for conducting remedial 
investigations and feasibility studies in an efficient, cost-effective, 
and timely manner. Such new procedures shall take into consideration a 
results-oriented approach in order to minimize the time required to 
conduct such investigations and studies. The President shall emphasize 
performance-based standards where feasible and, where appropriate, 
provide means to update the most practicable methods under such 
performance-based approaches. The President shall, as appropriate, 
employ a phased approach to site characterization and remediation in 
which remedies are arrived at through a sequence of investigations and 
actions. Information gathered in one phase shall be used to inform each 
successive phase until final remediation goals are determined and 
attained.
 ``(2) To facilitate efficient and effective site characterization 
that promotes early evaluation of remedial alternatives and to prevent 
ground water contamination problems from worsening, the President shall 
ensure, to the extent practicable, that hydrogeologic and contaminant-
related information necessary to select final ground water remedial 
actions, including findings of technical impracticability, shall be 
collected as part of site characterization activities prior to and 
during the remedial investigation.
 ``(h) Institutional Controls.--
 ``(1) Assurances.--In any case in which the President 
 selects a remedial action that relies on restrictions on the 
 use of land, water, or other resources or other activities to 
 provide protection, the President shall ensure that such 
 controls, taken together with other response measures, are 
 adequate to protect human health and the environment. 
 Institutional controls which form a significant portion of the 
 basis for a finding that a set of remedial options will 
 adequately protect human health and the environment must be--
 ``(A) enforceable;
 ``(B) publicly noticed; and
 ``(C) as appropriate for deed restrictions or other 
 similar measures, incorporated in the recordation 
 systems of the appropriate jurisdiction where the 
 property is located.
 The President may allow for a reasonable schedule for 
 appropriate public notice and recordation.
 ``(2) Identification and registry--Each record of decision 
 with respect to a facility shall clearly identify any 
 institutional controls that restrict uses of land, water, or 
 other resources or other activities at the facility. The 
 President shall also provide the identity of the Government 
 official who is primarily responsible for monitoring and 
 enforcing the institutional controls. The President shall 
 maintain a registry of restrictions on the use of land, water, 
 or other resources through institutional controls that are 
 included in final records of decision as part of the basis of 
 decision at National Priorities List facilities.
 ``(3) Report.--The President shall, in consultation with 
 representatives of State and local governments, study the use 
 and effectiveness of institutional controls at National 
 Priorities List facilities. Within 3 years after the date of 
 enactment of this subsection, and after issuance of a draft 
 report and opportunity for public comment, the President shall 
 issue a final report on the use and effectiveness of 
 institutional controls at National Priorities List facilities, 
 together with recommendations to improve efficiency and 
 effectiveness.''.

SEC. 102. OBJECTIVE RISK ASSESSMENT STANDARDS.

 Title I (42 U.S.C. 9621) is amended by adding the following new 
section at the end thereof:

``SEC. 127. OBJECTIVE RISK ASSESSMENT PRINCIPLES, GUIDELINES, AND 
 REVIEWS.

 ``(a) General Principles.--Risk assessments and characterizations 
conducted under this Act shall--
 ``(1) provide scientifically objective assessments, 
 estimates, and characterizations which neither minimize nor 
 exaggerate the nature and magnitude of risks to human health 
 and the environment;
 ``(2) distinguish scientific findings from other 
 considerations;
 ``(3) be based on the best, relevant, and current 
 scientific and technical information, including available or 
 reasonably obtainable (A) epidemiologic data, (B) data on 
 bioavailability, and (C) site-specific and all other relevant 
 information made available to the President; and
 ``(4) be based on a careful analysis of the weight of 
 scientific evidence that supports conclusions about risk to 
 human health and the environment.
 ``(b) Guidelines.--(1) Within 2 years after the enactment of this 
section, the President shall update and publish exposure assessments 
and ecological risk assessment guidelines which are consistent with the 
principles in subsection (a). Ecological risk guidelines shall address 
how to evaluate the significance of risks to populations of plant and 
animal species, ecological communities, and ecosystems.
 ``(2) Final guidelines under this subsection shall be established 
after external peer review and notice and opportunity for comment on 
draft guidelines.
 ``(c) Study of Substances.--(1) The President shall conduct a study 
of the cancer potency values of 12 hazardous substances listed under 
paragraph (2) of section 104(i) that are frequently found to pose 
significant risks at National Priorities List facilities. The study may 
also include a review of other health effects values. The President 
shall not include a substance in the study under this subsection if 
such substance is under scientific reevaluation pursuant to title XIV 
of the Safe Drinking Water Act.
 ``(2) The President shall make a scientifically objective 
assessment of different methodologies for determining the health 
effects of chemical mixtures at relevant doses based on reasonable 
exposure scenarios at National Priorities List facilities.
 ``(3) For purposes of such study and assessments, within 30 days 
after the date of the enactment of this section, the President shall 
obtain public comments on such study and assessments. Not later than 15 
months after the date of the enactment of this section, the President 
shall publish a draft of such assessments. After receiving such 
comments on such draft assessments, and after external peer review, but 
within 2 years after the date of the enactment of this section, the 
President shall complete the study and publish the assessments under 
this subsection. The publication of the final assessments shall be 
considered final agency action.
 ``(4) The study and assessments under this subsection shall include 
a discussion, to the extent relevant, of both laboratory and 
epidemiological data of sufficient quality which finds, or fails to 
find, a significant correlation between health risks and a potential 
toxin. Where conflicts among such data appear to exist, or where animal 
data are used as a basis to assess human health risks, the study and 
assessments shall include discussion of differences in study designs, 
comparative physiology, routes of exposure, bioavailability, 
pharmacokinetics, and any other relevant and significant factor.
 ``(5) Where the study and assessment involve application of any 
significant assumption, inference, or model, the President shall--
 ``(A) state the weight of scientific evidence supporting a 
 selection relative to other plausible alternatives;
 ``(B) fully describe any model used in the risk assessment 
 and make explicit the assumptions incorporated in the model; 
 and
 ``(C) indicate the extent to which any significant model 
 has been validated by, or conflicts with, empirical data.
 ``(6) To the extent scientifically appropriate, the President shall 
include, among other estimates or health effects values, central 
estimates of risks or health effects values, using the most plausible 
assumptions, given the weight of the scientific information available 
to the President. Where significant assumptions have substantially 
similar scientific support, the President shall provide a description 
of the range of estimates or values.
 ``(d) Lead-in-Soils Review.--(1) Not later than 30 days after the 
date of the enactment of this subsection, the Administrator shall enter 
into a contract with the National Academy of Sciences to review 
existing science (and any new science made available prior to 
completion of the review) on the relationship, if any, between lead in 
residential soils and blood lead levels. The review shall be consistent 
with section 127(a) and shall include an assessment of whether, and, if 
so, to what extent, blood lead levels are affected by removing lead-
containing soil at varying levels; an assessment of whether, and, if 
so, to what extent, blood lead levels are affected by variation in the 
type of lead compounds, soil type, and other site-specific factors; and 
a review of the methodologies for modeling the impact of soil lead 
levels on blood lead levels.
 ``(2) The National Academy of Sciences shall complete the review 
under paragraph (1) no later than 6 months after contracting with the 
Administrator. The review shall include an opportunity for peer review 
and public comment and participation. The National Academy of Sciences 
shall report its findings, in writing, to Congress and the 
Administrator within 30 days after completing its review.
 ``(e) Reconciliation of Data.--(1) The President shall reconcile 
any empirical data made available to the President from a statistically 
significant representation of residents concerning lead in blood along 
with any other relevant information (including the review under 
subsection (d)), in the process of making estimates of risks based on 
models, methodologies, guidance, or rules concerning the exposure, 
uptake, bioavailability, and biokinetics of lead in soils. No 
projections based on any model, methodology, guidance, or rule 
concerning the exposure, uptake, bioavailability, or biokinetics of 
lead in soils may be used to predict blood lead levels or to select 
remedial actions unless the projections have been reconciled with 
empirical data as required by this subsection.
 ``(2) For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `reconcile' means to 
compare all relevant information on a technical basis and, in any case 
where there are differences between empirical data and data or 
projections of data based on any model, methodology, guidance, or rule, 
to explain in writing each difference and to make a judgment based on 
the weight of the scientific evidence.''.

SEC. 103. REMEDY UPDATES AND REMEDY REVIEW BOARD.

 Section 121(c) (42 U.S.C. 9621(c)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting after ``Review.--'' the following:
 ``(1) Five-year review.--''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
 ``(2) Review by request.--
 ``(A) In general.--To ensure that records of 
 decision reflect the current state of knowledge with 
 respect to remediation science, technology, and 
 engineering; best available facility data; and most 
 recent policy and guidance of the Environmental 
 Protection Agency, and to improve the cost-
 effectiveness of site remediation while ensuring 
 reliable long-term protection of human health and the 
 environment, the President, upon receiving a request 
 from an interested party, shall review a past Superfund 
 record of decision. If appropriate, based on such 
 review, the President shall modify the record of 
 decision. The President shall not be required to 
 conduct more than one review of a record of decision 
 under this paragraph.
 ``(B) Costs.--The President may establish rules 
 requiring a party requesting review under this 
 paragraph to pay the reasonable costs to the Federal 
 and State governments associated with reviewing the 
 record of decision.
 ``(C) Past record of decision defined.--For the 
 purpose of this subsection, the term ``past Superfund 
 record of decision'' means a record of decision 
 selecting a remedy at a site on the National Priorities 
 List that was signed prior to October 2, 1995, and has 
 not been reviewed pursuant to United States 
 Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Solid Waste 
 and Emergency Response Directive, EPA540/F-96/026, or 
 otherwise updated since October 2, 1995.
 ``(D) Administrative record.--The results of the 
 President's review of a record of decision under this 
 subsection and the basis for the President's decision 
 to update or not update a remedy shall be placed in the 
 administrative record for the facility.
 ``(E) Judicial review.--The President's decision 
 under this subsection to modify or not modify a remedy 
 following a review under this subsection shall not be 
 subject to judicial review.
 ``(F) Limitation on statutory construction.--
 Nothing in this subsection may be construed to affect 
 the authority of the President to modify or amend a 
 record of decision.
 ``(3) National superfund remedy review board.--
 ``(A) Establishment.--The President shall establish a 
 National Superfund Remedy Review Board to control remedy costs, 
 and to provide for protective, consistent, and cost-effective 
 remedial decisions, at facilities on the National Priorities 
 List.
 ``(B) Threshold for review.--For remedial alternatives 
 evaluated and identified after the date of the enactment of 
 this paragraph, following completion of the evaluation or 
 remedial alternatives and identification of a preferred remedy, 
 the Board shall review remedies for those facilities on the 
 National Priorities List for which the estimated cost of the 
 preferred remedy exceeds $15,000,000. If requested, the Board 
 may review remedies for any facility for which the estimated 
 cost for the preferred remedy is $15,000,000 or less.
 ``(C) Board membership.--The Board shall consist of experts 
 on remedy selection, cost-effectiveness, and implementation of 
 this Act. Such experts may be selected from the Environmental 
 Protection Agency, State environmental agencies, and other 
 Federal departments and agencies, including the Department of 
 Defense and the Department of Energy. No person who 
 participated in the development of a remedy for a facility may 
 be a member of the Board reviewing such remedy.
 ``(D) Public participation.--For each remedy that is 
 subject to review under this paragraph, the President shall 
 notify the State, the affected local government, the affected 
 community (including any community assistance group), and the 
 potentially responsible parties that the review will 
take place. Such notice shall include a brief description of the 
preferred remedy and information regarding the location of the 
administrative record established for the facility under section 
113(k). The Board shall review all comments that are received during 
the period for public comment. The Board is not required to review any 
comments that exceed 4,000 words or are not received during such 
period.
 ``(E) Board recommendations.--With respect to a facility 
 for which the Board conducts a review under this paragraph, the 
 Board shall make recommendations to the Regional Administrator 
 of the Environmental Protection Agency for the region in which 
 the facility is located. The Regional Administrator shall make 
 such recommendations publicly available and shall place such 
 recommendations in the administrative record for the facility 
 immediately upon receipt. When the proposed remedial 
 alternative for the facility is issued, the President shall 
 explain any deviations from the Board's recommendations.
 ``(F) Reviews of remedies proposed by states under section 
 151.--This section shall apply to remedies developed by States 
 under section 151. To the extent practicable, a majority of the 
 members of the Board reviewing any such remedies shall be 
 officials from State environmental agencies. This paragraph 
 shall not apply to remedies developed by States under section 
 152, although the Administrator shall encourage such States to 
 provide reviews of remedies in a manner consistent with this 
 paragraph.''.

SEC. 104. PUBLIC HEALTH AUTHORITIES.

 (a) Disease Registry and Medical Care Providers.--Section 104(i)(1) 
of such Act (42 U.S.C. 9604(i)(1)) is amended as follows:
 (1) By amending subparagraph (A) to read as follows:
 ``(A) in cooperation with the States, for scientific 
 purposes and public health purposes, establish and maintain a 
 national registry of persons exposed to toxic substances;''.
 (2) In subparagraph (E), by striking ``admission to 
 hospitals and other facilities and services operated or 
 provided by the Public Health Service'' and inserting 
 ``referral to licensed or accredited health care providers''.
 (b) Determining Health Effects.--Section 104(i)(5)(A) of such Act 
(42 U.S.C. 9604(i)(5)(A)) is amended as follows:
 (1) By striking ``designed to determine the health effects 
 (and techniques for development of methods to determine such 
 health effects) of such substance'' and inserting ``conducted 
 directly or by means such as cooperative agreements and grants 
 with appropriate public and nonprofit institutions. The 
 research shall be designed to determine the health effects (and 
 techniques for development of methods to determine such health 
 effects) of the substance''.
 (2) By redesignating clause (iv) as clause (v).
 (3) By striking ``and'' at the end of clause (iii).
 (4) By inserting after clause (iii) the following new 
 clause:
 ``(iv) laboratory and other studies which can lead to the 
 development of innovative techniques for predicting organ-
 specific, site-specific, and system-specific acute and chronic 
 toxicity; and''.
 (c) Public Health at NPL Facilities.--Section 104(i)(6) of such Act 
(42 U.S.C. 9604(i)(6)) is amended as follows:
 (1) By amending subparagraph (A) to read as follows:
 ``(A)(i) The Administrator of ATSDR shall perform a preliminary 
public health assessment for each facility, including those facilities 
owned by any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United 
States, on the National Priorities List and those sites that are the 
subject of a petition under subparagraph (B). The preliminary public 
health assessment shall be commenced as soon as practicable after each 
facility is proposed for inclusion on the National Priorities List or 
ATSDR accepts a petition for a health assessment. Where ATSDR, in 
consultation with local public health officials, determines it is 
indicated by the preliminary public health assessment, ATSDR shall 
conduct a public health assessment of those sites posing a health 
hazard, which should be considered in selecting the remedial action.
 ``(ii) The Administrator of ATSDR shall design public health 
assessments that take into account the needs and conditions of the 
affected community, in cooperation with States.
 ``(iii) The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency 
shall place highest priority on facilities with releases of hazardous 
substances which result in actual ongoing human exposures at levels of 
public health concern or adverse health effects as identified in a 
public health assessment conducted by the ATSDR or are reasonably 
anticipated based on currently known facts.''.
 (2) In subparagraph (D), by inserting ``(i)'' after ``(D)'' 
 and by adding the following at the end of the subparagraph: 
 ``The President and the Administrator of ATSDR shall develop 
 strategies to obtain relevant on-site and off-site 
 characterization data for use in the health assessment, the 
 President shall, to the maximum extent practicable, provide the 
 Administrator of ATSDR with the data and information necessary 
 to make public health assessments sufficiently prior to the 
 choice of remedial actions to allow ATSDR to complete these 
 assessments. Where deemed appropriate, the Administrator of 
 ATSDR shall provide to the President as soon as practicable 
 after site discovery, recommendations for sampling 
 environmental media for hazardous substances of public health 
 concern. To the extent feasible, the President shall 
 incorporate such recommendations into its site investigation 
 activities.
 ``(ii) In order to improve community involvement in health 
assessments, the Administrator of ATSDR shall carry out each of the 
following duties:
 ``(I) The Administrator of ATSDR shall actively collect 
 from Community Assistance Groups (`CAGs'), from State and local 
 public health authorities, and from other sources in 
 communities affected or potentially affected by releases of 
 hazardous substances data regarding exposure, relevant human 
 activities, and other factors.
 ``(II) The Administrator of ATSDR shall design health 
 assessments that take into account the needs and conditions of 
 the affected community. Community-based research models, 
 building links to local expertise, and local health resources 
 should be used. In preparing such designs, emphasis shall be 
 placed on collection of actual exposure data, and sources of 
 multiple exposure shall be considered.''.
 (3) In subparagraph (H), by striking ``health assessment'' 
 each place it appears and inserting ``public health 
 assessment''.
 (d) Health Studies.--Subparagraph (A) of section 104(i)(7) of such 
Act (42 U.S.C. 9604(i)(7)) is amended to read as follows: ``(A) 
Whenever in the judgment of the Administrator of ATSDR it is 
appropriate on the basis of the results of a public health assessment 
or on the basis of other appropriate information, the Administrator of 
ATSDR shall conduct a human health study of exposure or other health 
effects for selected groups or individuals in order to determine the 
desirability of conducting full scale epidemiologic or other health 
studies of the entire exposed population.''.
 (e) Distribution of Materials to Health Professionals and Medical 
Centers.--Paragraph (14) of section 104(i) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
9604(i)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(14) In implementing this subsection and other health-related 
provisions of this Act in cooperation with the States, the 
Administrator of ATSDR shall--
 ``(A) assemble, develop as necessary, and distribute to the 
 State and local health officials, tribes, medical colleges, 
 physicians, nursing institutions, nurses, and other health 
 professionals and medical centers, appropriate educational 
 materials (including short courses) on the medical 
 surveillance, screening, and methods of prevention, diagnosis, 
 and treatment of injury or disease related to exposure to 
 hazardous substances (giving priority to those listed in 
 paragraph (2)), through means the Administrator of ATSDR 
 considers appropriate; and
 ``(B) assemble, develop as necessary, and distribute to the 
 general public and to at-risk populations appropriate 
 educational materials and other information on human health 
 effects of hazardous substances.''.
 (f) Grant Awards, Contracts, and Community Assistance activities.--
Section 104(i)(15) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 6904(i)(15)) is amended as 
follows:
 (1) By inserting ``(A)'' before ``The activities''.
 (2) In the first sentence, by striking ``cooperative 
 agreements with States (or political subdivisions thereof)'' 
 and inserting ``grants, cooperative agreements, or contracts 
 with States (or political subdivisions thereof), other 
 appropriate public authorities, public or private institutions, 
 colleges, universities, and professional associations''.
 (3) In the second sentence, by inserting ``public'' before 
 ``health assessments''.
 (4) By adding at the end the following new subparagraphs:
 ``(B) When a public health assessment is conducted at a facility on 
the National Priorities List, or a facility is being evaluated for 
inclusion on the National Priorities List, the Administrator of ATSDR 
may provide the assistance specified in this paragraph to public or 
private nonprofit entities, individuals, and community-based groups 
that may be affected by the release or threatened release of hazardous 
substances in the environment.
 ``(C) The Administrator of the ATSDR, pursuant to the grants, 
cooperative agreements, and contracts referred to in this paragraph, is 
authorized and directed to provide, where appropriate, diagnostic 
services, health data registries and preventative public health 
education to communities affected by the release of hazardous 
substances.''.
 (g) Peer Review Committee.--Subsection (i) of section 104 of such 
Act is amended by adding the following at the end thereof:
 ``(19) The Administrator of ATSDR shall establish an external peer 
review committee of qualified health scientists who serve for fixed 
periods and meet periodically to--
 ``(A) provide guidance on initiation of studies;
 ``(B) assess the quality of study reports funded by the 
 agency; and
 ``(C) provide guidance on effective and objective risk 
 characterization and communication.
The peer review committee may include additional specific experts 
representing a balanced group of stakeholders on an ad hoc basis for 
specific issues. Meetings of the committee should be open to the 
public.''.

SEC. 105. INDIAN HEALTH PROVISIONS.

 Section 104(i) (42 U.S.C. 9406(i)) is amended as follows:
 (1) In paragraph (1)--
 (A) by inserting ``the Indian Health Service'' 
 after ``the Secretary of Transportation'';
 (B) by inserting ``and tribal'' after ``and 
 local'';
 (C) in subparagraph (A) (as amended by this Act) by 
 inserting ``and Indian tribes'' after ``the States''; 
 and
 (D) in subparagraph (C) by inserting ``Indian 
 tribes'' after ``States,''.
 (2) In paragraph (4) by--
 (A) striking ``State officials and local 
 officials'' and inserting ``State, tribal, and local 
 officials''; and
 (B) inserting in the second sentence ``or Indian 
 tribes'' after ``States''.
 (3) In paragraph (5)(A) by inserting ``and the Indian 
 Health Service'' after ``Public Health Service''.
 (4) In paragraph (6)(C) by inserting ``where low population 
 density is not used as an excluding risk factor'' after 
 ``health appears highest''.
 (5) In paragraph (6)(E)--
 (A) by inserting ``Indian tribe'' after ``Any''; 
 and
 (B) by inserting at the end of the subparagraph the 
 following: ``If the ATSDR or the Administrator of the 
 Environmental Protection Agency does not act on the 
 recommendations of the State or Indian tribe, then the 
 Administrators must respond in writing to the State or 
 tribe why they have not acted on the 
 recommendations.''.
 (6) In paragraph (6)(F) by striking ``and'' after 
 ``emissions,'' and inserting ``and any other pathways resulting 
 from subsistence activities'' after ``contamination''.
 (7) In paragraph (6)(G) by striking the period at the end 
 of the last sentence and inserting the following: ``and give 
 special consideration, where appropriate, to any practices of 
 the affected community that may result in increased exposure to 
 hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants, such as 
 subsistence hunting, fishing, and gathering.''.
 (8) In paragraph (10)--
 (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph 
 (D);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of 
 subparagraph (E) and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by inserting after revised subparagraph (E) the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(F) and the health impacts from pollutants, 
 contaminants, and hazardous substances on Indian tribes 
 from covered facilities.''.

SEC. 106. HAZARD RANKING SYSTEM.

 Section 105(c) (42 U.S.C. 9605(c)) is amended by inserting after 
paragraph (4) the following new paragraphs:
 ``(5) Risk prioritization.--In setting priorities under 
 subsection (a)(8), the President shall place highest priority 
 on facilities with releases of hazardous substances which 
 result in actual ongoing human exposures at levels of public 
 health concern or demonstrated adverse health effects as 
 identified in a health assessment conducted by the Agency for 
 Toxic Substances and Disease Registry or are reasonably 
 anticipated based on currently known facts.
 ``(6) Prior response action.--Any evaluation under this 
 section shall take into account all prior response actions 
 taken at the facility.''.

SEC. 107. REMOVAL ACTIONS.

 Section 104(c)(1) (42 U.S.C. 9604(c)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``consistent with the remedial action to 
 be taken'' and inserting ``not inconsistent with any remedial 
 action that has been selected or is anticipated at the time of 
 the removal action,'';
 (2) by striking ``$2,000,000'' and inserting 
 ``$3,000,000''; and
 (3) by striking ``12 months'' and inserting ``two years''.

SEC. 108. HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE PROPERTY USE.

 Section 104 (42 U.S.C. 9604) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:
 ``(k) Hazardous Substance Property Use.--
 ``(1) Authority of president to acquire easements.--In 
 order to prevent exposure to, reduce the likelihood of, or 
 otherwise respond to a release or threatened release of a 
 hazardous substance, the President may acquire, at fair market 
 value, or for other consideration as agreed to by the parties, 
 a hazardous substance easement which restricts, limits, or 
 controls the use of land, water, or other natural resources, 
 including specifying permissible or impermissible uses of land, 
 prohibiting specified activities upon property, prohibiting the 
 drilling of wells or use of ground water, or restricting the 
 use of surface water.
 ``(2) Use of easements.--A hazardous substance easement and 
 notice of a property use restriction under this subsection may 
 be used wherever institutional controls have been selected as a 
 component of remedial action for a site listed on the National 
 Priorities List.
 ``(3) Persons subject to easements.--A hazardous substance 
 easement shall be enforceable for 20 years and may be renewed 
 for additional 20-year periods where necessary to meet the 
 standards of this section (unless terminated and released as 
 provided for in this section) against any owner of the affected 
 property and all persons who subsequently acquire interest in 
 the property or rights to use the property, including lessees, 
 licensees, and any other person with an interest in the 
 property, without respect to privity or lack of privity of 
 estate or contract, lack of benefit running to any other 
 property, assignment of the easement to another party, or any 
 other circumstance which might otherwise affect the 
 enforceability of easements or similar deed restrictions under 
 the laws of the State. The easement shall be binding upon 
 holders of any other interests in the property regardless of 
 whether such interests are recorded or whether they were 
 recorded prior or subsequent to the easement, and shall remain 
 in effect notwithstanding any foreclosure or other assertion of 
 such interests.
 ``(4) Contents of easements.--A hazardous substance 
 easement shall contain, at a minimum--
 ``(A) a legal description of the property affected;
 ``(B) the name or names of any current owner or 
 owners of the property as reflected in public land 
 records;
 ``(C) a description of the release or threatened 
 release; and
 ``(D) a statement as to the nature of the 
 restriction, limitation, or control created by the 
 easement.
 ``(5) Use restriction notice.--Whenever the President 
 acquires a hazardous substance easement or assigns a hazardous 
 substance easement to another party, the President shall record 
 a notice of property use restriction in the public land records 
 for the jurisdiction in which the affected property is located. 
 Such a notice shall specify restrictions, limitations, or 
 controls on the use of land, water, or other natural resources 
 provided for in the hazardous substance easement.
 ``(6) Filing of notice.--Wherever recording in the public 
 land records is required under this subsection, the President 
 shall file the notice or other instrument in the appropriate 
 office within the State (or governmental subdivision) in which 
 the affected property is located, as designated by State law. 
 If the State has not by law designated one office for the 
 recording of interests in real property or claims or rights 
 burdening real property, the document or notice shall be filed 
 in the office of the clerk of the United States district court 
 for the district in which the affected property is located.
 ``(7) Methods of acquiring easements.--The President may 
 acquire a hazardous substance easement by purchase or other 
 agreement, by condemnation, or by any other means permitted by 
 law. Compensation for such easement shall be at fair market 
 value, or for other consideration as agreed to by the parties, 
 for the interest acquired. The direct cost of such easements, 
 ensuring adequate public notice of such easements, and 
 otherwise tracking and maintaining the protections afforded by 
 the easements shall be considered response costs which are 
 recoverable under this Act.
 ``(8) Assignment of easements to parties other than the 
 president.--
 ``(A) Authority to assign.--The President may 
 assign an easement acquired under this subsection to a 
 State or other governmental entity that has the 
 capability of effectively enforcing the easement over 
 the period of time necessary to achieve the purposes of 
 the easement. In the case of any assignment, the 
 easement shall be fully enforceable by the assignee. 
 Any assignment of such an easement by the President may 
 be made by following the same procedures as are used 
 for the transfer of an interest in real property to a 
 State under subsection (j).
 ``(B) Effect of assignment.--Any interest in 
 property granted to a State or other governmental 
 entity which restricts, limits, or controls the use of 
 land, water, or other natural resources in order to 
 prevent exposure to, reduce the likelihood of, or 
 otherwise respond to, a release or threatened release 
 of a hazardous substance, and which is expressly 
 designated in writing as a hazardous substance easement 
 within the meaning of this paragraph, shall create the 
 same rights, have the same legal effect, and be 
 enforceable in the same manner as a hazardous substance 
 easement held by the President regardless of whether 
 the interest in property is otherwise denominated as an 
 easement, covenant, or any other form of property 
 right.
 ``(9) Public notice.--Not later than 180 days after the 
 date of the enactment of this subsection, the President shall 
 issue regulations regarding the procedures to be used for 
 public notice of proposed property use restrictions. Such 
 regulations shall ensure that before acquiring a hazardous 
 substance easement, and before recording any notice of such 
 easement, the President will give notice and an opportunity to 
 comment to the owner of the affected property, all other 
 persons with recorded interests in the property, any lessees or 
 other authorized occupants of the property known to the 
 President, the State and any municipalities in which the 
 property is located, any relevant community assistance group 
 established under section 117, the affected community, and the 
 general public.
 ``(10) Termination of easements.--An easement acquired 
 under this subsection shall remain in force until it expires by 
 its terms or until the holder of the easement executes and 
 records a termination and release in accordance with the terms 
 of the easement and approved by the Administrator of the 
 Environmental Protection Agency or the relevant assignee. Such 
 termination shall be recorded in the same manner as the 
 easement.
 ``(11) Enforcement.--
 ``(A) Effect of violations.--Violation of any 
 restriction, limitation, or control imposed under a 
 hazardous substance easement shall have the same effect 
 as failure to comply with an order issued under section 
 106 and relief may be sought either in enforcement 
 actions under section 106(b)(1), section 120(g), or 
 section 127(e) or in citizens suits under section 310. 
 No citizens suit under section 310 to enforce such a 
 notice may be commenced if the holder of the easement 
 has commenced and is diligently prosecuting an action 
 in court to enforce the easement.
 ``(B) Enforcement actions.--The President may take 
 appropriate enforcement actions to ensure compliance 
 with the terms of the easement whenever the 
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency 
 determines that the terms set forth in the easement are 
 being violated. If the easement has been assigned to a 
 party other than the President and that party has not 
 taken appropriate enforcement actions, the President 
 may notify the assignee of the violation. If the party 
 does not take appropriate enforcement actions within 30 
 days of such notification, or sooner in the case of an 
 imminent hazard, the President may initiate such 
 enforcement actions.
 ``(12) Applicability of other provisions.--Holding a 
 hazardous substance easement shall not subject either the 
 holder thereof or the owner of the affected property to 
 liability under section 107. Any such easement acquired by the 
 President shall not be subject to the requirements of 
 subsection (j) or section 120(h).''.

SEC. 109. EFFECTIVE DATE AND TRANSITION RULES.

 The amendments made by this title shall apply--
 (1) to any final remedial action selected under the 
 Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and 
 Liability Act of 1980 for which the Record of Decision 
 (hereinafter in this section referred to as the ``ROD'') was 
 signed, or the consent decree was lodged, after the date of the 
enactment of this Act; and
 (2) to any modifications made to any ROD after the date of 
 enactment of this Act.

 TITLE II--LIABILITY

SEC. 201. PARTIES NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR POLLUTION.

 (a) In General.--Section 107 (42 U.S.C. 9607) is amended by adding 
at the end the following:
 ``(o) Exemptions and Limitations of Liability.--
 ``(1) Pre-1987 generators and transporters.--No person 
 (other than the United States or a department, agency or 
 instrumentality of the United States) shall be liable under 
 paragraph (3) or (4) of subsection (a) for a release or 
 threatened release at a facility or vessel not owned by the 
 United States listed on the National Priorities List, if no 
 activity of such person described in such paragraph (3) or (4) 
 occurred after January 1, 1987, unless it is demonstrated by a 
 preponderance of the evidence that--
 ``(A) such person generated or transported 
 hazardous substances that have contributed 
 significantly or could contribute significantly to the 
 costs of the response or to the costs of the natural 
 resource damages;
 ``(B) such person has impeded the performance of 
 the response action or natural resource damage 
 restoration;
 ``(C) such person is legally affiliated with a 
 liable person at the facility or vessel through any 
 direct familial, contractual, corporate, or financial 
 relationship to the facility other than that arising 
 from a contract for the disposal, treatment, or 
 transportation of the hazardous substances at, to, or 
 from the facility; or
 ``(D) such person has not substantively complied 
 with all requests made under the authority of sections 
 104(e), 122(g)(2), and 128 with respect to such 
 facility or vessel.
 ``(2) Municipal solid waste and sewage sludge.--No person 
 (other than the United States or a department, agency or 
 instrumentality of the United States) shall be liable under 
 paragraph (3) or (4) of subsection (a) for a release or 
 threatened release at any facility or vessel not owned by the 
 United States listed on the National Priorities List if the 
 activity of such person described in such paragraph (3) or (4) 
 involved only municipal solid waste or sewage sludge, unless it 
 is demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that--
 ``(A) the hazardous substances contained in such 
 waste or sludge have contributed significantly or could 
 contribute significantly to the costs of the response 
 or to the costs of the natural resource damages;
 ``(B) such person has impeded the performance of 
 the response action or natural resource damage 
 restoration; or
 ``(C) such person has not substantively complied 
 with all requests made under the authority of sections 
 104(e), 122(g)(2), and 128 with respect to such 
 facility or vessel.
 ``(3) De micromis exemption.--No person (other than the 
 United States or a department, agency or instrumentality of the 
 United States) shall be liable under paragraph (3) or (4) of 
 subsection (a) for a release or threatened release at any 
 facility or vessel if the activity of such person described in 
 such paragraph (3) or (4) involved no more than 110 gallons of 
 liquid materials containing hazardous substances or more than 
 200 pounds of solid materials containing hazardous substances, 
 unless it is demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence 
 that--
 ``(A) such hazardous substances have contributed 
 significantly or could contribute significantly to the 
 costs of the response or to the costs of the natural 
 resource damage restoration;
 ``(B) such person has impeded the performance of a 
 response action or natural resource damage restoration; 
 or
 ``(C) such person has not substantively complied 
 with all requests made under the authority of section 
 104(e).
 ``(4) Facilities acquired by inheritance or bequest.--No 
 person shall be liable under this section for costs or damages 
 at any facility or vessel to the extent that liability at such 
 facility or vessel is based solely on the person's status as an 
 owner under paragraph (1) of subsection (a) for a release or 
 threat of release from the facility or vessel, and the person 
 acquired the facility or vessel by inheritance or bequest if 
 the person--
 ``(A) acquired the real property on which the 
 facility concerned is located, or acquired the vessel, 
after placement of the hazardous substance occurred at the facility or 
vessel;
 ``(B) did not cause, contribute to, or consent to 
 the release or threat of release; and
 ``(C) exercised due care with respect to the 
 hazardous substance concerned, including precautions 
 against foreseeable acts of third parties, taking into 
 consideration the characteristics of such hazardous 
 substance, in light of all relevant facts and 
 circumstances.
 ``(5) Certain tax exempt organizations.--A person's 
 liability under this section with respect to a release or 
 threatened release from a facility or vessel shall be limited 
 to the lesser of the fair market value of the facility or 
 vessel or the actual proceeds of the sale of the facility or 
 vessel received by the person, to the extent such liability is 
 based solely on the person's status under paragraph (1) of 
 subsection (a) as owner of the facility or vessel if the 
 person--
 ``(A) holding title, either outright or in trust, 
 to the facility or vessel is an organization described 
 in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986 and exempt from tax under section 501(a) of such 
 Code and holds such title as a result of a charitable 
 donation that qualifies under sections 170, 2055, or 
 2522 of such Code;
 ``(B) exercised due care with respect to the 
 hazardous substance concerned, including precautions 
 against foreseeable acts of third parties, taking into 
 consideration the characteristics of such hazardous 
 substance, in light of all relevant facts and 
 circumstances;
 ``(C) did not cause, contribute to, or consent to 
 the release or threat of release; and
 ``(D) acquired the real property on which the 
 facility concerned is located, or acquired the vessel, 
 after placement of the hazardous substance occurred at 
 the facility or vessel.
 ``(6) Construction contractors.--No person shall be liable 
 under this section for costs or damages at any facility or 
 vessel to the extent that liability is based solely on a 
 person's construction activities at a facility or vessel if 
 such person can demonstrate by a preponderance of evidence that 
 such construction activities were specifically directed by and 
 carried out in accordance with a contract with an owner or 
 operator of the facility or vessel.
 ``(7) Railroad owners.--No person shall be liable under 
 this section for costs or damages at any facility to the extent 
 that liability is based solely on the status of the person as a 
 railroad owner or operator of a spur track, including a spur 
 track over land subject to an easement, to a facility that is 
 owned or operated by a person that is not affiliated with the 
 railroad owner or operator, if--
 ``(A) the spur track provides access to a main line 
 or branch line track that is owned or operated by the 
 railroad;
 ``(B) the spur track is 10 miles long or less; and
 ``(C) the railroad owner or operator does not cause 
 or contribute to a release or threatened release at the 
 spur track.
 ``(8) Grantees of certain easements.--No person shall be 
 liable under this section for costs or damages at any facility 
 for a release or threat of release from the facility to the 
 extent that liability is based solely on the status of the 
 person as--
 ``(A) a holder of a pipeline right-of-way or 
 easement; or
 ``(B) a holder of a gas or oil lease;
if the holder of such right-of-way, easement, or lease did not cause, 
contribute to, or consent to the release or threat of release.
 ``(9) Inapplicability.--An exemption under paragraph (4), 
 (5), (6), (7), or (8) shall not apply to any person with 
 respect to any facility or vessel if it is demonstrated that--
 ``(A) such person has impeded the performance of a 
 response action or natural resource damage restoration 
 at such facility or vessel;
 ``(B) such person has refused to provide 
 cooperation and facility access to persons authorized 
 to conduct response actions or natural resource damage 
 restorations at the facility or vessel; or
 ``(C) such person has not substantively complied 
 with all requests made under the authority of section 
 104(e) with respect to such facility or vessel.
 ``(10) Limitations on liability of municipalities.--
 ``(A) Small municipalities.--With respect to a 
 facility listed on the National Priorities List at 
 which the predominant sources of contamination 
initially originated with parties liable under subparagraph (3) or (4) 
of subsection (a) prior to the enactment of the Superfund Reform Act, 
that is owned or operated only by small municipalities and that is not 
subject to the criteria for solid waste landfills published under 
subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6941 et seq.) at 
part 258 of title 40, Code of Federal Regulations (or a successor 
regulation), the aggregate liability of all small municipalities for 
response costs incurred on or after the date of enactment of this 
subsection shall be the lesser of--
 ``(i) 10 percent of the total amount of 
 response costs at the facility; or
 ``(ii) the costs of compliance with the 
 requirements of subtitle D of the Solid Waste 
 Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6941 et seq.) for the 
 facility (as if the facility had continued to 
 accept municipal solid waste through January 1, 
 1997).
 ``(B) Aggregate liability of large 
 municipalities.--With respect to a facility listed on 
 the National Priorities List at which the predominant 
 sources of contamination originated with parties liable 
 under subparagraph (3) or (4) of subsection (a) prior 
 to the enactment of the Superfund Reform Act, that is 
 owned or operated only by large municipalities and that 
 is not subject to the criteria for solid waste 
 landfills published under subtitle D of the Solid Waste 
 Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6941 et seq.) at part 258 of 
 title 40, Code of Federal Regulations (or a successor 
 regulation), the aggregate liability of all large 
 municipalities for response costs incurred on or after 
 the date of enactment of this subsection shall be the 
 lesser of--
 ``(i) 20 percent of the proportion of the 
 total amount of response costs at the facility; 
 or
 ``(ii) the costs of compliance with the 
 requirements of subtitle D of the Solid Waste 
 Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6941 et seq.) for the 
 facility (as if the facility had continued to 
 accept municipal solid waste through January 1, 
 1997).
 ``(C) Aggregate liability of municipalities and 
 nonmunicipalities.--With respect to a facility listed 
 on the National Priorities List that is owned and 
 operated by a combination of small and large 
 municipalities or persons other than municipalities and 
 that is subject to the criteria for solid waste 
 landfills published under subtitle D of the Solid Waste 
 Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6941 et seq.) at part 28 of 
 title 40, Code of Federal Regulations (or a successor 
 regulation)--
 ``(i) the allocator shall determine the 
 proportion of the contamination of the landfill 
 that was made during the ownership or operation 
 of it by small and large municipalities and 
 persons other than municipalities during the 
 time the facility was in operation; and
 ``(ii) shall allocate among the parties an 
 appropriate percentage of total liability which 
 for the municipal parties shall not exceed the 
 aggregate liability percentages stated in 
 paragraphs (1) and (2).
 ``(D) Limitations.--The liability limitations of 
 this paragraph shall not apply to--
 ``(i) a person that acted in violation of 
 subtitle C of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 
 U.S.C. Sec. 6921 et seq.);
 ``(ii) a person that owned or operated a 
 facility in violation of the applicable 
 requirements for municipal solid waste landfill 
 units under subtitle D of the Solid Waste 
 Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. Sec. 6941 et seq.) 
 after October 9, 1991;
 ``(iii) a person that did not act pursuant 
 to and in substantial compliance with any other 
 applicable permit, license, or other approval 
 or authorization relating to solid waste or 
 sewage sludge disposal issued by an appropriate 
 Federal, State, Indian tribe, or local 
 government authority, and such violation caused 
 contamination of the facility; or
 ``(iv) a person that impedes the 
 performance of a response action.
 ``(11) Treatment of non-liable parties.--The Administrator 
 shall seek to minimize the administrative and legal burdens on 
 parties that are not liable pursuant to this section. To the 
 extent practicable, the Administrator shall--
 ``(A) inform such parties that they are exempted 
 from liability pursuant to this section, and offer them 
written assurances establishing their exempt status; and
 ``(B) eliminate or minimize any need for such 
 parties to retain legal counsel in connection with 
 administrative or legal proceedings concerning the 
 facility at issue.
 ``(p) Significant Contributions.--For purposes of paragraphs (1), 
(2), and (3) of subsection (o), a demonstration that hazardous 
substances have contributed significantly or could contribute 
significantly to the costs of a response or to natural resource damages 
shall be based upon the following factors in relationship to the costs 
of the response or to the natural resource damages:
 ``(1) The degree to which the person caused, contributed 
 to, or consented to the release or threat of release of 
 hazardous substances at the facility.
 ``(2) The amount of hazardous substances contributed by the 
 person. Any person who arranged for the disposal or treatment, 
 or arranged with a transporter for transport for disposal or 
 treatment, of hazardous substances constituting less than one 
 percent by volume of the hazardous substances at a facility 
 shall be presumed not to have contributed significantly to the 
 costs of a response or to natural resource damages.
 ``(3) The degree of toxicity of the hazardous substances 
 contributed by the person.
 ``(4) The mobility of the hazardous substances contributed 
 by the person.
 ``(5) The degree of involvement of the person in the 
 generation, transportation, treatment, storage, or disposal of 
 the hazardous substances it contributed, including whether the 
 person exercised control over the owner or operator of the 
 facility or vessel during the period when such activities 
 occurred.
 ``(6) The degree of care exercised by the person with 
 respect to the hazardous substances it contributed, taking into 
 account the characteristics of the hazardous substances.
 ``(7) The cooperation of the person in performing any 
 response action and in providing complete and timely 
 information pursuant to sections 104(e) and 122(g)(2).''.
 (b) Effective Date and Transition Rules.--The amendments made by 
this section shall take effect upon the date of the enactment of this 
Act, except that such amendments shall not apply in the following:
 (1) Any action brought by any person other than the United 
 States under section 107 or 113 of the Comprehensive 
 Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 
 for contribution to response costs or natural resource damage 
 restoration actually incurred by such person before November 9, 
 1997.
 (2) Any action seeking indemnity, rights of defense, or 
 other rights under any contract of indemnification or 
 insurance.

SEC. 202. CLARIFICATIONS OF CERTAIN LIABILITY.

 (a) Amount of Liability.--Section 107(c)(3) (42 U.S.C. 9607(c)(3)) 
is amended in the first sentence by striking ``at least equal to,'' and 
all that follows through the end of the sentence and inserting ``up to 
three times the amount of such response costs.''.
 (b) Clarification of Common Carrier Liability.--Section 107(b)(3) 
is amended by striking out ``from a published tariff and acceptance 
for'' and inserting ``exclusively from a contract for''.
 (c) Other Clarifications.--Section 107(a) (42 U.S.C. 9607(a)) is 
amended as follows:
 (1) In paragraph (1), by striking ``and'' and inserting 
 ``or''.
 (2) In paragraph (4)(B)--
 (A) by striking ``other'' both places it appears; 
 and
 (B) by inserting ``, other than the United States, 
 a State, or an Indian tribe,'' before the phrase 
 ``consistent with the national contingency plan''.
 (3) In paragraph (4), by striking ``by such person,'' and 
 all that follows through ``shall be liable for--'' and 
 inserting in lieu thereof the following: ``by such person--
from which there is a release, or a threatened release, that causes the 
incurrence of response costs, of a hazardous substance, shall be liable 
for--''.
 (4) By designating the text beginning with ``The amounts 
 recoverable'' and ending with ``this subsection commences.'' as 
 paragraph (5) and aligning the margin of such text with 
 paragraph (4).
 (5) By adding the following new paragraph at the end 
 thereof:
 ``(6) The costs recoverable under this section shall not 
 include any costs incurred by the United States for management 
 support, for research and development, or for enforcement.''.

SEC. 203. AMENDMENTS TO SECTION 106.

 (a) Administrative Orders.--Section 106(a) (42 U.S.C. 9606(a)) is 
amended by adding at the end the following: ``The President may not 
amend such administrative orders or issue additional orders relating to 
the facility without a subsequent finding of an imminent and 
substantial endangerment. No order may be issued under this section 
against any person who would not be liable for costs or damages 
referred to in section 107(a). In any case in which the President 
issues an order to a person under this subsection, the President shall 
provide information concerning the evidence that indicates that each 
element of liability contained in section 107(a) is present. In the 
case of a person who is found liable by an allocator under section 128, 
the President may issue orders under this section only in accordance 
with section 128(m).''.
 (b) Sufficient Cause.--Section 106(b)(1) (42 U.S.C. 9606(b)(1)) is 
amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(A)'' after ``(b)(1)'';
 (2) by striking ``to enforce such order'';
 (3) by inserting before the period ``, or be required to 
 comply with such order, or both, even if another person has 
 complied, or is complying, with the terms of the same order or 
 another order pertaining to the same facility and release or 
 threatened release''; and
 (4) by inserting at the end the following:
 ``(B) For purposes of this subsection and section 107(c)(3), a 
`sufficient cause' includes, without limitation, an objectively 
reasonable belief by the person to whom the order is issued that--
 ``(i) the person is not liable for any response costs under 
 section 107; or
 ``(ii) that the action to be performed pursuant to the 
 order is inconsistent with the national contingency plan.

SEC. 204. CIVIL PROCEEDINGS.

 (a) Petitions.--Section 113(a) (42 U.S.C. 9613(a)) is amended as 
follows:
 (1) By striking ``upon application by any interested 
 person'' and inserting ``by any interested person through the 
 filing of a petition for review''.
 (2) By striking ``application shall be made'', and 
 inserting ``petition shall be filed''.
 (b) Period in Which Action May Be Brought.-- Section 113(g) (42 
U.S.C. 9613(g)) is amended by striking paragraphs (2) and (3) and 
inserting in lieu thereof the following:
 ``(2) Actions for recovery of costs.--(A) Except as 
 provided in subparagraph (C), an initial action for recovery of 
 costs referred to in section 107 must be commenced--
 ``(i) for a removal action, within 3 years after 
 completion of all removal action taken with respect to 
 the facility, including off-site disposal of any 
 removed materials, except that if physical on-site 
 construction of the remedial action is initiated within 
 3 years after the completion of all removal action 
 taken with respect to the facility, costs incurred for 
 removal action may be recovered in a cost recovery 
 action brought under clause (ii); and
 ``(ii) for a remedial action, within 6 years after 
 initiation of physical on-site construction of the 
 remedial action.
 ``(B) In any such action described in this paragraph, the 
 court shall enter a declaratory judgment on liability for 
 response costs or damages that will be binding in such action 
 or in any subsequent action or actions to recover further 
 response costs or damages. A subsequent action or actions under 
 section 107 for further response costs at the vessel or 
 facility may be maintained at any time during the response 
 action, but must be commenced no later than 3 years after the 
 date of completion of all response action. Except as otherwise 
 provided in this paragraph, an action may be commenced under 
 section 107 for recovery of costs at any time after such costs 
 have been incurred.
 ``(C) An action by any potentially responsible party 
 against another potentially responsible party for recovery of 
 any response costs or damages must be commenced within the 
 later of--
 ``(i) the time limitations set forth in 
 subparagraph (A); or
 ``(ii) where recovery is sought for costs or 
 damages paid pursuant to a judgment or settlement, 3 
 years after--
 ``(I) the date of judgment in any action 
 under this Act for recovery of such costs or 
 damages, or
 ``(II) the date of any administrative order 
 or judicial settlement for recovery of the 
 costs or damages paid or incurred pursuant to 
 such a settlement.''.

SEC. 205. LIMITATIONS ON CONTRIBUTION ACTIONS.

 Section 113(f) (42 U.S.C. 9613(f)) is amended as follows:
 (1) By amending paragraph (1) as follows:
 (A) By striking ``Any person'' in the first 
 sentence and inserting ``Except as provided in 
 paragraph (4), any person who is liable or potentially 
 liable under section 107(a)''.
 (B) By striking ``, during or following any civil 
 action under section 106 or under section 107(a).'' and 
 inserting ``in a claim asserted under section 
 107(a).''.
 (C) In the second sentence, by striking ``this 
 section'' and inserting ``section 107(a), this 
 section,''.
 (D) By striking the sentence beginning with 
 ``Nothing in this subsection''.
 (2) By amending paragraph (2) to read as follows:
 ``(2) Settlements.--A person who has resolved its liability 
 to the United States in an administrative or judicially 
 approved settlement shall not be liable for contribution or any 
 other claims by any person other than a State acting under 
 section 107(a)(4)(A) (and not as a potentially responsible 
 party) regarding response actions, response costs, or damages 
 addressed in the settlement. A person who has resolved its 
 liability to a State or an Indian tribe in an administrative or 
 judicially approved settlement shall not be liable for 
 contribution or any other claims by persons other than the 
 United States Government acting under section 107(a)(4)(A) (and 
 not as a potentially responsible party) regarding response 
 actions, response costs or damages addressed in the settlement 
 for which the State or Indian tribe has a claim under this 
 title. Such settlement does not discharge any other potentially 
 responsible persons unless its terms so provide, but it reduces 
 the potential liability of such other persons by the amount of 
 the settlement. The protection afforded by this subsection 
 shall include protection against claims, under Federal or State 
 law, that may be asserted against the settling party for 
 recovery of response costs or damages incurred or paid by 
 another person, if such costs or damages are addressed in the 
 settlement, but shall not include protection against claims 
 based on contractual indemnification or other express 
 contractual agreements to pay such costs or damages.''.
 (3) By adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Limitations on contribution actions.--(A) There shall 
 be no right of contribution under this subsection in any of the 
 following circumstances:
 ``(i) The person asserting the right of 
 contribution has waived the right in a settlement 
 pursuant to this Act.
 ``(ii) The person from whom contribution is sought 
 is not liable under this Act.
 ``(iii) The person from whom contribution is sought 
 has entered into a settlement with the United States 
 pursuant to section 122(g), with respect to matters 
 addressed in that settlement.
 ``(B) Any person who commences an action for contribution 
 shall be liable to the person against whom the claim of 
 contribution is brought for all reasonable costs of defending 
 against the claim, including all reasonable attorneys' and 
 expert witness fees, if--
 ``(i) the action is barred by subparagraph (A);
 ``(ii) the action is brought against a person who 
 is protected from such suits pursuant to section 
 113(f)(2) by reason of a settlement with the United 
 States; or
 ``(iii) the action is brought during the moratorium 
 pursuant to section 128 (relating to allocation).''.

SEC. 206. LIABILITY OF RESPONSE ACTION CONTRACTORS.

 (a) Extension of Negligence Standard.--Subsection (a) of section 
119 (42 U.S.C. 9619(a)) is amended as follows:
 (1) In paragraph (1), by striking out ``title or under any 
 other Federal law'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``title, 
 under any other Federal law or under the law of any State or 
 political subdivision of a State''.
 (2) by adding at the end of paragraph (1) the following: 
 ``Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, this section shall 
 not apply in determining the liability of a response action 
 contractor under the law of any State or political subdivision 
 thereof if the State has adopted a law determining the 
 liability of a response action contractor.''.
 (3) By adding at the end of paragraph (2) the following: 
 ``Such conduct shall be evaluated based on the generally 
 accepted standards and practices in effect at the time and 
 place that the conduct occurred.''.
 (b) Extension of Indemnification Authority.--Section 119(c) is 
amended by adding at the end of paragraph (1) the following: ``Any such 
agreement may apply to claims for negligence arising under Federal law 
or under the law of any State or political subdivision of a State.''.
 (c) Indemnification for Threatened Releases.--Section 119(c)(5) is 
amended in subparagraph (A) by inserting ``or threatened release'' 
after ``release'' both places it appears.
 (d) Clarification of Liability.--Section 119(a) (42 U.S.C. 9219(a)) 
is amended by inserting after paragraph (4) the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(5) Liability.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 this Act, any liability of a response action contractor under 
 this Act shall be determined solely in accordance with this 
 section.''.
 (e) Limitation on Actions.--Section 119 is amended by adding at the 
end the following new subsection:
 ``(g) Limitation on Actions Against Response Action Contractors.--
No action to recover for any injury to property, real or personal, or 
for bodily injury or wrongful death, or any other expenses or costs 
arising out of the performance of services under a response action 
contract, nor any action for contribution or indemnity for damages 
sustained as a result of such injury, shall be brought against any 
response action contractor more than 6 years after the completion of 
work at any site under such contract. Notwithstanding the preceding 
sentence, this section shall not--
 ``(1) bar recovery for a claim caused by the conduct of the 
 response action contractor that is grossly negligent or that 
 constitutes intentional misconduct;
 ``(2) affect any right of indemnification that such 
 response action contractor may have under this section or may 
 acquire by written agreement with any party; or
 ``(3) apply in any State or political subdivision thereof 
 it the State has adopted a statute of repose determining the 
 liability of a response action contractor.''.
 (f) Extension Relating to Sureties.--(1) Section 119(e)(2) is 
amended in subparagraph (C) by striking ``and before January 1, 
1996,''.
 (2) Section 119(g)(5) is amended by striking out ``, or after 
December 31, 1995''.
 (g) Extension of Coverage to All Response Actions.--Section 
119(e)(1) is amended as follows:
 (1) By striking ``carrying out an agreement under section 
 106 or 122''.
 (2) By striking ``any remedial action under this Act at a 
 facility listed on the National Priorities List, or any removal 
 action under this Act,'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``any 
 response as defined by section 101(25),''.

SEC. 207. EXPEDITED FINAL SETTLEMENTS.

 Section 122 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 is amended as follows:
 (1) Subsection (g) is amended by striking ``(g)'' and all 
 that follows through the end of subparagraph (A) of paragraph 
 (1) and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
 ``(g) Expedited Final Settlement.--
 ``(1) Parties eligible for expedited settlement.--The 
 President shall, as promptly as possible, offer to reach a 
 final administrative or judicial settlement with potentially 
 responsible parties who, in the judgment of the President, meet 
 one or more of the following conditions for eligibility for an 
 expedited settlement:
 ``(A) The potentially responsible party's liability 
 is based solely on paragraph (3) or (4) of section 
 107(a) and the party's individual contribution of 
 hazardous substances at the facility is de minimis. The 
 contribution of hazardous substances to a facility by a 
 potentially responsible party is de minimis if both of 
 the following conditions are met:
 ``(i) The potentially responsible party's 
 volumetric contribution of materials containing 
 hazardous substances is insignificant in 
 comparison to the total volumetric 
 contributions of materials containing hazardous 
 substances at the facility. An individual 
 contribution is presumed to be insignificant if 
 it is one percent or less of the total 
 volumetric contribution at the facility, unless 
 the Administrator identifies a different 
 threshold based on site-specific factors.
 ``(ii) The potentially responsible party's 
 hazardous substances do not present toxic or 
 other hazardous effects that are significantly 
 greater than those of other hazardous 
 substances at the facility.''.
 (2) Such subsection (g) is further amended by inserting 
 after subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1) the following:
 ``(C)(i) The potentially responsible party's 
 liability is based solely on paragraph (3) or (4) of 
 section 107(a), and the potentially responsible party 
 can demonstrate an inability to pay response costs.
 ``(ii) For purposes of this subparagraph, the 
 following provisions apply:
 ``(I) In the case of a small business, the 
 President shall take into consideration the 
 ability to pay of the business, if requested by 
 the business. The term `ability to pay' means 
 the President's reasonable expectation of the 
 ability of the small business to pay its total 
 settlement amount and still maintain its basic 
 business operations. Such consideration shall 
 include the business's overall financial 
 condition and demonstrable constraints on its 
 ability to raise revenues.
 ``(II) Any business requesting such 
 consideration shall promptly provide the 
 President with all relevant information needed 
 to determine the business's ability to pay.
 ``(III) The business shall demonstrate the 
 amount of its ability to pay. If the business 
 employs fewer than 75 employees or has annual 
 gross revenues of less than $5,000,000, the 
 President shall perform any analysis that may 
 be required to demonstrate the business's 
 ability to pay. The President, in his 
 discretion, may perform such analysis for any 
 other party or require such other party to 
 perform the analysis.
 ``(IV) If the President determines that a 
 small business is unable to pay its total 
 settlement amount immediately, the President 
 shall consider alternative payment methods as 
 may be necessary or appropriate. The methods to 
 be considered may include installment payments 
 to be paid during a period of not to exceed 10 
 years and the provision of in-kind services.
 ``(iii) Any municipality which is a potentially 
 responsible party may submit for consideration by the 
 President an evaluation of the potential impact of the 
 settlement on essential services that the municipality 
 must provide, and the feasibility of making delayed 
 payments or payments over time. If a municipality 
 asserts that it has additional environmental 
 obligations besides its potential liability under this 
 Act, then the municipality may create a list of the 
 obligations, including an estimate of the costs of 
 complying with such obligations.
 ``(iv) Any municipality which is a potentially 
 responsible party may establish an inability to pay 
 through an affirmative showing that such payment of its 
 liability under this Act would either--
 ``(I) create a substantial demonstrable 
 risk that the municipality would default on 
 existing debt obligations, be forced into 
 bankruptcy, be forced to dissolve, or be forced 
 to make budgetary cutbacks that would 
 substantially reduce current levels of 
 protection of public health and safety; or
 ``(II) necessitate a violation of legal 
 requirements or limitations of general 
 applicability concerning the assumption and 
 maintenance of fiscal municipal obligations.
 ``(v) This subparagraph shall not limit or affect 
 the President's authority to evaluate any person's 
 ability to pay or to enter into settlements with any 
 person based on that person's inability to pay.''.
 (3) Paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection (g) are amended to 
 read as follows:
 ``(2) Basis of determination.--Any person who enters into a 
 settlement pursuant to this subsection shall provide any 
 information requested by the President or by an allocator in 
 accordance with section 128 (relating to allocation 
 information-gathering authority) or section 104(e) of this Act. 
 The determination of whether a person is eligible for an 
 expedited settlement shall be made on the basis of all 
 information available to the President at the time the 
 determination is made. The President's determination as to the 
 eligibility of a party that is not a department, agency, or 
 instrumentality of the United States for settlement pursuant to 
 this section shall not be subject to judicial review. If the 
 President determines that a party is not eligible for a 
 settlement pursuant to this section, the President shall 
 explain the basis for that determination in writing to any 
 person who requests such a settlement.
 ``(3) Additional factors relevant to settlements with 
 municipalities.--In any settlement with a municipality pursuant 
 to this Act, the President may take additional equitable 
 factors into account in determining an appropriate settlement 
 amount, including the limited resources available to that 
 party, and any in-kind services that the party may provide to 
 support the response action at the facility. In considering the 
 value of in-kind services, the President shall consider the 
 fair market value of those services.''.
 (4) Subsection (g) is further amended by amending paragraph 
 (5) by inserting the following before the first sentence: ``A 
 party who enters into a settlement pursuant to paragraph (1)(A) 
 or (1)(C) of this subsection shall be deemed to have resolved 
 its liability under this Act to the United States for all 
 matters addressed in the settlement.''.
 (5) Subsection (h) is amended as follows:
 (A) By amending the heading to read as follows: 
 ``Authority To Settle Claims for Fines, Civil 
 Penalties, Punitive Damages, and Cost Recovery.--''.
 (B) In paragraph (1):
 (i) In the first sentence, by striking 
 ``costs incurred'' and inserting ``past and 
 future costs incurred or that may be 
 incurred''.
 (ii) In the first sentence, by inserting 
 after ``if the claim has not been referred to 
 the Department of Justice for further action.'' 
 the following: ``The head of any department or 
 agency with the authority to seek fines, civil 
 penalties, or punitive damages under this Act 
 may consider, compromise, and settle claims for 
 any such fines, civil penalties, or punitive 
 damages which may otherwise be assessed in 
 civil administrative or judicial proceedings if 
 the claim has not been referred to the 
 Department of Justice for further action.''.

SEC. 208. ALLOCATIONS AT MULTI-PARTY FACILITIES.

 Title I (42 U.S.C. 9601 et seq.) is amended by adding after section 
127 the following new section:

``SEC. 128. ALLOCATIONS AT MULTI-PARTY FACILITIES.

 ``(a) Eligibility for Allocation.--
 ``(1) Mandatory allocation.--Except as provided in 
 paragraph (2), the President shall initiate the allocation 
 process established under this section for each response action 
 at a non-federally owned facility listed on the National 
 Priorities List which is eligible for fair share funding under 
 this section.
 ``(2) Ineligible response actions.--The allocation process 
 under this section shall not apply to any response action for 
 which there has been a final settlement, decree, or order that 
 determined the liability and share of responsibility of all 
 potentially responsible parties at the facility before November 
 9, 1997.
 ``(3) Scope of allocations.--Each allocation under this 
 section shall apply to the costs incurred on or after November 
 9, 1997, in performing any response actions at a facility that 
 have not been completed before November 9, 1997, unless the 
 allocator determines, in consultation with the President, that 
 it should apply only to one or more of such response actions at 
 the facility.
 ``(b) Moratorium on Litigation and Enforcement.--
 ``(1) Moratorium on litigation.--No person may commence any 
 civil action or assert any claim under this Act seeking 
 recovery of any response costs, or contribution toward such 
 costs, in connection with any response action at a facility for 
 which the President is required to initiate an allocation under 
 this section, until 90 days after issuance of the allocator's 
 report or of a second or subsequent report under this section.
 ``(2) Stay.--If any action or claim referred to in 
 paragraph (1) is pending on the date of enactment of this 
 section or on the date by which the President is required to 
initiate an allocation, such action or claim (including any pendent 
claim under State law over which a court is exercising jurisdiction) 
shall be stayed until 90 days after the issuance of the allocator's 
report or of a second or subsequent report under this section, unless 
the court determines that a stay will result in manifest injustice.
 ``(3) Tolling of limitations period.--Any applicable 
 limitations period with respect to actions subject to paragraph 
 (1) shall be tolled from the earlier of--
 ``(A) the date of listing of the facility on the 
 National Priorities List, if such listing occurs after 
 the date of enactment of this section; or
 ``(B) the date by which the President is required 
 to initiate the allocation process pursuant to this 
 section;
 until 90 days after the issuance of the allocator's report or a 
 second or subsequent report under this section.
 ``(4) Moratorium on enforcement.--After the date of 
 enactment of this section, the Administrator shall not issue 
 any order nor require the Attorney General to maintain any suit 
 under section 106 to or against any persons at any facility 
 that is the subject of an allocation under subsection (a) until 
 90 days after the issuance of the allocator's report or of a 
 second or subsequent report under this section, except an order 
 requiring the performance of a response action that is 
 necessary to address a release at the facility that constitutes 
 a public health or environmental emergency. Nothing in this 
 subparagraph shall affect the Administrator's ability to 
 respond to releases or threatened releases of hazardous 
 substances pursuant to section 104 prior to such time and seek 
 recovery of such costs pursuant to section 107.
 ``(c) Allocation Process.--
 ``(1) Flexible process.--Each allocation under this section 
 shall be performed by a neutral third-party allocator, who 
 shall conduct the allocations--
 ``(A) in a fair and impartial manner;
 ``(B) in an efficient, orderly, time-sensitive 
 manner; and
 ``(C) in a manner consistent with section 
 107(o)(11) that imposes as few burdens as possible on 
 parties not liable for response costs.
 ``(2) Initiation of allocation.--The President shall 
 initiate the allocation process for a facility by performing a 
 comprehensive search for all parties potentially liable 
 pursuant to section 107(a) at the facility not later than the 
 date of the commencement of the remedial investigation at the 
 facility. With respect to a facility eligible for an allocation 
 where a remedial investigation has been completed as of the 
 date of enactment of the Superfund Reform Act, the 
 Administrator shall initiate allocations as expeditiously as 
 possible, but in any event not later than 12 months after such 
 date of enactment.
 ``(3) Retention of allocator.--The Administrator shall, not 
 later than 90 days after initiating the allocation process, 
 enter into a contract with a neutral allocator for the 
 performance of the allocation. The President, not later than 90 
 days after the date of enactment of the Superfund Reform Act, 
 shall establish by rule a process for the expedited selection 
 and retention by contract at each facility of a neutral 
 allocator, acceptable both to the potentially responsible 
 parties and to a representative of the Fund, to conduct the 
 allocations under this section. Each contract by which the 
 Administrator retains an allocator shall authorize the 
 allocator to acquire reasonable support services, including 
 secretarial, clerical, computer support, legal, and 
 investigative services. The President shall not issue any rule 
 that limits the discretion of the allocator in the conduct of 
 the allocation.
 ``(4) Parties to the allocation.--
 ``(A) Federal government.--The Administrator or the 
 Attorney General shall participate in the allocation 
 process as the representative of the Fund.
 ``(B) Allocation parties.--
 ``(i) Initial allocation parties.--Promptly 
 after the retention of an allocator, the 
 Administrator shall transmit to the allocator a 
 list of all potentially responsible parties at 
 the facility. Such list shall specifically 
 designate parties that, in the judgment of the 
 Administrator based on a preponderance of the 
 evidence using the factors set forth in section 
 107(p), are liable under section 107(a), 
 notwithstanding the exemptions to liability set 
 forth in section 107(o). For purposes of this 
 section, such parties shall be known as 
 significant contributors. Such list shall also 
 designate the parties whose liability, in the 
judgment of the Administrator, is eliminated or limited pursuant to 
section 107(o). The Administrator shall also transmit to the allocator 
all information gathered concerning the involvement of all parties at 
the facility.
 ``(ii) Nominated parties.--The allocator 
 shall allow each potentially responsible party 
 on the list transmitted by the Administrator 
 under clause (i) a period of 60 days to 
 nominate additional potentially responsible 
 parties. Each such nomination shall include all 
 available information regarding the potential 
 liability of each person named and a 
 recommendation on whether the person should be 
 considered to be a significant contributor as 
 defined in section 107(p). The allocator shall 
 not include a nominated person on the list of 
 allocation parties unless it appears from the 
 nomination, based on a preponderance of the 
 evidence, that the person is potentially liable 
 under section 107(a). Any allocation party that 
 receives a zero share in the allocator's final 
 report shall be entitled to recover three times 
 its costs of participating in the allocation 
 process (including reasonable attorney's fees) 
 from any person that nominated the party. Any 
 allocation party that is not identified in the 
 allocator's final report as a significant 
 contributor shall be entitled to recover its 
 costs of participating in the allocation 
 process (including reasonable attorney's fees) 
 from any person that recommended to the 
 allocator that such allocation party be 
 considered a significant contributor.
 ``(d) Information-Gathering Authority.--The allocator may gather 
such information as necessary to conduct a fair and impartial 
allocation. The allocator may--
 ``(1) exercise the information-gathering authority of the 
 Administrator under section 104(e);
 ``(2) in the allocator's sole discretion, permit discovery 
 or conduct hearings;
 ``(3) request that the Attorney General enforce any 
 information request or subpoena issued by the allocator and, if 
 the Attorney General does not respond promptly to the request, 
 retain counsel to enforce the information request or subpoena; 
 and
 ``(4) request that the Attorney General seek to impose 
 civil penalties for any failure to submit a complete and timely 
 answer to an information request or subpoena or for any 
 unlawful conduct within the allocation process, or criminal 
 penalties under section 1001 of title 18, United States Code, 
 for any false or misleading material statements in connection 
 with the allocation process.
 ``(e) Confidentiality of Information.--
 ``(1) In general.--All persons involved in the allocation 
 shall assure the confidentiality at all times of all 
 information submitted to the allocator. Information submitted 
 to the allocator shall not be--
 ``(A) disclosed to any person except as may be 
 required by court order, issued only when necessary to 
 prevent manifest injustice;
 ``(B) subject to disclosure to any person under 
 section 552 of title 5, United States Code; or
 ``(C) discoverable or admissible in any Federal, 
 State, or local judicial or administrative proceeding 
 (if not independently discoverable or admissible).
 ``(2) No waiver.--The submission to the allocator of 
 information shall not constitute a waiver of any privilege 
 under any Federal or State law or rule.
 ``(f) Equitable Factors for Allocation.--
 ``(1) Factors.--The allocator shall prepare a nonbinding 
 allocation of percentage shares of responsibility to each 
 allocation party and to the fair share funding (as defined in 
 subsection (g)), in accordance with the provisions of this 
 section and without regard to any theory of joint and several 
 liability, based on the following:
 ``(A) The degree to which the allocation party 
 caused, contributed to, or consented to the release or 
 threat of release of hazardous substances at the 
 facility.
 ``(B) The amount of hazardous substances 
 contributed by each allocation party.
 ``(C) The degree of toxicity of the hazardous 
 substances contributed by each allocation party.
 ``(D) The mobility of the hazardous substances 
 contributed by each allocation party.
 ``(E) The degree of involvement of each allocation 
 party in the generation, transportation, treatment, 
storage, or disposal of the hazardous substances it contributed.
 ``(F) The degree of care exercised by each 
 allocation party with respect to the hazardous 
 substances it contributed, taking into account the 
 characteristics of the hazardous substances.
 ``(G) The cooperation of each allocation party in 
 performing any response action and in providing 
 complete and timely information to the allocator.
 ``(H) Such other equitable factors as the allocator 
 determines are appropriate.
 ``(2) Presumption.--The allocator shall presume that the 
 parties designated by the Administrator pursuant to subsection 
 (c)(4)(B) as parties whose liability is eliminated under 
 section 107(o) are not significant contributors. Such 
 presumption is rebuttable by a preponderance of the evidence.
 ``(g) Fair Share Funding.--For each response action that is the 
subject of an allocation under this section, the allocator shall 
determine the share of liability, if any, to be allocated to the Fund 
for that response action. Such amount shall be referred to as the `fair 
share funding' of that response action. The fair share funding shall 
consist of the sum of following amounts:
 ``(1) The amount attributable to the aggregate share of 
 liability that the allocator determines to be attributable to 
 insolvent, defunct, or unidentifiable parties that are not 
 affiliated with any viable allocation party.
 ``(2) The amount that is the difference between--
 ``(A) the amount attributable to the aggregate 
 share of liability that the allocator determines to be 
 attributable to allocation parties who have resolved 
 their liability to the United States for the response 
 action; and
 ``(B) the amount actually paid by those parties to 
 the United States to resolve their liability.
 ``(3) The amount attributable to the aggregate share of 
 liability that the allocator determines to be attributable to 
 persons (known or unknown) who are entitled to an exemption 
 from liability under section 107(o) or any other provision of 
 this Act.
 ``(h) Allocator's Report.--Not later than 24 months after the date 
on which the Administrator enters into a contract to retain an 
allocator, the allocator shall provide a written final allocation 
report to the Administrator and the allocation parties specifying the 
percentage share of responsibility of each allocation party (without 
regard to section 107(o)) and of the fair share funding. The allocator 
shall separately list those parties that are significant contributors 
as defined in section 107(p) (and therefore remain liable for response 
costs), and those parties that are not liable pursuant to section 
107(o). Before issuing the final allocation report, the allocator shall 
allow each allocation party to comment on a draft allocation report. 
The allocator's actions shall not be subject to judicial review.
 ``(i) Complete Allocation by the Parties.--The allocator shall 
promptly adopt, in lieu of issuing any allocation report, any agreement 
among some or all of the allocation parties that allocates 80 percent 
of the recoverable costs of a response action at a facility to the 
signatories, if the settlement contains a waiver of all claims against 
all other allocation parties for contribution toward such costs.
 ``(j) Rejection of Allocation Report.--
 ``(1) Rejection.--The Administrator and the Attorney 
 General may jointly reject a report issued by an allocator only 
 if the Administrator and the Attorney General jointly publish, 
 not later than 90 days after the Administrator receives the 
 report, a written determination that--
 ``(A) no rational interpretation of the facts 
 before the allocator, in light of the factors required 
 to be considered, would form a reasonable basis for the 
 shares assigned to the parties; or
 ``(B) the allocation process was directly and 
 substantially affected by bias, procedural error, 
 fraud, or unlawful conduct.
 ``(2) Finality.--A report issued by an allocator may not be 
 rejected after the date that is 90 days after the date on which 
 the United States accepts a settlement offer (excluding an 
 expedited settlement under section 122(g)) based on the 
 allocation.
 ``(3) Delegation.--The authority to make a determination 
 under this subsection may not be delegated to any officer or 
 employee below the level of an Assistant Administrator or an 
 Assistant Attorney General with authority for implementing this 
 Act.
 ``(k) Second and Subsequent Allocations.--If a report is rejected 
under subsection (j), the allocation parties shall select an allocator 
to perform, on an expedited basis, a new allocation based on the same 
record available to the previous allocator. The moratorium and tolling 
provisions of subsection (b) shall then be extended until 180 days 
after the date of the issuance of any second or subsequent allocation 
report.
 ``(l) Settlements Based on Allocations.--
 ``(1) Cash-out settlements.--Subject to the Administrator's 
 authority pursuant to subsection (m), any allocation party 
 shall be entitled to resolve its liability to the United States 
 for response actions subject to an allocation if, not later 
 than 90 days after the date of issuance of a report by the 
 allocator, the party--
 ``(A) offers to settle with the United States based 
 on its allocated share as specified by the allocator; 
 and
 ``(B) agrees to the other terms and conditions 
 stated in this subsection.
 ``(2) Performance settlements.--Using the procedures set 
 forth in section 122, the Administrator and one or more parties 
 may enter into an agreement requiring the performance of 
 response actions subject to an allocation.
 ``(3) Provisions of settlements.--Each settlement based on 
 an allocation under this subsection shall include--
 ``(A) a waiver of contribution rights against all 
 persons that are potentially responsible parties for 
 any response action addressed in the settlement;
 ``(B) a covenant not to sue consistent with section 
 122(f) and, except in the case of a cash-out 
 settlement, provisions regarding performance or 
 adequate assurance of performance of the response 
 action;
 ``(C) in the case of a settlement under paragraph 
 (1), a premium, not to exceed 10 percent, that is 
 calculated on a facility-specific basis and reflects 
 the actual risk to the United States of not recovering 
 response costs for the response action, despite the 
 diligent prosecution of litigation against any viable 
 allocation party that has not resolved its liability to 
 the United States, except that no premium shall apply 
 if all allocation parties participate in the settlement 
 or if the settlement covers 100 percent of the response 
 costs subject to the allocation;
 ``(D) complete protection from all claims for 
 contribution regarding the response action addressed in 
 the settlement; and
 ``(E) provisions through which a settling party 
 shall receive prompt reimbursement from the Fund under 
 subsection (n) of any response costs incurred by the 
 party for any response action that is the subject of 
 the allocation in excess of the allocated share of the 
 party.
 ``(m) Administrative Orders.--
 ``(1) Post-allocation issuance of section 106 orders.--
 Except as provided in paragraph (2), upon the expiration of the 
 moratorium period under subsection (b)(4), the President may 
 issue orders under section 106 to a person or persons found 
 liable at the facility by the allocator only if the aggregate 
 allocated share or shares of such person's or persons' 
 liability exceed 15 percent.
 ``(2) Waiver.--The President may issue an order under 
 section 106 to a person to whom the President otherwise would 
 be prohibited from issuing an order under paragraph (1) if the 
 person waives in writing the prohibition provided by paragraph 
 (1) against being issued an order.
 ``(3) Order in lieu of other action for recovery.--An 
 administrative order issued under section 106 shall be in lieu 
 of any action by the United States or any other person against 
 a party for recovery of response costs in connection with the 
 response action, or for contribution toward the costs of the 
 response action.
 ``(n) Post-Allocation Performance.--
 ``(1) In general.--An allocation party that incurs costs 
 after the date of enactment of this section for the performance 
 (whether under a consent decree or settlement or under an 
 administrative order issued under section 106) of a response 
 action that is the subject of an allocation under this section 
 to an extent that exceeds the percentage share of the 
 allocation party, as determined by the allocator, shall be 
 entitled to prompt reimbursement from the Fund of the excess 
 amount. Such right to reimbursement shall not be contingent on 
 recovery by the United States of any response costs from any 
 person.
 ``(2) Terms and conditions.--
 ``(A) Timing.--
 ``(i) In general.--A reimbursement payment 
 shall be paid during the course of the response 
 action that was the subject of the allocation, 
 with reasonable progress payments at 
 significant milestones.
 ``(ii) Construction.--Reimbursement for the 
 construction portion of the response action 
 shall be paid not later than 120 days after the 
 date of actual completion of the construction.
 ``(B) Equitable offset.--A reimbursement payment is 
 subject to equitable offset or recoupment by the 
 Administrator at any time if the allocation party fails 
 to perform the response action in a proper and timely 
 manner.
 ``(C) Waiver.--An allocation party seeking 
 reimbursement under this subsection waives the right to 
 seek recovery of response costs in connection with the 
 response action, or contribution toward the response 
 costs, from any other person.
 ``(3) Amounts owed.--
 ``(A) Delay if funds are unavailable.--If funds are 
 unavailable in any fiscal year to reimburse all 
 allocation parties pursuant to paragraph (1), the 
 Administrator may delay payment until funds are 
 available.
 ``(B) Priority.--The priority for reimbursement 
 shall be based on the length of time that has passed 
 since any settlement between the United States and the 
 allocation parties pursuant to subsection (l).-
 ``(C) Payment from funds made available in 
 subsequent fiscal years.--Any amount due and owing in 
 excess of available appropriations in any fiscal year 
 shall be paid from amounts made available in subsequent 
 fiscal years, along with interest on the unpaid 
 balances at the rate equal to that of the current 
 average market yield on outstanding marketable 
 obligations of the United States with a maturity of 1 
 year.
 ``(o) Post-Settlement Litigation.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to subsection (l), and on the 
 expiration of the moratorium period under subsection (b)(4), 
 the Administrator may commence an action under section 107 
 against any party that has not resolved its liability to the 
 United States following an allocation and may seek to recover 
 any response costs not recovered through settlements with other 
 persons, including all or any of the amounts constituting the 
 fair share funding.
 ``(2) Certification.--In commencing or maintaining an 
 action under section 107 against a party after the expiration 
 of the moratorium period under subsection (b)(4), the Attorney 
 General shall certify in the complaint that the defendant 
 failed to settle the matter based on the share that the 
 allocation report assigned to the party.
 ``(3) Impleader.--A defendant in an action under paragraph 
 (1) may implead an allocation party only if the allocation 
 party did not resolve its liability to the United States.
 ``(4) Response costs.--
 ``(A) Allocation process.--The cost of implementing 
 the allocation process under this section, including 
 reasonable fees and expenses of the allocator, shall be 
 deemed a necessary response cost.
 ``(B) Funding of fund shares.--The costs of all 
 fair share funding under this section--
 ``(i) shall be considered as a necessary 
 cost of response; and
 ``(ii) shall be recoverable under section 
 107 only from an allocation party that has not 
 reached a settlement under subsection (l) and 
 has not received an order issued under section 
 106.''.

SEC. 209. TRANSITION RULES RELATING TO CERTAIN NONLIABLE PARTIES.

 Title I (42 U.S.C. 9601 et seq.) is further amended by adding at 
the end the following new section:

``SEC. 129. TRANSITION RULES RELATING TO CERTAIN NONLIABLE PARTIES.

 ``(a) Costs Incurred After November 7, 1997, by Nonliable 
Parties.--With respect to facilities for which an allocation under 
section 128 has been performed, the Administrator shall reimburse 
nonliable parties for costs of response incurred by them after November 
9, 1997, at such facilities in accordance with the reimbursement 
provisions in section 128(n).
 ``(b) Continued Performance Required.--The amendments to this Act 
made by the Superfund Reform Act shall not affect the responsibility of 
a nonliable party to perform a response action if ordered to do so 
under section 106 or if required to do so under a settlement or consent 
decree entered into with the United States before the date of the 
enactment of this section.
 ``(c) Nonliable Party Defined.--For purposes of this section, the 
term `nonliable party' means a potentially responsible party who 
becomes exempt from liability under this Act on the date of the 
enactment of the Superfund Reform Act because of the amendments made by 
that Act.''.

SEC. 210. CLARIFICATION OF LIABILITY UNDER CERCLA FOR RECYCLING 
 TRANSACTIONS.

 Title I (42 U.S.C. 9601 et seq.) is further amended by adding at 
the end the following new section:

``SEC. 130. RECYCLING TRANSACTIONS.

 ``(a) Liability Clarification.--As provided in subsections (b), 
(c), (d), and (e), a person who arranged for the recycling of a 
recyclable material shall not be liable under section 107(a)(3) or 
107(a)(4).
 ``(b) Recyclable Material Defined.--For purposes of this section, 
the term `recyclable material' means scrap paper, scrap plastic, scrap 
glass, scrap textiles, scrap rubber (other than whole tires), scrap 
metal, or spent lead-acid, spent nickel-cadmium, and other spent 
batteries, as well as minor amounts of material incident to or adhering 
to the scrap material as a result of its normal and customary use prior 
to becoming scrap.
 ``(c) Transactions Involving Scrap Paper, Plastic, Glass, Textiles, 
or Rubber.--Transactions involving scrap paper, scrap plastic, scrap 
glass, scrap textiles, or scrap rubber (other than whole tires) shall 
be deemed to be arranging for recycling if the person who arranged for 
the transaction (by selling recyclable material or otherwise arranging 
for the recycling of recyclable material) can demonstrate by a 
preponderance of the evidence that all of the following criteria were 
met at the time of the transaction:
 ``(1) The recyclable material met a commercial 
 specification grade.
 ``(2) A market existed for the recyclable material.
 ``(3) A substantial portion of the recyclable material was 
 made available for use as feedstock for the manufacture of a 
 new saleable product.
 ``(4) The recyclable material could have been a replacement 
 or substitute for a virgin raw material, or the product to be 
 made from the recyclable material could have been a replacement 
 or substitute for a product made, in whole or in part, from a 
 virgin raw material.
 ``(5) For transactions occurring 90 days or more after the 
 date of enactment of this section, the person exercised 
 reasonable care to determine that the facility where the 
 recyclable material would be handled, processed, reclaimed, or 
 otherwise managed by another person (hereinafter in this 
 section referred to as a `consuming facility') was in 
 compliance with substantive (not procedural or administrative) 
 provisions of any Federal, State, or local environmental law or 
 regulation, or compliance order or decree issued pursuant 
 thereto, applicable to the handling, processing, reclamation, 
 storage, or other management activities associated with 
 recyclable material.
 ``(6) For purposes of this subsection, `reasonable care' 
 shall be determined using criteria that include (but are not 
 limited to)--
 ``(A) the price paid in the recycling transaction;
 ``(B) the ability of the person to detect the 
 nature of the consuming facility's operations 
 concerning its handling, processing, reclamation, or 
 other management activities associated with recyclable 
 material; and
 ``(C) the result of inquiries made to the 
 appropriate Federal, State, or local environmental 
 agency (or agencies) regarding the consuming facility's 
 past and current compliance with substantive (not 
 procedural or administrative) provisions of any 
 Federal, State, or local environmental law or 
 regulation, or compliance order or decree issued 
 pursuant thereto, applicable to the handling, 
 processing, reclamation, storage, or other management 
 activities associated with the recyclable material. For 
 the purposes of this paragraph, a requirement to obtain 
 a permit applicable to the handling, processing, 
 reclamation, or other management activity associated 
 with the recyclable materials shall be deemed to be a 
 substantive provision.
 ``(d) Transactions Involving Scrap Metal.--
 ``(1) Transactions involving scrap metal shall be deemed to 
 be arranging for recycling if the person who arranged for the 
 transaction (by selling recyclable material or otherwise 
 arranging for the recycling of recyclable material) can 
 demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that at the time 
 of the transaction--
 ``(A) the person met the criteria set forth in 
 subsection (c) with respect to the scrap metal;
 ``(B) the person was in compliance with any 
 applicable regulations or standards regarding the 
 storage, transport, management, or other activities 
 associated with the recycling of scrap metal that the 
 Administrator promulgates under the Solid Waste 
 Disposal Act subsequent to the enactment of this 
 section and with regard to transactions occurring after 
 the effective date of such regulations or standards; 
 and
 ``(C) the person did not melt the scrap metal prior 
 to the transaction.
 ``(2) For purposes of paragraph (1)(C), melting of scrap 
 metal does not include the thermal separation of 2 or more 
 materials due to differences in their melting points (referred 
 to as `sweating').
 ``(3) For purposes of this subsection, the term `scrap 
 metal' means bits and pieces of metal parts (e.g., bars, 
 turnings, rods, sheets, wire) or metal pieces that may be 
 combined together with bolts or soldering (e.g., radiators, 
 scrap automobiles, railroad box cars), which when worn or 
 superfluous can be recycled, except for scrap metals that the 
 Administrator excludes from this definition by regulation and 
 steel shipping containers of a capacity from 30 liters to and 
 including 3,000 liters, whether intact or not, having any 
 hazardous substance (but not metal bits or pieces) contained in 
 or adhering thereto.
 ``(e) Transactions Involving Batteries.--
 ``(1) Transactions involving spent lead-acid batteries, 
 spent nickel-cadmium batteries, or other spent batteries shall 
 be deemed to be arranging for recycling if the person who 
 arranged for the transaction (by selling recyclable material or 
 otherwise arranging for the recycling of recyclable material) 
 can demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that at the 
 time of the transaction--
 ``(A) the person met the criteria set forth in 
 subsection (c) with respect to the spent lead-acid 
 batteries, spent nickel-cadmium batteries, or other 
 spent batteries, but did not recover the valuable 
 components of such batteries; and
 ``(B)(i) with respect to transactions involving 
 lead-acid batteries, the person was in compliance with 
 applicable Federal environmental regulations or 
 standards, and any amendments thereto, regarding the 
 storage, transport, management, or other activities 
 associated with the recycling of spent lead-acid 
 batteries;
 ``(ii) with respect to transactions involving 
 nickel-cadmium batteries, Federal environmental 
 regulations or standards are in effect regarding the 
 storage, transport, management, or other activities 
 associated with the recycling of spent nickel-cadmium 
 batteries, and the person was in compliance with 
 applicable regulations or standards or any amendments 
 thereto; or
 ``(iii) with respect to transactions involving 
 other spent batteries, Federal environmental 
 regulations or standards are in effect regarding the 
 storage, transport, management, or other activities 
 associated with the recycling of such batteries, and 
 the person was in compliance with applicable 
 regulations or standards or any amendments thereto.
 ``(2) For purposes of paragraph (1)(A), a person who, by 
 contract, arranges or pays for processing of batteries by an 
 unrelated third person and receives from such third person 
 materials reclaimed from such batteries shall not thereby be 
 deemed to recover the valuable components of such batteries.
 ``(f) Exclusions.--
 ``(1) The exemptions set forth in subsections (c), (d), and 
 (e) shall not apply if--
 ``(A) the person had an objectively reasonable 
 basis to believe at the time of the recycling 
 transaction--
 ``(i) that the recyclable material would 
 not be recycled;
 ``(ii) that the recyclable material would 
 be burned as fuel, or for energy recovery or 
 incineration; or
 ``(iii) for transactions occurring before 
 90 days after the date of the enactment of this 
 section, that the consuming facility was not in 
 compliance with a substantive (not procedural 
 or administrative) provision of any Federal, 
 State, or local environmental law or 
 regulation, or compliance order or decree 
 issued pursuant thereto, applicable to the 
 handling, processing, reclamation, or other 
 management activities associated with the 
 recyclable material;
 ``(B) the person had reason to believe that 
 hazardous substances had been added to the recyclable 
 material for purposes other than processing for 
 recycling;
 ``(C) the person failed to exercise reasonable care 
 with respect to the management and handling of the 
 recyclable material (including adhering to customary 
 industry practices current at the time of the recycling 
 transaction designed to minimize, through source 
 control, contamination of the recyclable material by 
 hazardous substances); or
 ``(D) with respect to any item of a recyclable 
 material, the item--
 ``(i) contained polychlorinated biphenyls 
 at a concentration in excess of 50 parts per 
 million or any new standard promulgated 
 pursuant to applicable Federal laws; or
 ``(ii) is an item of scrap paper containing 
 at the time of the recycling transaction a 
 concentration of a hazardous substance that has 
 been determined by the Administrator, after 
 notice and comment, to present a significant 
 risk to human health or the environment in 
 light of the nature of scrap paper management 
 and recycling.
 ``(2) For purposes of this subsection, an objectively 
 reasonable basis for belief shall be determined using criteria 
 that include (but are limited to) the size of the person's 
 business, customary industry practices (including customary 
 industry practices current at the time of the recycling 
 transaction designed to minimize, through source control, 
 contamination of the recyclable material by hazardous 
 substances), the price paid in the recycling transaction, and 
 the ability of the person to detect the nature of the consuming 
 facility's operations concerning its handling, processing, 
 reclamation, or other management activities associated with the 
 recyclable material.
 ``(3) For purposes of this subsection, a requirement to 
 obtain a permit applicable to the handling, processing, 
 reclamation, or other management activities associated with 
 recyclable material shall be deemed to be a substantive 
 provision.
 ``(g) Effect on Other Liability.--Nothing in this section shall be 
deemed to affect the liability of a person under paragraph (1) or (2) 
of section 107(a).
 ``(h) Regulations.--The Administrator has the authority, under 
section 115, to promulgate additional regulations concerning this 
section.
 ``(i) Effect on Pending or Concluded Actions.--The exemptions 
provided in this section shall not affect any concluded judicial or 
administrative action or any pending judicial action initiated by the 
United States prior to enactment of this section.
 ``(j) Liability for Attorney's Fees for Certain Actions.--Any 
person who commences an action in contribution against a person who is 
not liable by operation of this section shall be liable to that person 
for all reasonable costs of defending that action, including all 
reasonable attorney's and expert witness fees.
 ``(k) Relationship to Liability Under Other Laws.--Nothing in this 
section shall affect--
 ``(1) liability under any other Federal, State, or local 
 statute or regulation promulgated pursuant to any such statute, 
 including any requirements promulgated by the Administrator 
 under the Solid Waste Disposal Act; or
 ``(2) the ability of the Administrator to promulgate 
 regulations under any other statute, including the Solid Waste 
 Disposal Act.''.

 TITLE III--BROWNFIELDS

SEC. 301. SHORT TITLE.

 This title may be cited as the ``Land Recycling Act of 1997''.

SEC. 302. FINDINGS.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) Brownfields are parcels of land that contain or 
 contained abandoned or under used commercial or industrial 
 facilities, the expansion or redevelopment of which is 
 complicated by the actual or potential presence of hazardous 
 substances, pollutants, or contaminants.
 (2) Brownfields, which may number in the hundreds of 
 thousands nationwide, threaten the environment, devalue 
 surrounding property, erode State and local tax bases, and 
 prevent job growth.
 (3) The primary environmental reason that current owners 
 and prospective developers do not redevelop brownfields is 
 their legitimate fears about the potential liability under 
 environmental laws associated with the cleanup and 
 redevelopment of these sites.
 (4) Current Federal law poses a barrier to the cleanup and 
 redevelopment of brownfields, leading instead to the 
 development of so-called greenfields, contributing to urban 
 sprawl, creating infrastructure problems, and reducing 
 recreational and agricultural opportunities.
 (5) Cleanup and redevelopment of brownfields will reduce 
 environmental contamination, encourage job growth, enhance 
 State and local tax bases, and curb the development of 
 greenfields.
 (6) Many States have enacted voluntary cleanup programs to 
 address the brownfields problem by allowing for the 
 consideration of future land use in deciding appropriate 
 cleanup standards and providing clear releases of liability 
 upon completion of cleanups.
 (7) State voluntary response programs have been very 
 effective in promoting the cleanup and redevelopment of 
 brownfields while ensuring the adequate protection of human 
 health and the environment.
 (b) Purposes and Objectives.--The purposes and objectives of this 
section are--
 (1) to increase significantly the pace of response 
 activities at contaminated sites by promoting and encouraging 
 the creation, development, and enhancement of State voluntary 
 response programs; and
 (2) to remove existing Federal barriers to the cleanup of 
 brownfield sites; and
 (3) to benefit the public health, welfare, and the 
 environment by cleaning up and returning contaminated sites to 
 economically productive or other beneficial uses.

SEC. 303. CLEANUPS PURSUANT TO STATE VOLUNTARY RESPONSE PROGRAM.

 (a) Prohibition on Enforcement.--Except as otherwise provided in 
this section, neither the President nor any other person (other than a 
State) may use any authority of the Comprehensive Environmental 
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601 et 
seq.) or of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.) to 
commence an administrative or judicial action under either of those 
Acts with respect to any release or threatened release at a facility 
that is, or has been, the subject of a voluntary response plan in a 
State that meets the requirements of subsection (b).
 (b) State Requirements.--The prohibition in subsection (a) applies 
with respect to a facility in a State only if the State submits to the 
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency a certification 
that the State has enacted into law a voluntary response program, that 
the State has committed the financial and personnel resources necessary 
to carry out such program, and that such program will be implemented in 
a manner protective of human health and the environment.
 (c) Limitation on Prohibition.--The prohibition under subsection 
(a) and the exemption under subsection (f) shall not apply with respect 
to--
 (1) any facility listed on the National Priorities List, 
 unless the Administrator, on a facility-by-facility basis and 
 pursuant to an agreement with the State concerned, makes a 
 finding that a facility listed on the National Priorities List 
 is eligible to participate in a State voluntary cleanup program 
 meeting the requirements of subsection (b);
 (2) any facility for which the Governor of a State has 
 requested Environmental Protection Agency assistance to perform 
 a response action;
 (3) any facility owned or operated by a department, agency, 
 or instrumentality of the United States; or
 (4) a release or threatened release to the extent that a 
 response action is required pursuant to an administrative order 
 or judicial order or decree entered into by the United States 
 under any of the following laws:
 (A) The Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
 Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601 
 et seq.).
 (B) The Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901 et 
 seq.).
 (C) The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 
 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.).
 (D) The Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. 
 2601 et seq.).
 (E) Title XIV of the Public Health Service Act 
 (commonly known as the Safe Drinking Water Act) (42 
 U.S.C. 300f et seq.).
 (d) Authority To Gather Information.--The prohibition in subsection 
(a) shall not affect the authority of the Administrator to carry out 
investigations, monitoring, surveys, testing, or other information 
gathering authorized under section 104(b) of the Comprehensive 
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 
U.S.C. 9604(b)) at facilities where there may be an imminent and 
substantial endangerment to human health or the environment, but only 
for purposes of determining whether the facility qualifies for listing 
on the National Priorities List pursuant to section 105 of that Act.
 (e) Prior Actions.--Nothing in this section shall affect 
administrative or judicial action commenced prior to the date of 
enactment of this section.
 (f) Permits and Other Requirements.--No Federal permit or permit 
revision shall be required for response actions conducted entirely 
onsite to respond to releases that are subject to the prohibition under 
subsection (a).
 (g) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
 (1) Voluntary response program.--The term ``voluntary 
 response program'' means a program established by a State 
 specifically to allow a person to respond voluntarily to the 
 release or threatened release of hazardous substances at 
 facilities in the State.
 (2) Voluntary response plan.--The term ``voluntary response 
 plan'' means a plan for responding to the release or threatened 
 release of hazardous substances at a particular facility under 
 a State voluntary response program.
 (h) Assistance to States.--The Administrator shall provide 
technical, financial, and other assistance to States to establish and 
enhance voluntary response programs. The Administrator shall encourage 
the States to develop risk sharing pools, indemnity pools, or 
insurance mechanisms to provide financing for response actions under 
their voluntary response programs.
 (i) Effect of Response.--Performance of a voluntary response action 
pursuant to this section shall not constitute an admission of liability 
under any Federal, State, or local law or regulation or in any citizens 
suit or other private action.

SEC. 304. INNOCENT LANDOWNERS.

 (a) In General.--Section 107 (42 U.S.C. 9607) is further amended by 
adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(q) Innocent Landowners.--
 ``(1) Conduct of environmental assessment.-- A person who 
 has acquired real property shall have made all appropriate 
 inquiry within the meaning of subparagraph (B) of section 
 101(35) if he establishes that, within 180 days prior to the 
 time of acquisition, an environmental site assessment of the 
 real property was conducted which meets the requirements of 
 this subsection.
 ``(2) Definition of environmental site assessment.--For 
 purposes of this subsection, the term `environmental site 
 assessment' means an assessment conducted in accordance with 
 the standards set forth in the American Society for Testing and 
 Materials (ASTM) Standard E1527-94, titled `Standard Practice 
 for Environmental Site Assessments: Phase I Environmental Site 
 Assessment Process' or with alternative standards issued by 
 rule by the Administrator or promulgated or developed by others 
 and designated by rule by the Administrator. Before issuing or 
 designating alternative standards, the Administrator shall 
 first conduct a study of commercial and industrial practices 
 concerning environmental site assessments in the transfer of 
 real property in the United States. Any such standards issued 
 or designated by the Administrator shall also be deemed to 
 constitute commercially reasonable and generally accepted 
 standards and practices for purposes of this paragraph. In 
 issuing or designating any such standards, the Administrator 
 shall consider requirements governing each of the following:
 ``(A) Interviews of owners, operators, and 
 occupants of the property to determine information 
 regarding the potential for contamination.
 ``(B) Review of historical sources as necessary to 
 determine previous uses and occupancies of the property 
 since the property was first developed. For purposes of 
 this subclause, the term `historical sources' means any 
 of the following, if they are reasonably ascertainable: 
 recorded chain of title documents regarding the real 
 property, including all deeds, easements, leases, 
 restrictions, and covenants, aerial photographs, fire 
 insurance maps, property tax files, USGS 7.5 minutes 
 topographic maps, local street directories, building 
 department records, zoning/land use records, and any 
 other sources that identify past uses and occupancies 
 of the property.
 ``(C) Determination of the existence of recorded 
 environmental cleanup liens against the real property 
 which have arisen pursuant to Federal, State, or local 
 statutes.
 ``(D) Review of reasonably ascertainable Federal, 
 State, and local government records of sites or 
 facilities that are likely to cause or contribute to 
 contamination at the real property, including, as 
 appropriate, investigation reports for such sites or 
 facilities; records of activities likely to cause or 
 contribute to contamination at the real property, 
 including landfill and other disposal location records, 
 underground storage tank records, hazardous waste 
 handler and generator records and spill reporting 
 records; and such other reasonably ascertainable 
 Federal, State, and local government environmental 
 records which could reflect incidents or activities 
 which are likely to cause or contribute to 
 contamination at the real property.
 ``(E) A visual site inspection of the real property 
 and all facilities and improvements on the real 
 property and a visual inspection of immediately 
 adjacent properties, including an investigation of any 
 hazardous substance use, storage, treatment, and 
 disposal practices on the property.
 ``(F) Any specialized knowledge or experience on 
 the part of the defendant.
 ``(G) The relationship of the purchase price to the 
 value of the property if uncontaminated.
 ``(H) Commonly known or reasonably ascertainable 
 information about the property.
 ``(I) The obviousness of the presence or likely 
 presence of contamination at the property, and the 
 ability to detect such contamination by appropriate 
 investigation.
 A record shall be considered to be `reasonably ascertainable' 
 for purposes of this paragraph if a copy or reasonable 
 facsimile of the record is publicly available by request 
 (within reasonable time and cost constraints) and the record is 
 practically reviewable.
 ``(3) Maintenance of information.--No presumption shall 
 arise under paragraph (1) unless the defendant has maintained a 
 compilation of the information reviewed and gathered in the 
 course of the environmental site assessment.''.
 (b) Cross Reference.--Section 101(35)(B) (42 U.S.C. 9601(35)(B)) is 
amended by inserting after ``all appropriate inquiry'' the following: 
``(as specified in section 107(o))''.

SEC. 305. BONA FIDE PROSPECTIVE PURCHASER LIABILITY.

 (a) Liability.--Section 107 (42 U.S.C. 9607) is further amended by 
adding at the end the following new subsections:
 ``(r) Bona Fide Prospective Purchaser.--(1) Notwithstanding 
paragraphs (1) through (4) of subsection (a), a person who does not 
impede the performance of a response action or natural resource 
restoration at a facility shall not be liable to the extent liability 
at such facility is based solely on paragraph (1) of subsection (a) for 
a release or threat of release from the facility, and the person is a 
bona fide prospective purchaser of the facility.
 ``(2) For purposes of this subsection, the term `bona fide 
prospective purchaser' means a person who acquires ownership of a 
facility after the date of enactment of this subsection, or a tenant of 
such a person, who can establish each of the following by a 
preponderance of the evidence:
 ``(A) All active disposal of hazardous substances at the 
 facility occurred before that person acquired the facility.
 ``(B) The person made all appropriate inquiry into the 
 previous ownership and uses of the facility and its real 
 property in accordance with generally accepted commercial and 
 customary standards and practices. Standards described in 
 subsection (q)(2) (relating to innocent landowners) shall 
 satisfy the requirements of this subparagraph. In the case of 
 property for residential or other similar use, purchased by a 
 nongovernmental or noncommercial entity, a site inspection and 
 title search that reveal no basis for further investigation 
 satisfy the requirements of this subparagraph.
 ``(C) The person provided all legally required notices with 
 respect to the discovery or release of any hazardous substances 
 at the facility.
 ``(D) The person exercised appropriate care with respect to 
 hazardous substances found at the facility by taking reasonable 
 steps to stop on-going releases, prevent threatened future 
 releases of hazardous substances, and prevent or limit human or 
 natural resource exposure to hazardous substances previously 
 released into the environment.
 ``(E) The person provides full cooperation, assistance, and 
 facility access to persons authorized to conduct response 
 actions at the facility, including the cooperation and access 
 necessary for the installation, integrity, operation, and 
 maintenance of any complete or partial response action at the 
 facility.
 ``(F) The person is not affiliated with any other person 
 liable for response costs at the facility, through any direct 
 or indirect familial relationship, or any contractual, 
 corporate, or financial relationship other than that created by 
 the instruments by which title to the facility is conveyed or 
 financed.
 ``(s) Prospective Purchaser and Windfall Lien.--(1) In any case in 
which there are unrecovered response costs at a facility for which an 
owner of the facility is not liable by reason of subsection (r), and 
the conditions described in paragraph (2) are met, the United States 
shall have a lien upon such facility for such unrecovered costs. Such 
lien--
 ``(A) shall not exceed the increase in fair market value of 
 the property attributable to the response action at the time of 
 a subsequent sale or other disposition of property;
 ``(B) shall arise at the time costs are first incurred by 
 the United States with respect to a response action at the 
 facility;
 ``(C) shall be subject to the requirements for notice and 
 validity established in paragraph (3) of subsection (l); and
 ``(D) shall continue until the earlier of satisfaction of 
 the lien or recovery of all response costs incurred at the 
 facility.
 ``(2) The conditions referred to in paragraph (1) are the 
following:
 ``(A) A response action for which there are unrecovered 
 costs is carried out at the facility.
 ``(B) Such response action increases the fair market value 
 of the facility above the fair market value of the facility 
 that existed within 6 months before the response action was 
 taken.''.

SEC. 306. CONTIGUOUS PROPERTIES.

 Section 107 (42 U.S.C. 9607) is further amended by adding at the 
end the following new subsection:
 ``(u) Contiguous Properties.--(1) A person (other than the United 
States or a department, agency, or instrumentality of the United 
States) who owns or operates real property that is contiguous to or 
otherwise similarly situated with respect to real property on which 
there has been a release or threatened release of a hazardous substance 
and that is or may be contaminated by such release shall not be liable 
under subsection (a) (1) or (2) by reason of such ownership or 
operation solely by reason of such contamination if such person--
 ``(A) did not cause, contribute to, or consent to the 
 release or threatened release;
 ``(B) provides full cooperation, assistance, and facility 
 access to persons authorized to conduct response actions at the 
 facility, including the cooperation and access necessary for 
 the installation, integrity, operation, and maintenance of any 
 complete or partial response action at the facility; and
 ``(C) is not affiliated with any other person liable for 
 response costs at the facility, through any direct or indirect 
 familial relationship, or any contractual, corporate, or 
 financial relationship.
 ``(2) The President may issue an assurance of no enforcement action 
under this Act to any such person and may grant any such person 
protection against cost recovery and contribution actions pursuant to 
section 113(f)(2). Such person may also petition the President to 
exclude from the description of a National Priorities List site such 
contiguous real property, if such property is or may be contaminated 
solely by ground water that flows under such property and is not used 
as a source of drinking water. The President may grant such a petition 
pursuant to such procedures as he deems appropriate.''.

 TITLE IV--NATURAL RESOURCE DAMAGES

SEC. 401. NATURAL RESOURCES DEFINED.

 Section 101(16) (42 U.S.C. 9601(16)) is amended by striking 
``belonging to'' and all that follows before the period at the end.

SEC. 402. CONSULTATION WITH NATURAL RESOURCES TRUSTEES.

 Section 104(c)(2) is amended by inserting ``and the affected 
natural resource trustee or trustees'' after ``State or States''.

SEC. 403. LIABILITY.

 Section 107(f) (42 U.S.C. 9607(f)) is amended by striking 
``(f)(1)'' and all that follows through the period at the end of 
paragraph (1) and inserting the following:
 ``(f) Natural Resources Liability.--
 ``(1) Liability.--
 ``(A) Liability to united states, states, and 
 indian tribes.--Except as provided by subparagraph (B), 
 in the case of an injury to, destruction of, or loss of 
 natural resources under subsection (a)(2)(C), liability 
 shall be--
 ``(i) to the United States Government, for 
 natural resources belonging to, managed by, or 
 held in trust by the United States Government 
 or selected for transfer (but not transferred 
 on or before the date of the injury, 
 destruction, or loss) to an Alaska Native 
 Corporation as part of the acreage entitlement 
 of the Corporation under the Alaska Native 
 Claims Settlement Act (43 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.);
 ``(ii) to a State, for natural resources 
 within the State belonging to, managed by, or 
 held in trust by the State or allocated to the 
 State pursuant to an interstate compact to 
 which the State is a signatory; and
 ``(iii) to an Indian tribe, for natural 
 resources belonging to, managed by, granted 
 rights to by treaty, or held in trust by the 
 tribe, or belonging to a member of such tribe 
 if such resources are subject to a trust 
 restriction on alienation; and
 ``(B) Exceptions to liability requirements.--No 
 liability to the United States, a State, or an Indian 
 tribe, shall be imposed under subsection (a)(2)(C) 
 where the party sought to be charged has demonstrated 
 that the injury to, destruction of, or loss of natural 
 resources complained of were specifically identified as 
 an irreversible and irretrievable commitment of natural 
 resources in an environmental impact statement, or 
 other comparable environment analysis, and the decision 
 to grant a permit or license authorizes such commitment 
 of natural resources, and the facility or project was 
 otherwise operating within the terms of its permit or 
 license, so long as, in the case of injury to, 
 destruction of, or loss of an Indian tribe occurring 
 pursuant to a Federal permit or license, the issuance 
 of that permit or license was not inconsistent with the 
 fiduciary duty of the United States with respect to the 
 Indian tribe.
 ``(C) Public trustees of natural resources.--The 
 President, the authorized representative of a State, or 
 the authorized representative of an Indian tribe shall 
 act on behalf of the public or the Indian tribe, as 
 appropriate, as trustee for a natural resource to 
 recover for injury to, destruction of, or loss of 
 natural resources under this section.''.

SEC. 404. DESIGNATION OF TRUSTEES.

 (a) Designation of Indian Tribe.--Section 107(f)(2) (42 U.S.C. 
9607(f)(2)) is amended--
 (1) by striking the paragraph heading and inserting the 
 following: ``Designation of federal, state, and indian tribe.--
 ''; and
 (2) by amending subparagraph (C) to read as follows:
 ``(C) Indian tribe.--The elected council or elected 
 head official of an Indian tribe shall designate Indian 
 tribe officials who may act on behalf of the Indian 
 tribe as trustees for natural resources under this Act 
 and shall notify the President of such designations. 
 Such Indian tribe officials shall assess damages to 
 natural resources for the purposes of this Act for 
 those natural resources under their trusteeship.''.
 (b) Relationship Among Trustees.--Section 107(f)(2) (42 U.S.C. 
9607(f)(2)) is further amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(E) Designation of lead decisionmaking trustee.--
 ``(i) In general.--If more than one trustee 
 is designated for a natural resource under this 
 paragraph, the following trustee may elect to 
 serve as the lead decisionmaking trustee for 
 the resource:
 ``(I) The United States, for 
 resources exclusively belonging to or 
 held in trust by the United States or 
 for which the United States exercises 
 primary management under the Endangered 
 Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1531 et 
 seq.), the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery 
 Conservation and Management Act (16 
 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.), the Migratory 
 Bird Treaty Act (16 U.S.C. 703 et 
 seq.), the Marine Mammal Protection Act 
 of 1972 (16 U.S.C. 1631 et seq.), the 
 Wild Free-Roaming Horses and Burros Act 
 (16 U.S.C. 1331 et seq.), or the Bald 
 Eagle Protection Act (16 U.S.C. 668 et 
 seq.).
 ``(II) An Indian tribe, for 
 resources belonging exclusively to such 
 tribe or for which the tribe is the 
 primary manager pursuant to a treaty.
 ``(III) A State, if the State is a 
 trustee for the resource and subclauses 
 (I) and (II) do not apply.
 ``(ii) Responsibility of lead 
 decisionmaking trustee.--A lead decisionmaking 
 trustee for a resource designated under this 
 subparagraph shall be responsible for 
 determining the measurement of damages for the 
 resource after soliciting and considering the 
 views of the other trustees for the resource.
 ``(iii) Limitation.--A trustee may not be 
 designated as a lead decisionmaking trustee for 
 a resource under this subparagraph if the 
 trustee is a potentially responsible party with 
 respect to damages to the resource.''.

SEC. 405. DETERMINATION OF CAUSATION.

 Section 107(f) (42 U.S.C. 9607(f)) is amended by adding at the end 
the following:
 ``(3) Determination of causation.--Any determination of 
 whether injury to, destruction of, or loss of a natural 
 resource results from a release under subsection (a)(2)(C) 
 shall be made in accordance with the Restatement (Second) of 
 Torts, as in effect on the date of the enactment of this 
 paragraph.''.

SEC. 406. MEASURE OF DAMAGES.

 Section 107(f) (42 U.S.C. 9607(f)) is further amended by adding at 
the end the following:
 ``(4) Measure of damages.--
 ``(A) In general.--The measure of damages to a 
 natural resource under subsection (a)(2)(C) shall be 
 limited to the following:
 ``(i) Reasonable costs of restoration of 
 the resource.
 ``(ii) The reasonable cost of temporary 
 restoration measures.
 ``(iii) The costs of reasonable assessment 
 of damages to the resource.
 ``(B) Nonuse values.--There shall be no recovery 
 under this Act based on non-use values.
 ``(C) Contingent valuation methodology.--Contingent 
 valuation methodology and other economic polling 
 techniques shall not be used to value either lost 
 natural resource services or any particular restoration 
 alternative.''.

SEC. 407. DAMAGE ASSESSMENTS.

 Section 107(f) (42 U.S.C. 9607(f)) is further amended by adding at 
the end the following:
 ``(5) Damage assessments.--
 ``(A) In general.--To the extent practicable, a 
 Federal, State, or Indian trustee designated under this 
 subsection shall base any measure of damages under 
 paragraph (4) with respect to a site on an assessment 
 of the specific conditions and restoration requirements 
 at the site.
 ``(B) Assessment requirements.--Any assessment used 
 by a trustee under subparagraph (A) shall be based on, 
 and performed in accordance with, generally accepted 
 scientific and technical standards, literature, and 
 methodologies that ensure the validity, reliability, 
 and cost-effectiveness of assessment results.''.

SEC. 408. SELECTION OF RESTORATION ALTERNATIVES.

 Section 107(f) (42 U.S.C. 9607(f)) is further amended by adding at 
the end the following:
 ``(7) Selection of restoration alternatives.--
 ``(A) In general.--In selecting a range of possible 
 restoration alternatives, a Federal, State, or Indian 
 tribe trustee, designated under this subsection shall 
 select reasonable measures that are feasible and cost-
 effective.
 ``(B) Preference.--A trustee may give preference to 
 any alternatives selected under subparagraph (A) that 
 meet the following requirements:
 ``(i) Notwithstanding the limitations in 
 paragraph (4), the incremental costs are 
 justified by the incremental benefits.
 ``(ii) Restoration is achieved in a timely 
 manner.
 ``(C) Replacement.--With the concurrence of the 
 affected trustees, any restoration alternative selected 
 may include temporary replacement of the services, or 
 some portion thereof, which would otherwise have been 
 provided by the injured natural resources.''.

SEC. 409. USE OF SUMS RECOVERED BY TRUSTEES.

 Section 107(f) (42 U.S.C. 9607(f)) is further amended by adding at 
the end the following:
 ``(8) Use of sums recovered by trustees.--
 ``(A) Use of sums recovered by the united states.--
 Damages recovered by the United States Government as a 
 trustee under this subsection shall be retained by the 
 trustee, without further appropriation, for use only to 
 restore, replace, or acquire the equivalent of such 
 natural resources.
 ``(B) Use of sums recovered by a state, or indian 
 tribe.--Damages recovered by a State or Indian tribe as 
 a trustee under this subsection shall be available for 
 use only to restore, replace, or acquire the equivalent 
 of such natural resources by the State or Indian 
 tribe.''.

SEC. 410. RELATION TO OTHER LAWS; DAMAGES OCCURRING BEFORE DECEMBER 11, 
 1980.

 Section 107(f) (42 U.S.C. 9607(f)) is further amended by adding at 
the end the following:
 ``(9) Relation to other laws.--
 ``(A) Double recovery prohibited.--Any trustee who 
 receives compensation for injury to, destruction of, or 
 loss of a natural resource pursuant to this section 
 shall be precluded from recovering compensation for the 
 injury to, destruction of, or loss of the same natural 
 resource pursuant to any other State or Federal law. 
 Any trustee who receives compensation for injury to, 
 destruction of, or loss of a natural resource pursuant 
 to any other Federal or State law shall be precluded 
 from receiving compensation for injury to, destruction 
 of, or loss of the same natural resource as provided in 
 this section.
 ``(B) Double liability prohibited.--Any person who 
 pays compensation to one or more parties for injury to, 
 destruction of, or loss of a natural resource pursuant 
 to this section shall not be required to pay 
 compensation for injury to, destruction of, or loss of 
 the same natural resource pursuant to this Act or any 
 other State or Federal law. Any person who pays 
 compensation for injury to, destruction of, or loss of 
 a natural resource pursuant to any other Federal or 
 State law shall not be required to pay compensation for 
 injury to, destruction of, or loss of the same natural 
 resource as provided in this section.
 ``(C) Person defined.--In this paragraph, the term 
 `person' has the meaning given such term by section 101 
 and also includes an Indian tribe.
 ``(10) Damages occurring before december 11, 1980.--There 
 shall be no recovery for injury to, destruction of, or loss of 
natural resources under the authority of subsection (a)(2)(C) where 
such injury, destruction, or loss and the release of a hazardous 
substance from which such injury, destruction, or loss resulted have 
occurred wholly before December 11, 1980.''.

SEC. 411. RESTORATION.

 Section 107(f) (42 U.S.C. 9607(f)) is further amended by adding at 
the end the following:
 ``(11) Restoration.--
 ``(A) Restoration goal defined.--An injury to, 
 destruction of, or loss of natural resources, for the 
 purposes of evaluating damages and identifying 
 restoration alternatives under this subsection or 
 section 106, shall mean a measurable adverse change in 
 a population or community of organisms that exceeds the 
 natural variability of the population or community of 
 organisms to an ecologically significant degree, as a 
 result of a release of a hazardous substance. The goal 
 of any restoration shall be to restore injured natural 
 resources to their baseline condition for the 
 reasonably anticipated use of the natural resources as 
 measured by the consumptive and nonconsumptive services 
 provided by such resources. For purposes of this 
 subparagraph:
 ``(i) The term `consumptive services' means 
 the use of a natural resource by the public 
 that includes activities such as fishing and 
 trapping in which resources are harvested.
 ``(ii) The term `nonconsumptive services' 
 means the physical use of the resource by the 
 public in a manner that does not reduce the 
 stock of the resource. Such uses include 
 activities related to visitation, such as 
 hiking, wildlife viewing, and photography, as 
 well as ecological services such as flood 
 control and filtration.
 ``(B) Measurement of restoration of certain 
 resources.--
 ``(i) Resources protected under wilderness 
 act or marine protection, research, and 
 sanctuaries act of 1972.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, restoration of an injured, damaged, 
 or lost biological resource that is protected 
 under the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et 
 seq.), or that is located in a marine sanctuary 
 designated under the Marine Protection, 
 Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972 (16 
 U.S.C. 1431 et seq.), may be measured by 
 reinstatement of populations of such resource 
 to the condition that would exist had the 
 release not occurred.
 ``(ii) Resources protected under endangered 
 species act of 1973.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, restoration of a resource that is 
 protected under the Endangered Species Act of 
 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.) may be measured 
 by compliance with existing or planned recovery 
 plans and requirements developed for such 
 resource under section 1533(f) of such Act.''.

SEC. 412. USE OF MEDIATION.

 Section 122(f) (42 U.S.C. 9622(f)) is amended by adding at the end 
the following new paragraph:
 ``(7) Use of mediation.--Any Federal natural resource 
 trustee, State natural resource trustee, or Indian tribe 
 seeking damages for injury to, destruction of, or loss of 
 natural resources in accordance with subsections (a) and (f) of 
 section 107 may initiate mediation for such claim with any 
 potentially responsible parties by means of the mediation 
 procedure or other alternative dispute resolution method 
 recognized by the district court in which the action is filed. 
 Such mediation shall be initiated not later than 120 days after 
 the filing of such action. Such 120-day period may be extended 
 upon agreement of all parties.''.

SEC. 413. APPLICABILITY.

 (a) In General.--The amendments made by this title shall not apply 
to an action to recover natural resource damages under section 107(f) 
in which a trial has begun before July 1, 1997, or in which a final 
settlement, decree, or order has been issued before such date.
 (b) Expired Actions Under Section 113(g)(1).--The amendments made 
by this title shall not be construed to affect any action for damages 
that has expired under section 113(g)(1) of the Comprehensive 
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 
U.S.C. 9601 et seq.), as in effect on the day before the date of the 
enactment of this Act.

 TITLE V--STATE ROLE

SEC. 501. STATE DELEGATION AT NPL FACILITIES.

 (a) State Delegation.--Title I of the Comprehensive Environmental 
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601 et 
seq.) is amended--
 (1) by inserting after the heading for title I the 
 following:

 ``Subtitle A--General Provisions'';

 and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subtitle:

 ``Subtitle B--State Role

``SEC. 151. STATE DELEGATION AT NPL FACILITIES.

 ``(a) State Authority.--
 ``(1) Actions for which authority may be delegated.--The 
 Administrator may, in accordance with this section, delegate 
 authority to a State to take any or all of the following 
 actions at any or all facilities within the State that are 
 listed on the National Priorities List:
 ``(A) Response actions under section 104.
 ``(B) Response actions under section 106(a) and 
 enforcement under section 106(b).
 ``(C) Cost recovery actions under section 107.
 ``(D) Authority under subsections (e) and (h) 
 (other than (h)(2)) of section 120.
 ``(E) Remedy selections under section 121.
 ``(F) Settlements under section 122.
 ``(G) Allocations under section 128.
 ``(H) Community participation activities under 
 section 117, other than the making of grants for 
 technical assistance under section 117(e).
 ``(2) Application for state authority.--The Governor of a 
 State may submit to the Administrator an application for State 
 delegation of one or more of the authorities listed in 
 paragraph (1) with respect to one or more facilities, and may 
 seek amendments to its delegated authority to add or delete 
 facilities or actions for which authority is delegated. Any 
 such application shall contain the following:
 ``(A) A list of facilities on the National 
 Priorities List within the State for which authority is 
 requested and a list of actions for which authority is 
 requested.
 ``(B) A certification that the State has adequate 
 legal authority to request, accept, administer, and 
 enforce the authority requested.
 ``(C) A certification that the State has the 
 financial and personnel resources, organization, and 
 expertise to administer and enforce the authority 
 requested.
 ``(3) Approval and disapproval of application.--
 ``(A) In general.--On the last day of the 180-day 
 period beginning on the date the Administrator receives 
 an application made in accordance with paragraph (2), 
 the application is deemed to be approved unless within 
 such 180-day period the Administrator disapproves the 
 application, or a specified portion of the application, 
 by making one of the following findings:
 ``(i) A finding that the State does not 
 have adequate legal authority to request, 
 accept, administer, or enforce the authority 
 requested.
 ``(ii) A finding that the State does not 
 have the financial and personnel resources, 
 organization, or expertise to administer and 
 enforce the authority requested.
 ``(B) Terms and conditions prohibited.--The 
 Administrator may not place any terms or conditions on 
 a delegation made pursuant to this section, except that 
 the Administrator may prescribe requirements to ensure 
 timely and effective recovery of response costs paid by 
 funds from the Hazardous Substance Superfund 
 established under subchapter A of chapter 98 of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 ``(C) Explanation and resubmittal.--If the 
 Administrator disapproves an application by making one 
 of the findings in clause (i) or (ii) of subparagraph 
 (A), the Administrator shall notify the Governor in 
 writing of the disapproval and explain the basis for 
 such finding within 180 days after receiving the 
 application. A notification under this subparagraph is 
 final agency action for purposes of judicial review. A 
 Governor may submit a revised application any time 
 after receiving notice of disapproval.
 ``(b) State Responsibilities and Authorities.--
 ``(1) Certification of use of funds.--Not later than one 
 year after a State receives funds pursuant to subsection (d), 
 and annually thereafter for as long as the State receives such 
 funds, the Governor of the State shall submit to the 
 Administrator the following:
 ``(A) A certification that the State has used the 
 funds in accordance with the requirements of this 
 section and this Act.
 ``(B) Information describing the manner in which 
 the State has used the funds.
 ``(C) Such other information about the use of the 
 funds as the Administrator considers necessary.
 ``(2) Cost recovery.--All response costs that are paid by 
 the State using State funds and that are recovered under 
 section 107 by a State for costs incurred at a facility for 
 which the State has delegated authority to take such action 
 pursuant to subsection (a) shall be retained by the State. All 
 response costs that are paid by funds from the Hazardous 
 Substance Superfund established under subchapter A of chapter 
 98 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and that are recovered 
 under section 107 by a State for costs incurred at a facility 
 for which the State has delegated authority to take such action 
 pursuant to subsection (a) shall be deposited into such 
 Superfund. The Administrator may take actions under section 107 
 to recover response costs at such a facility. In any action 
 commenced in a court of the United States by a State to recover 
 costs described in this paragraph, the Administrator may 
 intervene as a matter of right.
 ``(c) Federal Responsibilities and Authorities.--
 ``(1) Review of use of funds.--The Administrator shall 
 review any certification submitted by a Governor pursuant to 
 subsection (b)(1). If the Administrator finds that funds were 
 used in a manner that is inconsistent with the provisions of 
 this Act, the Administrator shall notify the Governor in 
 writing. If the Governor fails to demonstrate promptly after 
 receiving such notice that the Administrator's finding is in 
 error, or that the inconsistency is being corrected, the 
 Administrator may request reimbursement of such sums as the 
 Administrator has found to be used in a manner inconsistent 
 with this Act or bring an action in the appropriate United 
 States district court to recover the amount of funds used in a 
 manner inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.
 ``(2) Withdrawal of delegation.--
 ``(A) Certified states.--If the Administrator finds 
 that a State does not meet the requirements for a 
 delegation of authority under subsection (a)(2), or is 
 exercising such authority in a manner inconsistent with 
 the requirements of this Act, the Administrator may 
 withdraw all of the State's delegated authority after 
 providing notice and an opportunity to correct 
 deficiencies pursuant to subparagraph (B). If the 
 Administrator finds that the State is failing to meet 
 the cost recovery requirements prescribed by the 
 Administrator pursuant to subsection (a)(3)(C), the 
 Administrator may withdraw all of the cost recovery 
 authority delegated to the State under subsection 
 (a)(1)(C).
 ``(B) Notice and opportunity to rectify.--The 
 Administrator shall notify a State in writing prior to 
 withdrawing authority delegated pursuant to subsection 
 (a). If the State has not addressed the deficiencies 
 listed in the Administrator's notification in a timely 
 manner after receiving the notification, the authority 
 may be withdrawn.
 ``(3) Delisting from national priorities list.--(A) Upon 
 receipt of a written statement described in subparagraph (B) 
 from a Governor with respect to a facility, the Administrator 
 shall publish a notice in the Federal Register to delist the 
 facility (or portion thereof) from the National Priorities 
 List.
 ``(B) The written statement referred to in subparagraph (A) 
 is a written statement from a Governor with respect to a 
 facility stating that--
 ``(i) no further action to address the 
 contamination at the facility (or portion thereof) is 
 necessary to protect human health and the environment; 
 or
 ``(ii) response action has been completed in 
 accordance with an enforceable agreement to clean up 
 the facility or cleanup is proceeding at the facility 
 under the Solid Waste Disposal Act.
 ``(4) Prohibited actions.--Except upon request from the 
 State or as provided in subsections (b)(4) and (d), the 
 Administrator is prohibited from taking any actions under 
 sections 104, 106, 107, 117 (other than 117(e)), 121, 122, and 
 section 128 (relating to allocations), and under subsections 
 (e) and (h) (other than subsection (h)(2)) of section 120, at 
 any facility on the National Priorities List for which 
 authority to take such actions has been delegated to a State 
 under this section.
 ``(d) Relationship to Cooperative Agreements.--Nothing in this 
section shall affect the authority of the Administrator under section 
104(d)(1) of this Act to enter into a cooperative agreement with a 
State or political subdivision or Indian Tribe.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 106(a) of such Act is amended by 
inserting after ``Attorney General of the United States'' the 
following: ``(or, in the case of a State delegation under section 151, 
the appropriate State official)''.

SEC. 502. STATE AUTHORIZATION AT NPL FACILITIES.

 Subtitle B of title I of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, as added by section 501, is 
further amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 152. STATE AUTHORIZATION AT NPL FACILITIES.

 ``(a) State Authority.--
 ``(1) Actions for which a state may receive 
 authorization.--The Administrator may, in accordance with this 
 section, authorize a State to implement the State's hazardous 
 substance response program in lieu of the response action 
 authorities of this Act at any or all of the facilities within 
 the State that are listed on the National Priorities List.
 ``(2) Application for state authorization.--The Governor of 
 a State may submit to the Administrator an application for 
 State authorization with respect to one or more facilities, and 
 may seek amendments to its authorization to add or delete 
 facilities. Any such application shall contain the following:
 ``(A) A list of facilities on the National 
 Priorities List within the State for which 
 authorization is requested.
 ``(B) A certification that the State has adequate 
 legal authority, financial and personnel resources, 
 organization, and expertise to administer and enforce 
 State hazardous substance response program at the 
 facilities for which authorization is requested.
 ``(C) A certification that the State hazardous 
 substance response program for which authorization is 
 requested, or any Federal hazardous response authority 
 delegated under section 121, will not use Federal funds 
 to relieve from liability for a release any person who 
 is liable under section 107.
 ``(D) A certification that response actions taken 
 by the State under the authorization will protect 
 public health and the environment.
 ``(3) Approval and disapproval of application.--
 ``(A) In general.--On or before the last day of the 
 180-day period beginning on the date the Administrator 
 receives an application made in accordance with 
 paragraph (2), the Administrator shall approve or 
 disapprove the application by making one of the 
 following findings:
 ``(i) A finding that the State does not 
 have the financial and personnel resources, 
 organization, or expertise to administer or 
 enforce the State hazardous substance response 
 program at the facilities for which 
 authorization is requested.
 ``(ii) A finding that the State's 
 implementation of the hazardous substance 
 response authority would use Federal funds to 
 relieve from liability for a release any person 
 who is liable under section 107.
 ``(iii) A finding that response actions 
 taken by the State under the authorization will 
 not protect public health and the environment.
 ``(B) Presumptive approval.--(i) Notwithstanding 
 subparagraph (A), if a State submits an application 
 that includes, in addition to the information in 
 paragraph (2), a certification that it meets any 3 of 
 the criteria set forth in clause (ii), the application 
 is deemed to be approved unless within the 180-day 
 period referred to in subparagraph (A) the 
 Administrator makes a finding that--
 ``(I) the application is incomplete or 
 inaccurate;
 ``(II) the State does not meet 3 of the 
 criteria set forth in clause (ii); or
 ``(III) the State's implementation of the 
 hazardous substance response authority would 
 use Federal funds to relieve from liability for 
 a release a person who is potentially liable 
 under section 107.
 ``(ii) The criteria referred to in clause (ii) are 
 the following:
 ``(I) A State cleanup program to remediate 
 hazardous waste sites has been in effect for at 
 least 10 years before the date of submission of 
 an application by the State under paragraph 
 (2).
 ``(II) Since the date on which a State 
 cleanup program to remediate hazardous waste 
 sites went into effect, the State has expended 
 or obligated at least $10,000,000 from its 
 State cleanup fund or other State source of 
 cleanup funding (including direct 
 appropriations).
 ``(III) The State cleanup program has at 
 least 100 full-time equivalent employees.
 ``(IV) At least 200 response actions at 
 facilities not listed on the National 
 Priorities List have been performed under the 
 State cleanup program.
 ``(V) There are located in the State at 
 least 100 non-Federal facilities listed on the 
 National Priorities List, or at least 6 non-
 Federal facilities listed on the National 
 Priorities List per million State residents.
 ``(C) Terms and conditions prohibited.--The 
 Administrator may not place any terms or conditions on 
 an authorization made pursuant to this section, except 
 that the Administrator may prescribe requirements to 
 ensure timely and effective recovery by the State of 
 response costs paid by funds from the Hazardous 
 Substance Superfund established under subchapter A of 
 chapter 98 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 ``(D) Explanation and resubmittal.--If the 
 Administrator disapproves an application by making one 
 of the findings in clause (i), (ii), or (iii) of 
 subparagraph (A), the Administrator shall notify the 
 Governor in writing of the disapproval and explain the 
 basis for such finding within 180 days after receiving 
 the application. A notification under this subparagraph 
 is final agency action for purposes of judicial review. 
 A Governor may submit a revised application any time 
 after receiving notice of disapproval.
 ``(b) State Responsibilities and Authorities.--
 ``(1) Certification of use of funds.--Not later than one 
 year after a State receives funds pursuant to subsection (d), 
 and annually thereafter for as long as the State receives such 
 funds, the Governor of the State shall submit to the 
 Administrator the following:
 ``(A) A certification that the State has used the 
 funds in accordance with the requirements of this 
 section and State law.
 ``(B) Information describing the manner in which 
 the State has used the funds.
 ``(C) Such other information about the use of the 
 funds as the Administrator considers necessary.
 ``(2) Cost recovery.--All response costs that are paid by 
 the State using State funds and that are recovered by a State 
 under section 107 or under State cost recovery provisions for 
 costs incurred at a facility for which the State has been 
 authorized pursuant to subsection (a) shall be retained by the 
 State. All response costs paid by funds from the Hazardous 
 Substance Superfund established under subchapter A of chapter 
 98 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 recovered under section 
 107 or under State liability provisions by a State for costs 
 incurred at a facility for which the State has been authorized 
 to take such action pursuant to subsection (a) shall be 
 deposited into such Superfund. Notwithstanding paragraph (1), 
 the Administrator may take actions under section 107 to recover 
 response costs at such a facility. In any action commenced in a 
 court of the United States by a State to recover costs 
 described in this paragraph, the Administrator may intervene as 
 a matter of right.
 ``(c) Federal Responsibilities and Authorities.--
 ``(1) Review of use of funds.--The Administrator shall 
 review any certification submitted by a Governor pursuant to 
 subsection (b)(1). If the Administrator finds that funds were 
 used in a manner that is clearly inconsistent with the 
 provisions of this section, the Administrator shall notify the 
 Governor in writing. If the Governor fails to demonstrate 
 promptly after receiving such notice that the Administrator's 
 finding is in error, or that the inconsistency is being 
 corrected, the Administrator may request reimbursement of such 
 sums as the Administrator has found to be used in a manner 
 clearly inconsistent with this section or bring an action in 
 the appropriate United States district court to recover the 
 amount of funds used in a manner clearly inconsistent with the 
 provisions of this section.
 ``(2) Withdrawal of authorization.--
 ``(A) Certified states.--If the Administrator finds 
 that a State does not meet the requirements for 
 authorization under subsection (a)(2), or fails to meet 
 terms and conditions for authorization added pursuant 
 to subsection (a)(3)(C), or is exercising such 
 authority in a manner clearly inconsistent with the 
 requirements of this section, the Administrator may 
 withdraw the State's authorization after providing 
 notice and an opportunity to correct deficiencies 
 pursuant to subparagraph (B).
 ``(B) Notice and opportunity to rectify.--The 
 Administrator shall notify a State in writing prior to 
 withdrawing authorization approved pursuant to 
 subsection (a). If the State has not addressed the 
 deficiencies listed in the Administrator's notification 
 in a timely manner after receiving the notification, 
 the authority may be withdrawn.
 ``(3) Delisting from national priorities list.--(A) Upon 
 receipt of a written statement described in subparagraph (B) 
 from a Governor with respect to a facility, the Administrator 
 shall publish a notice in the Federal Register to delist the 
 facility (or portion thereof) from the National Priorities 
 List.
 ``(B) The written statement referred to in subparagraph (A) 
 is a written statement from a Governor with respect to a 
 facility stating that--
 ``(i) no further action to address the 
 contamination at the facility (or portion thereof) is 
 necessary to protect human health and the environment; 
 or
 ``(ii) response action has been completed in 
 accordance with an enforceable agreement to clean up 
 the facility or cleanup is proceeding at the facility 
 under the Solid Waste Disposal Act.
 ``(4) Prohibited actions.--Except upon request from the 
 State or as provided in subsection (d), the Administrator is 
 prohibited from taking any actions under this Act at any 
 facility on the National Priorities List for which 
 authorization has been granted under this section.
 ``(d) Relationship to Cooperative Agreements and Section 131.--
Nothing in this section shall affect the authority of the Administrator 
under section 104(d)(1) of this Act to enter into a cooperative 
agreement with a State or political subdivision or Indian Tribe.''.

SEC. 503. FEDERAL FUNDING OF STATE ACTIONS UNDER STATE DELEGATION OR 
 STATE AUTHORIZATION.

 Subtitle B of title I of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, as added by section 501, is 
further amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 153. FEDERAL FUNDING.

 ``(a) Funding for States with Delegated Authority.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Administrator shall fund the cost to 
 a State of exercising any delegated authorities as such costs 
 arise, where such costs may be determined on a site-specific 
 basis, except as provided in paragraph (3).
 ``(2) Allocation.--The Administrator shall allocate funds 
 among States for program activities for which costs cannot be 
 determined on a site-specific basis considering the following 
 factors:
 ``(A) The cost of administering the delegated 
 authority.
 ``(B) The number of facilities for which the State 
 has been delegated authority.
 ``(C) The types of activities for which the State 
 has been delegated authority.
 ``(D) The number of facilities within the State on 
 the National Priorities List.
 ``(E) The number of other high priority facilities 
 within the State.
 ``(F) The need for development of the State 
 program.
 ``(G) The need for additional personnel.
 ``(H) The amount of resources available through 
 State programs for the cleanup of contaminated 
 facilities.
 ``(I) The benefit to human health and the 
 environment of providing the funding.
 ``(3) Reimbursement for removal actions under section 
 104.--The cost to a State of exercising any delegated removal 
 authority under section 104 shall be reimbursed in accordance 
 with section 123.
 ``(b) Funding for States With Authorization.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Administrator shall fund the cost to 
 a State of exercising any authority for which an authorization 
 has been made under section 152 as such costs arise, where such 
 costs may be determined on a site-specific basis.
 ``(2) Authority of administrator to deny or recover certain 
 costs.--(A) With respect to site-specific costs attributable to 
 a State cleanup standard, requirement, criteria, or limitation 
 that is more stringent than a legally applicable Federal 
 standard, requirement, criteria, or limitation, the 
 Administrator may deny funding to the State for such costs, or 
 seek recovery from the State of any funds from the Hazardous 
 Substance Superfund used by the State for such costs, if the 
 Administrator makes the finding described in subparagraph (B).
 ``(B) The finding referred to in subparagraph (A) is a 
 finding by the Administrator in the case of a remedial action 
 to be undertaken solely under section 104 using the Hazardous 
 Substance Superfund that selection of a remedial action that 
 attains such level or standard of control will not provide a 
 balance between the need for protection of public health and 
 the environment at the facility under consideration, and the 
 availability of amounts from the Hazardous Substance Superfund 
 to respond to other sites which present or may present a threat 
 to public health or the environment, taking into consideration 
 the relative immediacy of such threats.
 ``(3) Allocation.--The Administrator shall allocate funds 
 among States for program activities for which costs cannot be 
 determined on a site-specific basis considering the following 
 factors:
 ``(A) The cost of administering the authority for 
 which the State has received authorization.
 ``(B) The number of facilities for which the State 
 has received authorization.
 ``(C) The need for additional personnel.
 ``(D) The amount of resources available through 
 State programs for the cleanup of contaminated 
 facilities.
 ``(E) The benefit to human health and the 
 environment of providing the funding.
 ``(c) List of Activities.--In consultation with the States, the 
Administrator shall publish a list of the activities for which costs 
may and may not be determined on a site-specific basis.
 ``(d) Use of Funds.--A State may use funds provided under this 
section to take any actions or perform any duties necessary to 
implement--
 ``(1) any authority delegated to the State under section 
 151; and
 ``(2) any State hazardous substance response program for 
 which the State has received authorization under section 152.
 ``(e) Cost Share.--A State may not use funds provided under this 
section unless the State provides assurances that it will pay the 
amount described in section 104(c)(3). A State may not use funds 
appropriated to carry out the purposes of this section to make such 
payments.''.

SEC. 504. STATE COST SHARE.

 Paragraph (3) of section 104(c) of the Comprehensive Environmental 
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9604(c)) 
is amended to read as follows:
 ``(3)(A) Neither the Administrator nor a State described in 
 subparagraph (B) may provide any remedial action pursuant to 
 this section unless the State first enters into a contract or 
 cooperative agreement with the Administrator providing 
 assurances deemed adequate by the Administrator that the State 
 will pay, in cash or through other in-kind contributions, 10 
 percent of the costs of the remedial action and 10 percent of 
 the costs of operation and maintenance.
 ``(B) Subparagraph (A) applies to any State--
 ``(i) which has been delegated authority pursuant 
 to section 151(a) to take remedial action; or
 ``(ii) which has received authorization under 
 section 152(a).
 ``(C) Subparagraph (A) does not apply in the case of 
 remedial action to be taken on land or water held by an Indian 
 Tribe, held by the United States in trust for Indians, held by 
 a member of an Indian Tribe (if such land or water is subject 
 to a trust restriction or alienation), or otherwise within the 
 borders of an Indian reservation.''.

SEC. 505. CONCURRENCE OF GOVERNORS REQUIRED FOR ADDITIONS TO NATIONAL 
 PRIORITIES LIST.

 (a) Governors' Concurrence Required.--Section 105 of the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 
of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9605) is amended by adding at the end the following 
new subsection:
 ``(h) Concurrence of Governors Required for Additions to National 
Priorities List.--The President may add a facility to the National 
Priorities List only with the concurrence of the Governor of the State 
in which the facility is located.''.
 (b) Cross Reference.--Subparagraph (B) of section 105(a)(8) is 
amended by inserting after ``shall revise the list'' the following: ``, 
subject to subsection (h),''.

SEC. 506. STATE AND LOCAL REIMBURSEMENT FOR RESPONSE ACTIONS.

 Section 123 is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 123. REIMBURSEMENT TO STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS.

 ``(a) Application.--Any State or general purpose unit of local 
government for a political subdivision which is affected by a release 
or threatened release at any facility may apply to the President for 
reimbursement under this section.
 ``(b) Reimbursement.--
 ``(1) Emergency response.--The President is authorized to 
 reimburse general purpose units of local government for 
 expenses incurred in carrying out emergency response actions 
 necessary to prevent or mitigate injury to human health or the 
 environment associated with the release or threatened release 
 of any hazardous substance or pollutant or contaminant. Such 
 actions may include, where appropriate, security fencing to 
 limit access, response to fires and explosions, and other 
 activities which require immediate response at the State or 
 local level.
 ``(2) Removal actions.--The President is authorized to 
 reimburse States for expenses incurred in carrying out removal 
 actions under section 104.
 ``(3) Limitations.--(A) Reimbursement under this section 
 shall not supplant State or local funds normally provided for 
 response.
 ``(B) No reimbursement may be provided under this 
 subsection to any general purpose unit of local government or 
 any State for expenses incurred before the date of the 
 enactment of the Superfund Reform Act.
 ``(c) Amount.--(1) The amount of any reimbursement to any general 
purpose unit of local government under subsection (b)(1) may not exceed 
$25,000 for a single response. The reimbursement under this section 
with respect to a single facility shall be limited to the general 
purpose units of local government having jurisdiction over the 
political subdivision in which the facility is located.
 ``(2) The amount of any reimbursement to a State under subsection 
(b)(2) may not exceed $50,000 for a single response. The reimbursement 
under this section with respect to a single facility shall be limited 
to the State in which the facility is located.
 ``(3) The amounts allowed for the State and general purpose units 
of local government may not be combined for any single response action.
 ``(d) Procedure.--Reimbursements authorized pursuant to this 
section shall be in accordance with rules promulgated by the 
Administrator within 1 year after the date of the enactment of the 
Superfund Reform Act.''.

 TITLE VI--FEDERAL FACILITIES

SEC. 601. STATE ROLE AT FEDERAL FACILITIES.

 Subsection (g) of section 120 is amended to read as follows:
 ``(g) State Role at Federal Facilities.--
 ``(1) Enforcement and dispute resolution.--(A) An 
 interagency agreement under this section between a State and 
 any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States 
 shall be enforceable by the State or the Federal department, 
 agency, or instrumentality in the United States district court 
 for the district in which the facility is located. The district 
 court shall have the jurisdiction to enforce compliance with 
 any provision, standard, regulation, condition, requirement, 
 order, or final determination which has become effective under 
 such agreement, and to impose any appropriate civil penalty 
 provided for any violation of the agreement, not to exceed 
 $25,000 per day.
 ``(B) At a Federal facility in a State to which the 
 President's authorities under subsection (e)(4) have been 
 transferred pursuant to section 131(a), if the State does not 
 concur in the remedy selection proposed by the Federal 
 department, agency, or instrumentality that owns or operates 
 the facility, the parties shall enter into dispute resolution 
 as provided in the interagency agreement. If there is no 
 interagency agreement, the State shall, not later than 120 days 
 after the transfer of authorities under section 131(a), enter 
 into an agreement with the head of the department, agency, or 
 instrumentality on a process for resolving disputes regarding 
 remedy selection for the facility. If a dispute is unresolved 
 after using the process under the interagency agreement or 
 dispute resolution agreement, the head of the Federal 
 department, agency, or instrumentality that owns the Federal 
 facility and the Governor of the State shall attempt to resolve 
 such dispute by consensus. If no agreement is reached between 
 the head of the Federal department, agency, or instrumentality 
 and the Governor, the State may issue the final determination. 
 In order to compel implementation of the State's selected 
 remedy, the State must bring a civil action in the appropriate 
 United States district court. The district court shall have 
 jurisdiction as provided in subparagraph (A) to issue any 
 relief that may be necessary to implement the remedial action, 
 to impose appropriate civil penalties not to exceed $25,000 per 
 day from the date the selected remedy becomes final, and to 
 review any challenges to the State's final determination 
 consistent with the standards set forth in section 113(j) of 
 this Act.
 ``(2) Limitation.--Except as necessary to implement the 
 transfer of the Administrator's authorities to a State pursuant 
 to section 131(a), nothing in this subsection shall be 
 construed as altering, modifying, or impairing in any manner, 
 or authorizing the unilateral modification of, any terms of any 
 agreement, permit, administrative or judicial order, decree, or 
 interagency agreement existing on the effective date of the 
 Superfund Reform Act. Any other modifications or revisions of 
 an interagency agreement entered into under this section shall 
 require the consent of all parties to such agreement, and 
 absent such consent the agreement shall remain unchanged.
 ``(3) Effect on other authorities.--Nothing in this 
 subsection shall affect the exercise by a State of any other 
 authorities that may be applicable to Federal facilities in the 
 State.''.

SEC. 602. INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGIES FOR REMEDIAL ACTION AT FEDERAL 
 FACILITIES.

 (a) In General.--Section 311 (42 U.S.C. 9660) is amended by adding 
at the end the following:
 ``(h) Federal Facilities.--
 ``(1) Designation.--The President may designate a facility 
 that is owned or operated by any department, agency, or 
 instrumentality of the United States, and that is listed or 
 proposed for listing on the National Priorities List, to 
 facilitate the research, development, and application of 
 innovative technologies for remedial action at the facility.
 ``(2) Use of facilities.--
 ``(A) In general.--A facility designated under 
 paragraph (1) shall be made available to Federal 
 departments and agencies, State departments and 
 agencies, and public and private instrumentalities, to 
 carry out activities described in paragraph (1).
 ``(B) Coordination.--The Administrator--
 ``(i) shall coordinate the use of the 
 facilities with the departments, agencies, and 
 instrumentalities of the United States; and
 ``(ii) may approve or deny the use of a 
 particular innovative technology for remedial 
 action at any such facility.
 ``(3) Considerations.--
 ``(A) Evaluation of schedules and penalties.--In 
 considering whether to permit the application of a 
 particular innovative technology for remedial action at 
 a facility designated under paragraph (1), the 
 Administrator shall evaluate the schedules and 
 penalties applicable to the facility under any 
 agreement or order entered into under section 120.
 ``(B) Amendment of agreement or order.--If, after 
 an evaluation under subparagraph (A), the Administrator 
 determines that there is a need to amend any agreement 
 or order entered into pursuant to section 120, the 
 Administrator shall comply with all provisions of the 
 agreement or order, respectively, relating to the 
 amendment of the agreement or order.''.
 (b) Report to Congress.--Section 311(e) (42 U.S.C. 9660(e)) is 
amended--
 (1) by striking ``At the time'' and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(1) In general.--At the time''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2) Additional information.--A report under paragraph (1) 
 shall include information on the use of facilities described in 
 subsection (h)(1) for the research, development, and 
 application of innovative technologies for remedial activity, 
 as authorized under subsection (h).''.

SEC. 605. FEDERAL ENTITIES AND FACILITIES.

 Section 120 (42 U.S.C. 9620) is amended as follows:
 (1) By amending the heading to read as follows:

``SEC. 120. FEDERAL ENTITIES AND FACILITIES.''.

 (2) By amending paragraph (1) of subsection (a) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(1)(A) Each department, agency, and instrumentality of 
 the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of the United 
 States shall be subject to, and comply with, all Federal, 
 State, interstate and local requirements, both substantive and 
 procedural (including any requirements for permits or 
 reporting, or any provisions for injunctive relief and such 
 sanctions as may be imposed by a court to enforce such relief), 
 regarding response actions and damages related to, or 
 management of, releases of hazardous substances, pollutants, or 
 contaminants in the same manner, and to the same extent, as any 
 nongovernmental entity is subject to such requirements, 
 including enforcement and liability (including natural resource 
 damage liability) under sections 106 and 107 of this title and 
 the payment of reasonable service charges.
 ``(B) The Federal, State, interstate, and local substantive 
 and procedural requirements referred to in subparagraph (A) 
 include, but are not limited to, all administrative orders and 
 all civil and administrative penalties and fines, regardless of 
 whether such penalties and fines are punitive or coercive in 
 nature or are imposed for isolated, intermittent, or continuing 
 violations. The United States hereby expressly waives any 
 immunity otherwise applicable to the United States with respect 
 to any such substantive or procedural requirement (including, 
 but not limited to, any injunctive relief, administrative order 
 or civil or administrative penalty or fine referred to in the 
 preceding sentence, or reasonable service charge).
 ``(C) The reasonable service charges referred to in this 
 paragraph include, but are not limited to, fees or charges 
 assessed in connection with the processing and issuance of 
 permits, renewal of permits, amendments to permits, review of 
 plans, studies, and other documents, and inspection and 
 monitoring of facilities, as well as any other 
 nondiscriminatory charges that are assessed in connection with 
 a State, interstate, or local response program.
 ``(D) Neither the United States, nor any agent, employee, 
 or officer thereof, shall be immune or exempt from any process 
 or sanction of any State or Federal court with respect to the 
 enforcement of any injunctive relief.
 ``(E) No agent, employee, or officer of the United States 
 shall be personally liable for any civil penalty under any 
 Federal or State response law with respect to any act or 
 omission within the scope of their official duties. An agent, 
 employee, or officer of the United States shall be subject to 
 any criminal sanction (including, but not limited to, any fine 
 or imprisonment) under any Federal or State response law, but 
 no department, agency, or instrumentality of the executive, 
 legislative, or judicial branch of the United States shall be 
 subject to any such sanctions.
 ``(F) The waiver of sovereign immunity provided in this 
 paragraph shall not apply to the extent a State law would apply 
 any standard or requirement to such Federal department, agency, 
 or instrumentality in a manner which is more stringent than 
 such standard or requirement would be applied to any other 
 person.
 ``(G) Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect 
 the liability of any person or entity other than a department, 
 agency, or instrumentality of the United States under sections 
 106 and 107 of this Act.
 ``(H)(i) The Administrator or a State with delegated 
 authority may issue an order under section 106 of this Act to 
 any department, agency, or instrumentality of the executive, 
 legislative, or judicial branch of the United States. The 
 Administrator or a State with delegated authority shall 
 initiate an administrative enforcement action against such a 
 department, agency, or instrumentality in the same manner and 
 under the same circumstances as action would be initiated 
 against any other person.
 ``(ii) No administrative order issued to such department, 
 agency, or instrumentality shall become final until such 
 department, agency, or instrumentality has had the opportunity 
 to confer with the President or a State with delegated 
 authority.
 ``(I) Each such department, agency, and instrumentality 
 shall have the right to contribution protection set forth in 
 section 113, when such department, agency, or instrumentality 
 resolves its liability under this Act.''.
 (3) By striking paragraph (4) of subsection (a).
 (4) By inserting ``(other than the indemnification 
 requirements of section 119)'' after ``responsibility'' in 
 subsection (a)(3).

SEC. 607. NOTIFICATION REGARDING UNCONTAMINATED PROPERTY AT FEDERAL 
 FACILITIES.

 Subsection (d) of section 120 (42 U.S.C. 9620) is amended by adding 
at the end the following: ``Upon identification of parcels of 
uncontaminated property pursuant to subsection (h)(4), the President 
may provide notice that the listing does not include the identified 
clean parcels.''.

SEC. 608. ANNUAL STUDIES OF PRIORITIES AT FEDERAL FACILITIES.

 (a) Study Requirement.--The head of each Federal department, 
agency, or instrumentality each fiscal year shall conduct a study to 
determine priorities among environmental management activities, within 
the funds available for such activities during such fiscal year, at 
facilities owned or operated by the department, agency, or 
instrumentality and on the National Priorities List.
 (b) Use of Standard Methodologies.--In conducting the study, the 
head of each department, agency, or instrumentality shall develop and 
apply standard methodologies for evaluating and ranking such 
priorities.
 (c) Matters To Be Considered.--In conducting the study, the head of 
the department, agency, or instrumentality shall consider a range of 
issues, including the following:
 (1) Health, safety, and environmental risks.
 (2) Reduction of infrastructure costs and life-cycle 
 cleanup costs.
 (3) Economic development concerns.
 (4) Views of affected citizens.
 (d) Participation.--In conducting the study, the head of the 
department, agency, or instrumentality shall provide for the 
participation, at a minimum, of the State in which the facility is 
located; the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency or a 
State with authorized under section 131; the department, agency, or 
instrumentality being regulated; and any affected citizens or entities.
 (e) Report.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment 
of the annual appropriation Act providing funds for a Federal 
department, agency, or instrumentality, the head of the department, 
agency, or instrumentality shall submit to Congress a report on the 
results of the study required by this section.
 (f) Effect of Study on Enforceable Agreements.--A study conducted 
under this section shall in no way impair or diminish the obligation of 
any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States to 
comply with requirements agreed to under section 120 of the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 
of 1980, unless such requirements have been specifically--
 (1) addressed; or
 (2) waived;
without objection from the State or Federal regulating agency.

SEC. 609. JUDICIAL REMOVALS.

 Section 113(b) is amended by inserting after the first sentence the 
following: ``Any action initiated in any State or local court against 
the United States (or any department, agency, instrumentality, officer, 
or employee of the United States) regarding liability or response 
actions related to, or the release, disposal, or management of, 
hazardous wastes or hazardous substances, may be removed by the United 
States (or any department, agency, instrumentality, officer, or 
employee of the United States) to the appropriate United States 
District Court in accordance with section 1446 of title 28, United 
States Code.''.

 TITLE VII--COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

SEC. 701. COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT.

 Section 117(e) (42 U.S.C. 9617(e)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(e) Improvement of Public Participation in the Superfund 
Decisionmaking Process.--
 ``(1) In general.--
 ``(A) Meetings and notice.--In order to provide an 
 opportunity for meaningful public participation in 
 every significant phase of response activities under 
 this Act, the Administrator shall provide the 
 opportunity for, and publish notice of, public meetings 
 before or during performance of--
 ``(i) a public health assessment and a 
 preliminary assessment and site inspection;
 ``(ii) a proposal that the site be added to 
 the National Priorities List;
 ``(iii) a remedial investigation/
 feasibility study, as appropriate;
 ``(iv) announcement of a proposed remedial 
 action plan; and
 ``(v) completion of a final remedial 
 design.
 ``(B) Information.--A public meeting under 
 subparagraph (A) shall be designed to obtain 
 information from the community, and disseminate 
 information to the community, with respect to a 
 facility concerning the Administrator's facility 
 activities and pending decisions.
 ``(2) Limitation.--Nothing in this subsection shall be 
 construed--
 ``(A) to provide for public participation in or 
 otherwise affect any negotiation, meeting, or other 
 discussion that concerns only the potential liability 
 or settlement of potential liability of any person, 
 whether prior to or following the commencement of 
 litigation or administrative enforcement action;
 ``(B) to provide for public participation in or 
 otherwise affect any negotiation, meeting, or other 
 discussion that is attended only by representatives of 
 the United States (or of a department, agency, or 
 instrumentality of the United States) with attorneys 
 representing the United States (or of a department, 
 agency, or instrumentality of the United States); or
 ``(C) to waive, compromise, or affect any privilege 
 that may be applicable to a communication related to an 
 activity described in subparagraph (A) or (B).
 ``(3) Evaluation.--
 ``(A) In general.--To the extent practicable, 
 before and during the facility evaluation, the 
 Administrator shall solicit and evaluate concerns, 
 interests, and information from the community.
 ``(B) Procedure.--An evaluation under subparagraph 
 (A) shall include, as appropriate--
 ``(i) face-to-face community surveys to 
 identify the location of private drinking water 
 wells, historic and current or potential use of 
 water, and other environmental resources in the 
 community;
 `` (ii) a public meeting;
 ``(iii) written responses to significant 
 concerns; and
 ``(iv) other appropriate participatory 
 activities.
 ``(4) Views and preferences.--
 ``(A) Solicitation.--During the facility 
 evaluation, the Administrator (or other person 
 performing the facility evaluation) shall solicit the 
 views and preferences of the community on the 
 remediation and disposition of hazardous substances or 
pollutants or contaminants at the facility.
 ``(B) Consideration.--The views and preferences of 
 the community shall be described in the facility 
 evaluation and considered in the screening of remedial 
 alternatives for the facility.
 ``(5) Alternatives.--Members of the community may propose 
 remedial action alternatives, and the Administrator shall 
 consider such alternatives in the same manner as the 
 Administrator considers alternatives proposed by potentially 
 responsible parties.
 ``(6) Information.--
 ``(A) The community.--The Administrator, with the 
 assistance of the community assistance group under 
 subsection (f) if there is one, shall provide 
 information to the community and seek comment from the 
 community throughout all significant phases of the 
 response action at the facility.
 ``(B) Technical staff.--The Administrator shall 
 ensure that information gathered from the community 
 during community outreach efforts reaches appropriate 
 technical staff in a timely and effective manner.
 ``(C) Responses.--The Administrator shall ensure 
 that reasonable written or other appropriate responses 
 will be made to significant information.
 ``(7) Nonprivileged information.--Throughout all phases of 
 response action at a facility, the Administrator shall make all 
 nonprivileged information relating to a facility available to 
 the public for inspection and copying without the need to file 
 a formal request, subject to reasonable service charges as 
 appropriate.
 ``(8) Presentation of risk information.--(A) The President, 
 in carrying out responsibilities under this Act, shall ensure 
 that the presentation of information on risk is unbiased and 
 informative. The results of any facility-specific risk 
 evaluation shall contain an explanation that clearly 
 communicates the risks at the facility, and shall--
 ``(i) identify and explain all significant 
 assumptions used in the evaluation, as well as 
 alternative assumptions, the policy or value judgments 
 used in choosing the assumptions, and whether empirical 
 data conflict with or validate the assumptions;
 ``(ii) present, to the extent feasible--
 ``(I) the scientifically objective 
 distribution of exposure estimates,
 ``(II) estimates, including central 
 estimates, of exposure and risk using the most 
 plausible assumptions given the weight of 
 current scientific information available to the 
 President,
 ``(III) groups identified under section 
 121(b)(3)(B) which are currently or would be 
 highly exposed or highly susceptible (aa) to 
 contamination from the site based on current 
 and reasonably anticipated uses of land, water, 
 and other resources at or around the site, or 
 (bb) to risks arising from implementation of a 
 remedial option, and
 ``(IV) a statement of the nature and 
 magnitude of the scientific uncertainties 
 associated with such estimates;
 ``(iii) include the size of the population 
 potentially at risk from releases from the facility 
 (based on the current or reasonably anticipated future 
 uses of the land, water, or other resources), the 
 exposure scenario used for each estimate, and the 
 likelihood that such potential exposures will occur; 
 and
 ``(iv) compare risks with estimates of greater, 
 lesser, and substantially equivalent risks that are 
 familiar to and routinely encountered by the general 
 public as well as other risks, and, where appropriate 
 and meaningful, comparison of those risks with other 
 similar risks regulated by Federal agencies resulting 
 from comparable activities and exposure pathways.
 Comparisons under clause (iv) should consider relevant 
 distinctions among risks, such as the voluntary or involuntary 
 nature of risks.
 ``(B) To the maximum extent practicable, documents made 
 available to the general public which purport to describe the 
 degree of risk to human health shall, at a minimum, provide 
 information specified in subparagraph (A) or a meaningful 
 reference to such information in another document reasonably 
 available to the public.
 ``(9) Requirements.--
 ``(A) Lengthy removal actions.--Notwithstanding any 
 other provision of this subsection, in the case of a 
 removal action taken in accordance with section 104 
 that is expected to require more than 180 days to 
 complete, and in any case in which implementation of a 
 removal action is expected to obviate or that in fact 
 obviates the need to conduct a long-term remedial 
 action, the Administrator shall, to the maximum extent 
 practicable, allow for public participation consistent 
 with paragraph (1).
 ``(B) Other removal actions.--In the case of all 
 other removal actions, the Administrator may provide 
 the community with notice of the anticipated removal 
 action and a public comment period, as appropriate.
 ``(10) Citizen suits.--Any person may commence a civil 
 action on his own behalf pursuant to section 310 alleging a 
 failure on the part of the President or any other officer of 
 the United States to comply with provisions of this section. 
 Relief shall be limited to an injunction requiring compliance 
 with this subsection.''.

SEC. 702. COMMUNITY ASSISTANCE GROUPS.

 Section 117 (42 U.S.C. 9617) is further amended by adding at the 
end the following new subsection:
 ``(f) Community Assistance Group.--
 ``(1) Establishment.--The Governor of the state where a 
 facility is located shall create a community assistance group 
 for a facility that is listed or proposed for listing on the 
 National Priorities List--
 ``(A) if the Governor determines that a 
 representative public forum will be helpful in 
 promoting direct, regular, and meaningful consultation 
 among persons interested in response action at the 
 facility; or
 ``(B) at the request of--
 ``(i) 50 individuals residing in, or at 
 least 20 percent of the population of, the area 
 in which the facility is located;
 ``(ii) a representative group of the 
 potentially responsible parties; or
 ``(iii) any local governmental entity with 
 jurisdiction over the facility.
 ``(2) Responsibilities.--A community assistance group 
 shall--
 ``(A) solicit the views of the local community on 
 various issues affecting the development and 
 implementation of remedial actions at the facility;
 ``(B) serve as a conduit of information to and from 
 the community to appropriate Federal, State, and local 
 agencies and potentially responsible parties;
 ``(C) serve as a representative of the local 
 community during the response action planning and 
 implementation process; and
 ``(D) provide reasonable notice of and 
 opportunities to participate in the meetings and other 
 activities of the community assistance group.
 ``(3) Access to documents.--The Administrator shall provide 
 a community assistance group access to documents in possession 
 of the Federal Government regarding response actions at the 
 facility that do not relate to liability and are not protected 
 from disclosure as confidential business information.
 ``(4) Community assistance group input.--
 ``(A) Consultation.--The Administrator (or if the 
 remedial action plan is being prepared or implemented 
 by a party other than the Administrator, the other 
 party) shall--
 ``(i) consult with the community assistance 
 group in developing and implementing the 
 remedial action plan; and
 ``(ii) keep the community assistance group 
 informed of progress in the development and 
 implementation of the remedial action plan.
 ``(B) Timely submission of comments.--The community 
 assistance group shall provide its comments, 
 information, and recommendations in a timely manner to 
 the Administrator (and other party).
 ``(C) Consensus.--The community assistance group 
 shall attempt to achieve consensus among its members 
 before providing comments and recommendations to the 
 Administrator (and other party), but if consensus 
 cannot be reached, the community assistance group shall 
 report or allow presentation of divergent views.
 ``(5) Technical assistance grants.--
 ``(A) Preferred recipient.--If a community 
 assistance group exists for a facility, the community 
 assistance group shall be the preferred recipient of a 
 technical assistance grant under subsection (g).
 ``(B) Prior award.--If a technical assistance grant 
 concerning a facility has been awarded prior to 
 establishment of a community assistance group--
 ``(i) the recipient of the grant shall 
 coordinate its activities and share information 
 and technical expertise with the community 
 assistance group; and
 ``(ii) one person representing the grant 
 recipient shall serve on the community 
 assistance group.
 ``(6) Membership.--
 ``(A) Number.--The Governor shall select not less 
 than 15 nor more than 20 persons to serve on a 
 community assistance group.
 ``(B) Notice.--Before selecting members of the 
 community assistance group, the Governor shall provide 
 a notice of intent to establish a community assistance 
 group to persons who reside in the local community.
 ``(C) Represented groups.--(i) The Administrator 
 shall, to the extent practicable, appoint members to 
 the community assistance group from each of the 
 following groups of persons:
 ``(I) Persons who reside or own residential 
 property near the facility.
 ``(II) Persons who, although they may not 
 reside or own property near the facility, may 
 be adversely affected by a release from the 
 facility.
 ``(III) Persons who are members of the 
 local public health or medical community and 
 are practicing in the community.
 ``(IV) Representatives of Indian tribes or 
 Indian communities that reside or own property 
 near the facility or that may be adversely 
 affected by a release from the facility.
 ``(V) Local representatives of citizen, 
 environmental, or public interest groups with 
 members residing in the community.
 ``(VI) Representatives of local 
 governments, such as city or county 
 governments, or both, and any other 
 governmental unit that regulates land use or 
 land use planning in the vicinity of the 
 facility.
 ``(VII) Members of the local business 
 community, which do not have liability at the 
 facility.
 ``(ii) The Governor shall provide particular 
 opportunity to participate to representatives of 
 persons who are or historically have been 
 disproportionately affected by contamination in their 
 community. Each community assistance group shall, to 
 the extent practicable, reflect the composition of the 
 community near the facility and its diversity of 
 interests. The local technical assistance grant 
 recipient shall be represented on the community 
 assistance group. Residents of the affected community 
 shall comprise no less than 50 percent of the total 
 membership of the community assistance group.
 ``(D) Pay.--Members of a community assistance group 
 shall serve without pay.
 ``(7) Participation by government representatives.--
 Representatives of the Administrator, the Administrator of the 
 Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, other Federal 
 agencies, and the State, as appropriate, shall participate as 
 requested by the community assistance group in community 
 assistance group meetings to provide information and technical 
 expertise, but shall not be members of the community assistance 
 group.
 ``(8) Administrative support.--The Administrator, to the 
 extent practicable, shall provide administrative services and 
 meeting facilities for community assistance groups.
 ``(9) FACA.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 U.S.C. 
 App.) shall not apply to a community assistance group.
 ``(10) Participation by potentially responsible parties.--
 Potentially responsible parties or their representatives, as 
 appropriate, may participate in community assistance group 
 meetings to provide information and technical expertise, but 
 shall not be members of the community assistance group.''.

SEC. 703. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS.

 Section 117 (42 U.S.C. 9617) is further amended by adding at the 
end the following new subsection:
 ``(g) Technical Assistance Grants.--
 ``(1) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Affected citizen group.--The term `affected 
 citizen group' means a group of 2 or more individuals 
 who may be affected by the release or threatened 
 release of a hazardous substance, pollutant, or 
 contaminant at any facility on the National Priorities 
 List.
 ``(B) Technical assistance grant.--The term 
 `technical assistance grant' means a grant made under 
 paragraph (2).
 ``(2) Authority.--
 ``(A) In general.--In accordance with a regulation 
 issued by the Administrator, the Administrator may make 
 grants available to affected citizen groups.
 ``(B) Availability of application process.--To 
 ensure that the application process for a technical 
 assistance grant is available to all affected citizen 
 groups, the Administrator shall periodically review the 
 process and, based on the review, implement appropriate 
 changes to improve availability.
 ``(3) Availability in advance.--The Administrator shall 
 make all or a portion (but not less than $5,000 or 10 percent 
 of the grant amount, whichever is greater) of the grant amount 
 available to a grant recipient in advance of the total 
 expenditures to be covered by the grant.
 ``(4) Limit per facility.--Not more than 1 technical 
 assistance grant may be made with respect to a single facility, 
 but the grant may be renewed to facilitate public participation 
 at all stages of response action.
 ``(5) Funding amount.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B), the amount of a technical assistance 
 grant may not exceed $50,000 for a single grant 
 recipient.
 ``(B) Increase.--The Administrator may increase the 
 amount of a technical assistance grant, or renew a 
 previous technical assistance grant, up to a total 
 grant amount not exceeding $100,000, to reflect the 
 complexity of the response action, the nature and 
 extent of contamination at the facility, the level of 
 facility activity, projected total needs as requested 
 by the grant recipient, the size and diversity of the 
 affected population, and the ability of the grant 
 recipient to identify and raise funds from other non-
 Federal sources.
 ``(6) Use of technical assistance grants.--
 ``(A) Permitted use.--A technical assistance grant 
 may be used to obtain technical assistance in 
 interpreting information with regard to--
 ``(i) the nature of the hazardous 
 substances locate at a facility;
 ``(ii) the work plan;
 ``(iii) the facility evaluation;
 ``(iv) a proposed remedial action plan, a 
 remedial action plan, and a final remedial 
 design for a facility;
 ``(v) response actions carried out at the 
 facility; and
 ``(vi) operation and maintenance activities 
 at the facility.
 ``(B) Prohibited use.--A technical assistance grant 
 may not be used for the purpose of collecting field 
 sampling data.
 ``(7) Grant guidelines.--
 ``(A) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the 
 date of enactment of this paragraph, the Administrator 
 shall develop and publish guidelines concerning the 
 management of technical assistance grants by grant 
 recipients.
 ``(B) Hiring of experts.--A recipient of a 
 technical assistance grant that hires technical experts 
 shall act in accordance with the guidelines under 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(C) Special rules.--
 ``(i) The President shall not approve any 
 TAG application unless the applicant agrees to 
 fully participate in the community assistance 
 group for the site to which the grant relates 
 and to present questions, concerns, and 
 suggestions to the organization whenever 
 possible. The President shall make no further 
 payments to any TAG recipient that does not 
 make a good faith effort to fulfill such 
 agreement.
 ``(ii) Early award of grants.--The 
 President shall award technical assistance 
 grants at the earliest appropriate time.''.

 TITLE VIII--MISCELLANEOUS

SEC. 801. DEFINITIONS.

 Section 101 (42 U.S.C. 9601) is amended as follows:
 (1) Paragraph (10)(H) is amended by striking ``subject to'' 
 and inserting ``in compliance with''.
 (2) Paragraph (11) is amended by striking out ``Response 
 Fund established by section 221 of this Act'' and all that 
 follows through the end of the paragraph and inserting in lieu 
 thereof ``Superfund established by section 9507 of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986.''.
 (3) Paragraph (14) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following: ``Such term does not include any naturally occurring 
 radioactive materials.''.
 (4) Paragraph (20) is amended as follows:
 (A) In subparagraph (A), by inserting ``the United 
 States or'' after ``similar means to''.
 (B) In subparagraph (D)--
 (i) in the first sentence by inserting 
 ``the United States or'' after ``does not 
 include'';
 (ii) in the second sentence, by inserting 
 ``any department, agency, or instrumentality of 
 the United States or'' before ``any State''; 
 and
 (iii) in the second sentence, by striking 
 ``a'' after ``such'' and inserting 
 ``department, agency, or instrumentality of the 
 United States or''.
 (C) by adding after subparagraph (D) the following 
 new subparagraph:
 ``(E) The term `owner or operator' shall not include the 
 United States or any department, agency, or instrumentality of 
 the United States or a conservator or receiver appointed by a 
 department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States if 
 the United States or the conservator or receiver meets both of 
 the following conditions:
 ``(i) The United States, conservator, or receiver 
 acquired ownership or control of a vessel or facility 
 (or any right or interest therein)--
 ``(I) in connection with the exercise of 
 receivership or conservatorship authority or 
 the liquidation or winding up of the affairs of 
 any entity subject to a receivership or 
 conservatorship, including any subsidiary 
 thereof; and
 ``(II) in connection with the exercise of 
 any seizure or forfeiture authority.
 ``(ii) The United States, conservator, or receiver 
 does not participate in the management of the vessel or 
 facility operations that result in a release or threat 
 of release of hazardous substances and complies with 
 such other requirements as the Administrator may set 
 forth by regulation.''.
 (5) Paragraph (23) (relating to the terms ``remove'' and 
 ``removal'') is amended--
 (A) in the first sentence--
 (i) by striking ``terms'' and inserting 
 ``term'';
 (ii) by striking ``necessary'' the first 
 place it appears and inserting ``necessarily''; 
 and
 (iii) by inserting after ``environment, 
 such actions'' the phrase ``or combination of 
 such actions'';
 (B) in the second sentence by striking ``term 
 includes'' and inserting ``terms include''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following: ``The term 
 `remove' or `removal' is not limited to emergency 
 situations and includes actions to address future or 
 potential exposures.''.
 (6) Paragraph (25) (relating to the terms ``respond'' and 
 ``response'') is amended--
 (A) by striking ``terms'' and inserting ``term'';
 (B) by striking the comma after ``remedial 
 action;''; and
 (C) by striking ``related thereto'' and inserting 
 ``(including attorneys' fees and expert witness fees) 
 and oversight activities related thereto when such 
 activities are undertaken by the President, a State or 
 Indian Tribe''.
 (7) Paragraph (29) (relating to the terms ``disposal'', 
 ``hazardous waste'', and ``treatment'') is amended by inserting 
 before the period the following: ``, except that the term 
 `hazardous substance' shall be substituted for the term 
 `hazardous waste' in the definitions of `disposal' and 
 `treatment'''.
 (8) Paragraph (33) (relating to the term ``pollutant or 
 contaminant'') is amended by striking ``; except that the'' and 
 inserting ``. The'' and by adding the following at the end 
 thereof: ``Such term does not include any naturally occurring 
 radioactive materials.''.
 (9) The following new paragraphs are added at the end:
 ``(39) Municipal solid waste.--The term `municipal solid 
 waste' means all waste materials generated by households, 
 including single and multi-family residences, and hotels and 
 motels. The term also includes waste materials generated by 
 commercial, institutional, and industrial sources, to the 
 extent such wastes (A) are essentially the same as waste 
 normally generated by households, or (B) are collected and 
 disposed of with other municipal solid waste or sewage sludge 
 as part of normal municipal solid waste collection services, 
 and, regardless of when generated, would be considered 
conditionally exempt small quantity generator waste under regulation 
issued pursuant to section 3001(d) of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 
U.S.C. 6921(d)). Examples of municipal solid waste include food and 
yard waste, paper, clothing, appliances, consumer product packaging, 
disposable diapers, office supplies, cosmetics, glass and metal food 
containers, elementary or secondary school science laboratory waste, 
and household hazardous waste. The term does not include combustion ash 
generated by resource recovery facilities or municipal incinerators, or 
waste from manufacturing or processing (including pollution control) 
operations not essentially the same as waste normally generated by 
households.
 ``(40) Municipality.--The term `municipality' means a 
 political subdivision of a State, including a city, county, 
 village, town, township, borough, parish, school district, 
 sanitation district, water district, or other public entity 
 performing local governmental functions. The term also includes 
 a natural person acting in the capacity of an official, 
 employee, or agent of any entity referred to in the preceding 
 sentence in the performance of governmental functions.
 (b) Definitions.--Section 101 (42 U.S.C. 9607) is further amended 
by adding at the end thereof the following:
 ``(42) Municipality.--The term `municipality'--
 ``(A) means a political subdivision of a State 
 (including a city, county, village, town, township, 
 borough, parish, school district, sanitation district, 
 water district, or other public entity performing local 
 governmental functions); and
 ``(B) includes a natural person acting in the 
 capacity of an official or employee of any entity 
 described in subparagraph (A) in the performance of a 
 governmental function.
 ``(43)(A) Large municipality.--The term `large 
 municipality' means a municipality with a population of 100,000 
 or more according to the 1990 census.
 ``(B) Small municipality.--The term `small municipality' 
 means a municipality with a population of less than 100,000 
 according to the 1990 census.
 ``(44) Arranger site.--The term `arranger site' means a 
 facility where the majority of hazardous substances disposed of 
 at the site were delivered to the site from other locations by 
 parties unaffiliated with the owners and operators of a site.
 ``(45) Qualified household hazardous waste collection 
 program.--The term `qualified household hazardous waste 
 collection program' means a program established by an entity of 
 the Federal Government, a State, a municipality, or an Indian 
 tribe that provides, at a minimum, for semiannual collection of 
 household hazardous wastes at accessible, well-publicized 
 collection points within the relevant jurisdiction.
 ``(46) Sewage sludge.--The term `sewage sludge' means 
 solid, semisolid, or liquid residue removed during the 
 treatment of municipal waste water, domestic sewage, or other 
 waste water at or by publicly owned or federally owned 
 treatment works.
 ``(47) Small business.--The term `small business' refers to 
 any business entity that employs no more than 100 individuals 
 and is a `small business concern' as defined under the Small 
 Business Act (15 U.S.C. 631 et seq.).
 ``(48) Small nonprofit organization.--The term `small 
 nonprofit organization' means any organization that does not 
 distribute any part of its income or profit to its members, 
 directors, or officers, employs no more than 100 paid 
 individuals at the involved chapter, office, or department, and 
 was recognized as a non-profit organization under section 
 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 ``(49) Construction contractor.--The term `construction 
 contractor' means a person who--
 ``(A) is not--
 ``(i) taking or required to take any 
 response action under this Act or any other 
 Federal or State law at the facility concerned,
 ``(ii) taking or required to take any 
 corrective action under the Solid Waste 
 Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.) at the 
 facility concerned, or
 ``(iii) otherwise responding to a release 
 or threatened release of a hazardous substance, 
 pollutant, or contaminant at the facility 
 concerned;
 ``(B) did not know or have reason to know of the 
 presence of hazardous substances at the facility 
 concerned before beginning construction activities;
 ``(C) provided all legally required notices with 
 respect to the discovery or release of any hazardous 
 substances at the facility; and
 ``(D) exercised due care with respect to the 
 hazardous substances discovered in the course of 
 performing the construction activity, including 
 precautions against foreseeable acts of third parties, 
 taking into consideration the characteristics of such 
 hazardous substance, in light of all relevant facts and 
 circumstances.
 ``(50) Naturally occurring radioactive materials.--The term 
 `naturally occurring radioactive materials' means materials 
 which are or contain naturally occurring radionuclides and 
 their respective decay products unless such materials are 
 derived from substances processed exclusively for their 
 radionuclide content. Such term does not include source, 
 special nuclear, or by-product material regulated under the 
 Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2011 and following).''.

SEC. 802. RESPONSE CLAIMS PROCEDURES.

 Section 112(a) (42 U.S.C. 9612(a)(2)) is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence, by adding after ``unless such 
 claim is'' the following: ``(1) accompanied by an audit 
 prepared by an independent, certified public accountant, and 
 (2)''; and
 (2) by inserting after the first sentence the following: 
 ``The Administrator reserves the right to review such audits to 
 determine that the costs for which the claimant is seeking 
 reimbursement are consistent with section 111 and, where 
 necessary, withhold claims or a portion thereof which are 
 inconsistent with section 111(a).''.

SEC. 803. SMALL BUSINESS OMBUDSMAN.

 The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall 
establish a small business Superfund assistance section within the 
small business ombudsman office at the Environmental Protection Agency. 
Such section shall carry out the following functions:
 (1) Act as a clearinghouse of information for small 
 businesses regarding the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
 Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980. Such information shall 
 be comprehensible to a lay person and shall include information 
 regarding the allocation process under section 130 of such Act, 
 requirements and procedures for expedited settlements pursuant 
 to section 122(g) of such Act, de minimis and de micromis 
 status, and ability-to-pay procedures.
 (2) Provide general advice and assistance to small 
 businesses as to their questions and problems concerning the 
 allocation and settlement processes, except that such advice 
 and assistance shall not include any legal advice as to 
 liability or any other legal representation. The ombudsman 
 shall not participate in the allocation process.
 (3) Develop proposals and make recommendations for changes 
 in policies and activities of the Environmental Protection 
 Agency which would better fulfill the goals of title II of the 
 Superfund Reform Act in ensuring equitable, simplified, and 
 expedited allocations and settlements for small businesses.

SEC. 804. CONSIDERATION OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT CLEANUP PRIORITIES.

 Section 104(c)(2) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(A)'' after ``(2)''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(B) In setting priorities for scheduling work and allocating 
oversight resources for a remedial action at a facility at which a 
potentially responsible party that is a State or local government 
proposes to carry out the remedial action (or a portion thereof), the 
President should give higher priority to such remedial action (or 
portion thereof) if the State or local government demonstrates that the 
remedial action--
 ``(i) will have a public benefit; and
 ``(ii) will result in the property on or adjacent to the 
 facility being returned to productive use.
A private potentially responsible party may request similar 
consideration, in the President's discretion.''.

SEC. 805. SAVINGS CLAUSE.

 Nothing in this Act or any amendment made by this Act shall affect 
the application of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 to any facility 
licensed by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.

SEC. 806. REPORT AND OVERSIGHT REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) Submission to State Governors.--Section 301(h)(1) (42 U.S.C. 
9651(h)(1)) is amended in the matter preceding subparagraph (A) by 
striking ``to Congress of such Agency'' and inserting ``of such Agency 
to Congress and the Governor of each State''.
 (b) Progress Report.--Section 301(h)(1)(A) is amended to read as 
follows:
 ``(A) A progress report of accomplishments and 
 expenditures on a State-by-State basis, including--
 ``(i) a statement of the number of 
 completed record of decisions, removal actions, 
remedial actions, and enforcement actions; and
 ``(ii) a statement of--
 ``(I) the aggregate amount expended 
 in each State;
 ``(II) the amount expended in each 
 State for site investigation and 
 cleanup activities;
 ``(III) the amount expended in each 
 State for non site-specific costs; and
 ``(IV) the amount expended for 
 enforcement actions and cost recovery 
 activities.''.
 (c) Other Report Contents.--Section 301(h)(1) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (B) by striking the period at the end 
 and inserting ``and removal or remedial action.''; and
 (2) in subparagraph (C) by inserting ``, removal action, 
 and remedial action'' after ``study''.
 (d) Response to State Comments by EPA.--Section 301(h) is amended 
by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4) Response to state comments by epa.--The Administrator 
 of the Environmental Protection Agency shall respond in writing 
 to any comments submitted to the Administrator by a State 
 regarding reports developed under this subsection.''.

SEC. 807. RESPONSE AUTHORITIES.

 (a) Disposal Authority.--Section 104(j) (42 U.S.C. 9604(j)) is 
amended as follows:
 (1) In paragraph (1), by striking ``remedial'' in the first 
 sentence and inserting ``response''.
 (2) By amending paragraph (2) to read as follows:
 ``(2) Disposal authority.--The President is authorized to 
 dispose of any interest in real property acquired for use by 
 the President under this subsection by sale, exchange, 
 donation, or otherwise and any such interest in real property 
 shall not be subject to any of the provisions of section 120 
 except the notice provisions of section 120(h)(1). Any moneys 
 received by the President pursuant to this paragraph shall be 
 deposited in the Fund.''.
 (3) In paragraph (3) by striking ``estate'' and inserting 
 ``property''.

SEC. 808. PRIORITIZATION.

 Section 105 (42 U.S.C. 9605) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:
 ``(h) Spending According to Established Priorities.--To the extent 
practicable, the President shall establish spending priorities for 
remedial actions based upon the following criteria:
 ``(1) The criteria in subsection (a)(8).
 ``(2) Most risk reduction for funds spent.
 ``(i) Proposed Expenditure Budget.--
 ``(1) Publication of proposed budget.--The President shall 
 develop and publish a proposed budget for expenditures for a 
 fiscal year for remedial actions based on the spending 
 priorities established under subsection (h).
 ``(2) Review and comment.--The President shall make 
 available the proposed expenditure budget required under 
 paragraph (1) for public review and comment. In carrying out 
 this paragraph, the President shall seek comments from affected 
 citizens and businesses, local and State governments (including 
 public health officials), Indian tribes, and environmental 
 groups on whether the remedial priorities in the proposed 
 expenditure budget are in accordance with the criteria referred 
 to in subsection (h).
 ``(3) Final budget.--The budget of the President for a 
 fiscal year submitted to Congress under section 1105 of title 
 31, United States Code, shall include a budget for expenditures 
 for remedial actions based on the proposed budget developed 
 under this subsection, taking into consideration any comments 
 received under paragraph (2).
 ``(j) Advisory Committees.--
 ``(1) Establishment.--The President shall establish an 
 advisory committee to be known as the `National Remediation 
 Advisory Committee' to make recommendations to the President on 
 the proposed expenditure budget developed under subsection (i) 
 and to review public comments received on such budget. The 
 President also may establish advisory committees located in the 
 regions of the Environmental Protection Agency, to be known as 
 regional remediation advisory committees, to review public 
 comments from each region before the comments are considered by 
 the National Remediation Advisory Committee and to provide 
 recommendations to such Advisory Committee. The recommendations 
 of an advisory committee established under this subsection 
 shall reflect its review of public comments received under 
 subsection (i) and its consideration of the priorities 
 established by the President under subsection (h).
 ``(2) Members.--The National Remediation Advisory Committee 
 and any regional remediation advisory committee may consist of 
 up to 20 members (none of whom may be Environmental Protection 
 Agency or Department of Justice officers or employees) with 
 expertise in science or health fields related to remediation, 
 including representatives of communities affected by hazardous 
 substances; State and local governments; environmental 
 organizations; and representatives of large and small 
 businesses (including remediation companies). Members shall 
 serve staggered 3-year terms, and be appropriately compensated.
 ``(3) Staff support.--The President shall provide personnel 
 to assist the National Remediation Advisory Committee and any 
 regional remediation advisory committee to carry out their 
 duties. To the extent practicable, such personnel shall be 
 employees from other Federal departments and agencies.
 ``(4) Funding.--The costs of the advisory committees 
 established under this subsection shall be included in the 
 proposed budget required under subsection (i).''.

SEC. 809. RESPONSE MANAGEMENT AND WORKER PROTECTION STANDARDS.

 Section 126 of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 
1986 (29 U.S.C. 655 note) is amended--
 (1) by amending the section heading to read as follows:

``SEC. 126. RESPONSE MANAGEMENT AND WORKER PROTECTION STANDARDS.''; AND

 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(h) Response Management and Training.--
 ``(1) Authority of remedial project managers.--The 
 President is encouraged to give greater decision making 
 authority to remedial project managers in order to increase the 
 pace of cleanups, reduce paperwork and administrative costs, 
 and reduce delays in making response action decisions.
 ``(2) Training.--(A) To ensure that response action 
 decisions continue to be given appropriate review to protect 
 human health and the environment and serve the other purposes 
 of this Act, the President shall require that remedial project 
 managers receive adequate training in environmental management. 
 Such training should include an undergraduate or graduate 
 degree that includes course work to develop skills in project 
 planning or management, sciences relevant to response actions, 
 and financial management. In determining the training that 
 shall be required, the President shall consider the amount of 
 training required under this section for workers, onsite 
 managers and supervisors under subsection (d), and any 
 additional responsibilities of remedial project managers.
 ``(B) In determining whether a remedial project manager has 
 received adequate training, the President may take into account 
 experience in managing environmental response projects, 
 considering the size and complexity of such projects.
 ``(3) Review of training facilities.--The President shall 
 conduct a review of existing training facilities to determine 
 whether a national environmental training center should be 
 established to provide training for remedial project managers, 
 on-scene coordinators, and other response personnel.''.

SEC. 810. ACTIONS RELATING TO SOURCE, BYPRODUCT, AND SPECIAL NUCLEAR 
 MATERIAL.

 (a) Material Subject to Decontamination Regulations for License 
Termination.--Title III is amended by adding at the end the following 
new section:

``SEC. 313. ACTIONS RELATING TO SOURCE, BYPRODUCT, AND SPECIAL NUCLEAR 
 MATERIAL.

 ``No authority of this Act may be used to commence an 
administrative or judicial action with respect to source, special 
nuclear, or byproduct material that is subject to decontamination 
regulations issued by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission for license 
termination under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2011 et 
seq.), or by a State that has entered into an agreement pursuant to 
section 274b. of that Act, unless such action is requested--
 ``(1) by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission; or
 ``(2) in the case of such material under the jurisdiction 
 of a State that has entered into an agreement pursuant to 
 section 274b. of that Act, the Governor of the State.''.
 (b) Material Released After License Termination.--Section 101(10) 
is amended by inserting before the period at the end of subparagraph 
(K) the following: ``, or any release of such material in accordance 
with regulations of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission following 
termination of a license issued by the Commission pursuant to the 
Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.) or by a State acting 
under an agreement entered into pursuant to section 274b. of that 
Act''.

 TITLE IX--FUNDING

 Subtitle A--Expenditures From the Hazardous Substance Superfund

SEC. 901. EXPENDITURES FROM THE HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SUPERFUND.

 (a) Expenditures.--Section 111 (42 U.S.C. 9611) is amended by 
striking out subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e) and inserting in 
lieu thereof the following:
 ``(a) Expenditures From Hazardous Substance Superfund.--
 ``(1) Subsection (b) expenditures.--Amounts appropriated to 
 the Hazardous Substance Superfund after January 1, 1998, 
 pursuant to section 9507(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986 and amounts credited under section 9602(b) of such Code 
 with respect to those appropriated amounts are available, may 
 be used only for the purposes specified in subsection (b) of 
 this section, and shall remain available until expended.
 ``(2) Subsections (b) and (c) expenditures.--Amounts 
 appropriated to the Hazardous Substance Superfund pursuant to 
 paragraph (2), (3), (4), (5), or (6) of section 9507(b) of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and amounts credited under 
 section 9602(b) of such Code with respect to those appropriated 
 amounts shall be available as provided in appropriations Acts 
 and may be used for the purposes specified in subsections (b) 
 and (c) of this section.
 ``(b) Response, Removal, and Remediation.--The President shall use 
amounts in the Fund as made available by paragraphs (1) and (2) of 
subsection (a) for costs of response, removal, and remediation (and 
administrative costs directly related to such costs), including the 
following:
 ``(1) Government response costs.--Payment of governmental 
 response costs incurred pursuant to section 104 of this title, 
 including costs incurred pursuant to the Intervention on the 
 High Seas Act.
 ``(2) Private response cost claims.--Payment of any claim 
 for necessary response costs incurred by any other person as a 
 result of carrying out the national contingency plan 
 established under section 105 of this title, if such costs are 
 approved under such plan, are reasonable in amount based on 
 open and free competition or fair market value for similar 
 available goods and services, and are certified by the 
 responsible Federal official.
 ``(3) Acquisition costs under section 104(j).--The costs 
 incurred by the President in acquiring real estate or interests 
 in real estate under section 104(j) (relating to acquisition of 
 property).
 ``(4) State and local government reimbursement.--
 Reimbursement to State and local governments under section 123, 
 except that during any fiscal year not more than 0.1 percent of 
 the total amount made available for purposes of this section 
 may be used for reimbursements to local governments and no 
 State may receive reimbursement of more than $2,000,000 in any 
 fiscal year.
 ``(5) Funds for states with delegated authority.--Payment 
 of any funds to a State pursuant to section 153 (relating to 
 State delegation).
 ``(6) Contracts and cooperative agreements.--Payment for 
 the implementation of any contract or cooperative agreement 
 under section 104(d).
 ``(7) Payments related to certain reductions, limitations, 
 and exemptions.--Payment of costs and reimbursement in 
 accordance with the following:
 ``(A) Section 128(n) (relating to post-allocation 
 performance).
 ``(B) Section 130(a) (relating to certain non-
 liable parties).
 No payment or reimbursement under this paragraph shall include 
 payment of, or reimbursement for, any portion of attorneys' 
 fees that do not constitute necessary costs of response within 
 the meaning of section 107(a)(4)(B).
 ``(8) Payment for the implementation of any contract or 
 cooperative agreement under section 104(d).
 ``(c) Administration, Oversight, Research, and Other Costs.--The 
President shall use amounts in the Fund as made available pursuant to 
subsection (a)(2) for the following costs (and administrative costs 
directly related to such costs):
 ``(1) Investigation and enforcement.--The costs of 
 identifying, investigating, and taking enforcement action 
 against releases of hazardous substances.
 ``(2) Overhead.--(A) The costs of providing services, 
 equipment, and other overhead related to the purposes of this 
 Act and needed to supplement equipment and services available 
 through contractors and other non-Federal entities.
 ``(B) The costs of establishing and maintaining damage 
 assessment capability for any Federal agency involved in strike 
 forces, emergency task forces, or other response teams under 
 the National Contingency Plan.
 ``(3) Employee safety programs.--The cost of maintaining 
 programs otherwise authorized by this Act to protect the health 
 and safety of employees involved in response to hazardous 
 substance releases.
 ``(4) Grants for technical assistance.--The cost of grants 
 under section 117(g) (relating to public participation grants 
 for technical assistance).
 ``(5) Worker training and education grants.--The cost of 
 grants under section 126(g) of the Superfund Amendments and 
 Reauthorization Act of 1986 for training and education of 
 workers.
 ``(6) ATSDR activities.-- Any costs incurred in accordance 
 with subsection (m) of this section (relating to ATSDR) and 
 section 104(i), including the costs of epidemiologic and 
 laboratory studies, health assessments, and other activities 
 authorized by section 104(i).
 ``(7) Evaluation costs under petition provisions of section 
 105(d).--Costs incurred by the President in evaluation 
 facilities pursuant to petitions under section 105(d) (relating 
 to petitions for assessment of release).
 ``(8) Contract costs under section 104(a)(1).--The costs of 
 contracts or arrangements entered into under section 104(a)(1) 
 to oversee and review the conduct of remedial investigations 
 and feasibility studies undertaken by persons other than the 
 President and the costs of appropriate Federal and State 
 oversight of remedial activities at National Priorities List 
 sites resulting from consent orders or settlement agreements.
 ``(9) Research, development, and demonstration costs under 
 section 311.--The cost of carrying out section 311 (relating to 
 research, development, and demonstration).
 ``(10) Awards under section 109.--The costs of any awards 
 granted under section 109(d) (relating to providing information 
 concerning violations).
 ``(d) Limitations on Natural Resources Claims.--No money in the 
Fund may be used for the payment of any claim under subsection (b)(7) 
or (b)(8) of this section where such expenses are associated with 
injury or loss resulting from long-term exposure to ambient 
concentrations of air pollutants from multiple or diffuse sources.
 ``(e) Other Limitations.--(1) Claims against or presented to the 
Fund shall not be valid or paid in excess of the total unobligated 
balance in the Fund at any one time. Such claims become valid and are 
payable only when additional money is collected, appropriated, or 
otherwise added to the Fund. Should the total claims outstanding at any 
time exceed the current balance of the Fund, the President shall pay 
such claims, to the extent authorized under this section, in full in 
the order in which they were finally determined, except that, for any 
fiscal year, the President shall ensure that an amount equivalent to 
the amount obligated in fiscal year 1997 for response actions will be 
available in that fiscal year for obligation for response actions prior 
to paying any claims under section 112(g).
 ``(2) No money in the Fund shall be available for remedial action, 
other than actions specified in subsection (c) of this section, with 
respect to federally owned facilities, except that money in the Fund 
shall be available for the provision of alternative water supplies 
(including the reimbursement of costs incurred by a municipality) in 
any case involving ground water contamination outside the boundaries of 
a federally owned facility in which the federally owned facility is not 
the only potentially responsible party.
 ``(f) Limitation on Certain Expenditures.--From the total sums made 
available under subsection (a) of this section for any fiscal year, the 
aggregate amount expended in such fiscal year for administration and 
management support, oversight, studies, design, investigations, 
assessment, and evaluation shall not exceed the following percentages 
of such total:
 ``(1) Fiscal years 1999, 2000, and 2001: 25 percent.
 ``(2) Fiscal year 2002 and thereafter: 20 percent.
The Administrator shall report to the Congress, within 90 days after 
the enactment of this subsection, any regulatory or statutory relief 
that will be required to operate under the funding limitations 
specified in this subsection.''.
 (b) Additional Amendments.--(1) Section 111 (42 U.S.C. 9611) is 
further amended by striking out subsections (j) and (n).
 (2) Section 107 (42 U.S.C. 9607) is amended by striking out 
subsection (k).

SEC. 902. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FROM GENERAL REVENUES.

 (a) Authorization.--Section 111(p)(1) is amended to read as 
follows:
 ``(1) In general.--The following sums are authorized to be 
 appropriated, out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise 
 appropriated, to the Hazardous Substance Superfund:
 ``(A) For fiscal year 1998, $250,000,000.
 ``(B) For fiscal year 1999, $250,000,000.
 ``(C) For fiscal year 2000, $250,000,000.
 ``(D) For fiscal year 2001, $250,000,000.
 ``(E) For fiscal year 2002, $250,000,000.
 In addition, there is authorized to be appropriated to the 
 Hazardous Substance Superfund for each fiscal year an amount 
 equal to so much of the aggregate amount authorized to be 
 appropriated under this subsection (and paragraph (2) of 
 section 131(b) of this title) as has not been appropriated 
 before the beginning of the fiscal year involved.''.
 (b) Repeal of Duplicative Authorization.--(1) Subsection (b) of 
section 517 of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (26 
U.S.C. 9507 note) is hereby repealed.
 (2) Section 9507(a)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is 
amended by striking out ``section 517(b) of the Superfund Revenue Act 
of 1986'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``section 111(p) of the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 
of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9611(p))''.

 Subtitle B--5-Year Extension of Hazardous Substance Superfund

SEC. 911. 5-YEAR EXTENSION OF HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SUPERFUND.

 (a) Extension of Taxes.--
 (1) The following provisions of the Internal Revenue Code 
 of 1986 are each amended by striking ``January 1, 1996'' each 
 place it appears and inserting ``January 1, 2003'':
 (A) Section 59A(e)(1) (relating to application of 
 environmental tax).
 (B) Paragraphs (1) and (3) of section 4611(e) 
 (relating to application of Hazardous Substance 
 Superfund financing rate).
 (2) Paragraph (2) of section 4611(e) of such Code is 
 amended--
 (A) by striking ``1993'' and inserting ``2000'',
 (B) by striking ``1994'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``2001'', and
 (C) by striking ``1995'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``2002''.
 (b) Increase in Aggregate Tax Which May Be Collected.--Paragraph 
(3) of section 4611(e) of such Code is amended by striking 
``$11,970,000,000'' each place it appears and inserting 
``$22,000,000,000'' and by striking ``December 31, 1995'' and inserting 
``December 31, 2002''.
 (c) Extension of Repayment Deadline for Superfund Borrowing.--
Subparagraph (B) of section 9507(d)(3) of such Code is amended by 
striking ``December 31, 1995'' and inserting ``December 31, 2002''.
 (d) Trust Fund Purposes.--Paragraph (1) of section 9507(c) of such 
Code is amended to read as follows:
 ``(1) In general.--(A) Amounts appropriated to the 
 Superfund after January 1, 1998, pursuant to subsection (b)(1) 
 shall be available only for the purposes specified in section 
 111(b) of CERCLA.
 ``(B) Amounts appropriated to the Superfund pursuant to 
 paragraph (2), (3), (4), (5), or (6) of subsection (b) shall be 
 available, as provided in appropriations Acts, only for the 
 purposes specified in section 111.''.
 (e) Coordination With Other Provisions.--Paragraph (2) of section 
9507(e) of the such Code is amended by striking ``CERCLA'' and all that 
follows through ``Acts'' and inserting ``CERCLA, the Superfund 
Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, and the Superfund Reform 
Act (or in any amendment made by any of such Acts)''.
 <all>