HR 2400 IH1S
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2400
To amend the Federal Water Pollution Control Act to provide for the wise
stewardship of wetlands, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
May 20, 1991
Mr. THOMAS of Georgia (for himself, Mr. JONES of North Carolina, Mr. FAZIO,
Mr. DARDEN, Mr. SISISKY, Mr. ROWLAND, Mr. SCHULZE, Mr. ROSE, Mr. HEFNER,
and Mr. RAY) introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the
Committees on Public Works and Transportation and Merchant Marine and Fisheries
A BILL
To amend the Federal Water Pollution Control Act to provide for the wise
stewardship of wetlands, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Wetlands Stewardship Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds and declares the following:
 (1) Wetlands perform a number of valuable functions which are important
 to the Nation's ecological and economic well-being, including--
 (A) providing contributions to our food and water supplies, flood control,
 and wildlife resources;
 (B) maintaining biological diversity by providing habitat; and
 (C) providing natural habitats for many migratory and resident fish and
 wildlife species, including migratory birds, endangered species, and
 commercial and recreational fisheries.
 (2) Wetlands constitute an estimated 5 percent of the Nation's land area,
 and are mostly located on privately owned lands. Wetlands are estimated to
 have been reduced by more than 50 percent in the contiguous United States
 since its founding, and continue to disappear by approximately 300,000
 acres each year.
 (3) A course of action that achieves a balance between the protection of
 valuable wetland resources and economic needs is required. The wetlands
 regulatory program needs to--
 (A) be streamlined, simplified, and given adequate resources to function
 properly;
 (B) encourage the advanced identification of wetlands to enable landowners
 and local governments to better plan their activities and conserve the
 resource;
 (C) give owners of wetlands more flexibility and incentives to protect,
 enhance, restore, and create wetlands;
 (D) effectively inform the public about wetlands values, policies, and
 regulations; and
 (E) include public participation in its development and implementation.
 (b) PURPOSE- The purpose of this Act is to provide a balanced approach to
 wetlands conservation that protects the Nation's wetlands resources while
 providing for the needs of landowners, industry, and commerce.
TITLE I--WETLANDS PERMITTING
SEC. 101. DEFINITIONS.
 (a) FEDERAL WATER POLLUTION CONTROL ACT- Section 404 of the Federal Water
 Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1344) is amended--
 (1) by striking subsection (d); and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(z) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) the term `navigable waters' includes wetlands;
 `(2) the term `riparian lands' means any area of land (including any wetlands
 or nonwetlands) that is a bank or flood plain adjacent to a water course,
 including the biotic and abiotic portions of such an area;
 `(3) the term `Secretary' means the Secretary of the Army, acting through
 the Chief of Engineers;
 `(4) the term `Secretary of the Interior' means the Secretary of the
 Interior, acting through the Director of the United States Fish and
 Wildlife Service;
 `(5) the term `unacceptable adverse effect' means an adverse impact on
 an aquatic or wetlands ecosystem which is likely to result in significant
 degradation of municipal water supplies (including surface or groundwater),
 flood retention sites, or significant loss of or damage to fisheries,
 shellfishing, or wildlife habitat or recreation areas; and
 `(6) the term `wetlands'--
 `(A) means any area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater
 at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and which under normal
 circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted
 for life in saturated soil conditions;
 `(B) includes swamps, certain bottomland hardwood forests, marshes, prairie
 potholes, playa lakes, vernal pools, bogs, fens, and other similar areas;
 `(C) does not include any area that is not--
 `(i)(I) inundated, saturated, or both, at or near the surface for 14 or
 more consecutive days during the growing season in most years; or
 `(II) periodically flooded by tidal water; and
 `(D) does not include any area of cropland that is manipulated (including
 by draining or otherwise physically altering to remove excess water)
 and cropped before December 23, 1985, and no longer exhibits wetlands
 functions, other than an area that is seasonally flooded or ponded for 14
 or more consecutive days during the growing season.'.
 (b) THIS ACT- For purposes of this Act, any term used in this Act that
 is defined in section 404(z) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
 as amended by this Act, shall have the meaning given that term in that
 section of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
SEC. 102. NO NET LOSS POLICY.
 Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1344),
 as amended by this Act, is amended by adding at the end the following
 new subsection:
 `(x) It is the policy of the United States--
 `(1) to achieve no overall net loss of the Nation's remaining wetlands base,
 as defined by acreage and function, and
 `(2) to restore and create wetlands, where feasible, to increase the
 quality and quantity of the Nation's wetlands resource base.'.
SEC. 103. PERMITS FOR ACTIVITIES AFFECTING NAVIGABLE WATERS.
 Section 404(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1344(a))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(a)(1) The Secretary may issue permits, after notice and opportunity
 for public hearing, for any of the following activities conducted in
 navigable waters:
 `(A) The discharge of dredged or fill material into navigable waters at
 a specified disposal site.
 `(B) Dredging, excavation, channelization, draining, or flooding of wetlands.
 `(C) Activities that are similar to those described in subparagraphs (A) and
 (B), which will impair the flow, reach, or circulation of navigable waters.
 `(2) The Secretary shall publish notice not later than 15 days after the
 date of receiving a completed application for a permit under this section.'.
SEC. 104. PROHIBITION OR RESTRICTION OF ACTIVITIES BY ADMINISTRATOR.
 (a) PROHIBITION OR RESTRICTION OF ACTIVITIES; NOTIFICATION- Section 404(c)
 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1344(c)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(1)' before the first sentence;
 (2) in the first sentence of paragraph (1) (as designated by paragraph
 (1) of this subsection)--
 (A) by striking `and he is authorized'; and
 (B) by inserting after `as a disposal site,' the second place that phrase
 appears the following: `and to prohibit or restrict any discharge into
 or alteration of navigable waters resulting from an activity for which a
 permit may be issued under subsection (a),';
 (3) in the second sentence of paragraph (1) (as designated by paragraph (1)
 of this subsection) by inserting before the period at the end the following:
 `, the Secretary of the Interior, and the affected States';
 (4) in the last sentence of paragraph (1) (as designated by paragraph
 (1) of this subsection) by striking `this subsection' and inserting `this
 paragraph'; and
 (5) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(2) EARLY NOTIFICATION- If the Administrator determines, after evaluating
 information made available to the Administrator through the review of a
 completed permit application (including any revisions to such application
 made available to the Administrator) that the Administrator is likely to
 exercise the authority granted to the Administrator in this subsection,
 the Administrator shall notify the Secretary and the applicant in writing
 of that determination and the reasons for the determination not later than
 30 days after receiving the completed permit application.'.
 (b) ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 404(c) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1344(c)), as amended by this section, is amended by adding at
 the end the following new paragraph:
 `(3) ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS- The Secretary and the Administrator shall,
 after notice and an opportunity for public comment, jointly issue rules
 establishing procedures under which--
 `(A) an applicant for a permit under this section, or any other person
 affected by a prohibition or restriction under paragraph (1), may appeal
 such a prohibition or restriction; and
 `(B) such an appeal shall be heard and decided by an official other than
 the person who made the determination of unacceptable adverse affect on
 which the prohibition or restriction is based.'.
 (2) TIME FOR ISSUANCE OF RULES- The Administrator and the Secretary shall
 issue rules under section 404(c)(3) of the Federal Water Pollution Control
 Act, as amended by this subsection, by not later than 180 days after the
 date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 105. GENERAL PERMITS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 404(e) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1344(e)) is amended--
 (1) by striking paragraph (1);
 (2) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3); and
 (3) by inserting before paragraph (3) (as so redesignated) the following
 new paragraphs:
 `(1) In carrying out functions under this section, the Secretary may,
 after notice and opportunity for a public hearing--
 `(A) issue general permits on a State, regional, or nationwide basis,
 for any category of navigable waters, or for any category of activities
 of a similar nature for which a permit may be issued under subsection (a),
 if the Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator, determines that
 activities authorized by the permits--
 `(i) will cause only minimal adverse environmental effects when performed
 separately, and
 `(ii) will have only minimal secondary and cumulative adverse effect on
 the environment; or
 `(B) issue general permits jointly with a State that has a State wetlands
 conservation plan approved under subsection (y), for categories of activities
 in navigable waters, or for categories of navigable waters, if the Secretary,
 in consultation with the Administrator, makes the determinations described
 in subparagraphs (A) (i) and (ii) with respect to activities authorized
 under the permits.
 `(2) Any general permit issued under this subsection shall--
 `(A) be based on the guidelines developed under subsection (b)(1);
 `(B) be issued only after consideration of the impact of such general
 permits on the policy stated in subsection (x); and
 `(C) be issued only after consideration of any public comments received
 pursuant to paragraph (1).'.
 (b) PUBLIC NOTICE REGARDING GENERAL PERMITS- Not later than 180 days after
 the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall publish in the
 Federal Register for public comment a description of any changes in the
 criteria for issuing general permits required pursuant to this Act.
SEC. 106. EXEMPTED ACTIVITIES.
 Section 404(f)(1) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1344(f)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by striking the material preceding subparagraph (A) and inserting
 the following:
 `(f)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), an activity related to--';
 (2) in subparagraph (A)--
 (A) by striking `from';
 (B) by striking `, silviculture,'; and
 (C) by striking `, fiber, and forest products,' and inserting `and fiber,';
 (3) in each of subparagraphs (B), (C), (D), and (E) by striking `for the
 purpose of';
 (4) in subparagraph (C) by striking `or the maintenance of drainage ditches'
 and inserting `or the normal maintenance of drainage ditches, including
 minor redesign and other engineering modifications intended to minimize
 any adverse environmental impacts.';
 (5) in subparagraph (F) by striking `resulting from' and all that follows
 through `208(b)(4)' and inserting `a State program which is approved
 under section 208(b)(4) and'; and
 (6) by inserting after subparagraph (F) the following new subparagraphs:
 `(G) an activity conducted in altered or degraded nontidal wetlands in
 private ownership, in accordance with the terms and conditions of an
 agreement between the landowner and the United States Fish and Wildlife
 Service or the Soil Conservation Service which provides for the restoration
 of the functions and value of those wetlands;
 `(H) normal silviculture activities which are conducted in accordance with
 best management practices approved by the State in which the activity is
 conducted, including bedding, seeding, cultivating, culling and thinning,
 minor drainage, and the harvest of forest products;
 `(I) maintenance of normal acquaculture activities being conducted on the day
 before the date of the enactment of the Wetlands Stewardship Act of 1991; and
 `(J) aggregate or clay mining activities--
 `(i) conducted in accordance with a State or Federal permit that requires--
 `(I) the reclamation of the affected wetlands by not later than 5 years
 after the date of the commencement of the activities; and
 `(II) that upon completion of that reclamation the wetlands reclaimed shall
 support wetlands functions and values equal to or greater than the functions
 and values supported by the wetlands before commencement of the activities;
 `(ii) if the Administrator determines the wetlands functions and values
 of the affected wetlands before commencement of the activities and after
 completion of reclamation pursuant to clause (i); and
 `(iii) if the person conducting the activities posts a bond in such amount
 as the Secretary determines to be sufficient to ensure that reclamation
 described in clause (i) is completed.'.
SEC. 107. EMERGENCY PERMITTING PROCEDURES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1344) is amended by inserting after subsection (c) the following
 new subsection:
 `(d)(1) The Secretary may issue regulations which establish special
 procedures for expedited issuing of permits under this section in a State
 or federally declared drought emergency.
 `(2) Procedures established under this subsection shall require that
 reasonable efforts are made to receive comments from interested Federal,
 State, and local agencies and the public regarding any permit issued under
 the regulations.'.
 (b) GUIDANCE- Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this
 Act, and after notice and opportunity for public comment, the Secretary,
 the Administrator, and the Secretary of Agriculture shall jointly issue
 guidance regarding special procedures under section 404(d) of the Federal
 Water Pollution Control Act, as added by this section.
SEC. 108. PERMIT REVIEW BY SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR.
 Section 404(m) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1344(m))
 is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: `If the
 Secretary does not adopt any recommendations contained in those comments,
 the Secretary shall respond in writing to the Secretary of the Interior
 describing the reasons for not adopting the recommendations.'.
SEC. 109. METHODS FOR WETLANDS DELINEATION AND WETLANDS FUNCTIONS AND VALUES
ASSESSMENT.
 (a) WETLANDS DELINEATION-
 (1) RULEMAKING- The Secretary, the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary
 of the Interior, and the Administrator shall jointly conduct a rulemaking
 proceeding in accordance with section 553 of title 5, United States Code,
 including the holding of public hearings, to review and revise, as necessary,
 the existing technical method for the delineation of wetlands for purposes
 of section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1344).
 (2) REQUIREMENTS FOR REVISIONS--Revisions made pursuant to this subsection
 shall--
 (A) be based on the best available scientific data,
 (B) use uniform conventions and standards for delineating wetlands to speed
 processing of permits under section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
 Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1344), and
 (C) ensure improved communications among Federal agencies, States, and
 the public to avoid duplication of effort with respect to that delineation.
 (3) PUBLICATION OF RULE- Not later than 180 days after the date of the
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall publish a rule that makes the
 revisions referred to in paragraph (1).
 (4) FURTHER REVIEW OF METHOD- Not later than 2 years after the date of
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary, the Secretary of the Interior,
 the Secretary of Agriculture, and the Administrator shall jointly review the
 method referred to in paragraph (1), as revised pursuant to this subsection,
 and shall make such further revisions to that method as may be necessary.
 (5) WETLANDS ACREAGE ESTIMATES- The Secretary, the Secretary of Agriculture,
 the Secretary of the Interior, and the Administrator shall jointly submit
 a report to the Congress--
 (A) on the date of the publication of a rule under paragraph (3), on the
 estimated total acreage of wetlands in each region of the United States that
 will be identified as wetlands under the method referred to in paragraph
 (1), as revised by that rule; and
 (B) not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, on
 the estimated total acreage in each region of the United States that will be
 identified as wetlands under the method as revised pursuant to paragraph (4).
 (b) WETLANDS FUNCTIONS AND VALUES ASSESSMENT- Section 404(q) of the Federal
 Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1344(q)), is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(1)' before `Not later than'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(2) The Secretary, the Secretary of the Interior, and the Administrator
 shall jointly develop methods for the assessment of wetlands functions
 and values for use under this section and other appropriate purposes.'.
 (c) COORDINATION- Section 404(q) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1344(q)), as amended by subsection (b), is further amended by
 adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(3) The Secretary, the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of
 Agriculture, and the Administrator shall fully coordinate regarding wetlands
 and other aquatic resources, including regarding wetlands research, mapping,
 restoration, and creation. Other Federal agencies and States may participate
 in these coordination efforts.'.
SEC. 110. COMPLIANCE ORDERS.
 Section 404(s)(2) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1344(s)(2)) is amended in the second sentence by striking `taking
 into account' and all that follows through the end of the sentence and
 inserting `taking into account the seriousness of the violation, including
 the impact of the violation on navigable waters and any other good faith
 efforts to comply with applicable requirements, including any voluntary
 restoration or enhancement of sites affected by the violation.'.
SEC. 111. REPORTS ON EFFECTS OF PERMIT PROGRAMS ON WETLANDS.
 Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1344)
 is amended by inserting after subsection (t) the following new subsection:
 `(u)(1) The Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator, the Secretary
 of the Interior, and those States which have a permit program approved
 under subsection (h)(2), shall report bienially to the Congress on the
 effects on wetlands of activities conducted under permits issued pursuant
 to this section, including general permits.
 `(2) For purposes of preparing reports under this subsection, the Secretary,
 the Administrator, and the Secretary of the Interior shall jointly monitor
 the achievement of the policy stated in subsection (x) under permits issued
 under this section.
 `(3) Reports under this subsection shall include consideration of relevant
 information contained in general permit applications, compliance monitoring
 records and maps, and any other relevant information.'.
SEC. 112. STATE REGULATION OF WETLANDS.
 (a) SUBMITTAL OF STATE PERMITTING PROGRAM- Section 404(g) of the Federal
 Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1344(g)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1) in the first sentence--
 (A) by striking `individual and general'; and
 (B) by striking `for the discharge of dredged or fill material into the
 navigable waters' and inserting `for activities in navigable waters for
 which a permit is required under subsection (a)';
 (2) by adding at the end of paragraph (1) the following new sentence:
 `The State shall submit to each of the Secretary and the Secretary of
 the Interior a copy of all materials submitted to the Administrator under
 this paragraph.';
 (3) by striking paragraph (2) and inserting the following:
 `(2) A permit program submitted by a State under this subsection may be
 limited to State permitting of activities conducted in navigable waters
 located in one or more counties or parishes of the, as specified in the
 description of the program submitted under paragraph (1).'; and
 (4) in paragraph (3)--
 (A) by striking `the ninetieth day' and inserting `the sixtieth day'; and
 (B) by striking `, acting through the United States Fish and Wildlife
 Service,'.
 (b) REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF STATE PERMITTING PROGRAM- Section 404(h)(1) of
 the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1344(h)(1)) is amended--
 (1) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A) by striking `, acting through
 the Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service';
 (2) in subparagraph (A)(iii)(III) by striking `the permitted discharge'
 and inserting `any activity authorized by a permit';
 (3) by striking subparagraph (D); and
 (4) by redesignating subparagraphs (E), (F), (G), and (H) in order as
 subparagraphs (D), (E), (F), and (G).
 (c) REVIEW OF STATE ADMINISTRATION OF PERMITTING PROGRAM- Section 404(j)
 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1344(j)) is amended
 to read as follows:
 `(j)(1) Each State which has a permit program approved under subsection
 (h)(2) shall transmit to the Administrator, by not later than 30 days after
 the end of each 6-month period following the date of the approval of the
 program, a biannual report enumerating and describing all applications for
 permits under the program received by the State during the period covered
 by the report.
 `(2) Each report of a State under this subsection shall include with
 respect to the period covered by the report--
 `(A) a copy of each permit application received by the State;
 `(B) with respect to each application, specification of whether the permit
 was approved, denied, or required to be revised, or is still pending;
 `(C) a copy of each general permit which the State issued or proposed to
 issue; and
 `(D) an analysis of the impacts of general permits that were issued by
 the State on the achievement of the policy stated in subsection (x).
 `(3)(A) Not later than 10 days after the date on which the Administrator
 receives a biannual report of a State under paragraph (1) the Administrator
 shall provide copies of the report to the Secretary and the Secretary of
 the Interior.
 `(B) If the Secretary or the Secretary of the Interior finds after reviewing
 that report that the State is not administering its program in accordance
 with this section (including the guidelines developed under subsection
 (b)(1)), the Secretary or the Secretary of the Interior, respectively, may
 recommend to the Administrator in writing that the Administrator withdraw
 approval of such program. Such recommendation shall be submitted to the
 Administrator by not later than 60 days after the date on which a copy
 of the biannual report is received under subparagraph (A), and shall cite
 the reasons for the recommendation to the Administrator to withdraw approval.
 `(4)(A) If after reviewing a biannual report of a State under this subsection
 and recommendations received from the Secretary or the Secretary of the
 Interior under paragraph (3), the Administrator determines that the State
 is not administering its program in accordance with this section (including
 the guidelines developed under subsection (b)(1)), the Administrator shall
 notify the State of that determination by not later than 60 days after
 receiving the biannual report.
 `(B) If, by the end of the 90-day period beginning on the date on which
 the Administrator notifies a State pursuant to subparagraph (A), the State
 has not taken appropriate action, the Administrator, after notice and
 opportunity for a hearing, shall withdraw approval of the State's program.
 `(5) The Administrator may, on a periodic basis, audit the program of a
 State which is approved under subsection (h)(2), to ensure that the State
 is achieving the policy stated in subsection (x).'.
 (d) AUTHORITIES OF STATE AND INTERSTATE AGENCIES PRESERVED- Section 404(t)
 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1344(t)) is amended
 in the first sentence--
 (1) by striking `the discharge of dredged or fill material in any portion
 of the navigable waters' and inserting `any activity for which a permit
 may be issued under subsection (a) in any portion of navigable waters'; and
 (2) by striking `the discharge of dredged or fill material' and inserting
 `any activity for which a permit may be issued under subsection (a)'.
SEC. 113. COMPENSATORY MITIGATION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1344) is amended by inserting after subsection (u) (as added
 by section 111) the following new subsection:
 `(v)(1) Except as provided in paragraphs (3) and (4), each permit issued
 under this section shall require that--
 `(A) to the extent practicable, measures shall be undertaken by the
 permittee to avoid any adverse effects on navigable waters caused by
 activities authorized by the permit;
 `(B) to the extent practicable, measures shall be taken to minimize any
 such effects that can not be avoided; and
 `(C) the permittee shall--
 `(i) conduct such mitigation as will compensate for any adverse effects for
 which measures referred to in subparagraphs (A) and (B) are not practicable
 (including for any losses of wetlands caused by activities authorized by the
 permit), by restoring existing degraded wetlands or creating new wetlands;
 `(ii) redeem an appropriate number of credits issued under the wetlands
 mitigation banking system established under paragraph (5); or
 `(iii) perform any combination of clauses (i) and (ii).
 `(2) The Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator, shall ensure that
 the conduct by a permittee of any mitigation pursuant to paragraph (1)(C)--
 `(A) is a specific, enforceable condition of the permit for which it is
 required; and
 `(B) is monitored to ensure compliance with the conditions of the permit
 and to determine the effectiveness of the mitigation in compensating for
 the adverse effects for which it is required.
 `(3) Subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) shall not apply to any
 activity conducted in an area which is identified as suitable for the
 conduct of activities for which permits may be required under subsection
 (a), pursuant to advanced planning conducted under subsection (w).
 `(4)(A) Upon appeal by an applicant for a permit under this section for
 an activity described in subparagraph (B), the Administrator may issue
 the permit or modify or reduce any mitigation required under the permit
 pursuant to paragraph (1)(C), if the applicant demonstrates that--
 `(i) the applicant has owned the property on which the activity requiring a
 permit under subsection (a) will occur, for 3 or more consecutive years; and
 `(ii) the denial of the permit or a failure to reduce the mitigation
 required would cause significant financial hardship.
 `(B) An activity referred to in subparagraph (A) is any activity--
 `(i) conducted for the purpose of--
 `(I) constructing a residence (other than a multiple unit development)
 or a building associated with a residence; or
 `(II) performing a minor expansion or repair of an existing structure; and
 `(ii) which adversely affects less than 3 acres of wetlands.
 `(C) An award of a permit, and a modification or reduction of mitigation,
 under this paragraph shall not affect the authority of the Secretary to
 require other mitigation under this subsection for the activity for which
 the award, modification, or reduction is granted.
 `(5) The Secretary may require a payment as mitigation for impacts to
 navigable waters resulting from an activity conducted under a general
 permit issued for a category of navigable waters.
 `(6)(A) Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of the
 Wetlands Stewardship Act of 1991, the Secretary, the Administrator, and
 the Secretary of the Interior shall jointly issue rules which establish
 a wetlands mitigation banking system in accordance with this paragraph.
 `(B) A wetlands mitigation banking system established under this paragraph
 shall consist of a system for--
 `(i) the issuance of an appropriate number of credits by the Secretary, or
 by any State having either a permit program approved under subsection (h)(2)
 or a State wetlands conservation plan that is approved under subsection
 (y), to any person who conducts a project which--
 `(I) creates wetlands,
 `(II) restores or enhances degraded prior existing wetlands, or
 `(III) creates, restores, or enhances uplands that serve as buffer zones
 to protect or enhance wetlands functions;
 `(ii) the redemption of those credits for purposes of complying with
 paragraph (1)(C); and
 `(iii) accounting of the issuance and redemption of those credits, and
 of any transfer of the credits which is authorized by rules issued under
 subparagraph (D).
 `(C) Rules issued under this paragraph shall establish--
 `(i) procedures and requirements for the issuance and redemption of credits
 under the mitigation banking system established by the rules;
 `(ii) standards for determining the number of credits to be issued for a
 project described in subparagraph (B)(i), with respect to--
 `(I) the number of acres of wetlands or uplands created, restored, or
 enhanced by the project;
 `(II) the wetlands functions created, restored, enhanced, or protected by
 the project;
 `(III) the time required for that creation, restoration, enhancement,
 or protection to be realized; and
 `(IV) the likelihood of success of the project; and
 `(iii) requirements to ensure the security of the long-term ownership
 interests of wetlands and uplands on which projects are conducted for
 credits, and to protect the wetlands values associated with those wetlands
 and uplands;
 `(iv) appropriate geographic restrictions on the redemption of credits; and
 `(v) responsibilities for monitoring the operation of the system.
 `(D) Rules issued under this paragraph--
 `(i) may authorize the transfer of credits issued under the mitigation
 banking system established under this paragraph; and
 `(ii) shall establish appropriate procedures and requirements for any such
 transfers and for accounting of those transfers.
 `(E) Rules issued under this paragraph shall authorize the redemption, for
 purposes of complying with paragraph (1)(C) with respect to any particular
 permitted activity, of credits issued with respect to more than 1 project.
 `(7) The Secretary shall require that, to the maximum extent feasible,
 mitigation required under paragraph (1)(C)(i) for an activity shall be
 conducted before, or concurrently with, that activity.'.
 (b) MITIGATION BANKING SYSTEM REPORT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Not later than 3 years after the date of the enactment
 of this Act, the Administrator, in consultation with the Secretary and
 the Secretary of the Interior, shall transmit to the Congress a report
 evaluating the effectiveness of the wetlands mitigation banking system
 established under section 404(v) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
 (as added by this section) in achieving the policy stated in section 404(x)
 of that Act (as added by section 102 of this Act).
 (2) CONTENT- The report under this subsection shall include--
 (A) an estimate of the total number of acres of wetlands for which credits
 have been issued under the wetlands mitigation banking system;
 (B) an estimate of the total number of acres of wetlands with respect to
 which credits under the system have been redeemed;
 (C) an assessment of how the system has assisted in achieving the policy
 stated in section 404(x) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (as
 amended by section 102 of this Act);
 (D) an assessment of the functions of the wetlands created, restored,
 or enhanced for credits issued under the system;
 (E) an assessment of the effectiveness of monitoring of projects for which
 credits have been issued under the system;
 (F) an assessment of whether the establishment of the system resulted in
 the more timely completion of applications for permits under section 404 of
 the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, or greater ease of administration
 of permitting programs under that section; and
 (G) a description of costs associated with administering the system.
SEC. 114. APPLICATION.
 The amendments made by this title shall not apply to--
 (1) any activity for which a significant alteration of land or navigable
 waters is commenced before the date of the enactment of this Act, including
 any activity for which substantial earthmoving or significant alteration
 of a hydrologic regime or flow and circulation of navigable waters is
 carried out before that date; or
 (2) any activity for which there is clear evidence that the Secretary
 specifically approved the conduct of the activity at a specific site, before
 May 21, 1991, including approval granted on the basis that the activity--
 (A) is not subject to any permit requirement under section 404 of the
 Federal Water Pollution Control Act, or
 (B) is authorized by a general permit under that section.
TITLE II--WETLANDS PLANNING AND PRESERVATION
SEC. 201. ADVANCED PLANNING.
 Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended by this
 Act, is amended by inserting after subsection (v) (as added by section 113)
 the following new subsection:
 `(w)(1)(A) Consistent with the guidelines developed under subsection
 (b)(1) and after notice and opportunity for public comment (including
 public hearings), the Administrator may, jointly with a State described
 in subparagraph (B), or in the case of any other State jointly with the
 Secretary, conduct advanced planning by identifying and describing navigable
 waters in the State that are generally suitable or generally unsuitable for
 the conduct of activities for which permits may be issued under subsection
 (a).
 `(B) A State referred to in subparagraph (A) is a State which the
 Administrator determines has made substantial progress in completing a
 State wetlands conservation plan under subsection (y).
 `(C) The Administrator may authorize an entity to which applications
 may be submitted under section 204(a) of the Demonstration Cities and
 Metropolitan Development Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 3334(a)), to identify and
 describe navigable waters under this subsection, if--
 `(i) the entity submits to the Administrator a plan for that identification
 and description that is approved by the Governor of each State that is
 affected by that identification and description;
 `(ii) the Administrator determines that the plan is not inconsistent
 with any other plan of an affected State submitted and approved by the
 Administrator under this subsection or subsection (y); and
 `(iii) the Administrator approves the plan.
 `(2) Identification and description of navigable waters in a State under
 this subsection may be conducted with respect to all or any portion of
 those waters.
 `(3) The Administrator shall produce and make publicly available maps
 depicting navigable waters which are identified and described under this
 subsection, which indicate--
 `(A) navigable waters that are generally suitable for the conduct of
 activities for which permits may be issued under subsection (a),
 `(B) navigable waters that are generally unsuitable for the conduct of
 those activities, and
 `(C) the wetlands functions of the navigable waters depicted.
 `(4)(A) The Administrator shall make grants to States, or to entities
 authorized under paragraph (1)(C) to identify and describe navigable
 waters, for use for identifying and describing navigable waters pursuant
 to this subsection.
 `(B) Eligibility for grants under this paragraph, and the amount of
 those grants, shall be determined based on the value, and any threat
 of degradation, destruction, or loss, of wetlands to be identified and
 described with the grants.
 `(C) Grants may be provided under this paragraph for use for identifying and
 describing navigable waters in any defined geographical area of a State,
 including for an entire State or for any county, parish, or watershed of
 a State.
 `(5) In carrying out advanced planning under this subsection, the
 Administrator and a State shall, to the maximum extent practicable, involve
 local public and private agencies and organizations which have expertise
 in wetlands conservation or land use planning or development.
 `(6) Not later than 60 days after identifying and describing navigable waters
 under this subsection, the Administrator, a State, or an entity authorized
 under paragraph 1(C), as appropriate, shall publish in a newspaper or
 other publication which is widely distributed in the area a notice of--
 `(A) that identification and description, including a description of the
 wetlands functions of the navigable waters that are the subject of the
 notice; and
 `(B) the public availability of maps produced pursuant to paragraph (3)
 depicting those navigable waters.'.
SEC. 202. WETLANDS MAPPING.
 (a) MAPPING OF PRIORITY WETLANDS- Not later than 2 years after the date of
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior, in consultation
 with the Secretary and the Administrator, shall identify--
 (1) areas of wetlands which should be given priority for mapping and
 digitizing because of--
 (A) their high wetlands value,
 (B) the threat of their loss, destruction, or degradation from human or
 natural causes, or
 (C) lack of existing or adequate maps, and
 (2) all areas under consideration for advanced planning under section 404(w)
 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as added by section 201.
 (b) MAPPING AND DIGITIZATION OF IDENTIFIED AREAS- Not later than 5 years
 after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior
 shall map and digitize all areas of wetlands identified under subsection (a).
 (c) NATIONAL WETLANDS INVENTORY PROJECT- Section 401(a) of the Emergency
 Wetlands Resources Act of 1986 (16 U.S.C. 3931(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (3) by striking `, as soon as practicable' and inserting
 `by not later than September 30, 2004';
 (2) in paragraph (3) by striking `and' after the semicolon at the end;
 (3) in paragraph (4) by striking the period at the end and inserting `;
 and'; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(5) produce, by not later than September 30, 2004, a digital wetlands
 data base for the United States based on the final wetlands maps produced
 under this subsection.'.
SEC. 203. STATE WETLANDS CONSERVATION PLANS.
 Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended by this
 Act, is amended by inserting after subsection (x) (as added in section 102)
 the following new subsection:
 `(y)(1) The Governor of any State may, after notice and opportunity for
 public comment, prepare and submit to the Administrator for approval a
 State wetlands conservation plan, which--
 `(A) establishes a State wetlands conservation policy which, to the maximum
 extent practicable, is consistent with the policy stated in subsection
 (x) for wetlands in the States;
 `(B) includes any existing maps, and provides for the preparation of
 necessary additional maps, depicting wetlands located in the State;
 `(C) describes causes of degradation incurred by the wetlands identified
 on maps referred to subparagraph (B);
 `(D) establishes management strategies for--
 `(i) reducing the causes of such degradation;
 `(ii) preserving and enhancing the quality and quantity of such wetlands,
 including the restoration of former wetlands;
 `(E) establishes a schedule for implementing the State wetlands conservation
 plan;
 `(F) provides a mechanism for monitoring achievement of the policy stated
 in subsection (x);
 `(G) provides adequate authority to each State agency responsible for
 implementing the plan to ensure such implementation; and
 `(H) establishes a process for updating the plan not less than once every
 5 years.
 `(2) In developing and implementing a plan under this subsection, a State
 shall, to the maximum extent practicable, involve local public and private
 agencies and organizations which have expertise in wetlands conservation
 or land use planning or development.
 `(3)(A) Not later than 180 days after the date of the receipt by the
 Administrator of any plan under paragraph (1), the Administrator shall--
 `(i) approve the plan if it meets the requirements described in paragraph
 (1);
 `(ii) disapprove the plan if it does not meet those requirements; or
 `(iii) approve any portion of the plan that meets those requirements,
 and disapprove the remainder of the plan.
 `(B) If the Administrator does not approve or disapprove a plan or portion
 of plan under this subsection before the end of the 180-day period beginning
 on the date of the receipt of the plan by the Administrator, such plan or
 portion is deemed to be approved for purposes of this subsection.
 `(4) Upon request of a State, the Administrator, the Secretary, or the
 Secretary of the Interior may provide technical assistance to the State
 in developing a plan under this subsection for those portions of navigable
 waters with respect to which such assistance is requested by such State.
 `(5) Based on need, including the value of and the threat to wetlands
 resources within each State, the Administrator shall provide financial
 assistance to States for--
 `(A) the development of State wetlands conservation plans under this
 subsection; and
 `(B) the implementation of such a plan which is approved under this
 subsection.'.
SEC. 204. WETLANDS FOR WILDLIFE PROGRAM.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment
 of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall establish a program to
 promote the conservation and wise stewardship of wetlands and riparian
 lands on private property. The program shall--
 (1) Provide assistance to private landowners for--
 (A) conserving wetlands and riparian lands,
 (B) enhancing wildlife and fisheries habitat, and
 (C) developing economic uses of wetlands which will not degrade wetlands.
 (2) coordinate with other existing programs of the Fish and Wildlife Service
 which aid private landowners in restoring, enhancing and conserving wetlands
 and riparian resources.
 (b) AUTHORIZATION FOR AGREEMENTS- The Secretary of the Interior may enter
 into agreements with any individual--
 (1) to conserve, restore or enhance wetlands and riparian lands, on the
 individual's property,
 (2) to provide habitat for fish and wildlife on the individual's property,
 and
 (3) which will provide for--
 (A) the transfer of wetlands and riparian lands through sales, exchanges
 and donations to--
 (i) Wetlands Preservation Trusts designated under section 2 of the Wetlands
 Preservation Trusts Act of 1991, or
 (ii) the National Wildlife Refuge System;
 (B) technical assistance to individuals who agree to restore, enhance or
 conserve wetlands and riparian lands on the individual's property;
 (C) the development of demonstration projects to study possible economic
 uses of wetlands which will not degrade wetlands including--
 (i) small timbering operations,
 (ii) recreational uses, and
 (iii) hunting of waterfowl and small game.
 (c) AWARDS- The Secretary of the Interior shall present annual Wetlands
 for Wildlife Awards to five individuals who the Secretary of the Interior
 determines have made a substantial contribution to the conservation and
 wise stewardship of wetlands and riparian on their property through the
 Wetlands for Wildlife Program established under this subsection.