HR 2666 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2666
To provide for the energy security of the United States.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
June 18, 1991
Mr. GEPHARDT (for himself, Mr. FAZIO, and Mr. WISE) introduced the following
bill; which was referred jointly to the Committees on Ways and Means and
Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To provide for the energy security of the United States.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Energy Security and Price Stability Act
 of 1991'.
SEC. 2. CONGRESSIONAL FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) volatile pricing impaired energy production in the United States during
 the 1980s, as indicated by the fact that since 1985 average daily domestic
 crude oil production has fallen nearly 20 percent, from approximately
 9,000,000 barrels per day to approximately 7,300,000 barrels;
 (2) annual energy efficiency gains in the United States, which had been
 averaging over 2 percent in energy expended per dollar of output, have
 been undermined and overall domestic petroleum consumption has increased
 by over 1,000,000 barrels per day;
 (3) crude petroleum and petroleum product imports have increased by 60
 percent since 1985 to an average level of approximately 8,500,000 barrels
 per day prior to August 1990, and at that level account for approximately
 one-half of domestic consumption;
 (4) petroleum imports from insecure regions of the world have risen five-fold
 since 1985, from less than 500,000 barrels per day to more than 2,800,000
 barrels per day in July 1990, and are projected to continue to increase
 in the future;
 (5) the economic damage to, and the jeopardy to the national security,
 of the United States following the invasion of Kuwait resulted materially
 from the failure of the United States--
 (A) to have an effective energy security policy,
 (B) to have an adequate Strategic Petroleum Reserve and to promptly use it,
 (C) to maintain a core domestic crude petroleum production capacity, and
 (D) to pursue energy efficiency as a national goal; and
 (6) an additional duty on petroleum imports will help to achieve the
 market stability necessary to stimulate additional investments in energy
 efficiency and new energy sources and may provide additional revenues for
 such investments and the Strategic Petroleum Reserve.
SEC. 3. FLOOR PRICE FOR DOMESTIC PETROLEUM.
 (a) ADDITIONAL IMPORT DUTY- The Additional U.S. Notes to chapter 27 of the
 Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States are amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new note:
 `8. (a) For purposes of this note and headings 2709.00 and 2710.00--
 `(i) the term `floor price adjustment factor' means the excess, if any, of--
 `(A) $20, over
 `(B) the average West Texas price of a barrel of crude petroleum during
 a 30-day period described in subdivision (b)(i); and
 `(ii) the term `floor price adjustment surcharge' means--
 `(A) in the case of goods provided for in heading 2709.00, the amount of
 the floor price adjustment factor, and
 `(B) in the case of goods provided for in heading 2710, an amount equal
 to 110 percent of the floor price adjustment factor.
 `(b)(i) The Secretary of Energy shall, before the 25th day of each month,
 determine the average West Texas price of a barrel of crude petroleum
 during the 30-day period preceding the 20th day of such month and, on the
 basis of that average, determine whether a floor price adjustment factor
 is attributable to such period.
 `(ii) If the Secretary of Energy determines under subdivision (i) that a
 floor price adjustment factor is attributable to any 30-day period, the
 Secretary of Energy shall calculate and certify to the Secretary of the
 Treasury, before the close of the month in which the determination is made,
 the applicable floor price adjustment surcharges.
 `(iii) The floor price adjustment surcharges certified to the Secretary
 of the Treasury under subdivision (ii) shall apply with respect to goods
 that are entered during the calendar month after the month in which the
 determination of the floor price adjustment factor on which such surcharges
 are based was made under subdivision (i).
 `(iv) For purposes of this note, the Secretary of Energy shall compute barrel
 equivalents for purposes of applying floor price adjustment surcharges to
 goods classified under subheadings 2710.00.35, 2710.00.40, and 2710.00.60.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) The column 1-general and column 2 rates of duty for each subheading
 under headings 2709.00 and 2710.00 of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the
 United States (except subheadings 2710.00.35, 2710.00.40, and 2710.00.60)
 are each amended by inserting `plus the applicable floor price adjustment
 surcharge determined under U.S. Note 8 to this chapter' after `bb1'.
 (2) The column 1-general and column 2 rates of duty for subheadings
 2710.00.35, 2710.00.40, and 2710.00.60 of such Schedule are each amended by
 inserting `plus the applicable floor price adjustment surcharge determined
 under U.S. Note 8 to this chapter' after `%'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The Secretary of Energy shall make determinations
 regarding whether or not floor price adjustment factors are attributable
 to 30-day periods commencing with the 30-day period ending on September
 19, 1991.
SEC. 4. ENERGY SECURITY INVESTMENT FUND.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is hereby established within the Treasury of the
 United States a trust fund to be known as the Energy Security Investment
 Fund (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `Fund'), consisting
 of such amount as may be transferred or credited to the Fund as provided
 in this section.
 (b) TRANSFERS TO FUND-
 (1) The Secretary shall transfer to the Fund out of the general fund of
 the Treasury of the United States amounts determined by the Secretary
 to be equivalent to the amounts received into the general fund that are
 attributable to floor price adjustment surcharges collected under headings
 2709.00 and 2710.00 of the HTS.
 (2) The amounts which are required to be transferred under paragraph
 (1) shall be transferred at least quarterly from the general fund of
 the Treasury of the United States to the Fund on the basis of estimates
 made by the Secretary of the amount referred to in paragraph (1) that
 are received into the Treasury. Proper adjustments shall be made in the
 amounts subsequently transferred to the extent previous estimates were in
 excess of, or less than, the amounts required to be transferred.
 (c) ADMINISTRATION OF FUND-
 (1) The Secretary is the trustee of the Fund and shall submit a report
 each fiscal year to the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of
 Representatives and the Committee on Finance of the Senate on--
 (A) the financial condition and the results of the operations of the Fund
 during the fiscal year preceding the fiscal year in which the report is
 submitted; and
 (B) on the expected condition and operations of the Fund during the fiscal
 year in which such report is submitted and the 5 fiscal years succeeding
 such fiscal year.
The report shall be printed as a House document of the session of the Congress
to which the report is made.
 (2)(A) The Secretary shall invest such portion of the Fund as is not,
 in his judgment, required to meet current withdrawal. Such investments
 may be made only in interest-bearing obligations of the United States.
 For such purpose, such obligations may be acquired--
 (i) on original issue at the issue price, or
 (ii) by purchase of outstanding obligations at the market price.
 (B) Any obligation acquired by the Fund may be sold by the Secretary at
 the market price.
 (C) The interest on, and the proceeds from the sale or redemption of,
 any obligations held in the Fund shall be credited to and form a part of
 the Fund.
 (d) Fund Purposes-
 (1) Subject to paragraph (2), amounts in the Fund shall be available,
 as provided in appropriation Acts--
 (A) for the acquisition of crude petroleum for storage in the Strategic
 Petroleum Reserve;
 (B) for the acquisition of petroleum products for storage in the Strategic
 Petroleum Reserve, including the purchase of home heating oil for storage
 in regions of the United States that are particularly dependent on oil of
 that kind;
 (C) for low-income home weatherization; and
 (D) for the carrying out by the Secretary of Energy of functions authorized
 by law with respect to--
 (i) the promotion of energy efficiency,
 (ii) the commercialization of energy efficient technologies and those
 based on the use of environmentally-sound domestically-produced fuels, and
 (iii) the enhancement of domestic oil and gas recovery.
 (2) The amounts available for appropriation from the Fund for any fiscal
 year are subject to the following limitations:
 (A) No amounts shall be available for appropriation from the Fund for
 the purpose described in paragraph (1)(A) at any time when the Strategic
 Petroleum Reserve contains 1,500,000,000 or more barrels of crude petroleum.
 (B) Amounts in the Fund that are attributable to floor price adjustment
 surcharges collected under subheadings 2710.00.05 and 2710.00.10 (relating
 to distillate and residual fuel oils) of the HTS shall be available only
 for the purpose described in paragraph (1)(B); except that at any time
 when the Strategic Petroleum Reserve contains 40,000,000 or more barrels of
 petroleum products, such amounts shall be available for energy conservation
 programs under paragraph (1)(D)(i) that are carried out in regions of the
 United States that are particularly dependent on heating oil.
SEC. 5. COOPERATION WITH HEMISPHERIC ALLIES TO ENHANCE ENERGY SECURITY.
 (a) DUTY WAIVER REGARDING CRUDE PETROLEUM IMPORTS FROM WESTERN HEMISPHERE
 COUNTRIES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (2), the President may waive during
 any fiscal year any floor price adjustment surcharge imposed under the
 Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States on quantities of crude
 petroleum provided for under heading 2709.00 that is the product of any
 nation in the Western Hemisphere if the President considers that--
 (A) the waiver will enhance the energy security of the United States and
 make available additional energy supplies;
 (B) the waiver will promote economic and political cooperation between
 such nation and the United States; and
 (C) the cooperation under subparagraph (B) will offer the prospect of
 increased economic opportunities for United States firms, including those
 in the oil and gas and related service industries, in such nation.
 (2) LIMITATIONS- The President may not waive the floor price adjustment
 surcharges under paragraph (1) for any fiscal year--
 (A) on an aggregate quantity of crude petroleum that is the product of
 any country, that exceeds--
 (i) an annual amount equal to twice the average monthly quantity of crude
 petroleum imports from that country into the United States during the last
 6 months of 1990, plus
 (ii) increased amounts that result from the development of additional
 crude petroleum production capacity in such country after 1990; and
 (B) unless by July 1 preceding the beginning of the fiscal year during
 which the waiver is to apply, the President submits to the Congress a
 written statement of his intent to grant the waiver with respect to such
 country during such year, together with an explanation of how the waiver
 will satisfy the conditions referred to in subparagraphs (A), (B), and
 (C) of paragraph (1).
If this Act is enacted after October 1, 1991, and the President decides
to exercise the waiver authority under this subsection with respect to any
country during fiscal year 1992, subparagraph (B) shall be treated as being
complied with if the President submits to Congress the written statement
described in that subparagraph within 60 days after such date of enactment.
 (b) WESTERN HEMISPHERE COOPERATION REPORT- The President shall prepare,
 and submit to the Congress, a report on the ways in which the United States
 and those countries in the Western Hemisphere that are petroleum producers
 can cooperate in matters regarding energy production and conservation. The
 President shall include in the report recommendations regarding the
 potential for expanding petroleum production in such countries and methods
 (including credit assistance) by which the United States can assist such
 countries to increase the production of petroleum.
SEC. 6. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this Act:
 (1) The term `entered' includes withdrawn from warehouse for consumption.
 (2) The term `HTS' means the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States.
 (3) The term `petroleum products' means the goods provided for under the
 subheadings of the heading 2710.00 of the HTS.
 (4) The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of the Treasury.