[Congressional Bills 111th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 895 Placed on Calendar Senate (PCS)]

 Calendar No. 51
111th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 S. 895

 To prevent mortgage foreclosures and enhance mortgage credit 
 availability.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 April 24, 2009

 Mr. Dodd (for himself, Mr. Durbin, and Mr. Schumer) introduced the 
 following bill; which was read the first time

 April 27, 2009

 Read the second time and placed on the calendar

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To prevent mortgage foreclosures and enhance mortgage credit 
 availability.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as ``Helping Families Save 
Their Homes Act of 2009''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is the 
following:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
 TITLE I--PREVENTION OF MORTGAGE FORECLOSURES

 Subtitle A--Modification of Residential Mortgages

Sec. 100. Definition.
Sec. 101. Eligibility for relief.
Sec. 102. Prohibiting claims arising from violations of the Truth in 
 Lending Act.
Sec. 103. Authority to modify certain mortgages.
Sec. 104. Combating excessive fees.
Sec. 105. Confirmation of plan.
Sec. 106. Discharge.
Sec. 107. Standing trustee fees.
Sec. 108. Effective date; application of amendments.
Sec. 109. GAO study.
Sec. 110. Report to Congress.
 Subtitle B--Related Mortgage Modification Provisions

Sec. 121. Adjustments as a result of modification in bankruptcy of 
 housing loans guaranteed by the Department 
 of Veterans Affairs.
Sec. 122. Payment of FHA mortgage insurance benefits.
Sec. 123. Adjustments as result of modification of rural single family 
 housing loans in bankruptcy.
Sec. 124. Unenforceability of certain provision as being contrary to 
 public policy.
Sec. 125. Mortgage modification data collecting and reporting.
 TITLE II--FORECLOSURE MITIGATION AND CREDIT AVAILABILITY

Sec. 201. Servicer safe harbor for mortgage loan modifications.
Sec. 202. Changes to HOPE for Homeowners Program.
Sec. 203. Requirements for FHA-approved mortgagees.
Sec. 204. Enhancement of liquidity and stability of insured depository 
 institutions to ensure availability of 
 credit and reduction of foreclosures.
Sec. 205. Application of GSE conforming loan limit to mortgages 
 assisted with TARP funds.
Sec. 206. Mortgages on certain homes on leased land.
Sec. 207. Sense of Congress regarding mortgage revenue bond purchases.
 TITLE III--MORTGAGE FRAUD

Sec. 301. Short title.
Sec. 302. Nationwide Mortgage Fraud Task Force.
 TITLE IV--FORECLOSURE MORATORIUM PROVISIONS

Sec. 401. Sense of the Congress on foreclosures.

 TITLE I--PREVENTION OF MORTGAGE FORECLOSURES

 Subtitle A--Modification of Residential Mortgages

SEC. 100. DEFINITION.

 Section 101 of title 11, United States Code, is amended by 
inserting after paragraph (43) the following (and make such technical 
and conforming changes as may be appropriate):
 ``(43A) The term `qualified loan modification' means a loan 
 modification agreement made in accordance with the guidelines 
 of the Obama Administration's Homeowner Affordability and 
 Stability Plan as implemented March 4, 2009, that--
 ``(A) reduces the debtor's payment (including 
 principal and interest, and payments for real estate 
 taxes, hazard insurance, mortgage insurance premium, 
 homeowners' association dues, ground rent, and special 
 assessments) on a loan secured by a senior security 
 interest in the principal residence of the debtor, to a 
 percentage of the debtor's income in accordance with 
 such guidelines, without any period of negative 
 amortization or under which the aggregate amount of the 
 regular periodic payments would not fully amortize the 
 outstanding principal amount of such loan;
 ``(B) requires no fees or charges to be paid by the 
 debtor in order to obtain such modification; and
 ``(C) permits the debtor to continue to make 
 payments under the modification agreement 
 notwithstanding the filing of a case under this title, 
 as if such case had not been filed.''.

SEC. 101. ELIGIBILITY FOR RELIEF.

 Section 109 of title 11, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by adding at the end of subsection (e) the following: 
 ``For purposes of this subsection, the computation of debts 
 shall not include the secured or unsecured portions of--
 ``(1) debts secured by the debtor's principal residence if 
 the value of such residence as of the date of the order for 
 relief under chapter 13 is less than the applicable maximum 
 amount of noncontingent, liquidated, secured debts specified in 
 this subsection; or
 ``(2) debts secured or formerly secured by what was the 
 debtor's principal residence that was sold in foreclosure or 
 that the debtor surrendered to the creditor if the value of 
 such real property as of the date of the order for relief under 
 chapter 13 was less than the applicable maximum amount of 
 noncontingent, liquidated, secured debts specified in this 
 subsection.'', and
 (2) by adding at the end of subsection (h) the following:
 ``(5) Notwithstanding the 180-day period specified in 
 paragraph (1), with respect to a debtor in a case under chapter 
 13 who submits to the court a certification that the debtor has 
 received notice that the holder of a claim secured by the 
 debtor's principal residence may commence a foreclosure on the 
 debtor's principal residence, the requirements of paragraph (1) 
 shall be considered to be satisfied if the debtor satisfies 
 such requirements not later than the expiration of the 30-day 
 period beginning on the date of the filing of the petition.''.

SEC. 102. PROHIBITING CLAIMS ARISING FROM VIOLATIONS OF THE TRUTH IN 
 LENDING ACT.

 Section 502(b) of title 11, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (8) by striking ``or'' at the end,
 (2) in paragraph (9) by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting ``; or'', and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(10) the claim for a loan secured by a security interest 
 in the debtor's principal residence is subject to a remedy for 
 rescission under the Truth in Lending Act notwithstanding the 
 prior entry of a foreclosure judgment, except that nothing in 
 this paragraph shall be construed to modify, impair, or 
 supersede any other right of the debtor.''.

SEC. 103. AUTHORITY TO MODIFY CERTAIN MORTGAGES.

 Section 1322 of title 11, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)--
 (A) by redesignating paragraph (11) as paragraph 
 (12),
 (B) in paragraph (10) by striking ``and'' at the 
 end, and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (10) the 
 following:
 ``(11) notwithstanding paragraph (2), with respect to a 
 claim for a loan originated before the effective date of this 
 paragraph and secured by a security interest in the debtor's 
 principal residence that is the subject of a notice that a 
 foreclosure may be commenced with respect to such loan, modify 
 the rights of the holder of such claim (and the rights of the 
 holder of any claim secured by a subordinate security interest 
 in such residence)--
 ``(A) by providing for payment of the amount of the 
 allowed secured claim as determined under section 
 506(a)(1);
 ``(B) if any applicable rate of interest is 
 adjustable under the terms of such loan by prohibiting, 
 reducing, or delaying adjustments to such rate of 
 interest applicable on and after the date of filing of 
 the plan;
 ``(C) by modifying the terms and conditions of such 
 loan--
 ``(i) to extend the repayment period for a 
 period that is no longer than the longer of 40 
 years (reduced by the period for which such 
 loan has been outstanding) or the remaining 
 term of such loan, beginning on the date of the 
 order for relief under this chapter; and
 ``(ii) to provide for the payment of 
 interest accruing after the date of the order 
 for relief under this chapter at a fixed annual 
 rate equal to the currently applicable average 
 prime offer rate as of the date of the order 
 for relief under this chapter, corresponding to 
 the repayment term determined under the 
 preceding paragraph, as published by the 
 Federal Financial Institutions Examination 
 Council in its table entitled `Average Prime 
 Offer Rates--Fixed', plus a reasonable premium 
 for risk; and
 ``(D) by providing for payments of such modified 
 loan directly to the holder of the claim or, at the 
 discretion of the court, through the trustee during the 
 term of the plan; and'', and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(g) A claim may be reduced under subsection (b)(11)(A) only on 
the condition that if the debtor sells the principal residence securing 
such claim, before completing all payments under the plan (or, if 
applicable, before receiving a discharge under section 1328(b)) and 
receives net proceeds from the sale of such residence, then the debtor 
agrees to pay to such holder not later than 15 days after receiving 
such proceeds--
 ``(1) if such residence is sold in the 1st year occurring 
 after the effective date of the plan, 90 percent of the amount 
 of the difference between the sales price and the amount of 
 such claim as originally determined under subsection (b)(11) 
 (plus costs of sale and improvements), but not to exceed the 
 unpaid amount of the allowed secured claim determined as if 
 such claim had not been reduced under such subsection;
 ``(2) if such residence is sold in the 2d year occurring 
 after the effective date of the plan, 70 percent of the amount 
 of the difference between the sales price and the amount of 
 such claim as originally determined under subsection (b)(11) 
 (plus costs of sale and improvements), but not to exceed the 
 unpaid amount of the allowed secured claim determined as if 
 such claim had not been reduced under such subsection;
 ``(3) if such residence is sold in the 3d year occurring 
 after the effective date of the plan, 50 percent of the amount 
 of the difference between the sales price and the amount of 
 such claim as originally determined under subsection (b)(11) 
 (plus costs of sale and improvements), but not to exceed the 
 unpaid amount of the allowed secured claim determined as if 
 such claim had not been reduced under such subsection;
 ``(4) if such residence is sold in the 4th year occurring 
 after the effective date of the plan, 30 percent of the amount 
 of the difference between the sales price and the amount of 
 such claim as originally determined under subsection (b)(11) 
 (plus costs of sale and improvements), but not to exceed the 
 unpaid amount of the allowed secured claim determined as if 
 such claim had not been reduced under such subsection; and
 ``(5) if such residence is sold in the 5th year occurring 
 after the effective date of the plan, 10 percent of the amount 
 of the difference between the sales price and the amount of 
 such claim as originally determined under subsection (b)(11) 
 (plus costs of sale and improvements), but not to exceed the 
 unpaid amount of the allowed secured claim determined as if 
 such claim had not been reduced under such subsection.
 ``(h) With respect to a claim of the kind described in subsection 
(b)(11), the plan may not contain a modification under the authority of 
subsection (b)(11)--
 ``(1) in a case commenced under this chapter after the 
 expiration of the 30-day period beginning on the effective date 
 of this subsection, unless--
 ``(A) the debtor certifies that the debtor--
 ``(i) not less than 30 days before the 
 commencement of the case, contacted the holder 
 of such claim (or the entity collecting 
 payments on behalf of such holder) regarding 
 modification of the loan that is the subject of 
 such claim;
 ``(ii) provided the holder of the claim (or 
 the entity collecting payments on behalf of 
 such holder) a written statement of the 
 debtor's current income, expenses, and debt 
 substantially conforming with the schedules 
 required under section 521(a) or such other 
 form as is promulgated by the Judicial 
 Conference of the United States for such 
 purpose; and
 ``(iii) considered any qualified loan 
 modification offered to the debtor by the 
 holder of the claim (or the entity collecting 
 payments on behalf of such holder); or
 ``(B) a foreclosure sale is scheduled to occur on a 
 date in the 30-day period beginning on the date of case 
 is commenced;
 ``(2) in any other case pending under this chapter, unless 
 the debtor certifies that the debtor attempted to contact the 
 holder of such claim (or the entity collecting payments on 
 behalf of such holder) regarding modification of the loan that 
 is the subject of such claim, before--
 ``(A) filing a plan under section 1321 that 
 contains a modification under the authority of 
 subsection (b)(11); or
 ``(B) modifying a plan under section 1323 or 1329 
 to contain a modification under the authority of 
 subsection (b)(11).
 ``(i) In determining the holder's allowed secured claim under 
section 506(a)(1) for purposes of subsection (b)(11)(A), the value of 
the debtor's principal residence shall be the fair market value of such 
residence on the date such value is determined and, if the issue of 
value is contested, the court shall determine such value in accordance 
with the appraisal rules used by the Federal Housing Administration.''.

SEC. 104. COMBATING EXCESSIVE FEES.

 Section 1322(c) of title 11, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1) by striking ``and'' at the end,
 (2) in paragraph (2) by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting a semicolon, and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) the debtor, the debtor's property, and property of 
 the estate are not liable for a fee, cost, or charge that is 
 incurred while the case is pending and arises from a debt that 
 is secured by the debtor's principal residence except to the 
 extent that--
 ``(A) the holder of the claim for such debt files 
 with the court and serves on the trustee, the debtor, 
 and the debtor's attorney (annually or, in order to 
 permit filing consistent with clause (ii), at such more 
 frequent periodicity as the court determines necessary) 
 notice of such fee, cost, or charge before the earlier 
 of--
 ``(i) 1 year after such fee, cost, or 
 charge is incurred; or
 ``(ii) 60 days before the closing of the 
 case; and
 ``(B) such fee, cost, or charge--
 ``(i) is lawful under applicable 
 nonbankruptcy law, reasonable, and provided for 
 in the applicable security agreement; and
 ``(ii) is secured by property the value of 
 which is greater than the amount of such claim, 
 including such fee, cost, or charge;
 ``(4) the failure of a party to give notice described in 
 paragraph (3) shall be deemed a waiver of any claim for fees, 
 costs, or charges described in paragraph (3) for all purposes, 
 and any attempt to collect such fees, costs, or charges shall 
 constitute a violation of section 524(a)(2) or, if the 
 violation occurs before the date of discharge, of section 
 362(a); and
 ``(5) a plan may provide for the waiver of any prepayment 
 penalty on a claim secured by the debtor's principal 
 residence.''.

SEC. 105. CONFIRMATION OF PLAN.

 (a) Section 1325(a) of title 11, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1) strike 
 ``subsection (b)'' and insert ``subsections (b) and (d)''.
 (2) in paragraph (5)--
 (A) by inserting ``except as otherwise provided in 
 section 1322(b)(11),'' after ``(5)'', and
 (B) in subparagraph (B)(iii)(I) by inserting 
 ``(including payments of a claim modified under section 
 1322(b)(11))'' after ``payments'' the 1st place it 
 appears,
 (3) in paragraph (8) by striking ``and'' at the end,
 (4) in paragraph (9) by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting a semicolon, and
 (5) by inserting after paragraph (9) the following:
 ``(10) notwithstanding subclause (I) of paragraph 
 (5)(B)(i), whenever the plan modifies a claim in accordance 
 with section 1322(b)(11), the holder of a claim whose rights 
 are modified pursuant to section 1322(b)(11) shall retain the 
 lien until the later of--
 ``(A) the payment of such holder's allowed secured 
 claim; or
 ``(B) completion of all payments under the plan 
 (or, if applicable, receipt of a discharge under 
 section 1328(b)); and
 ``(11) whenever the plan modifies a claim in accordance 
 with section 1322(b)(11), the court finds that such 
 modification is in good faith (Lack of good faith exists if the 
 debtor has no need for relief under this paragraph because the 
 debtor can pay all of his or her debts and any future payment 
 increases on such debts without difficulty for the foreseeable 
 future, including the positive amortization of mortgage debt. 
 In determining whether a reduction of the principal amount of 
 the loan resulting from a modification made under the authority 
 of section 1322(b)(11) is made in good faith, the court shall 
 consider whether the holder of such claim (or the entity 
 collecting payments on behalf of such holder) has offered to 
 the debtor a qualified loan modification that would enable the 
 debtor to pay such debts and such loan without reducing such 
 principal amount.) and does not find that the debtor has been 
 convicted of obtaining by actual fraud the extension, renewal, 
 or refinancing of credit that gives rise to a modified 
 claim.''.
 (b) Section 1325 of title 11, United States Code, is amended by 
adding at the end the following (and make such technical and conforming 
changes as may be appropriate):
 ``(d) Notwithstanding section 1322(b)(11)(C)(ii), the court, on 
request of the debtor or the holder of a claim secured by a senior 
security interest in the debtor's principal residence, may confirm a 
plan proposing a reduction in the interest rate on the loan secured by 
such security interest and that does not reduce the principal, provided 
the total monthly mortgage payment is reduced to a percentage of the 
debtor's income in accordance with the guidelines of the Obama 
Administration's Homeowner Affordability and Stability Plan as 
implemented March 4, 2009, if, taking into account the debtor's 
financial situation, after allowance of expenses that would be 
permitted for a debtor under this chapter subject to paragraph (3) of 
subsection (b), regardless of whether the debtor is otherwise subject 
to such paragraph, and taking into account additional debts and fees 
that are to be paid in this chapter and thereafter, the debtor would be 
able to prevent foreclosure and pay a fully amortizing 30-year loan at 
such reduced interest rate without such reduction in principal.''.

SEC. 106. DISCHARGE.

 Section 1328(a) of title 11, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(other than payments to holders of 
 claims whose rights are modified under section 1322(b)(11))'' 
 after ``paid'', and
 (2) in paragraph (1) by inserting ``or, to the extent of 
 the unpaid portion of an allowed secured claim, provided for in 
 section 1322(b)(11)'' after ``1322(b)(5)''.

SEC. 107. STANDING TRUSTEE FEES.

 (a) Amendment to Title 28.--Section 586(e)(1)(B)(i) of title 28, 
United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(I) except as provided in subparagraph 
 (II)'' after ``(i)'',
 (2) by striking ``or'' at the end and inserting ``and'', 
 and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(II) 4 percent with respect to payments 
 received under section 1322(b)(11) of title 11 
 by the individual as a result of the operation 
 of section 1322(b)(11)(D) of title 11, unless 
 the bankruptcy court waives all fees with 
 respect to such payments based on a 
 determination that such individual has income 
 less than 150 percent of the income official 
 poverty line (as defined by the Office of 
 Management and Budget, and revised annually in 
 accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus 
 Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981) applicable 
 to a family of the size involved and payment of 
 such fees would render the debtor's plan 
 infeasible.''.
 (b) Conforming Provision.--The amendments made by this section 
shall apply to any trustee to whom the provisions of section 302(d)(3) 
of the Bankruptcy Judges, United States Trustees, and Family Farmer 
Bankruptcy Act of 1986 (Public Law 99-554; 100 Stat. 3121) apply.

SEC. 108. EFFECTIVE DATE; APPLICATION OF AMENDMENTS.

 (a) Effective Date.--Except as provided in subsection (b), this 
subtitle and the amendments made by this subtitle shall take effect on 
the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) Application of Amendments.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 amendments made by this subtitle shall apply with respect to 
 cases commenced under title 11 of the United States Code 
 before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) Limitation.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply with respect 
 to cases closed under title 11 of the United States Code as of 
 the date of the enactment of this Act that are neither pending 
 on appeal in, nor appealable to, any court of the United 
 States.

SEC. 109. GAO STUDY.

 The Comptroller General shall carry out a study, and submit to the 
Committee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives and the 
Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate, not later than 2 years after 
the date of the enactment of this Act a report containing--
 (1) the results of such study of--
 (A) the number of debtors who filed, during the 1-
 year period beginning on the date of the enactment of 
 this Act, cases under chapter 13 of title 11 of the 
 United States Code for the purpose of restructuring 
 their principal residence mortgages,
 (B) the number of mortgages restructured under the 
 amendments made by this subtitle that subsequently 
 resulted in default and foreclosure,
 (C) a comparison between the effectiveness of 
 mortgages restructured under programs outside of 
 bankruptcy, such as Hope Now and Help for Homeowners, 
 and mortgages restructured under the amendments made by 
 this subtitle,
 (D) the number of cases presented to the bankruptcy 
 courts where mortgages were restructured under the 
 amendments made by this subtitle that were appealed,
 (E) the number of cases presented to the bankruptcy 
 courts where mortgages were restructured under the 
 amendments made by the subtitle that were overturned on 
 appeal, and
 (F) the number of bankruptcy judges disciplined as 
 a result of actions taken to restructure mortgages 
 under the amendments made by this subtitle, and
 (2) a recommendation as to whether such amendments should 
 be amended to include a sunset clause.

SEC. 110. REPORT TO CONGRESS.

 Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Comptroller General, in consultation with the Federal Housing 
Administration, shall submit to the Congress, a report containing--
 (1) a comprehensive review of the effects of the amendments 
 made by this subtitle on bankruptcy court,
 (2) a survey of whether the program should limit the types 
 of homeowners eligible for the program, and
 (3) a recommendation on whether such amendments should 
 remain in effect.

 Subtitle B--Related Mortgage Modification Provisions

SEC. 121. ADJUSTMENTS AS A RESULT OF MODIFICATION IN BANKRUPTCY OF 
 HOUSING LOANS GUARANTEED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS 
 AFFAIRS.

 (a) In General.--Section 3732 of title 38, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by redesignating paragraph (2) as subparagraph 
 (A) of paragraph (2), and
 (2) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(B) In the event that a housing loan guaranteed 
 under this chapter is modified under the authority 
 provided under section 1322(b) of title 11, United 
 States Code, the Secretary may pay the holder of the 
 obligation the unpaid balance of the obligation due as 
 of the date of the filing of the petition under title 
 11, United States Code, plus accrued interest, but only 
 upon the assignment, transfer, and delivery to the 
 Secretary (in a form and manner satisfactory to the 
 Secretary) of all rights, interest, claims, evidence, 
 and records with respect to the housing loan.''.
 (b) Maturity of Housing Loans.--Paragraph (1) of section (d) of 
section 3703 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting 
``at the time of origination'' after ``loan''.
 (c) Implementation.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs may 
implement the amendments made by this section through notice, procedure 
notice, or administrative notice.

SEC. 122. PAYMENT OF FHA MORTGAGE INSURANCE BENEFITS.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (a) of section 204 of the National 
Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1710(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by adding at the end the following 
 new subparagraph:
 ``(E) Modification of mortgage in bankruptcy.--
 ``(i) Authority.--If an order is entered 
 under the authority provided under section 
 1322(b) of title 11, United States Code, that 
 (a) determines the amount of an allowed secured 
 claim under a mortgage in accordance with 
 section 506(a)(1) of title 11, United States 
 Code, and the amount of such allowed secured 
 claim is less than the amount due under the 
 mortgage as of the date of the filing of the 
 petition under title 11, United States Code, or 
 (b) reduces the interest to be paid under a 
 mortgage in accordance with section 1325 of 
 such title, the Secretary may pay insurance 
 benefits for the mortgage as follows:
 ``(I) Full payment and 
 assignment.--The Secretary may pay the 
 insurance benefits for the mortgage, 
 but only upon the assignment, transfer, 
 and delivery to the Secretary of all 
 rights, interest, claims, evidence, and 
 records with respect to the mortgage 
 specified in clauses (i) through (iv) 
 of paragraph (1)(A). The insurance 
 benefits shall be paid in the amount 
 equal to the original principal 
 obligation of the mortgage (with such 
 additions and deductions as the 
 Secretary determines are appropriate) 
 which was unpaid upon the date of the 
 filing of by the mortgagor of the 
 petition under title 11 of the United 
 States Code. Nothing in this Act may be 
 construed to prevent the Secretary from 
 providing insurance under this title 
 for a mortgage that has previously been 
 assigned to the Secretary under this 
 subclause. The decision of whether to 
 utilize the authority under this 
 subclause for payment and assignment 
 shall be at the election of the 
 mortgagee, subject to such terms and 
 conditions as the Secretary may 
 establish.
 ``(II) Assignment of unsecured 
 claim.--The Secretary may make a 
 partial payment of the insurance 
 benefits for any unsecured claim under 
 the mortgage, but only upon the 
 assignment to the Secretary of any 
 unsecured claim of the mortgagee 
 against the mortgagor or others arising 
 out of such order. Such assignment 
 shall be deemed valid irrespective of 
 whether such claim has been or will be 
 discharged under title 11 of the United 
 States Code. The insurance benefits 
 shall be paid in the amount specified 
 in subclause (I) of this clause, as 
 such amount is reduced by the amount of 
 the allowed secured claim. Such allowed 
 secured claim shall continue to be 
 insured under section 203.
 ``(III) Interest payments.--The 
 Secretary may make periodic payments, 
 or a one-time payment, of insurance 
 benefits for interest payments that are 
 reduced pursuant to such order, as 
 determined by the Secretary, but only 
 upon assignment to the Secretary of all 
 rights and interest related to such 
 payments.
 ``(ii) Delivery of evidence of entry of 
 order.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 this paragraph, no insurance benefits may be 
 paid pursuant to this subparagraph for a 
 mortgage before delivery to the Secretary of 
 evidence of the entry of the order issued 
 pursuant to title 11, United States Code, in a 
 form satisfactory to the Secretary.'';
 (2) in paragraph (5), in the matter preceding subparagraph 
 (A), by inserting after ``section 520, and'' the following: ``, 
 except as provided in paragraph (1)(E),''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(10) Loan modification program.--
 ``(A) Authority.--The Secretary may carry out a 
 program solely to encourage loan modifications for 
 eligible delinquent mortgages through the payment of 
 insurance benefits and assignment of the mortgage to 
 the Secretary and the subsequent modification of the 
 terms of the mortgage according to a loan modification 
 approved by the mortgagee.
 ``(B) Payment of benefits and assignment.--Under 
 the program under this paragraph, the Secretary may pay 
 insurance benefits for a mortgage, in the amount 
 determined in accordance with paragraph (5)(A), without 
 reduction for any amounts modified, but only upon the 
 assignment, transfer, and delivery to the Secretary of 
 all rights, interest, claims, evidence, and records 
 with respect to the mortgage specified in clauses (i) 
 through (iv) of paragraph (1)(A).
 ``(C) Disposition.--After modification of a 
 mortgage pursuant to this paragraph, the Secretary may 
 provide insurance under this title for the mortgage. 
 The Secretary may subsequently--
 ``(i) re-assign the mortgage to the 
 mortgagee under terms and conditions as are 
 agreed to by the mortgagee and the Secretary;
 ``(ii) act as a Government National 
 Mortgage Association issuer, or contract with 
 an entity for such purpose, in order to pool 
 the mortgage into a Government National 
 Mortgage Association security; or
 ``(iii) re-sell the mortgage in accordance 
 with any program that has been established for 
 purchase by the Federal Government of mortgages 
 insured under this title, and the Secretary may 
 coordinate standards for interest rate 
 reductions available for loan modification with 
 interest rates established for such purchase.
 ``(D) Loan servicing.--In carrying out the program 
 under this section, the Secretary may require the 
 existing servicer of a mortgage assigned to the 
 Secretary under the program to continue servicing the 
 mortgage as an agent of the Secretary during the period 
 that the Secretary acquires and holds the mortgage for 
 the purpose of modifying the terms of the mortgage. If 
 the mortgage is resold pursuant to subparagraph 
 (C)(iii), the Secretary may provide for the existing 
 servicer to continue to service the mortgage or may 
 engage another entity to service the mortgage.''.
 (b) Amendment to Partial Claim Authority.--Paragraph (1) of section 
230(b) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1715u(b)(1)) is amended 
by striking ``12 of the monthly mortgage payments'' and inserting ``30 
percent of the unpaid principal balance of the mortgage''.
 (c) Implementation.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development 
may implement the amendments made by this section through notice or 
mortgagee letter.

SEC. 123. ADJUSTMENTS AS RESULT OF MODIFICATION OF RURAL SINGLE FAMILY 
 HOUSING LOANS IN BANKRUPTCY.

 (a) Guaranteed Rural Housing Loans.--Subsection (h) of section 502 
of the Housing Act of 1949 (42 U.S.C. 1472(h)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (7)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A), by inserting before the 
 period at the end the following: ``, unless the 
 maturity date of the loan is modified in a bankruptcy 
 proceeding or at the discretion of the Secretary''; and
 (B) in subparagraph (B), by inserting before the 
 semicolon the following: ``, unless such rate is 
 modified in a bankruptcy proceeding'';
 (2) by redesignating paragraphs (13) and (14) as paragraphs 
 (14) and (15), respectively; and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (12) the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(13) Payment of guarantee.--In addition to all other 
 authorities to pay a guarantee claim, the Secretary may also 
 pay the guaranteed portion of any losses incurred by the holder 
 of a note or the servicer resulting from a modification of a 
 note by a bankruptcy proceeding.''.
 (b) Insured Rural Housing Loans.--Subsection (j) of section 517 of 
the Housing Act of 1949 (42 U.S.C. 1487(j)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (2) through (7) as 
 paragraphs (3) through (8), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(2) to pay for losses incurred by holders or servicers in 
 the event of a modification pursuant to a bankruptcy 
 proceeding;''.
 (c) Implementation.--The Secretary of Agriculture may implement the 
amendments made by this section through notice, procedure notice, or 
administrative notice.

SEC. 124. UNENFORCEABILITY OF CERTAIN PROVISION AS BEING CONTRARY TO 
 PUBLIC POLICY.

 No provision in any investment contract between a servicer and a 
securitization vehicle or investor in effect as of the date of 
enactment of this Act that requires excess bankruptcy losses that 
exceed a certain dollar amount on residential mortgages to be borne by 
classes of certificates on a pro rata basis that refers to types of 
bankruptcy losses that could not have been incurred under the law in 
effect at the time such contract was entered into shall be enforceable, 
as such provision shall be contrary to public policy. Notwithstanding 
this section, such reference to types of bankruptcy losses that could 
have been incurred under the law in effect at the time such contract 
was entered into shall be enforceable.

SEC. 125. MORTGAGE MODIFICATION DATA COLLECTING AND REPORTING.

 (a) Reporting Requirements.--Not later than 120 days after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, and quarterly thereafter, the Comptroller 
of the Currency, in coordination with the Director of the Office of 
Thrift Supervision, shall submit a report to the Committee on Banking, 
Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate, the Committee on Financial 
Services of the House of Representatives, and the Joint Economic 
Committee on the volume of mortgage modifications reported to the 
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Office of Thrift 
Supervision, under the mortgage metrics program of each such Office, 
during the previous quarter, including the following:
 (1) A copy of the data collection instrument currently used 
 by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Office 
 of Thrift Supervision to collect data on loan modifications.
 (2) The total number of mortgage modifications resulting in 
 each of the following:
 (A) Additions of delinquent payments and fees to 
 loan balances.
 (B) Interest rate reductions and freezes.
 (C) Term extensions.
 (D) Reductions of principal.
 (E) Deferrals of principal.
 (F) Combinations of modifications described in 
 subparagraph (A), (B), (C), (D), or (E).
 (3) The total number of mortgage modifications in which the 
 total monthly principal and interest payment resulted in the 
 following:
 (A) An increase.
 (B) Remained the same.
 (C) Decreased less than 10 percent.
 (D) Decreased between 10 percent and 20 percent.
 (E) Decreased 20 percent or more.
 (4) The total number of loans that have been modified and 
 then entered into default, where the loan modification resulted 
 in--
 (A) higher monthly payments by the homeowner;
 (B) equivalent monthly payments by the homeowner;
 (C) lower monthly payments by the homeowner of up 
 to 10 percent;
 (D) lower monthly payments by the homeowner of 
 between 10 percent to 20 percent; or
 (E) lower monthly payments by the homeowner of more 
 than 20 percent.
 (b) Data Collection.--
 (1) Required.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 60 days after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller of 
 the Currency and the Director of the Office of Thrift 
 Supervision, shall issue mortgage modification data 
 collection and reporting requirements to institutions 
 covered under the reporting requirement of the mortgage 
 metrics program of the Comptroller or the Director.
 (B) Inclusiveness of collections.--The requirements 
 under subparagraph (A) shall provide for the collection 
 of all mortgage modification data needed by the 
 Comptroller of the Currency and the Director of the 
 Office of Thrift Supervision to fulfill the reporting 
 requirements under subsection (a).
 (2) Report.--The Comptroller of the Currency shall report 
 all requirements established under paragraph (1) to each 
 committee receiving the report required under subsection (a).

 TITLE II--FORECLOSURE MITIGATION AND CREDIT AVAILABILITY

SEC. 201. SERVICER SAFE HARBOR FOR MORTGAGE LOAN MODIFICATIONS.

 (a) Safe Harbor.--
 (1) Loan modifications and workout plans.--Notwithstanding 
 any other provision of law, and notwithstanding any investment 
 contract between a servicer and a securitization vehicle or 
 investor, a servicer that acts consistent with the duty set 
 forth in section 129A(a) of Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 
 1639a) shall not be liable for entering into a loan 
 modification, workout, or other loss mitigation plan, 
 including, but not limited to, disposition, including any 
 modification or refinancing undertaken pursuant to standard 
 loan modification, sale, or disposition guidelines issued by 
 the Secretary of the Treasury or his designee under the 
 Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008, with respect to 
 any such mortgage that meets all of the criteria set forth in 
 paragraph (2)(B) to--
 (A) any person, based on that person's ownership of 
 a residential mortgage loan or any interest in a pool 
 of residential mortgage loans or in securities that 
 distribute payments out of the principal, interest and 
 other payments in loans on the pool;
 (B) any person who is obligated pursuant to a 
 derivatives instrument to make payments determined in 
 reference to any loan or any interest referred to in 
 subparagraph (A); or
 (C) any person that insures any loan or any 
 interest referred to in subparagraph (A) under any law 
 or regulation of the United States or any law or 
 regulation of any State or political subdivision of any 
 State.
 (2) Ability to modify mortgages.--
 (A) Ability.--Notwithstanding any other provision 
 of law, and notwithstanding any investment contract 
 between a servicer and a securitization vehicle or 
 investor, a servicer--
 (i) shall not be limited in the ability to 
 modify mortgages, the number of mortgages that 
 can be modified, the frequency of loan 
 modifications, or the range of permissible 
 modifications; and
 (ii) shall not be obligated to repurchase 
 loans from or otherwise make payments to the 
 securitization vehicle on account of a 
 modification, workout, or other loss mitigation 
 plan for a residential mortgage or a class of 
 residential mortgages that constitute a part or 
 all of the mortgages in the securitization 
 vehicle,
 if any mortgage so modified meets all of the criteria 
 set forth in subparagraph (B).
 (B) Criteria.--The criteria under this subparagraph 
 with respect to a mortgage are as follows:
 (i) Default on the payment of such mortgage 
 has occurred or is reasonably foreseeable.
 (ii) The property securing such mortgage is 
 occupied by the mortgagor of such mortgage.
 (iii) The servicer reasonably and in good 
 faith believes that the anticipated recovery on 
 the principal outstanding obligation of the 
 mortgage under the particular modification or 
 workout plan or other loss mitigation action 
 will exceed, on a net present value basis, the 
 anticipated recovery on the principal 
 outstanding obligation of the mortgage to be 
 realized through foreclosure.
 (3) Applicability.--This subsection shall apply only with 
 respect to modifications, workouts, and other loss mitigation 
 plans initiated before January 1, 2012.
 (b) Reporting.--Each servicer that engages in loan modifications or 
workout plans subject to the safe harbor in subsection (a) shall report 
to the Secretary on a regular basis regarding the extent, scope and 
results of the servicer's modification activities. The Secretary shall 
prescribe regulations specifying the form, content, and timing of such 
reports.
 (c) Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the following 
definitions shall apply:
 (1) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of the Treasury.
 (2) Securitization vehicle.--The term ``securitization 
 vehicle'' means a trust, corporation, partnership, limited 
 liability entity, special purpose entity, or other structure 
 that--
 (A) is the issuer, or is created by the issuer, of 
 mortgage pass-through certificates, participation 
 certificates, mortgage-backed securities, or other 
 similar securities backed by a pool of assets that 
 includes residential mortgage loans; and
 (B) holds such mortgages.

SEC. 202. CHANGES TO HOPE FOR HOMEOWNERS PROGRAM.

 (a) Program Changes.--Section 257 of the National Housing Act (12 
U.S.C. 1715z-23) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in the heading for paragraph (1), by striking 
 ``the board'' and inserting ``secretary'';
 (B) in paragraph (1), by striking ``Board'' 
 inserting ``Secretary, after consultation with the 
 Board,''; and
 (C) by adding after paragraph (2) the following:
 ``(3) Duties of board.--The Board shall advise the 
 Secretary regarding the establishment and implementation of the 
 HOPE for Homeowners Program.''.
 (2) by striking ``Board'' each place such term appears in 
 subsections (e), (h)(1), (h)(3), (j), (l), (n), (s)(3), and (v) 
 and inserting ``Secretary'';
 (3) in subsection (e)--
 (A) by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(1) Borrower certification.--
 ``(A) No intentional default or false 
 information.--The mortgagor shall provide a 
 certification to the Secretary that the mortgagor has 
 not intentionally defaulted on the existing mortgage or 
 mortgages and has not knowingly, or willfully and with 
 actual knowledge, furnished material information known 
 to be false for the purpose of obtaining the eligible 
 mortgage to be insured and has not been convicted under 
 Federal or State law for fraud during the 10-year 
 period ending upon the insurance of the mortgage under 
 this section.
 ``(B) Liability for repayment.--The mortgagor shall 
 agree in writing that the mortgagor shall be liable to 
 repay to the Secretary any direct financial benefit 
 achieved from the reduction of indebtedness on the 
 existing mortgage or mortgages on the residence 
 refinanced under this section derived from 
 misrepresentations made by the mortgagor in the 
 certifications and documentation required under this 
 paragraph, subject to the discretion of the 
 Secretary.'';
 (B) in paragraph (4)(A), by striking ``; subject to 
 standards established by the Board under subparagraph 
 (B),'';
 (C) in paragraph (7), by striking ``and provided 
 that'' and all that follows through ``new second lien'' 
 and inserting ``and except that the Secretary may, 
 under such terms and conditions as the Secretary may 
 establish, permit the establishment of a second lien on 
 a property under an eligible mortgage to be insured, 
 for the purpose of facilitating payment of closing or 
 refinancing costs by a State or locality using funds 
 provided under the HOME Investment Partnerships program 
 under title II of the Cranston-Gonzalez National 
 Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 12721 et seq.) or the 
 community development block grants program under title 
 I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 
 (42 U.S.C. 5301 et seq.) or by a State or local housing 
 finance agency'';
 (D) in paragraph (9)--
 (i) by striking ``by procuring (A) an 
 income tax return transcript of the income tax 
 return of the mortgagor, or (B)'' and inserting 
 ``in accordance with procedures and standards 
 that the Secretary shall establish, which may 
 include requiring the mortgagee to procure''; 
 and
 (ii) by striking ``and by any other method, 
 in accordance with procedures and standards 
 that the Board shall establish'';
 (E) by striking subparagraph (10);
 (F) in paragraph (11), by inserting before the 
 period at the end the following: ``, except that the 
 Secretary may provide exceptions to such latter 
 requirement (relating to present ownership interest) 
 for any mortgagor who has inherited a property or for 
 any mortgagor who has relocated to a new jurisdiction, 
 and is in the process of trying to sell such property 
 or has been unable to sell such property due to adverse 
 market conditions'';
 (G) by redesignating paragraph (11) as paragraph 
 (10); and
 (H) by adding at the end:
 ``(11) Ban on millionaires.--The mortgagor shall not have a 
 net worth, as of the date the mortgagor first applies for a 
 mortgage to be insured under the Program under this section, 
 that exceeds $1,000,000.'';
 (4) in subsection (h)(2)--
 (A) by striking ``The Board shall prohibit the 
 Secretary from paying'' and inserting ``The Secretary 
 shall not pay''; and
 (B) by inserting after the period at the end the 
 following: ``In implementing this provision with 
 respect to a failure by a mortgagor to make a first 
 payment, the Secretary shall establish policies and 
 timing of endorsements as consistent as is possible 
 with endorsement policies established with respect to 
 mortgages insured under section 203(b)'';
 (5) in subsection (i)--
 (A) by inserting ``, after weighing maximization of 
 participation with consideration of collection of 
 premiums,'' after ``Secretary shall'';
 (B) in paragraph (1), by striking ``equal to 3 
 percent'' and inserting ``not more than 2 percent''; 
 and
 (C) in paragraph (2), by striking ``equal to 1.5 
 percent'' and inserting ``not more than 1 percent'';
 (6) in subsection (k)--
 (A) by striking the subsection heading and 
 inserting ``Exit Fee'';
 (B) in paragraph (1), in the matter preceding 
 subparagraph (A), by striking ``such sale or 
 refinancing'' and inserting ``the mortgage being 
 insured under this section''; and
 (C) in paragraph (2), by striking ``and the 
 mortgagor'' and all that follows through the end and 
 inserting ``may, upon any sale or disposition of the 
 property to which the mortgage relates, be entitled to 
 up to 50 percent of appreciation, up to the appraised 
 value of the home at the time when the mortgage being 
 refinanced under this section was originally made. The 
 Secretary may share any amounts received under this 
 paragraph with the holder of the eligible mortgage 
 refinanced under this section.'';
 (7) in the heading for subsection (n), by striking ``the 
 Board'' and inserting ``Secretary'';
 (8) in subsection (p), by striking ``Under the direction of 
 the Board, the'' and inserting ``The'';
 (9) in subsection (s)--
 (A) in the first sentence of paragraph (2), by 
 striking ``Board of Directors of'' and inserting 
 ``Advisory Board for''; and
 (B) in paragraph (3)(A)(ii), by striking 
 ``subsection (e)(1)(B) and such other'' and inserting 
 ``such'';
 (10) in subsection (v), by inserting after the period at 
 the end the following: ``The Secretary shall conform documents, 
 forms, and procedures for mortgages insured under this section 
 to those in place for mortgages insured under section 203(b) to 
 the maximum extent possible consistent with the requirements of 
 this section.''; and
 (11) by adding at the end the following new subsections:
 ``(x) Payment to Existing Loan Servicer.--The Secretary may 
establish a payment to the servicer of the existing senior mortgage for 
every loan insured under the HOPE for Homeowners Program in an amount, 
for each such loan, that does not exceed $1,000.
 ``(y) Auctions.--The Secretary, with the concurrence of the Board, 
shall, if feasible, establish a structure and organize procedures for 
an auction to refinance eligible mortgages on a wholesale or bulk 
basis.''.
 (b) Reducing TARP Funds To Offset Costs of Program Changes.--
Paragraph (3) of section 115(a) of the Emergency Economic Stabilization 
Act of 2008 (12 U.S.C. 5225) is amended by inserting ``, as such amount 
is reduced by $2,316,000,000,'' after ``$700,000,000,000''.

SEC. 203. REQUIREMENTS FOR FHA-APPROVED MORTGAGEES.

 (a) Mortgagee Review Board.--Paragraph (2) of section 202(c) of the 
National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1708(c)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (E), by inserting ``and'' after the 
 semicolon;
 (2) in subparagraph (F), by striking ``; and'' and 
 inserting a period; and
 (3) by striking subparagraph (G).
 (b) Limitations on Participation and Mortgagee Approval and Use of 
Name.--Section 202 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1708) is 
amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsections (d), (e), and (f) as 
 subsections (e), (f), and (g), respectively;
 (2) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(d) Limitations on Participation in Origination and Mortgagee 
Approval.--
 ``(1) Requirement.--Any person or entity that is not 
 approved by the Secretary to serve as a mortgagee, as such term 
 is defined in subsection (c)(7), shall not participate in the 
 origination of an FHA-insured loan except as authorized by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(2) Eligibility for approval.--In order to be eligible 
 for approval by the Secretary, an applicant mortgagee shall not 
 be, and shall not have any officer, partner, director, 
 principal, manager, supervisor, loan processor, loan 
 underwriter, or loan originator of the applicant mortgagee who 
 is--
 ``(A) currently suspended, debarred, under a 
 limited denial of participation (LDP), or otherwise 
 restricted under part 24 or 25 of title 24 of the Code 
 of Federal Regulations, or any successor regulations to 
 such parts, or under similar provisions of any other 
 Federal agency;
 ``(B) under indictment for, or has been convicted 
 of, an offense that reflects adversely upon the 
 applicant's integrity, competence or fitness to meet 
 the responsibilities of an approved mortgagee;
 ``(C) subject to unresolved findings contained in a 
 Department of Housing and Urban Development or other 
 governmental audit, investigation, or review;
 ``(D) engaged in business practices that do not 
 conform to generally accepted practices of prudent 
 mortgagees or that demonstrate irresponsibility;
 ``(E) convicted of, or who has pled guilty or nolo 
 contendre to, a felony related to participation in the 
 real estate or mortgage loan industry--
 ``(i) during the 7-year period preceding 
 the date of the application for licensing and 
 registration; or
 ``(ii) at any time preceding such date of 
 application, if such felony involved an act of 
 fraud, dishonesty, or a breach of trust, or 
 money laundering;
 ``(F) in violation of provisions of the S.A.F.E. 
 Mortgage Licensing Act of 2008 (12 U.S.C. 5101 et seq.) 
 or any applicable provision of State law; or
 ``(G) in violation of any other requirement as 
 established by the Secretary.
 ``(3) Rulemaking and implementation.--The Secretary shall 
 conduct a rulemaking to carry out this subsection. The 
 Secretary shall implement this subsection not later than the 
 expiration of the 60-day period beginning upon the date of the 
 enactment of this subsection by notice, mortgagee letter, or 
 interim final regulations, which shall take effect upon 
 issuance.''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(h) Use of Name.--The Secretary shall, by regulation, require 
each mortgagee approved by the Secretary for participation in the FHA 
mortgage insurance programs of the Secretary--
 ``(1) to use the business name of the mortgagee that is 
 registered with the Secretary in connection with such approval 
 in all advertisements and promotional materials, as such terms 
 are defined by the Secretary, relating to the business of such 
 mortgagee in such mortgage insurance programs; and
 ``(2) to maintain copies of all such advertisements and 
 promotional materials, in such form and for such period as the 
 Secretary requires.''.
 (c) Change of Status.--The National Housing Act is amended by 
striking section 532 (12 U.S.C. 1735f-10) and inserting the following 
new section:

``SEC. 532. CHANGE OF MORTGAGEE STATUS.

 ``(a) Notification.--Upon the occurrence of any action described in 
subsection (b), an approved mortgagee shall immediately submit to the 
Secretary, in writing, notification of such occurrence.
 ``(b) Actions.--The actions described in this subsection are as 
follows:
 ``(1) The debarment, suspension of a Limited Denial of 
 Participation (LDP), or application of other sanctions, fines, 
 or penalties applied to the mortgagee or to any officer, 
 partner, director, principal, manager, supervisor, loan 
 processor, loan underwriter, or loan originator of the 
 mortgagee pursuant to applicable provisions of State or Federal 
 law.
 ``(2) The revocation of a State-issued mortgage loan 
 originator license issued pursuant to the S.A.F.E. Mortgage 
 Licensing Act of 2008 (12 U.S.C. 5101 et seq.) or any other 
 similar declaration of ineligibility pursuant to State law.''.
 (d) Civil Money Penalties.--Section 536 of the National Housing Act 
(12 U.S.C. 1735f-14) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in the matter preceding subparagraph 
 (A), by inserting ``or any of its owners, 
 officers, or directors'' after ``mortgagee or 
 lender'';
 (ii) in subparagraph (H), by striking 
 ``title I'' and all that follows through ``Act 
 of 1989)'' and inserting ``title I or II''; and
 (iii) by inserting after subparagraph (J) 
 the following:
 ``(K) Violation of section 202(d) of this Act (12 
 U.S.C. 1708(d)).''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``or'' 
 at the end;
 (ii) in subparagraph (C), by striking the 
 period at the end and inserting ``; or''; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following 
 new subparagraph:
 ``(D) causing or participating in any of the 
 violations set forth in paragraph (1) of this 
 subsection.''; and
 (2) in subsection (g), by striking ``The term'' and all 
 that follows through the end of the sentence and inserting 
 ``For purposes of this section, a person acts knowingly when a 
 person has actual knowledge of acts or should have known of the 
 acts.''.
 (e) Expanded Review of FHA Mortgagee Applicants and Newly Approved 
Mortgagees.--Not later than the expiration of the 3-month period 
beginning upon the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of 
Housing and Urban Development shall--
 (1) expand the existing process for reviewing new 
 applicants for approval for participation in the mortgage 
 insurance programs of the Secretary for mortgages on 1- to 4-
 family residences for the purpose of identifying applicants who 
 represent a high risk to the Mutual Mortgage Insurance Fund; 
 and
 (2) implement procedures that, for mortgagees approved 
 during the 12-month period ending upon such date of enactment--
 (A) expand the number of mortgages originated by 
 such mortgagees that are reviewed for compliance with 
 applicable laws, regulations, and policies; and
 (B) include a process for random reviews of such 
 mortgagees and a process for reviews that is based on 
 volume of mortgages originated by such mortgagees.

SEC. 204. ENHANCEMENT OF LIQUIDITY AND STABILITY OF INSURED DEPOSITORY 
 INSTITUTIONS TO ENSURE AVAILABILITY OF CREDIT AND 
 REDUCTION OF FORECLOSURES.

 (a) Permanent Increase in Deposit Insurance.--
 (1) Amendments to federal deposit insurance act.--Effective 
 upon the date of the enactment of this Act, section 11(a) of 
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1821(a)) is 
 amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1)(E), by striking ``$100,000'' 
 and inserting ``$250,000'';
 (B) in paragraph (1)(F)(i), by striking ``2010'' 
 and inserting ``2015'';
 (C) in subclause (I) of paragraph (1)(F)(i), by 
 striking ``$100,000'' and inserting ``$250,000'';
 (D) in subclause (II) of paragraph (1)(F)(i), by 
 striking ``the calendar year preceding the date this 
 subparagraph takes effect under the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Reform Act of 2005'' and inserting ``calendar 
 year 2008''; and
 (E) in paragraph (3)(A), by striking ``, except 
 that $250,000 shall be substituted for $100,000 
 wherever such term appears in such paragraph''.
 (2) Amendment to federal credit union act.--Section 207(k) 
 of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1787(k)) is 
 amended--
 (A) in paragraph (3)--
 (i) by striking the opening quotation mark 
 before ``$250,000'';
 (ii) by striking ``, except that $250,000 
 shall be substituted for $100,000 wherever such 
 term appears in such section''; and
 (iii) by striking the closing quotation 
 mark after the closing parenthesis; and
 (B) in paragraph (5), by striking ``$100,000'' and 
 inserting ``$250,000''.
 (3) Repeal of eesa provision.--Section 136 of the Emergency 
 Economic Stabilization Act (12 U.S.C. 5241) is hereby repealed.
 (b) Extension of Restoration Plan Period.--Section 7(b)(3)(E)(ii) 
of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1817(b)(3)(E)(ii)) is 
amended by striking ``5-year period'' and inserting ``8-year period''.
 (c) FDIC and NCUA Borrowing Authority.--
 (1) FDIC.--Section 14(a) of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1824(a)) is amended by striking 
 ``$30,000,000,000'' and inserting ``$100,000,000,000''.
 (2) NCUA.--Section 203(d)(1) of the Federal Credit Union 
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1783(d)(1)) is amended by striking 
 ``$100,000,000'' and inserting ``$6,000,000,000''.
 (d) Expanding Systemic Risk Special Assessments.--Section 
13(c)(4)(G)(ii) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 
1823(c)(4)(G)(ii)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(ii) Repayment of loss.--
 ``(I) In general.--The Corporation 
 shall recover the loss to the Deposit 
 Insurance Fund arising from any action 
 taken or assistance provided with 
 respect to an insured depository 
 institution under clause (i) from 1 or 
 more special assessments on insured 
 depository institutions, depository 
 institution holding companies (with the 
 concurrence of the Secretary of the 
 Treasury with respect to holding 
 companies), or both, as the Corporation 
 determines to be appropriate.
 ``(II) Treatment of depository 
 institution holding companies.--For 
 purposes of this clause, sections 
 7(c)(2) and 18(h) shall apply to 
 depository institution holding 
 companies as if they were insured 
 depository institutions.
 ``(III) Regulations.--The 
 Corporation shall prescribe such 
 regulations as it deems necessary to 
 implement this clause. In prescribing 
 such regulations, defining terms, and 
 setting the appropriate assessment rate 
 or rates, the Corporation shall 
 establish rates sufficient to cover the 
 losses incurred as a result of the 
 actions of the Corporation under clause 
 (i) and shall consider: the types of 
 entities that benefit from any action 
 taken or assistance provided under this 
 subparagraph; economic conditions, the 
 effects on the industry, and such other 
 factors as the Corporation deems 
 appropriate and relevant to the action 
 taken or the assistance provided. Any 
 funds so collected that exceed actual 
 losses shall be placed in the Deposit 
 Insurance Fund.''.
 (e) Establishment of a National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund 
Restoration Plan Period.--Section 202(c)(2) of the Federal Credit Union 
Act (12 U.S.C. 1782(c)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new subparagraph:
 ``(D) Fund restoration plans.--
 ``(i) In general.--Whenever--
 ``(I) the Board projects that the 
 equity ratio of the Fund will, within 6 
 months of such determination, fall 
 below the minimum amount specified in 
 subparagraph (C) for the designated 
 equity ratio; or
 ``(II) the equity ratio of the Fund 
 actually falls below the minimum amount 
 specified in subparagraph (C) for the 
 equity ratio without any determination 
 under sub-clause (I) having been made,
 the Board shall establish and implement a Share 
 Insurance Fund restoration plan within 90 days 
 that meets the requirements of clause (ii) and 
 such other conditions as the Board determines 
 to be appropriate.
 ``(ii) Requirements of restoration plan.--A 
 Share Insurance Fund restoration plan meets the 
 requirements of this clause if the plan 
 provides that the equity ratio of the Fund will 
 meet or exceed the minimum amount specified in 
 subparagraph (C) for the designated equity 
 ratio before the end of the 5-year period 
 beginning upon the implementation of the plan 
 (or such longer period as the Board may 
 determine to be necessary due to extraordinary 
 circumstances).
 ``(iii) Transparency.--Not more than 30 
 days after the Board establishes and implements 
 a restoration plan under clause (i), the Board 
 shall publish in the Federal Register a 
 detailed analysis of the factors considered and 
 the basis for the actions taken with regard to 
 the plan.''.

SEC. 205. APPLICATION OF GSE CONFORMING LOAN LIMIT TO MORTGAGES 
 ASSISTED WITH TARP FUNDS.

 In making any assistance available to prevent and mitigate 
foreclosures on residential properties, including any assistance for 
mortgage modifications, using any amounts made available to the 
Secretary of the Treasury under title I of the Emergency Economic 
Stabilization Act of 2008, the Secretary shall provide that the 
limitation on the maximum original principal obligation of a mortgage 
that may be modified, refinanced, made, guaranteed, insured, or 
otherwise assisted, using such amounts shall not be less than the 
dollar amount limitation on the maximum original principal obligation 
of a mortgage that may be purchased by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage 
Corporation that is in effect, at the time that the mortgage is 
modified, refinanced, made, guaranteed, insured, or otherwise assisted 
using such amounts, for the area in which the property involved in the 
transaction is located.

SEC. 206. MORTGAGES ON CERTAIN HOMES ON LEASED LAND.

 Section 255(b)(4) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1715z-
20(b)(4)) is amended by striking subparagraph (B) and inserting:
 ``(B) under a lease that has a term that ends no 
 earlier than the minimum number of years, as specified 
 by the Secretary, beyond the actuarial life expectancy 
 of the mortgagor or comortgagor, whichever is the later 
 date.''.

SEC. 207. SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING MORTGAGE REVENUE BOND PURCHASES.

 It is the sense of the Congress that the Secretary of the Treasury 
should use amounts made available in this Act to purchase mortgage 
revenue bonds for single-family housing issued through State housing 
finance agencies and through units of local government and agencies 
thereof.

 TITLE III--MORTGAGE FRAUD

SEC. 301. SHORT TITLE.

 This title may be cited as the ``Nationwide Mortgage Fraud Task 
Force Act of 2009''.

SEC. 302. NATIONWIDE MORTGAGE FRAUD TASK FORCE.

 (a) Establishment.--There is established in the Department of 
Justice the Nationwide Mortgage Fraud Task Force (hereinafter referred 
to in this section as the ``Task Force'') to address mortgage fraud in 
the United States.
 (b) Support.--The Attorney General shall provide the Task Force 
with the appropriate staff, administrative support, and other resources 
necessary to carry out the duties of the Task Force.
 (c) Executive Director.--The Attorney General shall appoint one 
staff member provided to the Task Force to be the Executive Director of 
the Task Force and such Executive Director shall ensure that the duties 
of the Task Force are carried out.
 (d) Branches.--The Task Force shall establish, oversee, and direct 
branches in each of the 10 States determined by the Attorney General to 
have the highest concentration of mortgage fraud.
 (e) Mandatory Functions.--The Task Force, including the branches of 
the Task Force established under subsection (d), shall--
 (1) establish coordinating entities, and solicit the 
 voluntary participation of Federal, State, and local law 
 enforcement and prosecutorial agencies in such entities, to 
 organize initiatives to address mortgage fraud, including 
 initiatives to enforce State mortgage fraud laws and other 
 related Federal and State laws;
 (2) provide training to Federal, State, and local law 
 enforcement and prosecutorial agencies with respect to mortgage 
 fraud, including related Federal and State laws;
 (3) collect and disseminate data with respect to mortgage 
 fraud, including Federal, State, and local data relating to 
 mortgage fraud investigations and prosecutions; and
 (4) perform other functions determined by the Attorney 
 General to enhance the detection of, prevention of, and 
 response to mortgage fraud in the United States.
 (f) Optional Functions.--The Task Force, including the branches of 
the Task Force established under subsection (d), may--
 (1) initiate and coordinate Federal mortgage fraud 
 investigations and, through the coordinating entities 
 established under subsection (e), State and local mortgage 
 fraud investigations;
 (2) establish a toll-free hotline for--
 (A) reporting mortgage fraud;
 (B) providing the public with access to information 
 and resources with respect to mortgage fraud; and
 (C) directing reports of mortgage fraud to the 
 appropriate Federal, State, and local law enforcement 
 and prosecutorial agency, including to the appropriate 
 branch of the Task Force established under subsection 
 (d);
 (3) create a database with respect to suspensions and 
 revocations of mortgage industry licenses and certifications to 
 facilitate the sharing of such information by States;
 (4) make recommendations with respect to the need for and 
 resources available to provide the equipment and training 
 necessary for the Task Force to combat mortgage fraud; and
 (5) propose legislation to Federal, State, and local 
 legislative bodies with respect to the elimination and 
 prevention of mortgage fraud, including measures to address 
 mortgage loan procedures and property appraiser practices that 
 provide opportunities for mortgage fraud.
 (g) Definition.--In this section, the term ``mortgage fraud'' means 
a material misstatement, misrepresentation, or omission relating to the 
property or potential mortgage relied on by an underwriter or lender to 
fund, purchase, or insure a loan.

 TITLE IV--FORECLOSURE MORATORIUM PROVISIONS

SEC. 401. SENSE OF THE CONGRESS ON FORECLOSURES.

 (a) In General.--It is the sense of the Congress that mortgage 
holders, institutions, and mortgage servicers should not initiate a 
foreclosure proceeding or a foreclosure sale on any homeowner until the 
foreclosure mitigation provisions, like the Hope for Homeowners 
program, as required under title II, and the President's ``Homeowner 
Affordability and Stability Plan'' have been implemented and determined 
to be operational by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and 
the Secretary of the Treasury.
 (b) Scope of Moratorium.--The foreclosure moratorium referred to in 
subsection (a) should apply only for first mortgages secured by the 
owner's principal dwelling.
 (c) FHA-Regulated Loan Modification Agreements.--If a mortgage 
holder, institution, or mortgage servicer to which subsection (a) 
applies reaches a loan modification agreement with a homeowner under 
the auspices of the Federal Housing Administration before any plan 
referred to in such subsection takes effect, subsection (a) shall cease 
to apply to such institution as of the effective date of the loan 
modification agreement.
 (d) Duty of Consumer to Maintain Property.--Any homeowner for whose 
benefit any foreclosure proceeding or sale is barred under subsection 
(a) from being instituted, continued , or consummated with respect to 
any homeowner mortgage should not, with respect to any property 
securing such mortgage, destroy, damage, or impair such property, allow 
the property to deteriorate, or commit waste on the property.
 (e) Duty of Consumer to Respond to Reasonable Inquiries.--Any 
homeowner for whose benefit any foreclosure proceeding or sale is 
barred under subsection (a) from being instituted, continued, or 
consummated with respect to any homeowner mortgage should respond to 
reasonable inquiries from a creditor or servicer during the period 
during which such foreclosure proceeding or sale is barred.
 Calendar No. 51

111th CONGRESS

 1st Session

 S. 895

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To prevent mortgage foreclosures and enhance mortgage credit 
 availability.

_______________________________________________________________________

 April 27, 2009

 Read the second time and placed on the calendar