HR 2937 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2937
To regulate interstate commerce by providing for uniform treatment of selected
product liability problems, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
JULY 17, 1991
Mr. ROTH introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the
Committees on the Judiciary and Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To regulate interstate commerce by providing for uniform treatment of selected
product liability problems, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Product Liability Uniform Standards Act'.
SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act--
 (1) the term `claimant' means any person who brings a product liability
 action, and if such action is brought through or on behalf of an estate,
 the term includes the claimant's decedent, or if such an action is brought
 through or on behalf of a minor, the term includes the claimant's patent
 or guardian;
 (2) the term `clear and convincing evidence' is that measure or degree of
 proof that will produce in the mind of the trier of fact a firm belief or
 conviction as to the truth of the allegations sought to be established;
 the level of proof required to satisfy this standard is more than that
 required under preponderance of the evidence, but less than that required
 for proof beyond a reasonable doubt;
 (3) the term `commerce' means trade, traffic, commerce, or transportation
 (A) between a place in a State and any place outside of that State; or
 (B) which affects trade, commerce, or transportation described in clause (A);
 (4) the term `manufacturer' means (A) any person who is engaged in a business
 to design or formulate and to produce, create, make, or construct any product
 (or component part of a product); (B) a product seller with respect to all
 aspects of a product (or component part of a product) which are created
 or affected when, before placing the product in the stream of commerce,
 the product seller designs or formulates and produces, creates, makes
 or constructs an aspect of a product (or component part of a product)
 made by another; or (C) any product seller not described in clause (B)
 which holds itself out as a manufacturer to the user of the product;
 (5) the term `person' means any individual corporation, company, association,
 firm, partnership, society, joint stock company, or any other entity
 (including any governmental entity);
 (6) the term `preponderance of the evidence' is that measure or degree of
 proof which, by the weight, credit, and value of the aggregate evidence
 on either side, establishes that it is more probable than not that a fact
 occurred or did not occur;
 (7) the term `product' means any object, substance, mixture or raw material
 in a gaseous, liquid or solid state which is capable of delivering itself,
 or as an assembled whole in a mixed or combined state or as a component part
 or ingredient, which is produced for introduction into trade or commerce,
 which has intrinsic economic value, and which is intended for sale or
 lease to persons for commercial or personal use;
 (8) the term `product seller' means a person who, in the course of a business
 conducted for that purpose, sells, distributes, leases, installs, prepares,
 blends, packages, labels, markets, repairs, maintains, or otherwise is
 involved in placing a product in the stream of commerce;
 (9) the term `State' means any State of the United States, the District
 of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam,
 American Samoa, the Northern Mariana Islands, the Trust Territory of the
 Pacific Islands, and any other territory or possession of the United States,
 or any political subdivision thereof.
SEC. 3. PREEMPTION OF OTHER LAWS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- (1) This Act supersedes any State law regarding recovery
 for any loss or damage caused by a product to the extent that this Act
 establishes a rule of law applicable to any civil action brought against
 a manufacturer or product seller for loss or damage caused by a product.
 (2) This Act shall not be construed to waive or affect any defense of
 sovereign immunity asserted by any State under any provision of law.
 (3) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to supersede any Federal law,
 except the Federal Employees Compensation Act.
 (4) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to waive or affect any defense
 of sovereign immunity asserted by the United States.
 (5) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to affect the applicability
 of any provision of the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976 (28
 U.S.C. 1602 et seq.).
 (b) ENVIRONMENTAL LAWS- (1) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to
 supersede--
 (A) any environmental protection law that authorizes a State or a person
 to institute an action for civil damages, civil penalties, injunctions,
 restitution, cost recovery, punitive damages, or any other form of relief
 resulting from contamination or pollution of the environment, or the
 threat of such contamination or pollution, caused by any product defined
 by State or Federal law as a toxic substance or waste, hazardous substance
 or material, hazardous waste or other contaminant or pollutant;
 (B) a right arising under the common law of a State to bring an action to
 abate a nuisance or otherwise protect against contamination or pollution
 of the environment, or the threat of such contamination or pollution,
 caused by any product; or
 (C) any law relating to a civil action for loss or damage, cleanup costs,
 civil penalties or injunctive relief, if the loss or damage for which a
 remedy is sought was caused by the release into the environment, or the
 threat of release into the environment, of a toxic substance or waste,
 hazardous substance or material, hazardous waste or other contaminant
 or pollutant.
 (2) As used in this subsection--
 (A) the term `contaminant or pollutant' includes (i) anything defined or
 designated as a contaminant or pollutant under any Federal or State law,
 and (ii) any element, substance, compound, mixture, or organism which,
 after release into the environment and upon exposure, ingestion, inhalation,
 impact, attachment, or assimilation into any organism either directly from
 the environment or indirectly by ingestion through food chains, will or
 may reasonably be anticipated to cause death, disease, injury, behavioral
 abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutation, physiological malfunctions
 (including malfunctions in reproduction), or physical deformations, in
 such organisms or their offspring;
 (B) the term `environment' has the meaning given to such term in section
 101(8) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
 Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601(8));
 (C) the term `hazardous waste' has the meaning given to such term in
 section 101(29) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation,
 and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601(14));
 (D) the term `hazardous waste' has the meaning given to such term in
 section 101(29) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation,
 and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601(29));
 (E) the term `law' means any law or authority, whether statutory or
 common; and
 (F) the term `release' has the meaning given to such term in section 101(22)
 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability
 Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601(22)), and, in addition, the term includes any
 depositing or placing into the environment.
SEC. 4. LIABILITY.
 In any product liability action in which the claimant alleges that the
 product is defective because of improper design, failure to warn, or failure
 to provide adequate instructions, the manufacturer or product seller shall be
 liable to the claimant only if the claimant establishes by a preponderance
 of the evidence that the manufacturer or the product seller was negligent,
 in that the conduct which brought about the defective condition of the
 product resulted from the failure to act as a reasonable manufacturer
 or product seller under the same or similar circumstances. The standard
 of care set forth herein shall govern whether the action is based on (1)
 strict liability or absolute liability; (2) breach of implied warranty of
 merchantability; or (3) breach of implied warranty of fitness for particular
 purpose. Nothing set forth herein shall prevent a claimant from bringing
 a cause of action for express warranty or any intentional tort.
SEC. 5. RESPONSIBILITY OF PRODUCT SELLERS.
 A product seller shall be treated as the manufacturer of a product and
 shall be liable for harm to the claimant caused by a product as if it were
 the manufacturer of the product if--
 (1) the manufacturer is not subject to service of process under the laws
 of the State in which the action is brought; or
 (2) the court determines that there is a reasonable likelihood that the
 claimant would be unable to enforce a judgment against the manufacturer.
SEC. 6. EFFECT OF WORKER'S COMPENSATION BENEFITS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- In the case of any product liability claim brought by or
 on behalf of an injured person entitled to compensation under any State
 or Federal worker compensation law, damages shall be reduced by the amount
 paid as worker compensation benefits for the same injury plus the present
 value of all future worker compensation benefits payable for the same
 injury under the worker compensation law.
 (b) SUBROGATION, CONTRIBUTION, IMPLIED INDEMNITY- Unless the manufacturer
 or product seller has expressly agreed to indemnify or hold an employer
 harmless for harm to an employee caused by a product, neither the employer
 nor the worker's compensation insurance carrier of the employer shall have
 a right of subrogation, contribution, or implied indemnity against the
 manufacture or product seller or a lien against the claimant's recovery
 from the manufacturer or product seller, if the harm arose from the sale
 of a defective product by the manufacturer or product seller.
 (c) THIRD-PARTY TORTFEASOR- In any product liability action in which
 damages are sought for harm for which the person injured is or would have
 been entitled to receive compensation under any State or Federal worker's
 compensation law, no third-party tortfeasor may maintain any action for
 implied indemnity or contribution against the employer or any coemployee
 of the person who was injured.
SEC. 7. PUNITIVE DAMAGES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Punitive damages may be awarded to the claimant if the
 claimant proves by clear and convincing evidence that the harm suffered
 was the result of the product manufacturer's or seller's reckless disregard
 for the safety of product users, consumers, or others who might be harmed
 by the product.
 (b) TRIER OF FACT- The trier of fact shall determine whether punitive
 damages should be awarded, and the amount of those damages, if any. In
 making this determination, the trier of fact shall consider--
 (1) the likelihood at the relevant time that serious harm would arise from
 the product manufacturer's or seller's misconduct,
 (2) the degree of the product manufacturer's or seller's awareness of
 that likelihood,
 (3) the profitability of the misconduct to the product manufacturer
 or seller,
 (4) the duration of the misconduct and any concealment of it by the product
 manufacturer or seller,
 (5) the attitude and conduct of the product manufacturer or seller upon
 discovery of the misconduct and whether the conduct has been terminated,
 (6) the financial condition of the product manufacturer or seller,
 (7) the total effect of other punishment imposed or likely to be imposed
 upon the product manufacturer or seller as a result of the misconduct,
 including punitive damage awards to persons similarly situated to the
 claimant and the severity of criminal penalties to which the product seller
 has been or may be subjected, and
 (8) whether the harm suffered by the claimant was also the result of the
 claimant's own reckless disregard for personal safety.
SEC. 8. PRODUCT LIABILITY REVIEW PANEL.
 (a) PANEL- The Judicial Conference of the United States shall establish a
 Product Liability Damages Review Panel (hereinafter in this section referred
 to as the `Panel') to conduct the studies required by this section. The Panel
 shall consist of three individuals selected on the basis of their expertise
 regarding civil actions and recovery for loss or damage caused by a product.
 (b) STUDY- The Panel shall conduct an empirical study of damages in relation
 to the product liability litigation system. As part of this study the
 Panel shall evaluate--
 (1) the nature and adequacy of damages in providing recovery for any loss
 or damage caused by a product,
 (2) the relationship between economic loss and pain and suffering damages,
 (3) whether damage awards differ among product categories and location
 of litigation,
 (4) whether damage awards for economic loss, pain and suffering, and
 punitive damages differ depending on claimants' economic status, sex,
 race, or ethnic origin,
 (5) the financial impact on industry and consumers of punitive damage awards,
 (6) the impact of attorneys' fees on the product liability system, and
 (7) all such other relationships between damages and the operation of the
 product liability system that the Panel shall see fit to investigate.
The results of the study shall be submitted to the Congress within 2 years
after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (c) COMPENSATION- A member of the Panel who is not an officer or employee
 of the Federal Government shall be entitled to receive compensation at
 a rate of basic pay in effect for grade GS-18 of the General Schedule
 pursuant to section 5332 of title 5, United States Code, for each day
 (including travel time) during which the member is engaged in the actual
 performance of the duties of the Panel.
 (d) AUTHORIZATION- There are authorized to be appropriated for the purposes
 of this section such sums as may be necessary in fiscal year 1990. Such
 sums shall remain available until expended.
SEC. 9. REVIEWABILITY.
 It is the intent of the Congress that, in other than exceptional cases,
 the Supreme Court of the United States shall not review issues relating
 solely to the sufficiency of the evidence in cases arising under this Act
 which have been finally decided by the highest court of any State.