HR 3509 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3509
To amend the Solid Waste Disposal Act to provide for the reduction of toxic
metals in packaging.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
October 3, 1991
Mr. WOLPE (for himself, Mr. ECKART, Mr. RINADLO, and Mr. GREEN) introduced
the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Solid Waste Disposal Act to provide for the reduction of toxic
metals in packaging.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Solid Waste Metals Reduction Act'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds the following:
 (1) The management of solid waste can pose a wide range of hazards to
 public health and safety and to the environment.
 (2) Packaging comprises a significant percentage of the overall solid
 waste stream.
 (3) Packaging that contains heavy metals is of special concern, because the
 metals are likely to be present in emissions or ash that may be produced
 when the packaging is incinerated or in leachate that may be produced when
 the packaging is disposed of in a landfill.
 (4) Lead, mercury, cadmium, and hexavalent chromium, on the basis of
 available scientific and medical evidence, are known to cause harmful
 effects on human health and the environment.
 (5) To reduce the toxicity of emissions, ash, and leachate, it is necessary
 as a first step to eliminate the addition of lead, mercury, cadmium,
 and hexavalent chromium to packaging.
 (6) The purpose of this Act is to achieve such a reduction in toxicity
 without impeding or discouraging the expanded use of post-consumer materials
 in the production of packaging and its components.
SEC. 3. TOXIC METALS IN PACKAGING.
 (a) AMENDMENT TO SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL ACT- The Solid Waste Disposal Act
 (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new subtitle:
`Subtitle K--Toxic Metals in Packaging
`SEC. 12001. DEFINITIONS.
 `As used in this subtitle:
 `(1) The term `package' means a container that provides a means of protecting
 or handling a product, including a unit package, an intermediate package,
 a shipping container, and unsealed receptacles, as defined by the American
 Society for Testing and Materials under 1987 designation D996. The term
 includes containers that provide a means of marketing a product, and
 receptacles such as carrying cases, crates, cups, pails, rigid foil and
 other trays, wrappers and wrapping films, bags, and tubs.
 `(2) The term `packaging component' means any individual assembled part of
 a package, including interior or exterior blocking, bracing, cushioning,
 weatherproofing, strapping, closures, labels, and tinplated steel that meets
 the American Society for Testing and Materials 1987 specification A623,
 or any additive to a package, including coatings, inks, dyes, pigments,
 adhesives, and stabilizers.
 `(3) The term `distributor' means a person who takes title to goods
 purchased from a manufacturer or supplier for sale or promotional use.
`SEC. 12002. PROHIBITIONS ON CERTAIN HEAVY METALS IN PACKAGING.
 `(a) PROHIBITION ON ADDITION OF METALS DURING MANUFACTURING OR DISTRIBUTION-
 Except as provided in section 12003, effective 2 years after the date
 of the enactment of the Solid Waste Metals Reduction Act, no person may
 intentionally introduce lead, cadmium, mercury, or hexavalent chromium to
 a package or packaging component during manufacturing or distribution.
 `(b) MAXIMUM CONCENTRATION LEVELS- The sum of the concentration levels of
 lead, cadmium, mercury, and hexavalent chromium present in a package or
 packaging component may not exceed the following:
 `(1) Effective 2 years after the date of the enactment of Solid Waste
 Metals Reduction Act, 600 parts per million by weight (0.06 percent).
 `(2) Effective 3 years after the date of the enactment of such Act, 250
 parts per million by weight (0.025 percent).
 `(3) Effective 4 years after the date of the enactment of such Act, 100
 parts per million by weight (0.01 percent).
`SEC. 12003. EXEMPTIONS.
 `(a) EXEMPT PACKAGES AND PACKAGING COMPONENTS- Section 12002 does not
 apply to the following packages and packaging components:
 `(1) Packages and packaging components with a code indicating that date
 of manufacture was prior to the effective date of section 12002.
 `(2) Packages and packaging components exempted by petition under subsection
 (b).
 `(3) Packages and packaging components containing lead, cadmium, mercury,
 or hexavalent chromium in amounts that would not exceed the maximum
 concentration levels set forth in section 12002(b) but for the addition
 of post-consumer materials.
 `(b) PETITION PROCEDURE- A manufacturer, supplier, or distributor of a
 package or packaging component may petition the Environmental Protection
 Agency for a 2-year exemption from section 12002 for a particular package
 or packaging component on the basis of showing that the addition of lead,
 cadmium, mercury, or hexavalent chromium to the package or packaging
 component during the manufacturing, supply, or distribution process (1)
 is necessary to comply with health or safety requirements of Federal law,
 or (2) is essential for the protection, safe handling, or function of
 the contents of the package. The Administrator may grant the exemption if
 warranted by the circumstances.
 `(c) TERMINATION OF EXEMPTIONS- (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2),
 the exemptions referred to in subsections (a)(2) and (a)(3) shall cease
 to be in effect on and after the expiration of the 6-year period following
 the date of the enactment of the Solid Waste Metals Reduction Act.
 `(2) An exemption referred to in subsection (a)(2) or (a)(3) may be renewed
 for a designated time period after the 6-year period specified in paragraph
 (1) if the Administrator makes a determination under section 12006 that
 the renewed exemption is warranted by the circumstances.
`SEC. 12004. CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
 `(a) MANUFACTURER REQUIREMENTS- (1) Effective 2 years after the date of
 the enactment of the Solid Waste Metals Reduction Act, a manufacturer or
 supplier of a package or packaging component shall certify, with respect
 to each type of package or packaging component manufactured or supplied,
 that the package or component is in compliance with the requirements of
 this subtitle, or, in the case of a package or component that is exempt
 from the requirements of this subtitle pursuant to section 12003, the
 specific basis upon which the exemption is granted. Such certification
 shall be contained in a certificate of compliance signed by an authorized
 official of the manufacturer or supplier.
 `(2) A copy of the certificate shall be kept on file by the manufacturer or
 supplier for as long as the manufacturer or supplier continues to manufacture
 or supply such package or packaging component. If the package or packaging
 component is reformulated or replaced, the certificate shall be kept on
 file until at least 1 year has expired after commencement of distribution
 of the reformulated or replacement package or packaging component.
 `(3) The manufacturer or supplier shall provide to each of its distributors
 a copy of each certificate of compliance required under paragraph (1)
 for packages or packaging components purchased by the distributor.
 `(4) If the manufacturer or supplier of a package or packaging component
 reformulates or creates a new package or packaging component, the
 manufacturer or supplier shall provide an amended or new certificate of
 compliance for the reformulated or new package or packaging component, in
 the same manner as the original certificate was provided under paragraph (1).
 `(b) DISTRIBUTOR REQUIREMENTS- Effective 2 years after the date of the
 enactment of the Solid Waste Metals Reduction Act, a distributor of packages
 or packaging components shall request from the manufacturer or supplier
 of the packages or components the relevant certificates of compliance
 and shall keep such certificates on file for as long as the distributor
 continues to distribute such package or packaging component.
 `(c) AVAILABILITY- (1) The manufacturer, supplier, or distributor of a
 package or packaging component shall provide certificates of compliance,
 or copies thereof, to the Environmental Protection Agency upon its request
 and to members of the public within 60 days after requested in accordance
 with paragraph (2).
 `(2) A request from a member of the public for a copy of a certificate of
 compliance from the manufacturer, supplier, or distributor of a package
 or packaging component shall--
 `(A) be made in writing, with a copy provided to the Administrator; and
 `(B) specify the package or packaging component with respect to which
 compliance is certified in the requested certificate.
`SEC. 12005. ENFORCEMENT.
 `(a) AUTHORITIES OF ADMINISTRATOR- Whenever on the basis of any information
 the Administrator determines that any person has violated or is in violation
 of this subtitle, the Administrator may issue an order assessing a civil
 penalty for any past or current violation, requiring compliance immediately
 or within a specified time period, or both, or the Administrator may commence
 a civil action in the United States district court in the district in which
 the violation occurred for appropriate relief, including a temporary or
 permanent injunction.
 `(b) CIVIL PENALTIES- (1) Any person who violates any requirement of this
 subtitle shall be liable to the United States for a civil penalty in an
 amount not to exceed $25,000 for each such violation. Each day a violation
 continues shall constitute a separate violation.
 `(2) Any person who willfully violates, or fails or refuses to comply with,
 any order of the Administrator under subsection (a) may, in an action
 brought in the appropriate United States district court to enforce such
 order, be fined not more than $25,000 for each day in which such violation
 occurs or such failure to comply continues.
`SEC. 12006. REGULATIONS AND REVIEW BY THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.
 `(a) REGULATIONS- Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of
 the Solid Waste Metals Reduction Act, the Administrator shall promulgate
 regulations to implement this subtitle.
 `(b) REVIEW- The Administrator shall review the effectiveness of this
 subtitle not later than 42 months after the date of the enactment of the
 Solid Waste Metals Reduction Act and shall report to the Congress the
 results of such review. The report shall contain (1) a recommendation
 on whether to renew for a designated time period either or both of the
 exemptions referred to in subsections (a)(2) and (a)(3) of section 12003,
 and (2) a description of the nature of the substitutes used in lieu of
 lead, mercury, cadmium and hexavalent chromium in packaging and packaging
 components. In carrying out the review, the Administrator may request
 from a person subject to this subtitle, and the person shall provide,
 such information as may be necessary to complete the review. The report
 may contain recommendations to add other toxic substances contained in
 packaging and packaging components to the substances covered by this
 subtitle in order to further reduce the toxicity of packaging waste.
`SEC. 12007. NON-PREEMPTION.
 `Nothing in this subtitle shall be construed as prohibiting a State from
 enacting and enforcing a standard or requirement with respect to toxic
 metals in packaging that is more stringent than a standard or requirement
 relating to toxic metals in packaging established or promulgated under
 this subtitle.'.
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- The table of contents for the Solid Waste Disposal
 Act (contained in section 1001 of such Act) is amended by adding at the
 end the following new items:
`Subtitle K--Toxic Metals in Packaging
`Sec. 12001. Definitions.
`Sec. 12002. Prohibitions on certain heavy metals in packaging.
`Sec. 12003. Exemptions.
`Sec. 12004. Certificate of compliance.
`Sec. 12005. Enforcement.
`Sec. 12006. Regulations and review by the Environmental Protection Agency.
`Sec. 12007. Non-preemption.'.