S 1392 CDS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1392
To strengthen the authority of the Federal Trade Commission regarding
fraud committed in connection with sales made with a telephone, and for
other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
JUNE 26 (legislative day, JUNE 11), 1991
Mr. BRYAN (for himself and Mr. MCCAIN) introduced the following bill;
which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation
November 27 (legislative day, NOVEMBER 23), 1991
Committee discharge
A BILL
To strengthen the authority of the Federal Trade Commission regarding
fraud committed in connection with sales made with a telephone, and for
other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SHORT TITLE
 SECTION 1. This Act may be cited as the `Telemarketing and Consumer Fraud
 and Abuse Prevention Act'.
DEFINITIONS
 SEC. 2. As used in this Act, the term--
 (1) `attorney general' means the chief legal officer of a State;
 (2) `Commission' means the Federal Trade Commission;
 (3) `State' means any State of the United States, the District of Columbia,
 Puerto Rico, the Northern Mariana Islands, and any territory or possession
 of the United States;
 (4) `telemarketing' means a plan, program, or campaign which is conducted
 to induce purchases of goods or services by significant use of one or more
 telephones and which has involved interstate telephone calls; the term
 does not include other use of a telephone in connection with business or
 personal transactions, nor does the term include the solicitation of sales
 through the mailing of a catalog which--
 (A) contains a written description or illustration of the goods or services
 offered for sale;
 (B) includes the business address of the seller;
 (C) includes multiple pages of written material or illustrations;
 (D) is issued not less frequently than once a year; and
 (E) is at least the third catalog satisfying the requirements of
 subparagraphs (A) through (D) that has been issued by the seller within
 the last five years,
where the seller does not place calls to customers but only receives calls
initiated by customers in response to the catalog and during those calls
takes orders only without further solicitation; and
 (5) `credit card laundering' means--
 (A) the act or practice by a person engaged in telemarketing (other than an
 act or practice permitted in a valid agreement with a member of a credit
 card system or the member's agent) of transferring to another person to
 be presented to a member of a credit card system or the member's agent,
 for payment, one or more evidences or records of transactions involving
 goods or services offered by telemarketing and paid for by credit card;
 (B) the act or practice by a person acting on behalf of a person engaged in
 telemarketing (other than an act or practice permitted in a valid agreement
 with a member of a credit card system or the member's agent) of causing
 or arranging for a third person to present to a member of a credit card
 system or the member's agent, for payment, one or more evidences or records
 of transactions involving goods or services offered by telemarketing and
 paid for by credit card; or
 (C) such other acts or practices defined in the rules of the Commission
 as credit card laundering.
TELEMARKETING RULES
 SEC. 3. (a) RULES ON TELEMARKETING ACTIVITIES- The Commission shall
 prescribe rules regarding telemarketing activities. In prescribing such
 rules, the Commission shall consider the inclusion of--
 (1) a requirement that goods or services offered by telemarketing be
 shipped or provided within a specified period and that if the goods or
 services are not shipped or provided within such period a refund be required;
 (2) authority for a person who orders a good or service through telemarketing
 to cancel the order within a specified period;
 (3) restrictions on the hours of the day when unsolicited telephone calls
 can be made to consumers;
 (4) a prohibition of telemarketing generated by computers on equipment that
 does not permit the individual called to terminate the telephone call; and
 (5) recordkeeping requirements.
 (b) PROHIBITION OF FRAUDULENT TELEMARKETING ACTS OR PRACTICES- The
 Commission also shall prescribe rules prohibiting fraudulent telemarketing
 acts or practices and shall include in such rules a definition of the term
 `fraudulent telemarketing acts or practices'. Credit card laundering shall
 be a fraudulent telemarketing act or practice.
 (c) DEADLINE; ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE- The Commission shall prescribe
 the rules under subsections (a) and (b) of this section within 180 days
 after the date of enactment of this Act. Such rules shall be prescribed
 in accordance with section 553 of title 5, United States Code.
 (d) TREATMENT OF RULE VIOLATIONS- Any violation of any rule prescribed under
 subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be treated as a violation of
 a rule under section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45)
 regarding unfair or deceptive acts or practices (subject to any remedy or
 penalty applicable to any violation thereof).
 (e) EFFECT ON STATE LAW- The rules promulgated under this section shall
 not be construed as preempting State law.
ACTIONS BY STATE ATTORNEYS GENERAL
 SEC. 4. (a) AUTHORITY OF STATES- Whenever the attorney general of any State
 has reason to believe that the interests of the residents of that State
 have been or are being threatened or adversely affected because any person
 has engaged or is engaging in a pattern or practice of telemarketing which
 violates any rule, regulation, or order of the Commission under this Act,
 the State may bring a civil action on behalf of its residents to enjoin
 such telemarketing, to enforce compliance with any rule, regulation, or
 order of the Commission under this Act, to obtain damages on behalf of
 their residents, or to obtain such further and other relief as the court
 may deem appropriate.
 (b) COURT JURISDICTION- The district courts of the United States, the United
 States courts of any territory, and the District Court of the United States
 for the District of Columbia shall have exclusive jurisdiction over all
 civil actions brought under this section to enforce any liability or duty
 created by any rule, regulation, or order of the Commission under this Act,
 or to obtain damages or other relief with respect thereto. Upon proper
 application, such courts shall also have jurisdiction to issue writs
 of mandamus, or orders affording like relief, commanding the defendant
 to comply with the provisions of any rule, regulation, or order of the
 Commission under this Act, including the requirement that the defendant
 take such action as is necessary to remove the danger of violation of any
 such rule, regulation, or order. Upon a proper showing, a permanent or
 temporary injunction or restraining order shall be granted without bond.
 (c) RIGHTS OF COMMISSION- The State shall serve prior written notice of
 any such civil action upon the Commission and provide the Commission with
 a copy of its complaint, except in any case where such prior notice is
 not feasible, in which case the State shall serve such notice immediately
 upon instituting such action. The Commission shall have the right (1)
 to intervene in the action, (2) upon so intervening, to be heard on all
 matters arising therein, and (3) to file petitions for appeal.
 (d) VENUE; SERVICE OF PROCESS- Any civil action brought under this section
 in a district court of the United States may be brought in the district
 wherein the defendant is found or is an inhabitant or transacts business
 or wherein the telemarketing occurred or is occurring, and process in such
 cases may be served in any district in which the defendant is an inhabitant
 or wherever the defendant may be found.
 (e) EFFECT ON STATE POWERS OF ATTORNEYS GENERAL- For purposes of bringing
 any civil action under this section, nothing in this Act shall prevent the
 attorney general from exercising the powers conferred on the attorney general
 by the laws of such State to conduct investigations or to administer oaths
 or affirmations or to compel the attendance of witnesses or the production
 of documentary and other evidence.
 (f) EFFECT ON ACTIONS UNDER STATE STATUTE- Nothing contained in this
 section shall prohibit an authorized State official from proceeding in
 State court on the basis of an alleged violation of any general civil or
 criminal statute of such State.
 (g) CIVIL ACTION BY COMMISSION- Whenever the Commission has instituted a
 civil action for violation of any rule prescribed under this Act, no State
 may, during the pendency of such action instituted by the Commission,
 subsequently institute a civil action against any defendant named in
 the Commission's complaint for violation of any rule as alleged in the
 Commission's complaint.
ACTIONS BROUGHT BY PRIVATE PERSONS
 SEC. 5. (a) DEFINITION- As used in this section, the term `person adversely
 affected by telemarketing' means--
 (1) any person who has incurred loss or damage in connection with
 telemarketing and who actually purchased goods or services through
 telemarketing, or paid or is obligated to pay for goods or services
 purchased through telemarketing;
 (2) any financial institution that has incurred loss or damage in connection
 with telemarketing; or
 (3) any member organization comprised of financial institution members,
 or any parent organization of such member organization, if one or more
 of the financial institution members is eligible to bring a civil action
 under this subsection.
Such term does not include a governmental entity.
 (b) PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION- (1) Any person adversely affected by any pattern
 or practice of telemarketing which violates any rule, regulation, or order
 of the Commission under this Act may, within 3 years after discovery of
 the violation, bring a civil action against a person who has engaged or
 is engaging in such pattern or practice of telemarketing if the amount
 in controversy exceeds the sum or value of $50,000 in actual damages for
 each person adversely affected by such telemarketing. Such an action may be
 brought to enjoin such telemarketing, to enforce compliance with any rule,
 regulation, or order of the Commission under this Act, to obtain damages,
 or to obtain such further and other relief as the court may deem appropriate.
 (2) The district courts of the United States, the United States courts of any
 territory, and the District Court of the United States for the District of
 Columbia shall have exclusive jurisdiction over all civil actions brought
 under this section to enforce any liability or duty created by any rule,
 regulation, or order of the Commission under this Act, or to obtain
 damages or other relief with respect thereto. Upon proper application,
 such courts shall also have jurisdiction to issue writs of mandamus,
 or orders affording like relief, commanding the defendant to comply with
 the provisions of any rule, regulation, or order of the Commission under
 this Act, including the requirement that the defendant take such action
 as is necessary to remove the danger of violation or of any such rule,
 regulation, or order. Upon a proper showing, a permanent or temporary
 injunction or restraining order shall be granted without bond.
 (3) The plaintiff shall serve prior written notice of the action upon
 the Commission and provide the Commission with a copy of its complaint,
 except in any case where such prior notice is not feasible, in which
 case the person shall serve such notice immediately upon instituting such
 action. The Commission shall have the right (A) to intervene in the action,
 (B) upon so intervening, to be heard on all matters arising therein, and
 (C) to file petitions for appeal.
 (4) Whenever the Commission has instituted a civil action for violation
 of any rule prescribed under this Act, no person may, during the pendency
 of such action instituted by the Commission, subsequently institute a
 civil action against any defendant named in the Commission's complaint
 for violation of any rule as alleged in the Commission's complaint.
 (5) Any civil action brought under this section in a district court of the
 United States may be brought in the district wherein the defendant is found
 or is an inhabitant or transacts business or wherein the telemarketing
 occurred or is occurring and process in such case may be served in any
 district in which the defendant is an inhabitant or wherever the defendant
 may be found.
 (c) AWARD OF COSTS AND FEES- The court, in issuing any final order in any
 action brought under subsection (b), may award costs of suit and reasonable
 fees for attorneys and expert witnesses to the prevailing party.
 (d) RIGHTS UNDER STATUTE OR COMMON LAW- Nothing in this section shall
 restrict any right which any person may have under any statute or common law.
VENUE
 SEC. 6. Subsections (a) and (b) of section 13 of the Federal Trade Commission
 Act (15 U.S.C. 53) are each amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following: `Whenever it appears to the court that the interests of justice
 require that any other person, partnership, or corporation should be a party
 in such suit, the court may cause such person, partnership, or corporation
 to be summoned without regard to whether they reside or transact business
 in the district in which the suit is brought, and to that end process may
 be served wherever the person, partnership, or corporation may be found.'.
SUBPOENA
 SEC. 7. (a) PHYSICAL EVIDENCE DEFINED- Section 20(a) of the Federal Trade
 Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 57b-1(a)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraph (7) as paragraph (8); and
 (2) by inserting immediately after paragraph (6) the following new paragraph:
 `(7) The term `physical evidence' means any object or device, including any
 medical device, food product, drug, nutritional product, cosmetic product,
 or audio or video recording.'.
 (b) ISSUANCE OF DEMAND- Section 20(c)(1) of the Federal Trade Commission
 Act (15 U.S.C. 57b-1(c)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `physical evidence or' immediately after `any' the second
 time it appears;
 (2) by inserting `to produce such physical evidence for inspection,'
 immediately before `to produce';
 (3) by inserting `physical evidence,' immediately after `concerning'; and
 (4) by inserting `evidence,' immediately before `material, answers,'.
 (c) CONTENTS OF DEMAND- Section 20(c)(3) of the Federal Trade Commission
 Act (15 U.S.C. 57b-1(c)(3)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `physical evidence or' immediately before `documentary
 material';
 (2) in subparagraph (A)--
 (A) by inserting `physical evidence or' immediately before `documentary'; and
 (B) by inserting `evidence or' immediately after `permit such';
 (3) in subparagraph (B), by inserting `evidence or' immediately before
 `material'; and
 (4) in subparagraph (C), by inserting `evidence or' immediately before
 `material'.
 (d) PRODUCTION OF EVIDENCE IN RESPONSE TO DEMAND- Section 20(c)(10) of
 the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 57b-1(c)(10)) is amended by
 inserting `physical evidence or' immediately before `documentary material'
 each place it appears.
FALSE ADVERTISEMENTS CONCERNING SERVICES
 SEC. 8. Section 12(a) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 52(a))
 is amended by inserting `services,' immediately after `devices,' each
 place it appears.
CLEARINGHOUSE
 SEC. 9. The Commission shall establish a clearinghouse for inquiries made
 to Federal agencies concerning telemarketing. The clearinghouse will provide
 information (other than information which may not be disclosed under section
 552(b) of title 5, United States Code, or under regulations prescribed by
 the Commission to implement sections 552(b) of title 5, United States Code)
 to anyone making inquiries respecting persons engaged in telemarketing or
 direct such inquiries to the appropriate Federal or State agency.
FINANCIAL DATA
 SEC. 10. Section 1109(a)(3) of the Right to Financial Privacy Act of 1978
 (12 U.S.C. 3409(a)(3)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraph (E) as subparagraph (F);
 (2) by striking `or' at the end of subparagraph (D); and
 (3) by inserting immediately after subparagraph (D) the following new
 subparagraph:
 `(E) dissipation, removal, or destruction of assets that are subject to
 forfeiture, seizure, redress, or restitution under any law of the United
 States by reason of having been obtained in violation of law; or'.
CRIMINAL CONTEMPT AUTHORITY
 SEC. 11. Section 16(a)(1) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15
 U.S.C. 56(a)(1)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A) by striking `civil' the first place it appears
 and inserting in lieu thereof `Federal court'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following: `The Commission may bring a criminal
 contempt action for violations of orders obtained in cases brought under
 section 13(b) of this Act in the same manner as civil penalty and other
 Federal court actions to which this subsection applies. Such cases may
 be initiated by the Commission on its own complaint, or pursuant to its
 acceptance of an appointment by a court to assist it in enforcing such
 orders pursuant to Rule 42(b) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.'.
ADMINISTRATION AND APPLICABILITY OF ACT
 SEC. 12. (a) ENFORCEMENT- Except as otherwise provided in sections 4 and
 5 of this Act, this Act shall be enforced by the Commission under the
 Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.).
 (b) APPLICABILITY OF FTCA- The Commission shall prevent any person from
 violating a rule, regulation, or order of the Commission under this Act
 in the same manner, by the same means, and with the same jurisdiction,
 powers, and duties as though all applicable terms and provisions of the
 Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.) were incorporated
 into and made a part of this Act. Any person who violates such a rule,
 regulation, or order shall be subject to the penalties and entitled to the
 privileges and immunities provided in the Federal Trade Commission Act in
 the same manner, by the same means, and with the same jurisdiction, powers,
 and duties as though all applicable terms and provisions of the Federal
 Trade Commission Act were incorporated into and made a part of this Act.
 (c) EXEMPTION- (1) No provision of this Act shall apply to any person
 exempt from the jurisdiction of the Commission under section 5(a)(2) of
 the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45(a)(2)), and nothing in this
 Act shall be construed to vest the Commission, or the attorney general of
 any State or any person, with jurisdiction or authority over any person
 not otherwise subject to the jurisdiction or authority of the Commission.
 (2)(A) No provision of this Act shall apply--
 (i) to a broker, dealer, municipal securities dealer, government securities
 broker, government securities dealer, or investment company in connection
 with the offer, sale, or purchase of any security, or to an issuer in
 connection with the offer, sale, or purchase of any security which that
 issuer has issued, or to any investment adviser providing investment advice
 relating to any security; or
 (ii) to the solicitation, acceptance, confirmation, or execution of
 orders for the entry into, purchase of, or sale of any contract, account,
 agreement, or transaction subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the
 Commodity Futures Trading Commission under the Commodity Exchange Act
 (7 U.S.C. 1 et seq.) by a person registered under the Commodity Exchange
 Act in order to engage in such activity, including as a futures commission
 merchant, introducing broker, commodity trading advisor, commodity pool
 operator, leverage transaction merchant, floor broker, or floor trader,
 or as a person associated with any such person.
 (B) For purposes of subparagraph (A)(i)--
 (1) the terms `broker', `dealer', `municipal securities dealer', `government
 securities broker', and `government securities dealer' have the meanings
 given them in section 3(a) (4), (5), (30), (43), and (44), respectively,
 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78c(a) (4), (5), (30),
 (43), and (44));
 (2) the term `investment adviser' has the meaning given it in section
 202(a)(11) of the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80b-2(a)(11));
 (3) the term `investment company' has the meaning given it in section 3(a)
 of the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-3(a));
 (4) the term `issuer' has the meaning given it in section 2(4) of the
 Securities Act of 1933 (15 U.S.C. 77b(4)); and
 (5) the term `security' has the meaning given to it in section 2(1) of
 the Securities Act of 1933 (15 U.S.C. 77b(1)), section 3(a)(10) of the
 Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78c(a)(10)), and section 2(a)(36)
 of the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-2(a)(36)).
LIFE CARE HOME STUDY
 SEC. 13. (a) STUDY- The Federal Trade Commission shall conduct a study
 of unfair or deceptive acts or practices in the life care home industry,
 including acts or practices engaged in by life care homes. Within 24 months
 after the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall report the
 findings and conclusions of the study to Congress. The Commission shall
 indicate in its report whether it intends to initiate a trade regulation
 rulemaking under section 18 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15
 U.S.C. 57a) respecting unfair or deceptive acts or practices in the life
 care home industry and the reasons for such determination.
 (b) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of subsection (a), the term--
 (1) `life care home' includes the facility or facilities occupied, or
 planned to be occupied, by residents or prospective residents where a
 provider undertakes to provide living accommodations and services pursuant
 to a life care contract, regardless of whether such facilities are operated
 on a profit or nonprofit basis; and
 (2) `life care contract' includes a contract between a resident and a
 provider to provide the resident, for the duration of such resident's life,
 living accommodations and related services in a life care home, including
 nursing care services, medical services, and other health-related services,
 which is conditioned upon the transfer of an entrance fee to the provider and
 which may be further conditioned upon the payment of periodic service fees.
SUNSET
 SEC. 14. The provisions of sections 3, 4, and 5 shall cease to have force
 and effect on and after the date that is five years following the date of
 enactment of this Act.