S 1408 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1408
To amend the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to clarify provisions regarding
disparate impact actions, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
June 27 (legislative day, JUNE 11), 1991
Mr. DANFORTH introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources
A BILL
To amend the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to clarify provisions regarding
disparate impact actions, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. FINDING AND PURPOSES.
 (a) FINDING- Congress finds that the decision of the Supreme Court in Wards
 Cove Packing Co. v. Atonio, 109 S. Ct. 2115 (1989) has weakened the scope
 and effectiveness of Federal civil rights protections.
 (b) PURPOSES- The purposes of this Act are--
 (1) to overrule the proof burdens and meaning of business necessity in Wards
 Cove Packing Co. v. Atonio and to codify the proof burdens and the meaning of
 business necessity used in Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 U.S. 424 (1971); and
 (2) to confirm statutory authority and provide statutory guidelines for
 the adjudication of disparate impact suits under title VII of the Civil
 Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.).
SEC. 3. BURDEN OF PROOF IN DISPARATE IMPACT CASES.
 IN GENERAL- Section 703 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-2)
 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(k)(1)(A) An unlawful employment practice based on disparate impact is
 established under this title only if--
 `(i) a complaining party demonstrates that a particular employment practice
 or particular employment practices (or decision-making process as described
 in (B)(i)) cause a disparate impact on the basis of race, color, religion,
 sex, or national origin; and
 `(ii)(I) the respondent fails to demonstrate that the practice or practices
 are required by business necessity; or
 `(II) the complaining party makes the demonstration described in subparagraph
 (C) with respect to a different employment practice and the respondent
 refuses to adopt such alternative employment practice.
 `(B)(i) With respect to demonstrating that a particular employment practice
 or particular employment practices cause a disparate impact as described
 in subsection (A)(i), the complaining party shall demonstrate that the
 particular employment practice causes in whole or in significant part the
 disparate impact, except that if the complaining party can demonstrate to
 the court that the elements of a respondent's decision-making process are
 not capable of separation for analysis, the decision-making process may
 be analyzed as one employment practice.
 `(ii) If the respondent demonstrates that a specific employment practice is
 not responsible in whole or in significant part for the disparate impact,
 the respondent shall not be required to demonstrate that such practice is
 required by business necessity.
 `(C) An employment practice which causes in whole or in significant part a
 disparate impact that is demonstrated to be required by business necessity
 shall be unlawful if the complaining party demonstrates that a different
 available employment practice, which would have less disparate impact and
 make a difference in the disparate impact that is more than negligible,
 would serve the respondent's legitimate interests as well and the respondent
 refuses to adopt such alternative employment practice.
 `(2) A demonstration that an employment practice is required by business
 necessity may not be used as a defense against a claim of intentional
 discrimination under this title.
 `(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, a rule barring the
 employment of an individual who currently and knowingly uses or possesses
 an illegal drug as defined in schedules I and II of section 102(6) of
 the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802(6)), other than the use or
 possession of a drug taken under the supervision of a licensed health care
 professional, or any other use or possession authorized by the Controlled
 Substances Act or any other provision of Federal law, shall be considered
 an unlawful employment practice under this title only if such rule is
 adopted or applied with an intent to discriminate because of race, color,
 religion, sex, or national origin.
SEC. 4. PROHIBITION AGAINST DISCRIMINATORY USE OF TEST SCORES.
 Section 703 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-2) (as amended
 by section 3) is further amended by adding at the end the following new
 subsection:
 `(1) It shall be an unlawful employment practice for a respondent, in
 connection with the selection or referral of applicants or candidates for
 employment or promotion, to adjust the scores of, use different cutoff
 scores for, or otherwise alter the results of, employment related tests
 on the basis of race, color, religion, sex or national origin.
SEC. 5. DEFINITIONS.
 IN GENERAL- Section 701 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e)
 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsections:
 `(l) The term `complaining party' means the Commission, the Attorney General,
 or a person who may bring an action or proceeding under this title.
 `(m) The term `demonstrates' means meets the burdens of production and
 persuasion.
 `(n) The term `required by business necessity' means--
 `(1) in the case of employment practices that are used as job qualifications
 or used to measure the ability to perform the job, the challenged practice
 must bear a manifest relationship to the employment in question.
 `(2) in the case of employment practices not described in (1) above,
 the challenged practice must bear a manifest relationship to a legitimate
 business objective of the employer.
 `(o) The term `employment in question' means--
 `(1) the performance of actual work activities required by the employer
 for a job or class of jobs; or
 `(2) any requirement related to behavior that is important to the job,
 but may not comprise actual work activities.
 `(p) The term `respondent' means an employer, employment agency, labor
 organization, joint labor-management committees controlling apprenticeship
 or other training or retraining program, including an on-the-job training
 program, or Federal entity subject to section 717.'.
SEC. 6. COVERAGE OF CONGRESS AND THE AGENCIES OF THE LEGISLATIVE BRANCH.
 (a) Coverage of the Senate.
 (1) APPLICATION TO SENATE EMPLOYMENT- The rights and protections provided
 pursuant to the amendments made by this Act shall, subject to paragraphs (2)
 through (5), apply with respect to any employee in an employment position
 in the Senate and any employing authority of the Senate.
 (2) INVESTIGATION AND ADJUDICATION OF CLAIMS- All claims raised by any
 individual with respect to Senate employment pursuant to the provisions
 described in paragraph (1) shall be investigated and adjudicated by the
 Select Committee on Ethics, pursuant to S. Res. 338, 88th Congress, as
 amended, or such other entity as the Senate may designate.
 (3) RIGHTS OF EMPLOYERS- The Committee on Rules and Administration shall
 ensure that Senate employees are informed of their rights under the
 provisions described in paragraph (1).
 (4) APPLICABLE REMEDIES- When assigning remedies to individuals found to have
 a valid claim under the provisions described in paragraph (1), the Select
 Committee on Ethics, or such other entity as the Senate may designate,
 shall to the extent practicable apply the same remedies applicable to all
 other employees covered by the provisions described in paragraph (1). Such
 remedies shall apply exclusively.
 (5) EXERCISE OF RULEMAKING POWER- Not withstanding any other provision of
 law, enforcement and adjudication of the rights and protections referred to
 in paragraph (1) shall be within the exclusive jurisdiction of the United
 States Senate. The provisions of paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) are enacted
 by the Senate as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate, with
 full recognition of the right of the Senate to change its rules, in the
 same manner, and to the same extent, as in the case of any other rule of
 the Senate.
 (b) COVERAGE OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the purposes
 of this Act shall, subject to paragraph (2), apply with respect to any
 employee in an employment position in the House of Representatives and
 any employing authority of the House of Representatives.
 (2) EMPLOYMENT IN THE HOUSE-
 (A) APPLICATION- The rights and protections under title VII of the Civil
 Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.) and the amendments made by
 this Act shall, subject to subparagraph (B), apply with respect to any
 employee in an employment position in the House of Representatives and
 any employing authority of the House of Representatives.
 (B) ADMINISTRATION-
 (i) IN GENERAL- In the administration of this paragraph, the remedies and
 procedures made applicable pursuant to the resolution described in clause
 (ii) shall apply exclusively.
 (ii) RESOLUTION- The resolution referred to in clause (i) is House
 Resolution 15 of the One Hundred First Congress, as agreed to January 3,
 1989, or any other provision that continues in effect the provisions of,
 or is a successor to, the Fair Employment Practices Resolution (House
 Resolution 558 of the One Hundredth Congress, as agreed to October 4, 1988).
 (C) EXERCISE OF RULEMAKING POWER- The provisions of subparagraph (B) are
 enacted by the House of Representatives as an exercise of the rulemaking
 power of the House of Representatives, with full recognition of the
 right of the House to change its rules, in the same manner, and to the
 same extent as in the case of any other rule of the House.
 (c) INSTRUMENTALITIES OF CONGRESS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The rights and protections under title VII of the Civil
 Rights Act of 1964 and the amendments made by this Act shall, subject to
 paragraphs (2) and (5), apply with respect to any employee in an employment
 position in an instrumentality of the Congress and any chief official of
 such an instrumentality.
 (2) ESTABLISHMENT OF REMEDIES AND PROCEDURES BY INSTRUMENTALITIES- The chief
 official of each instrumentality of the Congress shall establish remedies
 and procedures to be utilized with respect to the rights and protections
 provided pursuant to paragraph (1). Such remedies and procedures shall
 apply exclusively.
 (3) REPORT TO CONGRESS- The chief official of each instrumentality of the
 Congress shall, after establishing remedies and procedures for purposes
 of paragraph (2), submit to the Congress a report describing the remedies
 and procedures.
 (4) DEFINITION OF INSTRUMENTALITIES- For purposes of this section,
 instrumentalities of the Congress include the Congressional Budget Office,
 the General Accounting Office, and the Office of Technology Assessment.
 (5) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this section shall alter the enforcement
 procedures for individuals protected under section 717 of the Civil Rights
 Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-16).