HR 5560 IH1S
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5560
To amend the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act to require new
standards for corporate average fuel economy, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
September 10, 1990
Mrs. BOXER (for herself, Ms. SCHNEIDER, Mr. STARK, Mr. RAVENEL, Mr. MILLER of
California, Mr. ROSE, Mr. PANETTA, Mr. DEFAZIO, Ms. PELOSI, Mr. GEJDENSON,
Mr. MARKEY, Mr. SCHUMER, Mr. OWENS of New York, Mr. OWENS of Utah, and
Mr. CAMPBELL of California) introduced the following bill; which was referred
to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act to require new
standards for corporate average fuel economy, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
That this Act may be cited as the `Motor Vehicle Fuel Efficiency Act of 1990'.
FINDINGS
 SEC. 2. The Congress finds and declares the following:
 (1) Improved efficiency in the consumption of petroleum is vitally important,
 not only because the worldwide supply is finite, but because the increasing
 dependence of the United States on foreign oil is a threat to our national
 security and adversely affects the trade balance.
 (2) The light duty vehicle fleet is a significant user of oil, accounting
 for about 39 percent of United States oil consumption.
 (3) Improvements in vehicle fuel efficiency between 1973 and 1987 amounted to
 a savings of 1.8 million barrels of oil per day and a savings to drivers of
 close to $30 billion. Conversely, the rollback of the corporate average fuel
 economy (CAFE) standard for the 1989 model year, from 27.5 miles per gallon
 to 26.5 miles per gallon, is expected to result in increased consumption
 of 900 million gallons of fuel over the life of the 1989 vehicles.
 (4) Emissions of carbon dioxide, including those from the light duty
 vehicle fleet, contribute substantially to increased retention of heat in
 the Earth's atmosphere and may cause long term global warming and disruption
 of climate-dependent activities.
 (5) The United States, with only 5 percent of the world's population, is
 responsible for 20 percent of world carbon dioxide emissions. United States
 carbon dioxide emissions from gasoline alone are greater than the carbon
 dioxide emissions from all sources in each of the following countries and
 areas of the world: Latin America, Japan, the Middle East, West Germany,
 South and Southeast Asia, the United Kingdom, Africa, and France.
 (6) The transportation sector is responsible for 31 percent of carbon
 dioxide emissions in the United States. Each gallon of gasoline burned
 results in the emission of 19.7 pounds of carbon dioxide.
 (7) The rollback of the CAFE standard for the 1989 model year is projected
 to result in 9 million tons of additional carbon dioxide emissions during
 the life of the 1989 vehicles.
 (8) Increased numbers of vehicles and vehicle miles traveled in the United
 States will necessitate a 3 percent annual increase in fuel efficiency
 merely to hold future carbon dioxide emissions at current levels. Therefore,
 substantial improvements in vehicle fuel efficiency will be needed to
 reduce these emissions.
 (9) CAFE standards and the successful response of automobile manufacturers
 to those standards have been very effective in increasing vehicle fuel
 efficiency, resulting in a doubling of the passenger car fleet fuel
 economy between 1975 and the present. However, current law does not require
 improvement above a standard of 27.5 miles per gallon which became effective
 in 1985. In recent years, the average fuel economy of the fleets of certain
 manufacturers has actually declined.
 (10) Light trucks were an insignificant part of the passenger vehicle market
 when CAFE standards were enacted in 1975, and have not been subjected
 to strict, legislatively established, CAFE standards. As a result, there
 have been few major technological changes related to fuel efficiency in
 the standard size light trucks since 1982, and fuel economy in some light
 truck models has actually declined between 1982 and 1986. Light trucks
 have become increasingly popular for passenger use, and such vehicles now
 account for approximately one-third of new passenger vehicle sales.
 (11) The Office of Technology Assessment and the Department of Energy
 agree that increased fuel efficiency is possible utilizing currently
 available technology and without significant changes in the size mix or
 performance of the fleet. With maximum use of conventional technologies,
 it is estimated by various experts that the fuel economy of the entire
 new car fleet could range from 33 to 38 miles per gallon by 1995.
 (12) Over the long term, by utilizing technology currently in production
 or in prototype, additional increases in fleet fuel economy beyond 1995
 estimates are achievable, from 40 miles per gallon to as high as 60 miles
 per gallon in the next decade.
 (13) Gasoline prices currently are lower in real dollars than they have
 been since the early 1970s. Since there is at least some correlation
 between gasoline prices and consumer demand for fuel efficient vehicles,
 it is unlikely that the market alone will achieve significant improvement
 in fuel economy.
 (14) An increase in fuel efficiency in the light duty vehicle fleet of 20
 percent by 1995 and 40 percent by 2001 would save 49.1 billion gallons of
 fuel between 1995 and 2001. This level of improvement also would reduce
 carbon dioxide emissions by 483.5 million tons between 1995 and 2001.
 (15) Use of a percentage improvement requirement is the only legislative
 approach currently available that assures achievement of the environmental
 and energy security goals to be served by a fuel efficiency standard. Such an
 approach ensures that each manufacturer is required to achieve significant
 improvement in fuel efficiency. By contrast, use of the same numerical
 standards for all manufacturers provides no incentive for manufacturers of
 primarily small vehicles to improve the fuel efficiency of those vehicles,
 and in effect establishes no standard for such manufacturers. The separate
 size or weight class standards presently available do not, standing alone,
 prohibit increases in the size and weight of the fleet as a whole, and so
 do not ensure that fuel savings will actually result from such standards.
 (16) Increased CAFE standards that require all manufacturers to improve by
 the same percentage are, therefore, both reasonable and necessary to ensure
 that improvements in fuel efficiency continue, in furtherance of the dual
 goals of the Nation's energy security and decreased carbon dioxide emissions.
AVERAGE FUEL ECONOMY STANDARDS
 SEC. 3. (a) Section 502(a)(1) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost
 Savings Act (15 U.S.C. 2002(a)(1)) is amended by striking:
`1985 and thereafter
27.5.'
and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
`1985 through 1994
27.5
 1995 and thereafter
As provided in accordance with section 514 of this Act.'.
 (b) Section 502(a)(4) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2002(a)(4)) is amended by striking `The Secretary' and inserting
 in lieu thereof `Except in the case of standards established by section 514,
 the Secretary'.
LIGHT TRUCKS
 SEC. 4. Section 502(b) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2002(b)) is amended by inserting `and which ends before model
 year 1995' immediately after `after the date of enactment of this title'.
EXEMPTIONS FOR LIMITED PRODUCTION
 SEC. 5. Section 502(c)(1) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings
 Act (15 U.S.C. 2002(c)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `passenger' each place it appears;
 (2) by inserting `or (b), or section 514 or 515' immediately before the
 period at the end of the first sentence; and
 (3) by inserting `or (b), or section 514 or 515,' immediately before
 `is more stringent'.
EMERGENCY VEHICLES
 SEC. 6. Section 502(g)(1) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings
 Act (15 U.S.C. 2002(g)(1)) is amended by inserting `or section 514 or 515'
 immediately before the period at the end of the first sentence.
CONSULTATION
 SEC. 7. Section 502(i) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings
 Act (15 U.S.C. 2002(i)) is amended by inserting `and sections 514 and 515'
 immediately before the period in the first sentence.
NOTIFICATION
 SEC. 8. Section 502(j) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings
 Act (15 U.S.C. 2002(j)) is amended by inserting `and sections 514 and 515'
 immediately before `or any modification'.
NEW STANDARDS
 SEC. 9. (a) Title V of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2001 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new sections:
`PASSENGER AUTOMOBILES
 `SEC. 514. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the average fuel
 economy for passenger automobiles manufactured by any manufacturer in model
 year 1995 and each model year thereafter shall not be less than the number of
 miles per gallon established for such model year pursuant to the following:
`Model year:
`1995 through 2000
For each such manufacturer, the average fuel economy required shall be an
amount determined by the Secretary to be equal to the average fuel economy
achieved by that manufacturer for passenger automobiles in model year 1988,
plus an amount equal to 20 percent (as measured in miles per gallon) of such
average fuel economy achieved for model year 1988; except that such standard
shall not be less than 27.5 miles per gallon and shall not exceed 40 miles
per gallon.
`2001 and thereafter
For each such manufacturer, the average fuel economy required shall be an
amount determined by the Secretary to be equal to the average fuel economy
achieved by that manufacturer for passenger automobiles in model year 1988,
plus an amount equal to 40 percent (as measured in miles per gallon) of such
average fuel economy achieved for model year 1988, unless such standard is
modified under section 516; except that such standard shall not be less than
33 miles per gallon and shall not exceed 45 miles per gallon.
`AUTOMOBILES OTHER THAN PASSENGER AUTOMOBILES
 `SEC. 515. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, commencing
 with model year 1995 and each model year thereafter, the average fuel
 economy for automobiles other than passenger automobiles manufactured by
 any manufacturer in any such model year shall not be less than the number of
 miles per gallon established for such model year pursuant to the following:
`Model year:
`1995 through 2000
For each such manufacturer, the average fuel economy required shall be an
amount determined by the Secretary to be equal to the average fuel economy
achieved by that manufacturer for light trucks in model year 1988, plus an
amount equal to 20 percent (as measured in miles per gallon) of such average
fuel economy achieved for model year 1988; except that such standard shall
not be less than 20 miles per gallon and shall not exceed 30 miles per gallon.
`2001 and thereafter
For each such manufacturer, the average fuel economy required shall be an
amount determined by the Secretary to be equal to the average fuel economy
achieved by that manufacturer in model year 1988, plus an amount equal to
40 percent (as measured in miles per gallon) of such average fuel economy
achieved for model year 1988, unless such standard is modified under section
516; except that such standard shall not be less than 24 miles per gallon
and shall not exceed 35 miles per gallon.
`MODIFICATIONS OF STANDARDS
 `SEC. 516. (a) Any time after the beginning of fiscal year 1995,
 the Secretary may modify any average fuel economy standard established
 under this Act for model year 2001 and thereafter in accordance with
 this section. In response to a petition from any person that is filed at
 least 12 months in advance of the model year to which it is applicable,
 the Secretary shall conduct a rulemaking proceeding to determine whether
 to increase or decrease such standard to the level which the Secretary
 determines is the maximum feasible average fuel economy for that model year
 (taking into consideration the factors listed in section 502(e) and the
 need to reduce carbon dioxide emissions), except that the Secretary shall
 not reduce any such standard below a standard equal to a 30-percent increase
 over the average fuel economy achieved by the manufacturer involved for the
 applicable type (or class) of vehicles for model year 1988. The Secretary
 may also conduct such a rulemaking on the Secretary's initiative.
 `(b) In determining the maximum feasible average fuel economy during a
 rulemaking proceeding under this section, the Secretary shall weigh equally
 each factor listed in section 502(e) and the need to reduce carbon dioxide
 emissions. In evaluating the economic practicability of the standard,
 the Secretary shall consider--
 `(1) the economic impact of the standard on the manufacturers and on the
 consumers of the vehicles subject to such standard;
 `(2) the savings in operating costs throughout the estimated average life
 of the vehicle compared to any increase in the price of, or in the initial
 charges for, or maintenance expenses of, the vehicles which are likely to
 result from the imposition of the standard;
 `(3) the total projected amount of energy savings likely to result
 directly from the imposition of the standard and the economic impact of
 such energy savings;
 `(4) any lessening of the utility or the performance of the vehicles likely
 to result from the imposition of the standard;
 `(5) the impact of any lessening of competition or any change in foreign
 trade that is likely to result from the imposition of the standard;
 `(6) the total projected amount of reduction in carbon dioxide emissions
 and the economic impact of such reduction; and
 `(7) other factors the Secretary considers relevant.'.
 (b)(1) Section 503(a)(1) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings
 Act (15 U.S.C. 2003(a)(1)) is amended by inserting `and section 514'
 immediately after `and (c)'.
 (2) Section 503(a)(2) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings
 Act (15 U.S.C. 2003(a)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `Average fuel economy for purposes of section 515 shall be calculated in
 accordance with rules of the EPA Administrator that are based upon the
 method required in paragraph (1) for calculation of average fuel economy
 of passenger automobiles.'.
FUEL ECONOMY TESTING
 SEC. 10. (a) The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency
 shall conduct--
 (1) an ongoing examination of the accuracy of fuel economy testing of
 passenger automobiles and light trucks by the Administrator performed in
 accordance with procedures in effect as of the date of enactment of this
 Act, as compared to the actual performance of such passenger automobiles
 and light trucks when driven by average drivers under average driving
 conditions in the United States; and
 (2) an assessment of the extent to which fuel economy deteriorates during
 the life of such passenger automobiles and light trucks.
Information on actual performance may be obtained through a survey of current
vehicle owners.
 (b) The Administrator shall, within 12 months after the date of enactment
 of this Act and annually thereafter, submit to the Committee on Commerce,
 Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Energy and
 Commerce of the House of Representatives a report on the results of the
 study required by subsection (a) of this section. The report shall include--
 (1) a comparison between (A) fuel economy measured, for each model in the
 applicable model year, through testing procedures in effect as of the date
 of enactment of this Act and (B) fuel economy of such passenger automobiles
 and light trucks during actual on-road performance, as determined under
 subsection (a) of this section;
 (2) a statement of the percentage difference, if any, between actual
 on-road fuel economy and fuel economy measured by test procedures of the
 Environmental Protection Administration; and
 (3) any recommendations for legislative or other action.
EXPLANATORY BOOKLET DISTRIBUTED BY SECRETARY OF ENERGY
 SEC. 11. (a)(1) Paragraph (1) of section 506(b) of the Motor Vehicle
 Information and Cost Savings Act (15 U.S.C. 2006(b)) is amended by adding
 at the end the following new sentence: `The Secretary of Energy shall
 distribute no less than 100 booklets each year to each dealer and shall
 distribute as many in addition to 100 booklets as are reasonably requested
 by dealers from time to time.'.
 (2) The amendment made by paragraph (1) of this subsection shall apply to
 the 12-month period beginning on the first day of the first month after the
 date of enactment of this Act and corresponding 12-month periods thereafter.
 (b) Section 506(e) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2006(e)) is amended by striking `Federal Energy Administrator'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `Secretary of Energy'.
STUDIES
 SEC. 12. (a) The Secretary of Transportation shall provide for a review
 to be undertaken by the National Academy of Sciences, in consultation
 with vehicle manufacturers, representatives of environmental and consumer
 groups, appropriate State and local officials, and representatives of
 labor, of the current state of research and development in light truck
 fuel economy and passenger automobile fuel economy and an assessment of
 the remaining potential for improving the fuel efficiency and reducing the
 energy consumption of passenger automobiles and light trucks. The assessment
 shall include all aspects of vehicle design, including engines, drive train,
 component parts, auto body, tires, and any other aspect contributing to
 the reduction of energy consumption. The National Academy shall, not later
 than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, submit a report to
 the Congress on the results of the review and assessment and in the report
 recommend research and development priorities that could result in the
 commercialization of fuel economy technology through the early years of the
 next century. The National Academy shall update the report every 5 years,
 beginning not later than 7 years after the date of enactment of this Act,
 and shall submit each updated report to the Congress.
 (b) The Secretary of Energy, in consultation with the Secretary of
 Transportation and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency,
 shall undertake a study of future options for regulating the fuel efficiency
 of passenger automobiles and light trucks beyond the year 2001. Such study
 shall utilize the results of the review and assessment required by subsection
 (a), and shall examine alternative forms of fuel economy regulations. The
 study shall determine--
 (1) the ability of each regulatory strategy to ensure continued future
 fleet fuel economy improvements;
 (2) the economic efficiency of each such strategy; and
 (3) the impact of each such strategy on the competitiveness of the United
 States economy.
The Secretary of Energy shall, not later than 3 years after the date of
enactment of this Act, submit a report to the Congress on the results of
the study required by this subsection.
REPEATED VIOLATIONS OF AVERAGE FUEL ECONOMY STANDARD
 SEC. 13. (a) Section 508(b)(1) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost
 Savings Act (15 U.S.C. 2008(b)(1)) is amended by adding at the end the
 following new subparagraph:
 `(C) Any civil penalty assessed under this subsection for a violation
 of section 507(a) (1) or (2) in model year 1995 or thereafter against a
 manufacturer shall be doubled if--
 `(i) the manufacturer violated section 507(a) (1) or (2) in the two model
 years immediately preceding the model year involved in the assessment; and
 `(ii) during each of such preceding years and the year involved in the
 assessment, the applicable average fuel economy standard exceeded the
 average fuel economy of the vehicles manufactured by such manufacturer by
 five-tenths of a mile per gallon or more.'.
 (b) Section 507(a)(1) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings
 Act (15 U.S.C. 2007(a)(1)) is amended by inserting `and section 514'
 immediately after `section 502(b))'.
 (c) Section 507(a)(2) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings
 Act (15 U.S.C. 2007(a)(2)) is amended by striking `section 502(b)' and
 inserting in lieu thereof `sections 502(b) and 515'.
AIRBAG CREDIT FOR SMALL PASSENGER AUTOMOBILES
 SEC. 14. (a) Section 503(a) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost
 Savings Act (15 U.S.C. 2003(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1) by inserting `, subject to paragraph (4),' immediately
 before `be calculated'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(4)(A) If a manufacturer manufactures small passenger automobiles which
 comply with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208 by means of
 airbags for the driver seating position only or for both the driver and
 front seat outboard seating positions, average fuel economy for purposes
 of section 502(a) and (c) shall be calculated as provided under subsection
 (a)(1), except that in the calculation of the sum of terms under subsection
 (a)(1)(B) the term applicable to any model type of small passenger automobile
 for which there are automobiles so equipped with airbags shall be determined
 by adding--
 `(i) the fraction that is created by dividing the number of small passenger
 automobiles of such model type that are equipped with airbags for the
 driver seating position only, by 105 percent of the fuel economy measured
 for such model type,
 `(ii) the fraction that is created by dividing the number of small passenger
 automobiles of such model type that are equipped with airbags for both
 the driver and outboard front seating positions, by 110 percent of the
 fuel economy measured for such model type, and
 `(iii) the fraction that is created by dividing the number of small
 passenger automobiles of such model type that are not so equipped, by the
 fuel economy measured for such model type.
 `(B) For purposes of this paragraph, the term `small passenger automobile'
 means a passenger automobile with a wheel base of less than 100 inches
 whose measured fuel economy is at least 35 miles per gallon.'.
 (b) Section 502(e) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Costs Savings Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2002(e)) is amended by adding at the end the following: `In
 determining maximum feasible average fuel economy, the Secretary shall
 not consider the alternative calculation for airbag-equipped passenger
 automobiles under section 503(a)(4).'.
DEFINITIONS
 SEC. 15. As used in this Act, `passenger automobile' has the meaning given
 that term under section 501 of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost
 Savings Act (15 U.S.C. 2001) and `light truck' shall have such meaning as
 the Secretary of Transportation prescribes.