S 503 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 503
To protect the ozone layer by reducing chlorofluorocarbons and halons,
and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
March 2 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. BAUCUS (for himself and Mr. CHAFEE) introduced the following bill; which
was read twice and referred to the Committee on Environment and Public Works
A BILL
To protect the ozone layer by reducing chlorofluorocarbons and halons,
and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SHORT TITLE
 SECTION 1. This Act may be cited as the `Chlorofluorocarbons and Halon
 Reduction Act of 1989'.
FINDINGS
 SEC. 2. The Congress finds that--
 (1) restrictions on the production of chloroflourocarbons (CFCs) and
 halons are essential to safeguarding the earth's ozone layer, reducing
 the greenhouse effect, and protecting human health and the environment;
 (2) restrictions on chlorofluorocarbons and halon production, as required
 under the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer and
 by Environmental Protection Agency regulations, will restrict the supply and
 therefore increase the price of these chemicals, and that increased prices
 provide a greater economic incentive for firms using these chemicals to
 increase recycling, while also providing an incentive for the introduction
 of chlorofluorocarbons and halon substitute chemicals;
 (3) future revenues from higher chlorofluorocarbons and halon prices,
 resulting from regulatory restrictions to protect human health and the
 environment, should be used for the benefit of the public. As such, some
 portion of these revenues should be made available in an equitable manner to
 facilitate and expedite the shift away from the harmful chlorofluorocarbons
 and halons by chlorofluorocarbons and halon producer and user firms;
 (4) because of the worldwide recognition of the need to move away from
 using ozone-depleting chemicals, strong international competition now
 exists to develop chemical substitutes and to produce chlorofluorocarbons-
 and halon-free products including refrigerators, electronic components,
 various foams, and automobile and commercial air conditioners. United States
 chemical producers and chlorofluorocarbons and halon user industries should
 be encouraged to successfully participate in this competition by developing
 improved chemicals and products that do not rely on chlorofluorocarbons
 and halons; and
 (5) special emphasis should be placed on developing new chlorofluorocarbons-
 and halon-free products and technologies with improved energy efficiency
 as a means of protecting the ozone layer and contributing to reductions
 in global warming.
OBJECTIVES AND NATIONAL GOAL
 SEC. 3. (a) The objective of this Act is to provide for a smooth transition
 away from the use of ozone-depleting chemicals in order to protect the
 earth's ozone layer and to limit global warming.
 (b) In order to achieve that objective, the national goal is to provide for
 an orderly and equitable shift to alternative chemicals and products and to
 facilitate the competitiveness of United States industry at home and abroad.
DEFINITIONS
 SEC. 4. As used in this Act, the term--
 (1) `Administrator' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
 Agency;
 (2) `assessment year' means the 12-month period as set forth in section 6(a)
 or as hereafter modified pursuant to this Act; and
 (3) `ozone-depleting chemicals' refers to those chemicals listed in section
 5(a) as may be modified by section 5(b);
 (4) `secretary' means the Secretary of the Treasury.
IMPOSITION OF PRODUCTION AND IMPORTATION CHARGE ON OZONE-DEPLETING CHEMICALS
 SEC. 5. (a)(i) Within 60 days following the date of the enactment of this
 Act, the Administrator shall issue such regulations as may be necessary,
 commencing with the effective date provided by the following table,
 to impose an ozone-protection charge on producers and importers of the
 following chemicals:
---------------------------------------------------------------
 Ozone-Depleting Chemical Effective Date
---------------------------------------------------------------
 Trichlorofluoromethane (CFC-11) July 1, 1989;
 Dichlorodifluoromethane (CFC-12) July 1, 1989;
 Trichlorotrifluoroethane (CFC-113) July 1, 1989;
 Dichlorotetrafluoroethane (CFC-114) July 1, 1989;
 (Mono) chloropentafluoroethane (CFC-115) July 1, 1989;
 Bromochlorodifluoroethane (Halon 1211) January 1, 1992;
 Bromotrifluorethane (Halon 1301) January 1, 1992; and
 Dibromotetrafluoroethane (Halon 2402) January 1, 1992.
---------------------------------------------------------------
 (ii) Within 60 days following the date of enactment of this Act, the
 Secretary shall issue such regulations to collect the production charge.
 (b) The Administrator shall promulgate regulations adding to the list
 of ozone-depleting chemicals referred to in subsection (a), chemicals
 which are known or can reasonably be anticipated to cause or contribute
 to stratospheric ozone depletion and whose production and importation
 he determines should be limited to protect public health and the
 environment. The Administrator shall also promulgate changes to the
 effective dates in subsection (a) if such changes are necessary to protect
 public health and the environment and are in furtherance of the goal and
 objective of this Act set forth in section 3.
 (c) In promulgating such regulations, the Administrator shall take such
 action as may be necessary to assure that no production or importation
 charge shall be imposed on any such chemicals that are used and entirely
 consumed in the production of other chemicals.
SETTING THE AMOUNT OF THE CHARGE
 SEC. 6. (a)(1) For each assessment year, the production charge shall be
 estimated using the procedures set forth in this section. The production
 charge for each assessment period will be the greater of the amounts
 calculated under this subsection or subsection (b).
 (2) The amount of the production charge shall be calculated on the basis
 of the following schedule:
 (A) Chlorofluorocarbons--
--Amount of
Assessment Period
--Base Charge
July 1, 1989 to Sept. 30, 1989
--$.25/pound
Oct. 1, 1989 to Sept. 30, 1990
--$.50/pound
Oct. 1, 1990 to Sept. 30, 1991
--$1.00/pound
Oct. 1, 1991 to Sept. 30, 1992
--$1.50/pound
Oct. 1, 1992 to Sept. 30, 1993
--$2.00/pound
Oct. 1, 1993 to Sept. 30, 1994
--$2.50/pound
and for every 12 month period thereafter $2.50/pound.
 (B) Halons--
--Amount of
Assessment Period
--Base Charge
Jan. 1, 1992 to Sept. 30, 1992
--$1.50/pound
Oct. 1, 1992 to Sept. 30, 1993
--$1.50/pound
and for every twelve month period thereafter $1.50/pound.
 (3) The Administrator shall promulgate regulations modifying the assessment
 periods consistent with any changes to the effective dates adopted under
 section 5(b).
 (4) The Administrator shall promulgate regulations modifying the amount
 of the base charge to reflect future changes in the expected price and
 availability of substitutes and alternative technologies to ozone-depleting
 chemicals.
 (5) The base charge shall be assessed against each pound (or portion
 thereof) of ozone-depleting chemical produced or imported multiplied by
 that chemical's ozone-depletion factor. The ozone-depletion factors for
 the covered chemicals are the following:
--Ozone Depletion
Ozone-Depleting Chemical
--Factor
CFC-11
--1.0
CFC-12
--1.0
CFC-113
--0.8
CFC-114
--1.0
CFC-115
--0.6
Halon 1211
--3.0
Halon 1301
--10.0
Halon 2402
--6.0
 (b)(1) The Administrator shall promulgate regulations modifying the
 factors or adding to the list in subsection (a) consistent with actions
 under section 5(b).
 (2) The charge shall be based on the calculated increase in revenues
 that result from the restrictions on the ozone-depleting chemicals in an
 assessment period. The charge shall be calculated by the Administrator as
 the total revenues from the sale of the ozone-depleting chemicals minus
 the estimated costs of production and reasonable rate of return.
 (3) Total revenues shall be determined by the Administrator based on
 reports required by the Administrator, by regulation, from each firm
 producing ozone-depletion chemicals for that assessment year. The reports
 shall include the total revenues from sales of ozone-depleting chemicals
 broken down by chemical. The reports shall be received by the Administrator
 within 30 days of the end of an assessment period.
 (4) Costs of production and reasonable rate of return shall be calculated by
 the Administrator as the 1986 weighted average price calculated separately
 for chlorofluorocarbons and for halons. To reflect future changes in
 production costs, the 1986 estimated weighted average price shall be
 multiplied each year by the producer price index for basic inorganic
 chemicals (published by the Department of Labor) for the period covered
 by that assessment year.
 (5) Regulations by the Administrator shall permit individual companies to
 petition the Administrator with documentation showing that their production
 costs have increased more than the industry average. The Administrator
 shall modify the application of the calculation of production costs if a
 valid showing is made.
 (6) The charge for importing ozone-depleting chemicals identified in section
 5(a) shall be the same charge as calculated for the production of those
 same chemicals in the applicable assessment period. The charge shall be
 assessed against the importer of record as listed on United States Customs
 Service Form 7501.
 (7) The Administrator shall notify producers and importers of the amount of
 their totaled assessed charge within 60 days of the end of the assessment
 period. Firms have within 30 days of the date of receipt of their assessment
 to submit full payment to the Secretary.
 (8) Firms exporting ozone-depleting substances shall apply to the
 Administrator for refunds for the calculated charge for the quantity
 of ozone-depleting chemicals that they exported in each assessment
 period. Applications for refunds must be submitted to the Administrator
 for approval within 30 days of the end of the applicable assessment
 period. The Administrator shall review the request for a refund and notify
 both the requestor and the Treasury within 60 days of its approval of such
 requests. Approved requests for refunds shall be paid by the Secretary.
SUPPORT FOR RESEARCH RELATED TO TECHNOLOGICAL ALTERNATIVES TO OZONE-DEPLETING
CHEMICALS
 SEC. 7. (a) All moneys received by the Secretary pursuant to this Act for
 any assessment year, up to $100 million, shall be deposited in the Ozone
 Layer and Climate Protection Trust Fund established by section 10 of this
 Act. All moneys so received in any assessment year in addition to such
 $100 million shall be deposited in the Treasury of the United States as
 miscellaneous receipts.
 (b)(1) Moneys in the Trust Fund shall be available for research grants
 as follows:
 (A) 30 percent to support research related to substitutes for ozone-depleting
 chemicals by chemical producers; and
 (B) 70 percent to support research into alternative products that are
 produced without ozone-depleting chemicals covered by this Act.
 (2) The research referred to in paragraph (1) shall include testing the
 basic properties of chemical substitutes; testing the applicability of
 possible substitutes in specific products; examining health, environmental,
 and safety issues related to the use of possible chemical substitutes;
 improving the energy efficiency of alternative technologies; monitoring
 environmental impacts; and other related purposes.
ADVISORY COMMITTEE
 SEC. 8. (a) The Administrator shall establish an advisory committee
 to advise him in connection with research to be carried out pursuant
 to this Act. Such committee shall be comprised of individuals who are
 representatives of chlorofluorocarbons and halon producers and users, the
 Department of Defense (designated by and with the approval of the Secretary
 of Defense), the Department of Commerce (designated by and with the approval
 of the Secretary of Commerce), and public interest groups. Members of the
 Committee will serve without additional pay as such.
 (b) It shall be the function of the advisory committee, at the request of
 the Administrator, to advise and make recommendations to the Administrator
 as to research to be carried out pursuant to this Act, and the making of
 grants to carry out such research.
 (c) In carrying out its function, the advisory committee shall consider,
 among other things, the quantities of ozone-depleting chemicals the
 proposed technology would replace; the timing of possible reductions with
 preference given to near-term technologies; the effect of global climate
 change; the likelihood of commercialization of the technology; the degree
 of public and private participation and support for a proposed project;
 the extent to which the research results of the project will be accessible
 to the public; and the energy efficiency that would result from the project.
GRANTS
 SEC. 9. (a) The Administrator is authorized to establish and carry out
 a grant program for the purpose of carrying out research authorized by
 this Act. Grants made under such program may be made to public and private
 entities, or combinations thereof, including consortia established expressly
 for the purpose of conducting research pursuant to this Act.
 (b) Applications for grants under this Act shall be submitted as such time
 and in such form and contain such information as the Administrator shall
 prescribe by regulation.
TRUST FUND
 SEC. 10. (a) There is established in the Treasury of the United States a
 trust fund to be known as the `Ozone Layer and Climate Protection Trust
 Fund' (referred to in this Act as the `Trust Fund'). The Trust Fund shall
 consist of such amounts as may be deposited in it as provided in this Act.
 (b) Amounts in the Trust Fund shall be available, as provided by
 appropriation Acts, to carry out the grant program under this Act.
 (c) It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Treasury to report to
 the Congress each year on the financial condition and the results of the
 operation of the Trust Fund during the preceding fiscal year and on its
 expected condition and operations during the next 5 fiscal years.
 (f)(1) It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Treasury to invest
 such portion of the Trust Fund as is not, in his judgment, required to meet
 current withdrawals. Such investments may be made only in interest-bearing
 obligations of the United States. For such purpose, such obligations may
 be acquired--
 (A) as original issue at the issue price, or
 (B) by purchase of outstanding obligations at the market price.
 (2) Any obligation acquired by such Trust Funds may be sold by the Secretary
 of the Treasury at market price. The interest on, and the proceeds from
 the sale or redemption of, such obligation held in such Trust Fund shall
 be credited to and become a part of the Trust Fund.
AUTHORIZATIONS
 SEC. 11. There are authorized to be appropriated from the Ozone Layer and
 Climate Protection Trust Fund such amounts as may be necessary to carry
 out the grant program under this Act.