S 2135 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 2135
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to enhance the enforcement
authority of the Food and Drug Administration, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
November 27 (legislative day, NOVEMBER 23), 1991
Mr. KENNEDY introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources
A BILL
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to enhance the enforcement
authority of the Food and Drug Administration, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; REFERENCE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Food, Drug, Cosmetic,
 and Device Enforcement Authorities Act'.
 (b) REFERENCE- Except as otherwise provided, whenever in this Act an
 amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of,
 a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made
 to a section or other provision of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
 (c) TABLE OF CONTENTS-
Sec. 1. Short title; reference; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Judicial recall authority.
Sec. 3. Administrative recall authority.
Sec. 4. Seizure and embargo authority.
Sec. 5. Subpoena authority.
Sec. 6. Civil money penalties.
Sec. 7. Inspections, records, and reports.
Sec. 8. Imported products.
Sec. 9. Interstate commerce.
Sec. 10. Technical amendments.
SEC. 2. JUDICIAL RECALL AUTHORITY.
 (a) AMENDMENT- Section 302(a) (21 U.S.C. 332(a)) is amended by adding
 `(1)' after `(a)' and by adding at the end the following:
 `(2) Any district court of the United States may order any appropriate
 person (including the manufacturer, importer, distributor, or retailer
 of a food, drug, device, or cosmetic) to recall a food, drug, device,
 or cosmetic which the court finds violates any provision of this Act.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Section 201 (21 U.S.C. 321) is amended by adding at the end the
 following:
 `(bb) The term `recall' means the retrieval, repair, or replacement of a
 product. Such term does not include a stock recovery or market withdrawal
 (as defined in regulations of the Secretary) which is unrelated to health
 consequences of the product involved and to any violation of this Act.
 `(cc) The term `district court of the United States' includes a United
 States court of the Territories.'.
 (2) The heading for section 302 (21 U.S.C. 332) is amended by inserting
 `and recall' after `injunction'.
SEC. 3. ADMINISTRATIVE RECALL AUTHORITY.
 (a) AMENDMENT- Chapter III (21 U.S.C. 331 et seq.) is amended by adding
 at the end the following:
`SEC. 308. RECALL.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- If the Secretary finds that there is a reasonable
 probability that a food, drug, or cosmetic would cause serious, adverse
 health consequences or death, the Secretary shall issue an order requiring
 the appropriate person (including the manufacturer, importer, distributor,
 or retailer of such food, drug, or cosmetic) to immediately cease any
 distribution of the food, drug, or cosmetic. The order shall provide the
 person subject to the order with an opportunity for an informal hearing,
 to be held not later than 10 days after the issuance of the order, on the
 actions required by the order and on whether the order should be amended
 to require a recall of the food, drug, or cosmetic.
 `(b) ACTION AFTER HEARING- If, after providing an opportunity for a hearing
 under subsection (a), the Secretary determines--
 `(1) that inadequate grounds exist to support the actions required by the
 order, the Secretary shall vacate such order; or
 `(2) that the order should be amended to include a recall of the food,
 drug, or cosmetic with respect to which the order was issued, the Secretary
 shall amend the order to require a recall.
 `(c) RECALL ORDER- An order under subsection (b)(2)--
 `(1) shall specify a timetable in which the recall of the food, drug, or
 cosmetic shall occur and shall require periodic reports to the Secretary
 describing the progress of the recall;
 `(2) shall not include the recall of a food, drug, or cosmetic from
 individuals; and
 `(3) shall provide for notice to individuals subject to risks associated
 with such food, drug, or cosmetic.
In providing the notice required by paragraph (3), the Secretary may use the
assistance of health professionals. If a significant number of individuals
described in such paragraph cannot be identified, the Secretary shall notify
the individuals pursuant to section 705(b). Such an order shall be considered
final agency action.
 `(d) REPORTS- Manufacturers, distributors, and importers of foods, drugs,
 or cosmetics shall report to the Secretary any recall of a food, drug,
 or cosmetic initiated by the manufacturer, distributor, or importer. Such
 a report shall be made not later than 5 days after such a recall or within
 such shorter period as the Secretary may by regulation require.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 301 (21 U.S.C. 331) is amended by adding
 at the end the following:
 `(u) The failure to comply with a recall order under 308(b)(2) or a
 requirement to report under section 308(d).'.
SEC. 4. SEIZURE AND EMBARGO AUTHORITY.
 (a) SEIZURE- Section 304(a) (21 U.S.C. 334(a)) is amended, in the first
 sentence of paragraph (1), by striking out `Any article' and all that follows
 through `shall be liable' and inserting in lieu thereof `Any article of food,
 drug, device, or cosmetic that is in violation of this Act shall be liable'.
 (b) EMBARGO-
 (1) TEMPORARY DETENTION-
 (A) Section 304(g)(1) (21 U.S.C. 334(g)(1)) is amended--
 (i)(I) in the first sentence, by striking out all that precedes `such
 officer or employee' and inserting in lieu thereof `If, during an inspection
 conducted under section 704, an officer or employee of the Department has
 reason to believe that a food, drug, device, or cosmetic is in violation
 of this Act,'; and
 (II) in such first sentence, by striking out `he' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `the Secretary' and by striking out `the device' and inserting in
 lieu thereof `the product';
 (ii) by striking out the last two sentences, and in the second and third
 sentences, by striking out `a device' each place it appears and inserting
 in lieu thereof `a product'; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following: `A detention order under this
 paragraph shall be considered final agency action.'.
 (B) Within 6 months of the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary
 of Health and Human Services shall propose a revision to the regulations
 in effect on such date under section 304(g) of the Federal Food, Drug,
 and Cosmetic Act to include food, drugs, and cosmetics. Within 6 months of
 the date such proposed revision is published in the Federal Register, the
 Secretary shall issue a final revision of such regulations. If the Secretary
 does not issue a final revision of such regulations upon the expiration
 of such 12 months, the Congress finds that there is good cause for the
 proposed revision to be considered the final revision of such regulations
 without response to comment because the implementation of the amendments to
 such section 304(g) is essential to protect the public health. Consequently
 in such event, the proposed revision of such regulations shall become the
 final revision. There shall be promptly published in the Federal Register a
 notice of the new status of the proposed revision. If the proposed revision
 of such regulations becomes final under this subparagraph, the Secretary
 shall complete the rulemaking begun with such proposed revision.
 (2) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (A) Section 301(r) (21 U.S.C. 331(r)) is amended--
 (i) by striking out `device' the first time it occurs and inserting in
 lieu thereof `food, drug, device, or cosmetic'; and
 (ii) by striking out `the device' and inserting in lieu thereof `such
 product'.
 (B) Section 304(g)(2) (21 U.S.C. 334(g)(2)) is amended by striking out
 `device' each place it appears and inserting in lieu thereof `product'.
SEC. 5. SUBPOENA AUTHORITY.
 Section 307 (21 U.S.C. 337) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(c)(1) For the purpose of any hearing, investigation, or other proceeding
 (other than a rule making) respecting a violation of this Act, the
 Commissioner may issue subpoenas requiring--
 `(A) the attendance and testimony of witnesses; and
 `(B) the production of documentary evidence,
relevant to the subject matter of the proceeding with respect to which the
subpoena is issued. Such a subpoena shall be issued in accordance with
regulations or guidelines issued by the Secretary. Such regulations and
guidelines shall; to the extent appropriate, include the requirements of
section 20 of the Federal Trade Commission Act.
 `(2) The Commissioner may not delegate the authority to issue a subpoena
 under paragraph (1), except to the head of the legal division of the Food
 and Drug Administration or an administrative law judge presiding over a
 hearing for which a subpoena is to be issued.
 `(d) In case of a refusal to obey a subpoena duly served upon any person
 under subsection (c), any district court of the United States for the
 judicial district in which such person charged with refusal to obey is found,
 resides, or transacts business, upon application by the Commissioner, shall
 have jurisdiction to issue an order requiring such person to appear and give
 testimony or to appear and produce evidence, or both. The failure to obey
 such order of the court may be punished by the court as contempt thereof.
 `(e) No subpoena issued under subsection (c) may require the disclosure
 of any record--
 `(1) identifying any formula or process information which is a trade secret;
 `(2) identifying an individual named in a medical file or an individual
 who is a research subject of a clinical trial; or
 `(3) which may not be inspected under section 704(c),
unless the Commissioner has made a finding that such information is necessary
for the hearing, investigation, or other proceeding for which the subpoena
was issued and has instituted regulations or guidelines to protect the
confidentiality of such record. Such regulations and guidelines shall, to the
extent appropriate, include the requirements of section 21 of the Federal
Trade Commission Act. The Commissioner may not delegate the authority to
make the finding prescribed in this subsection.'.
SEC. 6. CIVIL MONEY PENALTIES.
 Chapter III (21 U.S.C. 331 et seq.), as amended by section 3(a), is amended
 by adding at the end the following new section:
`SEC. 309. CIVIL MONEY PENALTIES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Any person that violates any requirement of this Act other
 than a requirement relating to devices shall be subject to a civil money
 penalty assessed under subsection (c). If a person commits such a violation,
 such person shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $25,000
 in the case of an individual, or $100,000 in the case of any other person,
 for each act involved in such violation, except that if the civil penalty
 is assessed for multiple violations, the civil penalty for any individual
 or person shall be not more than $3,000,000 for all violations adjudicated
 in a single proceeding.
 `(b) VIOLATIONS- Any person that in connection with a matter under the
 jurisdiction of the Food and Drug Administration under this Act--
 `(1) knowingly made or caused to be made, to any officer, employee, or
 agent of the Department, a false statement or representation with relation
 to a material fact;
 `(2) knowingly failed to disclose, to an officer, employee, or agent of the
 Department, a material fact which such person has an obligation to disclose;
 `(3) bribed or attempted to bribe, or paid or attempted to pay an illegal
 gratuity to, any officer, employee, or agent of the Department;
 `(4) destroyed, altered, removed, or secreted, or procured the destruction,
 alteration, removal, or secretion of, any material document or other
 material evidence which was the property of or in the possession of the
 Department, for the purpose of interfering with the Department's discharge
 of its responsibilities; or
 `(5) knowingly obstructed an investigation of the Department,
shall be subject to a civil money penalty assessed under subsection (c). If
a person commits such a violation, such person shall be subject to a civil
penalty of not more than $250,000 in the case of an individual, or $1,000,000
in the case of any other person, for each act involved in such violation.
 `(c) ASSESSMENT-
 `(1) ORDER- A civil money penalty under subsection (a) or (b) shall be
 assessed by the Secretary by an order determined on the record after
 affording the person written notice and an opportunity for an agency
 hearing on disputed issues of material fact and the amount of the penalty.
 `(2) LIMITATIONS- The Secretary may not initiate an action under paragraph
 (1) with respect to any act with respect to which civil money penalties are
 to be assessed more than 6 years after the date when facts, material to such
 act, are known or reasonably should have been known by the Secretary, but
 in no event more than 10 years after the date on which the act took place.
 `(d) CONSIDERATIONS- In determining the amount of any penalty imposed
 pursuant to subsection (a) or (b), the Secretary shall take into account
 such matters as justice may require, including, as the Secretary finds
 appropriate, the nature of the act subject to penalty, the degree of
 culpability, the gain or advantage to the person or cost or other injury
 to others resulting from the violative act, any history of prior offenses,
 and the financial condition of the person subject to penalty.
 `(e) JUDICIAL REVIEW- Any person that is subject to an order assessing a
 penalty under subsection (b)(1) may obtain a review of such order by the
 United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia or for any
 other circuit in which the person resides or in which the person has its
 principal place of business, by filing a petition with such court within
 60 days following the date of the order.
 `(f) COURT ACTION- Civil money penalties assessed on a person under
 subsection (b)(1) may be recovered in a civil action in the name of
 the United States brought by the Secretary in accordance with this
 subsection or by the Attorney General in the United States district court
 for any district in which such person resides or transacts business. The
 amount of such penalty, including any amount agreed upon in compromise,
 may be deducted from any sum then or later owing by the United States to
 the person against whom the penalty has been imposed. Before initiating
 such an action, the Secretary shall notify the Attorney General of the
 Secretary's intent to initiate such an action. The Secretary shall not
 initiate such an action until after--
 `(1) the Attorney General has advised the Secretary of the Attorney
 General's decision not to proceed with criminal prosecution; or
 `(2) 60 days have elapsed without the Secretary having been notified by
 the Attorney General of a decision to proceed with criminal prosecution.
 `(g) DEFINITION- For purposes of this section, the term `knowingly' means
 that a person, with respect to information or an action--
 `(1) has actual knowledge of the information or action; or
 `(2) acts in deliberate ignorance or reckless disregard of the truth or
 falsity of the information or of the action.'.
SEC. 7. INSPECTIONS, RECORDS, AND REPORTS.
 (a) GENERAL AUTHORITY- Section 704 (21 U.S.C. 374) is amended to read
 as follows:
`SEC. 704. INSPECTIONS, RECORDS, AND REPORTS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- For purposes of enforcement of this Act, officers or
 employees duly designated by the Secretary, upon presenting appropriate
 credentials and a written notice to the owner, operator, or agent in charge,
 are authorized, except as provided in subsections (b) and (c)--
 `(1) to enter and inspect at reasonable times, within reasonable limits,
 and in a reasonable manner--
 `(A) any factory, warehouse, or establishment (including consulting
 laboratories) in which--
 `(i) food, drugs, devices, or cosmetics; or
 `(ii) packaging, labeling, or containers for such products,
are manufactured, processed, packed, or held for introduction into interstate
commerce or after such introduction; or
 `(B) any vehicle being used to transport or hold such products in interstate
 commerce; and
 `(2) to collect and retain samples of articles referred to in paragraph
 (1) or of any other thing found during an inspection under such paragraph
 and bearing on whether such articles are in violation of this Act.
 `(b) SCOPE-
 `(1) FOODS AND COSMETICS- An inspection under subsection (a) of a food
 or cosmetic shall extend to equipment, finished and unfinished materials,
 containers, labeling, processes, controls, and facilities bearing on whether
 the articles are in violation of this Act and to records or portions of
 records which contain information which--
 `(A) provide the identity and amount of ingredients used in the food
 or cosmetic;
 `(B) provide the temperature at which the food or cosmetic is processed
 and the time taken to process the product;
 `(C) provide the results of quality control tests performed on the food
 or cosmetic;
 `(D) provide information pertaining to the movement of the food or cosmetic
 in commerce or the holding of the product during or after such movement; and
 `(E) provide information pertaining to consumer complaints concerning the
 food or cosmetic.
 `(2) DRUGS AND DEVICES- An inspection under subsection (a) of a drug
 or device shall extend to all things (including equipment, finished
 and unfinished materials, containers, labeling, records, files, papers,
 processes, controls, and facilities) bearing on whether the articles are
 in violation of this Act.
 `(3) INFANT FORMULAS- An officer or employee making an inspection under
 subsection (a) for purposes of enforcing the requirements of section 412
 applicable to infant formulas shall be permitted, at all reasonable times,
 to have access to and to copy and verify any records--
 `(A) bearing on whether the infant formula manufactured or held in the
 facility inspected meets the requirements of section 412; or
 `(B) required to be maintained under section 412.
 `(c) LIMITATIONS-
 `(1) INSPECTION SITES- No inspection under subsection (a)(1) shall
 extend to--
 `(A) pharmacies which maintain establishments in conformance with any
 applicable local laws regulating the practice of pharmacy and medicine and
 which are regularly engaged in dispensing prescription drugs or devices,
 upon prescriptions of practitioners licensed to administer such drugs or
 devices to patients under the care of such practitioners in the course of
 their professional practice, and which do not, either through a subsidiary
 or otherwise, manufacture, prepare, propagate, compound, or process drugs
 or devices for sale other than in the regular course of their business of
 dispensing or selling drugs or devices at retail;
 `(B) practitioners licensed by law to prescribe or administer drugs,
 or prescribe or use devices, as the case may be, and who manufacture,
 prepare, propagate, compound, or process drugs, or manufacture or process
 devices solely for use in the course of their professional practice;
 `(C) persons who manufacture; prepare, propagate, compound, or process
 drugs, or manufacture or process devices solely for use in research,
 teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale; or
 `(D) such other classes of persons as the Secretary may by regulation exempt
 from the application of such inspection upon a finding that inspection
 as applied to such classes of persons in accordance with subsection (a)
 is not necessary for the protection of the public health.
 `(2) RECORDS- No inspection under paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (b)
 shall extend to--
 `(A) records disclosing financial data, sales data other than shipment
 data, pricing data, personnel data (other than data as to qualifications
 of technical and professional personnel performing functions subject
 to this Act), and research data (other than data relating to new drugs,
 antibiotic drugs, and devices and subject to reporting and inspection under
 regulations lawfully issued pursuant to section 505 (i) or (j), section
 507 (d) or (g), section 519, or 520(g), data relating to other drugs or
 devices which in the case of a new drug would be subject to reporting or
 inspection under lawful regulations issued pursuant to section 505(j)),
 or other data relating to a food or cosmetic which data are subject to
 reporting and inspection requirements similar to such requirements under
 the regulations referred to in the parenthetical in this subparagraph; or
 `(B) records disclosing the identity of any spice; flavoring, or color which
 is not required to be certified under section 706(c) if the inspector is
 furnished with information providing the identity of all such ingredients
 used in the factory, warehouse, or establishment inspected.
 `(3) NOTICE- A separate notice shall be given for each inspection under
 subsection (a), but a notice shall not be required for each entry made
 during the period covered by the inspection. Each such inspection shall
 be commenced and completed with reasonable promptness.
 `(d) COMPLETION- Upon completion of any inspection under subsection (a)
 of a factory, warehouse, consulting laboratory, or other establishment, and
 before leaving the premises, the officer or employee making the inspection
 shall give to the owner, operator, or agent in charge a report in writing
 setting forth any conditions or practices observed by such officer or
 employee which, in the officer or employee's judgment, indicate that any
 food, drug, device, or cosmetic in such establishment--
 `(1) consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid, or decomposed
 substance; or
 `(2) has been prepared, packed, or held under unsanitary conditions whereby
 it may have become contaminated with filth, or whereby it may have been
 rendered injurious to health.
A copy of such report shall be sent promptly to the Secretary.
 `(e) SAMPLES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- If the officer or employee making an inspection under
 subsection (a) of a factory, warehouse, or other establishment has
 obtained any sample in the course of the inspection, upon completion of the
 inspection and before leaving the premises the officer or employee shall
 give to the owner, operator, or agent in charge a receipt describing the
 samples obtained.
 `(2) FOOD SAMPLES- Whenever in the course of an inspection under subsection
 (a) of a factory or other establishment where food is manufactured,
 processed, or packed, the officer or employee making the inspection obtains
 a sample of any such food, and an analysis is made of such sample for the
 purpose of ascertaining whether such food consists in whole or in part
 of any filthy, putrid, or decomposed substance, or is otherwise unfit for
 food, a copy of the results of such analysis shall be furnished promptly
 to the owner, operator, or agent in charge.
 `(f) RECORDS AND REPORTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each manufacturer, importer, and distributor of products
 regulated under this Act and each owner, operator, or agent in charge of a
 factory, warehouse, consulting laboratory, or other establishment subject
 to inspection under subsection (a) shall maintain such records and make
 such reports as the Secretary determines by regulation to be necessary
 to enable the manufacturer, importer, or distributor or owner, operator,
 or agent to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
 `(2) DEVICES- Every person required under section 519 or 520(g) to maintain
 records and every person who is in charge or custody of such records shall,
 upon request of an officer or employee designated by the Secretary, permit
 such officer or employee at all reasonable times to have access to, and
 to copy and verify, such records.'.
 (b) OTHER AUTHORITIES- Section 702(e) (21 U.S.C. 372(e)) is amended--
 (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking out `relating to
 counterfeit drugs' and inserting in lieu thereof `relating to counterfeit
 drugs, the illegal distribution of steroids or steroid substitutes, or a
 violation of section 301(t)'; and
 (2) in paragraph (4)--
 (A) by striking out `with respect to such drugs';
 (B) by striking out `his' and inserting in lieu thereof `such officer or
 employee's'; and
 (C) by striking out `he' and inserting in lieu thereof `such officer
 or employee'.
 (c) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Section 301(e) (21 U.S.C. 331(e)) is amended
 by striking out `or 519' and inserting in lieu thereof `519, or 704(e)'.
SEC. 8. IMPORTED PRODUCTS.
 (a) AMENDMENTS- Section 801 (21 U.S.C. 381) is amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 801. IMPORTS AND EXPORTS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL-
 `(1) NOTICE AND SAMPLES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of the Treasury shall notify the Secretary
 of Health and Human Services of food, drugs, devices, and cosmetics which
 are being imported or offered for import into the United States. The
 Secretary of the Treasury shall deliver to the Secretary of Health and
 Human Services, upon the Secretary's request, samples of such food, drugs,
 devices, and cosmetics.
 `(B) DRUGS AND DEVICES- The Secretary of Health and Human Services
 shall furnish to the Secretary of the Treasury a list of establishments
 registered pursuant to section 510(i). If the Secretary of the Treasury
 determines that any drugs or devices imported or offered for import into
 the United States were manufactured, prepared, propagated, compounded,
 or processed in an establishment not registered under such section, the
 Secretary shall provide the Secretary of Health and Human Services with
 samples of such drugs or devices.
 `(C) CLAIMS- The owner or consignee of an article, a sample of which was
 delivered to the Secretary of Health and Human Services or was examined
 under this paragraph, may not make a claim for a payment for such sample.
 `(D) PROCEDURE- If a sample of an article is delivered to the Secretary of
 Health and Human Services under subparagraph (A) or (B), the Secretary of
 the Treasury shall give notice of such delivery to the owner or consignee of
 such article. Such owner or consignee shall be given a reasonable opportunity
 to present views to the Secretary of Health and Human Services respecting
 the admission of such article.
 `(2) REFUSAL OF ADMISSION- If it appears from the examination by the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services of samples of an article provided
 under paragraph (1) or otherwise that--
 `(A) such article has been manufactured, processed, or packed under
 unsanitary conditions or, in the case of a device, the methods used in, or
 the facilities or controls used for, the manufacture, packing, storage,
 or installation of the device do not conform to the requirements of
 section 520(f);
 `(B) such article is forbidden or restricted in sale in the country in
 which it was produced or from which it was exported; or
 `(C) such article is adulterated; misbranded, or in violation of this Act,
such article shall be refused admission, except as provided in subsection
(b). Subparagraph (B) shall not be construed to prohibit the admission of
any narcotic drug the importation of which is permitted under the Controlled
Substances Import and Export Act.
 `(b) HANDLING OF ARTICLES BEFORE ADMISSION- Pending a decision as to the
 admission of an article being offered for import, the Secretary of the
 Treasury may authorize delivery of such article to the owner or consignee
 upon the execution by the owner or consignee of a good and sufficient
 bond providing for the payment of such liquidated damages in the event of
 default as may be required pursuant to regulations of the Secretary of the
 Treasury. The bond required for an owner or consignee shall be equal to the
 invoice value of the article being imported or offered for import, except
 that if the owner or consignee has defaulted 2 times on a bond required by
 this subsection within the previous 12 months, the bond shall be equal to at
 least 3 times such invoice value. If an owner or consignee defaults within
 the previous 12 months on a bond which is subject to the increased valuation,
 no delivery may be made under this subsection to the owner or consignee.
 `(c) CORRECTION OF DEFICIENCY- If it appears to the Secretary of Health
 and Human Services that an article described in subsection (a)(2)(C) can,
 by relabeling or other action, be brought into compliance with this Act or
 rendered other than a food, drug, device, or cosmetic, final determination as
 to admission of such article may be deferred. Upon filing of timely written
 application by the owner or consignee and the execution by the owner or
 consignee of a bond as provided in subsection (b), the Secretary may,
 in accordance with regulations, authorize the applicant to perform such
 action specified in such authorization. All such action pursuant to such
 authorization shall be under the supervision of an officer or employee of
 the Department of Health and Human Services designated by the Secretary,
 or an officer or employee of the Department of the Treasury designated by
 the Secretary of the Treasury.
 `(d) REFUSED ARTICLES-
 `(1) REFUSAL OF DELIVERY- The Secretary of the Treasury shall refuse to
 authorize delivery of an article refused admission under subsection (a)(2)
 to the owner or consignee of the article. If the Secretary of the Treasury
 refuses to authorize the delivery of an article, the article shall remain
 under the physical custody of the Secretary of the Treasury pending decision
 as to its admission.
 `(2) ACTION AFTER REFUSAL- As to any article which is refused admission
 under subsection (a)--
 `(A) in the case of an article which the Secretary of Health and Human
 Services finds, after affording the owner or consignee an opportunity to
 correct the deficiency which caused the article to be in violation of this
 Act and for an informal hearing, that there is a reasonable probability that
 the use of, or exposure to, such article will cause significant adverse
 health consequences or death, the Secretary of the Treasury shall cause
 the destruction of such article--
 `(i) in not less than 10 days after the date of a decision in a hearing; or
 `(ii) in not less than 10 days after the date of the notice of such refusal,
whichever is later; or
 `(B) in the case of any other article, the Secretary of the Treasury shall
 cause the destruction of such article unless such article is exported or the
 owner or consignee has corrected the deficiency which caused the article
 to be in violation of this Act, within 30 days of the date of notice of
 such refusal or within such additional time as may be prescribed pursuant
 to regulations of the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
A decision on a hearing under subparagraph (A) is final agency action.
 `(e) MARK- If an article which is refused admission is to be exported,
 the Secretary of the Treasury shall require the importer of such article to
 mark it `United States refused entry' before it is exported and to report
 to the Secretary the intended destination of such article. Before such
 an article may be exported, the Secretary of the Treasury shall certify
 to the Secretary of Health and Human Services that the article has been
 marked as required and that it will be exported from the port through
 which the owner or consignee attempted to import it.
 `(f) PAYMENT OF EXPENSES- All expenses (including travel, per diem or
 subsistence, and salaries of officers or employees of the United States)
 in connection with the destruction provided for in subsection (d) and the
 supervision of the relabeling or other action authorized under subsection
 (c), the amount of such expenses to be determined in accordance with
 regulations, and all expenses in connection with the storage, cartage, or
 labor with respect to any article refused admission under subsection (a),
 shall be paid by the owner or consignee and, in default of such payment,
 shall constitute a lien against any future importations made by such owner
 or consignee.
 `(g) PRESCRIPTION DRUGS-
 `(1) IMPORT RESTRICTION- Except as provided in paragraph (2), no drug
 subject to section 503(b) which is manufactured in a State and exported
 may be imported into the United States unless the drug is imported by the
 person who manufactured the drug.
 `(2) AUTHORITY TO IMPORT- The Secretary may authorize the importation of
 a drug the importation of which is prohibited by paragraph (1) if the drug
 is required for emergency medical care.
 `(h) EXPORT AUTHORITY-
 `(1) EXPORTS- A food, drug, device, or cosmetic intended for export shall
 not be deemed to be adulterated or misbranded under this Act if it--
 `(A) accords to the specifications of the foreign purchaser;
 `(B) is not in conflict with the laws of the country to which it is intended
 for export;
 `(C) is labeled on the outside of the shipping package that it is intended
 for export; and
 `(D) is not sold or offered for sale in domestic commerce.
This paragraph does not authorize the exportation of any new animal drug,
or an animal feed bearing or containing a new animal drug, which is unsafe
within the meaning of section 512.
 `(2) APPLICATION- Paragraph (1) does not apply to any device--
 `(A) which does not comply with an applicable requirement of section 514
 or 515;
 `(B) which under section 520(g) is exempt from either such section; or
 `(C) which is a banned device under section 516,
unless, in addition to the requirements of paragraph (1), the Secretary
has determined that the exportation of the device is not contrary to public
health and safety and has the approval of the country to which it is intended
for export.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Section 301(t) (21 U.S.C. 331(t)) is amended by striking out `801(d)(1)'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `801(e)(1)'.
 (2) Section 301 (21 U.S.C. 331) (as amended by section 3(b)) is amended
 by adding at the end the following:
 `(v) The failure to place on an article a mark required by section 801(a)
 or the removal or alteration of such a mark and the failure to export
 an article bearing such mark through the port through which the owner or
 consignee attempted to import it.
 `(w) The importation or introduction or delivery for introduction into
 interstate commerce of an article which has been refused admission under
 section 801.'.
 (3) Section 303(b)(1) (21 U.S.C. 333(b)(1)) is amended by striking out
 `801(d)(1)' and inserting in lieu thereof `801(e)(1)'.
 (4) Section 304(d)(1) (21 U.S.C. 334(d)(1)) is amended--
 (A) by striking out `801(d)' the first time it appears and inserting in
 lieu thereof `801(f)'; and
 (B) by striking out `801(d)' each time it appears and inserting in lieu
 thereof `801(e)'.
 (5) Section 802 (21 U.S.C. 382) is amended, in subsections (b)(1)(G)
 and (f)(1)(E), by striking out `801(d)(1)' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `801(e)(1)'.
 (c) REGULATIONS- The Secretary of the Treasury shall promulgate regulations--
 (1) for the marking under section 801(a) of the Federal Food, Drug,
 and Cosmetic Act (as amended by subsection (a)) of articles refused
 admission, and
 (2) prescribing the period for the correction of a deficiency in an article
 under section 801(c)(3) of such Act (as amended by subsection (a)),
within one year of the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 9. INTERSTATE COMMERCE.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) Section 201(b) (21 U.S.C. 321(b)) is amended by striking out `and
 (2)' and inserting in lieu thereof `(2)' and by adding before the period
 the following:`, or (3) commerce involving an article or activity which
 affects interstate commerce'.
 (2) Section 531(4) (21 U.S.C. 360hh(4)) is amended by `and (B)' and inserting
 in lieu thereof `(B)' and by adding before the period the following:`, or (C)
 commerce involving an article or activity which affects interstate commerce'
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 709 (21 U.S.C. 379a) is amended by
 striking out `device' and inserting in lieu thereof `food, drug, device,
 or cosmetic,'.
SEC. 10. TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS.
 Sections 201(c), (d), and (y), and and section 801 (21 U.S.C. 321(c),
 (d), and (y), and 381) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act are
 each amended by striking out `Health, Education, and Welfare' each place
 it appears and inserting in lieu thereof `Health and Human Services' and
 section 201(d) (21 U.S.C. 321(d)) is amended by adding before the period
 the following: `and the term `Commissioner' means the Commissioner of Food
 and Drugs'.