HR 2585 SC
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2585
To control the release of toxic air pollutants, to reduce the threat of
catastrophic chemical accidents, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
June 8, 1989
Mr. LELAND (for himself, Mr. MOLINARI, Mr. FLORIO, Mr. SIKORSKI, Mr. WAXMAN,
Mr. TORRES, Mrs. ROUKEMA, Mr. FORD of Tennessee, Mr. NOWAK, Mr. SCHEUER,
Mr. MARKEY, Mr. SAXTON, Mr. SMITH of New Jersey, and Mr. BATES) introduced
the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
August 29, 1989
Additional sponsors: Mr. MINETA, Mr. OBERSTAR, Mr. PALLONE, Mr. RAVENEL,
Mr. SABO, Mr. EDWARDS of California, Mr. CARDIN, Mr. VENTO, Mr. YATES,
Mr. HAYES of Illinois, Ms. PELOSI, Mr. SMITH of New Hampshire, Mr. DYMALLY,
Mr. PAYNE of New Jersey, Mr. CLAY, Mr. AUCOIN, Mr. OBEY, and Mr. Kostmayer
A BILL
To control the release of toxic air pollutants, to reduce the threat of
catastrophic chemical accidents, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Air Toxics Control Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. HAZARDOUS AIR POLLUTANTS.
 Section 112 of the Clean Air Act is amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 112. HAZARDOUS AIR POLLUTANTS.
 `(a) DEFINITIONS-
 `(1) The term `major emitting facility' means all stationary sources which
 (A) belong to the same industrial grouping, (B) are located on one or more
 contiguous or adjacent properties, (C) are under the control of the same
 person (or persons under common control), and (D) in the aggregate, emit,
 or have the potential to emit, considering installed and operating controls,
 10 tons per year or more of any hazardous air pollutant or 25 tons per year
 or more of any combination of hazardous air pollutants. The Administrator
 may establish a lesser quantity, or in the case of radionuclides different
 criteria, for a major emitting facility than that specified in the
 previous sentence, on the basis of the potency of the air pollutant,
 other characteristics of the air pollutant, or other relevant factors.
 `(2) The term `area source' means any source of a hazardous air pollutant
 which is neither part of a major emitting facility nor a source regulated
 under title II.
 `(3) The term `stationary source' means any building, structure, installation
 or stationary pollutant emitting activity which emits, or may emit, any
 hazardous air pollutant.
 `(4) The term `modification' means any physical change in, or change in
 the method of operation of, a major emitting facility which increases
 the amount of any hazardous air pollutant emitted by the facility or
 which results in the emission of a hazardous air pollutant not previously
 emitted. The Administrator may establish a de minimus amount of emissions
 increase which shall not be considered a modification for purposes of this
 paragraph. Such amount shall not exceed the amount which may be established
 in accordance with the same standards as are used in establishing a de
 minimus level under subsection (m).
 `(5) The term `owner or operator' means any person who owns, leases,
 operates, controls, or supervises a major emitting facility
 `(6) The term `new major emitting facility' means a major emissions
 facility in any category the construction or modification of which is
 commenced after the publication of regulations (or, if earlier, proposed
 regulations) establishing a standard under this section applicable to such
 category of major emitting facilities.
 `(7) The term `existing major emitting facility' means any major emitting
 facility other than a new major emitting facility.
 `(8) The term `hazardous air pollutant' means an air pollutant listed
 pursuant to subsection (b).
 `(9) The term `adverse environmental effects' means adverse effects to
 wildlife, aquatic life or other natural resources including disruption
 of local ecosystems, impacts on populations of endangered or threatened
 species, degradation of environmental quality, or other comparable effects.
 `(10) The term `permitting authority' means the Administrator, except that
 in the case of a State with an approved permit program under this section,
 such term means the responsible State official designated under the State
 program as the permitting authority for purposes of such program.
 `(11) The term `threshold' means the concentration level of a substance
 below which no serious adverse effects to human health occur, with an
 ample margin of safety.
 `(12) The term `serious adverse effects to human health' means an increase
 in mortality or serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness,
 including, but not limited to, effects which are carcinogenic, mutagenic,
 teratogenic, neurotoxic, which cause reproductive dysfunction, or which
 are acutely or chronically toxic, whether individually or by reason of
 cumulative or synergistic effects.
 `(b) LIST OF HAZARDOUS POLLUTANTS-
 `(1) INITIAL LIST- The Congress establishes for purposes of this section
 the following list of hazardous air pollutants:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 CAS Number Chemical Name
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 75070 Acetaldehyde
 60355 Acetamide
 75058 Acetonitrile
 98862 Acetophenone
 53963 2-Acetylaminofluorine
 107028 Acrolein
 79061 Acrylamide
 79107 Acrylic acid
 107131 Acrylonitrile
 309002 Aldrin
 107051 Allyl chloride
 92671 4-Aminobiphenyl
 7664417 Ammonia
 62533 Aniline
 90040 o-Anisidine
 7440360 Antimony
 7440382 Arsenic (inorganic including arsine)
 1332214 Asbestos
 7440393 Barium
 71432 Benzene
 92875 Benzidine
 50328 Benzo(a)pyrene
 98077 Benzotrichloride
 100447 Benzyl chloride
 7440417 Beryllium
 92524 Biphenyl
 117817 Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (DEHP)
 542881 Bis(chloromethyl)ether
 75252 Bromoform
 106990 1,3-Butadiene
 85687 Butyl benzyl phthalate
 7440439 Cadmium
 156627 Calcium cyanamide
 133062 Captan
 63252 Cabaryl
 75150 Carbon disulfide
 56235 Carbon tetrachloride
 120809 Catechol
 133904 Chloramben
 57749 Chlordane
 7782505 Chlorine
 79118 Chloroacetic acid
 532274 2-Chloroacetophenone
 108907 Chlorobenzene
 510156 Chlorobenzilate
 67663 Chloroform
 107302 Chloromethyl methyl ether
 126998 Chloroprene
 7440473 Chromium
 7440484 Cobalt
 0 Coke Oven Emissions
 7440508 Copper
 1319773 Cresols/Cresylic acid (isomers and mixture), 95487, 108394, 106445
 57125 Cyanide, 74908
 94757 2,4-D, salts and esters
 3547044 DDE
 334883 Diazomethane
 132649 Dibenzofurans
 96128 1,2-Dibromo-3-chloropropane
 84742 Dibutylphthalate
 106467 1,4-Dichlorobenzene(p)
 91941 3,3-Dichlorobenzidene
 111444 Dichloroethyl ether (Bis(2-chloroethyl)ether)
 542756 1,3-Dichloropropene
 62737 Dichlorvos
 115322 Dicofol (Kelthane)
 60571 Dieldrin
 111422 Diethanolamine
 121697 N,N-Diethyl aniline (N,N-Dimethylaniline)
 64675 Diethyl sulfate
 119904 3,3-Dimethoxybenzidine
 60117 Dimethyl aminoazobenzene
 119937 3,3-Dimethyl benzidine
 79447 Dimethyl carbamoyl chloride
 68122 Dimethyl formamide
 57147 1,1-Dimethyl hydrazine
 131113 Dimethyl phthalate
 77781 Dimethyl sulfate
 534521 4,6-Dinitro-o-cresol, and salts
 51285 2,4-Dinitrophenol
 121142 2,4-Dinitrotoluene
 123911 1,4-Dioxane (1,4-Diethyleneoxide)
 122667 1,2-Diphenylhydrazine
 106898 Epichlorohydrin (1-Chloro-2,3-epoxypropane)
 140885 Ethyl acrylate
 100414 Ethyl benzene
 51796 Ethyl carbamate (Urethane)
 75003 Ethyl chloride (Chloroethane)
 106934 Ethylene dibromide (Dibromoethane)
 107062 Ethylene dichloride (1,2-Dichloroethane)
 107211 Ethylene glycol
 110805 Ethylene glycol monoethyl ether (2-Ethoxyethanol)
 151564 Ethylene imine (Aziridine)
 75218 Ethylene oxide
 96457 Ethylene thiourea
 75343 Ethylidene dichloride (1,1-Dichloroethane)
 50000 Formaldehyde
 76448 Heptachlor
 118741 Hexachlorobenzene
 87683 Hexachlorobutadiene
 77474 Hexachlorocyclopentadiene
 67721 Hexachloroethane
 822060 Hexamethylene-1,6-diisocyanate
 680319 Hexamethylphosphoramide
 302012 Hydrazine
 7647010 Hydrochloric acid
 7664393 Hydrogen fluoride (Hydrofluoric acid)
 7783064 Hydrogen sulfide
 123319 Hydroquinone
 78591 Isophorone
 7439921 Lead
 58899 Lindane (all isomers)
 108316 Maleic anhydride
 7439965 Manganese
 7439976 Mercury
 67561 Methanol
 72435 Methoxychlor
 109864 2-Methoxyethanol (Methyl cellosolve)
 74839 Methyl bromide (Bromomethane)
 74873 Methyl chloride (Chloromethane)
 71556 Methyl chloroform (1,1,1-Trichloroethane)
 78933 Methyl ethyl ketone (2-Butanone)
 60344 Methyl hydrazine
 74884 Methyl iodide (Iodomethane)
 108101 Methyl isobutyl ketone (Hexone)
 624839 Methyl isocyanate
 80626 Methyl methacrylate
 101144 4,4-Methylene bis(2-chloroaniline)
 75092 Methylene chloride (Dichloromethane)
 101688 Methylene diphenyl diisocyanate (MDI)
 101779 4,4-Methylenedianiline
 91203 Naphthalene
 7440020 Nickel
 7697372 Nitric acid
 98953 Nitrobenzene
 92933 4-Nitrobiphenyl
 1836755 Nitrofen
 100027 4-Nitrophenol
 79469 4-Nitropropane
 684935 N-Nitroso-N-methylurea
 62759 N-Nitrosodimethylamine
 59892 N-Nitrosomorpholine
 20816120 Osmium tetroxide
 56382 Parathion
 82688 Pentachloronitrobenzene (Quintobenzene)
 87865 Pentachlorophenol
 108952 Phenol
 106503 p-Phenylenediamine
 75445 Phosgene
 7803512 Phosphine
 7723140 Phosphorus
 85449 Phthalic anhydride
 1336363 Polychlorinated biphenyls (Aroclors)
 1120714 1,3-Propane sultone
 57578 beta-Propiolactone
 114261 Propoxur (Baygon)
 78875 Propylene dichloride (1,2-Dichloropropane)
 75569 Propylene oxide
 75558 1,2-Propylenimine (2-Methyl aziridine)
 91255 Quinoline
 106514 Quinone
 10043922 Radionuclides (including radon)
 7782492 Selenium
 100425 Styrene
 96093 Styrene oxide
 100210 Terephthalic acid
 1746016 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
 79345 1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane
 127184 Tetrachloroethylene (Perchloroethylene)
 7440280 Thallium
 108883 Toluene
 95807 2,4-Toluene diamine
 584849 2,4-Toluene diisocyanate
 95534 o-Toluidine
 8001352 Toxaphene (Chlorinated camphene)
 120821 1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene
 79005 1,1,2-Trichloroethane
 79016 Trichloroethylene
 95954 2,4,5-Trichlorophenol
 88062 2,4,6-Trichlorophenol
 121448 Triethylamine
 1582098 Trifluralin
 108054 Vinyl acetate
 593602 Vinyl bromide
 75014 Vinyl chloride
 75354 Vinylidene chloride (1,1-Dichloroethylene)
 1330207 Xylenes (isomers and mixture), 95476, 108383, 106423
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 `(2) PETITION FOR MODIFICATION OF LIST- Any person may petition the
 Administrator to modify the list under this subsection by adding or
 deleting a substance. Within 12 months after receipt of such a petition
 the Administrator shall either grant the petition or publish a written
 explanation of why the petition should not be granted. The Administrator
 may not deny a petition solely on the basis of inadequate resources or
 time for review.
 `(3) ADDITIONS TO LIST- (A) The Administrator shall add a substance to
 the list upon a showing by the petitioner, or on the Administrator's own
 determination, that the substance is an air pollutant and that emissions
 of the substance, ambient concentrations of the substance, or chemical
 transformation products formed in the atmosphere from the substance are known
 to cause, or may reasonably be anticipated to cause, serious adverse effects
 to human health or serious or widespread adverse environmental effects.
 `(B) No air pollutant for which a national primary ambient air quality
 standard has been established shall be added to the list under this
 subsection, but specific air pollutants in a general class of air pollutants
 for which such a standard has been established may be added to the list.
 `(C) No substance, practice, process, or activity regulated under part B
 of this Act shall be subject to regulation under this section solely due
 to its adverse effects on ozone in the stratosphere.
 `(4) DELETIONS FROM LIST- The Administrator shall remove a substance
 from the list under this subsection upon a showing by the petitioner,
 or on the Administrator's own determination, that there is adequate data
 on the health and environmental effects of the substance to determine that
 neither emissions nor ambient concentrations of the substance nor chemical
 transformation products formed in the atmosphere from the substance cause,
 or may be reasonably be anticipated to cause, serious adverse effects to
 human health or serious or widespread adverse environmental effects.
 `(5) REVIEW AND REVISIONS OF LIST- The Administrator shall, from time to
 time, but not less often than every 5 years, review and revise the list
 established by this subsection.
 `(c) LIST OF CATEGORIES-
 `(1) CATEGORIES- Not later than 12 months after the enactment of the Air
 Toxics Control Act of 1989, the Administrator shall, by rule, list all
 categories of major emitting facilities.
 `(2) REVIEW AND REVISIONS- The Administrator shall periodically review and
 revise (by rule) the list of categories under this subsection to insure that
 the list includes all categories of major emitting facilities. Whenever
 the Administrator includes any additional category on the list, he shall
 establish a date (not later than 3 years after such inclusion) for the
 promulgation of emissions standards under this section for major emitting
 facilities in that category.
 `(d) SCHEDULE FOR STANDARDS-
 `(1) TIMETABLES FOR PROMULGATION OF STANDARDS- The Administrator shall
 promulgate regulations establishing emissions standards under subsection
 (e) for major emitting facilities in each category listed under subsection
 (c)(1). The standards shall be promulgated as expeditiously as practicable
 after the listing of such categories, but no later than the deadline
 specified in Table 1 for the percentage of the categories specified in
 Table 1:
TABLE 1
-----------------------------------------------------------------
 Percentage of categories listed under subsection (c) Deadlines*
-----------------------------------------------------------------
 10 percent or more of the listed categories 2 years.
 25 percent or more of the listed categories 3 years.
 50 percent or more of the listed categories 5 years.
 100 percent of the listed categories 8 years.
-----------------------------------------------------------------
*Time periods are measured from the date of enactment of the Air Toxics
Control Act of 1989.
 `(2) PRIORITIES- In determining priorities for scheduling the promulgation
 of standards under subsection (e), the Administrator shall consider each
 of the following:
 `(A) The quantity of hazardous air pollutants that major emitting facilities
 in each category emit.
 `(B) The known or anticipated adverse effects of such pollutants on human
 health and the environment.
 `(C) The proximity of major emitting facilities in the category to populated
 areas and, the extent of human exposure to emissions of hazardous air
 pollutants from such facilities and, to the extent feasible, the risks to
 individuals most exposed.
 `(D) The efficiency of grouping the categories according to the pollutants
 emitted or the processes or technologies used.
 `(E) The availability of control technologies or other means for reducing
 emissions of hazardous air pollutants from such facilities.
 `(3) NOTICE OF PRIORITIES- Simultaneously with promulgation of a rule under
 subsection (c)(1) listing all categories of major emitting facilities the
 Administrator shall publish a notice specifying which of such categories
 shall be subject to the initial 2-year deadline established under this
 subsection. Within 24 months after the enactment of the Air Toxics Control
 Act of 1989, the Administrator shall publish a notice specifying which of
 such categories is subject to the other deadlines established under this
 subsection. Not later than 1 year before any deadline applicable under
 this subsection to a category occurs, the Administrator may substitute
 another category for the category otherwise subject to such deadline,
 taking into consideration the provisions of paragraph (2).
 `(e) EMISSION STANDARDS-
 `(1) BACT STANDARD- The Administrator shall promulgate emission standards
 under this subsection which reflect the degree of emission reduction
 achievable through the application of the best available control technology
 for the control of hazardous air pollutants from new and existing major
 emitting facilities in any category listed pursuant to subsection (c). Such
 standards shall require the maximum degree of reduction in emissions
 of each air pollutant subject to this section (including a prohibition
 on such emissions, where achievable) that the Administrator, taking into
 consideration the cost of achieving such emissions reduction, and any nonair
 quality health and environmental impacts and energy requirements, determines
 is achievable for new or existing facilities to which such standard applies,
 through application of measures, processes, methods, systems or techniques
 which may include, but shall not be limited to, any of the following:
 `(A) Measures which reduce the volume of such pollutants through process
 changes, substitution of materials or other modifications.
 `(B) Measures which enclose systems or processes to eliminate emissions.
 `(C) Measures which collect, capture or treat such pollutants when released
 from a process, stack, storage or fugitive emissions point.
 `(D) Measures which are design, equipment, operational or work practice
 standards.
 `(E) Measures which are a combination of the above.
 `(2) MINIMUM DEGREE OF EMISSION REDUCTION- For purposes of paragraph (1),
 the degree of emission reduction deemed achievable for a major emitting
 facility shall not be less stringent than the greatest degree of emissions
 reduction achieved in practice by any major emitting facility in the same
 category. For existing major emitting facilities, in determining the degree
 of emissions reduction achieved in practice by any major emitting facility
 in the same category, the Administrator may exclude the 10 percent of the
 major emitting facilities having the lowest emission rates. Nothing in this
 subsection shall preclude the Administrator from establishing a standard
 under this subsection for facilities which requires a degree of reduction
 in emissions more stringent than the most stringent emissions reduction
 achieved in practice by major emitting facilities in the same category.
 `(3) REVIEW AND REVISION- The Administrator shall review emissions standards
 promulgated under this section no less often than every 5 years and revise
 such standards as may be necessary to take into account improvements in
 practices, processes and control technologies that can reduce emissions
 of hazardous air pollutants.
 `(4) CONGRESSIONALLY ESTABLISHED STANDARD- (A) If, within 6 months
 after any applicable deadline established pursuant to this section for
 promulgation of a standard under this subsection for emissions of any
 hazardous air pollutant from any major emitting facility in any category,
 no such standard has been promulgated, such facility shall be subject,
 by operation of law, to an emission standard for that pollutant which
 requires the greatest degree of emissions reduction achieved in practice
 by major emitting facilities in the same category.
 `(B) For purposes of applying the provisions of this section a standard under
 this paragraph shall be treated as a standard promulgated under this section
 6 months after the applicable deadline referred to in subparagraph (A). Such
 standard shall remain in force and effect until a standard promulgated by
 the Administrator under this section takes effect with respect to emissions
 of the hazardous air pollutant concerned from the facility concerned.
 `(f) RISK EVALUATION- Not later than 4 years after promulgation of an
 emissions standard for a category of major emitting facilities pursuant
 to subsection (e), the Administrator shall complete an evaluation of
 the risks to human health and the environment resulting from hazardous
 air pollutants emitted from major emitting facilities in that category
 remaining after application of such standards.
 `(g) STANDARDS FOR EMISSIONS OF CARCINOGENS AND OTHER NONTHRESHOLD AIR
 POLLUTANTS-
 `(1) EPA DETERMINATION- For a hazardous air pollutant that has an adverse
 effect on human health for which the Administrator has not established a
 threshold, if, as a result of the risk evaluation under subsection (f),
 the Administrator determines that the BACT standards under subsection
 (e) for any category of major emitting facilities do not eliminate all
 lifetime risks of carcinogenic effects or other serious adverse effects to
 human health attributable to emissions of that air pollutant from major
 emitting facilities in that category greater than one in 1,000,000 for
 the individual in the population who is most exposed to such emissions,
 the Administrator shall, within 5 years after the promulgation of such
 standards, revise the standards in accordance with this subsection.
 `(2) REVISED STANDARD- A standard revised under this subsection shall
 be adequate to eliminate all lifetime risks of carcinogenic effects and
 other serious adverse effects to human health attributable to emissions
 of the hazardous air pollutant from major emitting facilities in the
 category concerned greater than one in 1,000,000 for the individual in
 the population who is most exposed to such emissions. In determining the
 appropriate level of any emissions standard under this subsection, only
 the considerations referred to in this paragraph shall be taken into account.
 `(h) STANDARDS FOR EMISSIONS OF THRESHOLD AIR POLLUTANTS-
 `(1) EPA DETERMINATION- For a hazardous air pollutant for which the
 Administrator has established a threshold, if, as a result of the risk
 evaluation under subsection (f), the Administrator determines that the BACT
 standards under subsection (e) for any category of major emitting facilities
 do not reduce emissions to a level resulting in ambient concentrations
 attributable to such emissions at or below the threshold for that pollutant,
 or to a level at which no serious or widespread adverse environmental effects
 occur, the Administrator shall, within 5 years after the effective date
 of such standards, revise the standards in accordance with this subsection.
 `(2) REVISED STANDARD- A standard revised under this subsection shall
 establish emission limitations for the hazardous air pollutant at the level
 which, in the judgment of the Administrator, reduces ambient concentrations
 attributable to emissions from the facility to or below the threshold level
 and the level which prevents serious or widespread adverse environmental
 effects. In determining the appropriate level of any emission standard under
 this subsection, only the considerations referred to in this subsection
 shall be taken into account.
 `(i) WORK PRACTICE STANDARDS AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS-
 `(1) PROMULGATION- (A) In addition to any standard under subsection (e),
 (g), or (h) expressed as a numerical emissions limitation, the Administrator
 may promulgate a design, equipment, work practice, or operation standard,
 or combination thereof, for major emitting facilities in any category.
 `(B) The Administrator shall promulgate such a standard in lieu of a
 standard under subsection (e), (g), or (h) whenever, in his judgment,
 it is not feasible to establish a standard for a category as a numerical
 emission limitation. Such standard shall achieve reductions comparable to the
 reductions which would be achieved pursuant to a standard under subsection
 (e), (g), or (h), as appropriate. If the Administrator promulgates a
 design or equipment standard under this paragraph, the Administrator shall
 include as part of such standard such requirements as will assure the
 proper operation and maintenance of any such element of design or equipment.
 `(2) TREATMENT UNDER OTHER PROVISIONS- Any standard or requirement under
 this subsection shall be treated as an emission standard for purposes of
 the provisions of this Act (other than the provisions of this subsection).
 `(j) LEAK PREVENTION, DETECTION, AND CORRECTION- Emissions standards
 under this section shall include leak prevention, detection and correction
 requirements unless the Administrator finds that such requirements are not
 feasible or necessary to prevent emissions of hazardous air pollutants. Such
 standards shall also cover substances listed under section 129. Such
 standards may include vapor recovery, secondary containment, and other
 requirements.
 `(k) ANNUAL SAFETY INSPECTION- Standards under this section shall require
 the owner or operator of the major emitting facility to carry out an
 annual safety inspection to locate all leaks and unpermitted releases of
 any hazardous air pollutant and report the results of such inspection to
 the permitting authority.
 `(l) MONITORING AND CERTIFICATION- Standards under this section shall
 include each of the following:
 `(1) Required procedures for monitoring emissions of hazardous air pollutants
 or otherwise measuring such emissions through the best available measurement
 methods.
 `(2) Procedures for demonstrating compliance with the requirements of this
 section for purposes of the annual certification required under subsection
 (n).
 `(m) DE MINIMUS EMISSIONS LEVEL-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT- In establishing any standard under this section or at
 any other time (after notice and opportunity for comment), the Administrator
 may establish a de minimus level for the emission of any hazardous air
 pollutant or combination of hazardous air pollutants for any category of
 major emitting facilities. Emissions of such air pollutant or combination
 of air pollutants from a major emitting facility shall not be subject to
 such standard unless emissions exceed such de minimus emissions level.
 `(2) THRESHOLD POLLUTANTS- For a hazardous air pollutant for which a
 threshold can be established, such a de minimus level shall be at or below
 the level which results in ambient concentrations attributable to such
 emissions at the threshold level or the level which is known to cause or
 which may reasonably be anticipated to cause serious or widespread adverse
 environmental effects.
 `(3) NONTHRESHOLD POLLUTANTS- For any other hazardous air pollutant,
 such a de minimus level shall be at or below the level which presents a
 lifetime risk of carcinogenic effects or other serious adverse effects to
 human health attributable to emissions of the hazardous air pollutant from
 major emitting facilities in the category concerned of 1 in 10,000,000 for
 the individual in the population who is most exposed to such emissions and
 below the level which is known to cause or may reasonably be anticipated
 to cause serious or widespread adverse environmental effects.
 `(4) LIMITATION- The de minimus emissions level shall not be greater
 than 10 tons per year for a single hazardous air pollutant or 25 tons per
 year for any combination of hazardous air pollutants emitted by a major
 emitting facility.
 `(n) PERMIT PROGRAM-
 `(1) PERMIT REQUIRED- Except as otherwise provided in this section, after the
 effective date of a standard under this section, it shall be unlawful for--
 `(A) any person to construct a new, or modify an existing, major emitting
 facility subject to such standard, or
 `(B) the owner or operator of any existing major emitting facility subject
 to such standard to emit any such hazardous air pollutant
except in compliance with a permit issued under this subsection for the
major emitting facility.
 `(2) MINIMUM ELEMENTS OF PERMIT PROGRAM- Within 12 months after the enactment
 of the Air Toxics Control Act of 1989, the Administrator shall promulgate
 regulations establishing the minimum elements of a permit program under
 this section. These elements shall include each of the following:
 `(A) A requirement that the permittee comply with all standards and
 requirements applicable under this section.
 `(B) Requirements for permit applications, including a standard application
 form and fees sufficient to offset the direct and indirect cost of
 processing applications.
 `(C) Requirements for monitoring or otherwise measuring emissions in
 accordance with this section and quarterly reporting requirements.
 `(D) A requirement that permittees pay an annual fee sufficient to offset
 all direct and indirect costs of administering the program.
 `(E) Opportunity for public comment prior to the issuance of any permit.
 `(F) A requirement that the permittee submit an annual certification to
 the permitting authority that demonstrates that the major emitting facility
 is in compliance with the permit.
 `(3) TERM OF PERMIT- Each permit issued, or renewed, under this section
 shall be for a term which does not exceed 5 years.
 `(4) INSPECTION- No permit shall be issued or renewed under this section
 for any major emitting facility unless the permitting authority has
 inspected the facility and determined that it is in compliance with all
 requirements of this section (and the requirements of section 129 in the
 case of a facility which is also subject to section 129).
 `(5) CONSOLIDATION WITH OTHER PERMITS- To the maximum extent practicable,
 permits issued to any major emitting facility under this section shall be
 consolidated with other permits required under this Act.
 `(6) ALTERNATIVE MEANS- If any permittee establishes to the satisfaction of
 the permitting authority that an alternative means of emission limitation
 for a major emitting facility--
 `(A) will achieve a reduction in emissions of any air pollutant greater
 than the reduction in emissions of such pollutant achieved under the
 requirements otherwise applicable under a standard in effect pursuant to
 this subsection, and
 `(B) will provide a greater level of protection for human health and
 the environment,
the permitting authority shall permit the use of such alternative means or
controls at the facility for purposes of compliance with this subsection
with respect to such pollutant.
 `(o) OPERATION OF EXISTING FACILITIES PENDING PERMIT ISSUANCE-
 `(1) CONTINUED OPERATIONS- Notwithstanding the prohibition contained in
 subsection (n), an existing major emitting facility in a category subject
 to a standard under this section may continue operations without obtaining
 a permit under this section for a period of 6 months after the effective
 date of such standard if the owner or operator of the facility provides
 a certification to the permitting authority, on or before the effective
 date of the standard concerned, that demonstrates that the facility is in
 compliance with such standard. Such certification shall comply with the
 requirements promulgated under subsection (l).
 `(2) TEMPORARY PERMIT- The permitting authority shall review any
 certification submitted under paragraph (1) within 90 days after receipt
 thereof. If the permitting authority determines that the certification
 is adequate, the authority shall issue a temporary operating permit for
 not more than 1 year for the facility under this section. The temporary
 operating permit shall incorporate the compliance, monitoring, reporting,
 annual fee and certification requirements of subsection (n). Any temporary
 permit issued under this paragraph shall be enforceable to the same extent
 as any permit under subsection (n).
 `(3) REVIEW AND INSPECTION- Within the 1-year period referred to in paragraph
 (2), the permitting authority shall complete a review of the operations
 of the major emitting facility to which the temporary permit was issued,
 including an inspection at the site of the major emitting facility, to
 determine whether a full operating permit under subsection (n) should
 be issued.
 `(p) EFFECTIVE DATES-
 `(1) NEW FACILITIES- In the case of a new major emitting facility each
 standard under this section shall be effective on the date of promulgation.
 `(2) EXISTING FACILITIES- The Administrator shall establish an effective
 date and compliance schedule for existing major emitting facilities
 which shall provide for compliance as expeditiously as practicable with
 each standard promulgated under this section. Such schedule shall require
 compliance with the standard no later than 3 years after the promulgation
 or revision of the standard.
 `(q) EXEMPTION FROM RESIDUAL RISK STANDARDS- In issuing any permit under this
 section, the permitting authority may exempt any major emitting facility from
 a standard under subsection (g) or (h) if the permit contains alternative
 emission limitations which the permitting authority determines (based
 on specific information submitted by the permittee and other information
 available to the permitting authority) will--
 `(1) in the case of a standard under subsection (g), assure that the
 combined effects of emissions of hazardous air pollutants from the facility
 (including additive and, to the extent possible, synergistic effects)
 will not create lifetime risks of carcinogenic effects or other serious
 adverse effects to human health greater than one in 1,000,000 for the
 individual in the population who is most exposed to such emissions; and
 `(2) in the case of a standard under subsection (h), assure that the
 combined effects of emissions of hazardous air pollutants from the facility
 (including additive and, to the extent possible, synergistic effects)
 will not exceed the level which, in the judgment of the Administrator,
 provides an ample margin of safety to prevent serious adverse effects to
 human health and serious or widespread adverse environmental effects.
 `(r) Extensions for Certain Existing Facilities-
 `(1) NONTHRESHOLD AIR POLLUTANTS- (A) For a standard revised under subsection
 (g), in issuing a permit under this section to any existing major emitting
 facility, the permitting authority may grant not more than 3 extensions
 of the effective date under this paragraph.
 `(B) The first extension under this paragraph may be granted if the
 permitting authority determines, based on specific information submitted
 by the owner or operator of the facility and other available information,
 that emissions of the hazardous air pollutant concerned from the facility do
 not create a lifetime risk of carcinogenic effects or other serious adverse
 effects to human health attributable to emissions of the air pollutant
 greater than one in 10,000 for the individual in the population who is most
 exposed to emissions of the pollutant from that facility. The permit under
 this section for any such facility shall contain an enforceable emissions
 limitation incorporating the conditions referred to in this subparagraph
 and requiring the facility to comply with the applicable standard under
 subsection (e). The extension shall be for a period of up to 2 years after
 the effective date under subsection (q).
 `(C) The permitting authority may grant up to 2 additional extensions
 of the effective date to an existing major emitting facility if the
 permitting authority determines, based on specific information submitted
 by the owner or operator and other available information, that the facility
 meets the requirements of subparagraph (B) and that the standard cannot be
 achieved by the facility using all available technology and operational
 controls. The permit under this section for any such facility shall
 contain an enforceable emissions limitation incorporating the conditions
 referred to in subparagraph (B) and requiring use by the facility of all
 available technology and operational controls for the control of the air
 pollutant concerned. The extension under this subparagraph shall be for a
 period of up to 2 years after the expiration of a prior extension under
 this paragraph. The permitting authority may require the permittee to
 conduct research and development on improved or more effective control
 technologies or management practices as a condition for any extension
 pursuant to this subparagraph.
 `(2) THRESHOLD AIR POLLUTANTS- (A) For a standard revised under subsection
 (h), in issuing a permit under this section to any existing major emitting
 facility, the permitting authority may grant not more than 3 extensions
 of the effective date if the permitting authority determines, based on
 specific information submitted by the owner or operator and other available
 information, that the standard cannot be achieved by the facility using
 all available technology and operational controls.
 `(B) The first extension shall be for a period of up to 2 years after the
 effective date under subsection (q). The permit under this section for any
 such facility shall contain an enforceable emissions limitation requiring
 the facility to comply with the applicable standard under subsection
 (e) and with an emission standard for the air pollutant concerned which
 requires at least the greatest degree of emission reduction achieved in
 practice by major emitting facilities in the same category.
 `(C) The permitting authority may grant up to 2 additional extensions of the
 effective date to an existing major emitting facility if the permitting
 authority determines, based on specific information submitted by the
 permittee and other available information, that the standard cannot be
 achieved by the facility using all available technology and operational
 controls. The permit under this section for any such facility shall
 contain an enforceable emission limitation incorporating the requirements
 of subparagraph (B) and requiring the use of all available technology and
 operational controls for the control of the air pollutant concerned. An
 extension under this subparagraph shall be for a period of up to 2 years
 after the expiration of a prior extension under this paragraph. The
 permitting authority may require the permittee to conduct research and
 development on improved or more effective control technologies or management
 practices as a condition for any extension pursuant to this subparagraph.
 `(3) DEFINITION- For purposes of this subsection, the phrase `all available
 technology and operational controls' shall include all measures which
 are technically feasible including process modifications and materials
 substitution to reduce emissions of hazardous air pollutants.
 `(4) PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS- An extension under this subsection after
 an extension issued in connection with the initial permit shall require
 a renewal of the permit.
 `(s) NATIONAL SECURITY- The President of the United States may exempt
 any major emitting facility from compliance with any standard under this
 section for a period of not more than 2 years if the President finds
 that the technology to implement such standards is not available and the
 operation of such facility is required for reasons of national security. An
 exemption under this paragraph may be extended for one or more additional
 periods, each period not to exceed 2 years. The President shall make a
 report to Congress with respect to each exemption (or extension thereof)
 made under this paragraph.
 `(t) VOLUNTARY REDUCTIONS BY EXISTING FACILITIES- In issuing any permit
 under this section, the permitting authority may exempt any existing major
 emitting facility from a standard promulgated pursuant to subsection (e)
 for any hazardous air pollutant upon a showing by the permittee that
 the facility achieved, prior to proposal of the standard, a reduction
 of 95 percent or more from uncontrolled emissions of such hazardous air
 pollutant from the facility. The permit under this section for any such
 facility shall contain enforceable emission limitations incorporating the
 conditions which qualified the facility for such exemption.
 `(u) AREA SOURCE PROGRAM-
 `(1) RESEARCH ON URBAN AIR POLLUTION- The Administrator shall, after
 consultation with State and local air pollution control officials, conduct a
 program of research with respect to categories of area sources of hazardous
 air pollutants in urban areas and mobile sources of hazardous air pollutants
 in such areas. Such research shall include each of the following:
 `(A) Ambient monitoring for a broad range of hazardous air pollutants in
 a representative number of urban locations.
 `(B) Analysis to characterize the sources of such pollution with a focus on
 area sources and the contribution that such sources make to public health
 risks from hazardous air pollutants.
 `(C) Consideration of atmospheric transformation and other factors which
 can elevate public health risks from such pollutants.
Health effects considered under this program shall include, but not be limited
to, carcinogenicity, mutagenicity, teratogenicity, neurotoxicity, reproductive
dysfunction and other acute and chronic effects. The Administrator shall
report the results of such research to the Congress not later than 2 years
after the date of enactment of the Air Toxics Control Act of 1989.
 `(2) MONITORING OF HAZARDOUS AIR POLLUTANTS IN MSAS- Under regulations
 promulgated by the Administrator, air pollution control agencies receiving
 grants under section 105 of this Act, and which have responsibility for a
 Metropolitan Statistical Area with a population exceeding 250,000 persons,
 shall be required to establish monitoring programs to detect and measure,
 to the extent practicable, the ambient concentration of hazardous pollutants
 in the air. The program shall provide particular emphasis for hazardous air
 pollutants emitted by area sources. Such regulations shall be promulgated
 within 12 months after the enactment of the Air Toxics Control Act of 1989.
 `(3) LIST OF CATEGORIES- Not later than 3 years after the enactment of the
 Air Toxics Control Act of 1989 and after notice and opportunity for public
 comment, the Administrator shall, by rule, list important categories of
 area sources of hazardous air pollutants which are known to cause or may
 reasonably be anticipated to cause serious adverse effects to human health
 or serious or widespread adverse environmental effects.
 `(4) STANDARDS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Administrator shall promulgate standards requiring
 the maximum degree of reduction in emissions of hazardous air pollutants
 from area sources in categories listed under this subsection (including
 a prohibition on such emissions, where achievable) that the Administrator,
 taking into consideration the cost of achieving such emissions reduction, and
 any nonair quality health and environmental impacts and energy requirements,
 determines is achievable. Such standards may apply to persons manufacturing,
 importing, introducing into commerce, installing, modifying, or operating
 any such area source, or to any combination of the foregoing, as the
 Administrator deems appropriate; and such standards may differ for new
 and existing area sources.
 `(B) Standards under this paragraph shall be promulgated for the percentage
 of such categories specified in the following Table no later than the
 deadline specified in the Table:
TABLE 2
----------------------------------------------------------------
 Percentage of categories listed under paragraph (2) Deadlines*
----------------------------------------------------------------
 25 percent or more of the listed categories 2 years.
 50 percent or more of the listed categories 4 years.
 75 percent or more of the listed categories 6 years.
 100 percent of the listed categories 8 years.
----------------------------------------------------------------
*Time periods are measured from the date on which area source categories
are listed under paragraph (3).
 `(C) PRIORITIES- In determining priorities for scheduling the promulgation
 of standards under this subsection, the Administrator shall consider each
 of the following:
 `(i) The quantity of hazardous air pollutants that area sources in each
 category emit.
 `(ii) The known or anticipated serious adverse effects of such pollutants
 on human health and the environment.
 `(iii) The extent of human exposure to emissions of hazardous air pollutants
 from area sources and, to the extent feasible, risks to individuals most
 exposed.
 `(iv) The availability of control measures or other means for reducing
 emissions of hazardous air pollutants from area sources in the categories.
Simultaneously with promulgation of a rule under paragraph (3) listing
categories of area sources the Administrator shall publish a notice specifying
which of such categories shall be subject to each of such deadlines.
 `(5) REVIEW AND REVISION- The Administrator shall review and revise emissions
 standards promulgated under this section no less often than every 5 years
 as necessary to take into account improvements in practices, processes and
 control technologies that can reduce emissions of hazardous air pollutants.
 `(6) EFFECTIVE DATE- Regulations under this subsection shall take effect
 as expeditiously as practicable, but not later than 3 years following
 promulgation.
 `(v) STATE PROGRAMS-
 `(1) SUBMISSION- Each State may develop and submit to the Administrator
 for approval a program for the implementation and enforcement of (A) the
 permit program applicable to major emitting facilities, or (B) standards
 established by the Administrator under the area source program, or (C)
 both. A program submitted by a State under this subsection may provide
 for partial or complete delegation of the Administrator's authorities
 and responsibilities for the the permit program or the implementation and
 enforcement of standards established by the Administrator under the area
 source program, or both, but shall not include authority to establish any
 requirements less stringent than those established by this Act or established
 by the Administrator pursuant to the authorities contained in this Act.
 `(2) EPA GUIDANCE- Not later than 12 months after the date of enactment
 of the Air Toxics Control Act of 1989, the Administrator shall publish
 guidance for State programs under this subsection.
 `(3) APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL- (A) Not later than 180 days after receiving
 a program submitted by a State under this subsection, and after notice and
 opportunity for public comment, the Administrator shall either approve or
 disapprove such program. The Administrator shall approve a State program
 submitted under this subsection if he determines that the State has adequate
 personnel and funding to administer the program and adequate authority to--
 `(i) issue permits in accordance with subsection (n) for all major emitting
 facilities within the State;
 `(ii) terminate or modify permits for cause, including establishment of
 a new emission standard applicable to the major emitting facility; or
 `(iii) enforce permits and the requirement to obtain a permit, including
 adequate civil and criminal penalties.
 `(B) If the Administrator disapproves a State program, the Administrator
 shall notify the State of any revisions or modifications necessary to
 obtain approval. The State may revise and resubmit the proposed program
 for review and approval pursuant to the provisions of this subsection. If
 the Administrator approves a State program, the Administrator shall
 delegate in whole or in part the authority to implement and enforce
 (i) the permit program applicable to major emitting facilities, or (ii)
 standards established by the Administrator under the area source program,
 or (iii) both.
 `(C) The Administrator shall review each State program under this section
 every 2 years. Whenever the Administrator determines, after public hearing,
 that a State is not administering and enforcing a program approved pursuant
 to this subsection in accordance with the requirements of this section
 and in conformity with the guidance published under this subsection, the
 Administrator shall so notify the State and, if action which will assure
 prompt compliance is not taken within 90 days, the Administrator shall
 withdraw approval of the program in whole or in part. The Administrator
 shall not withdraw approval of any program unless the reasons for withdrawal
 shall have been stated in writing and made public.
 `(4) EPA AUTHORITY- (A) Each State administering a program under this
 subsection shall transmit to the Administrator a copy of each permit
 application and any application for an extension or modification submitted
 under this section, and shall provide for notice to the Administrator of
 each permit proposed to be issued by the State.
 `(B) The Administrator may, within 60 days of receiving such notice,
 object in writing to the issuance of a State permit as not in compliance
 with the requirements of this section. The Administrator shall provide with
 the objection a statement of the reasons for the objection and the terms and
 conditions that the Administrator would impose if the permit were issued by
 the Administrator. No State permit shall be issued unless the State first
 publishes a written response to the Administrator's objections explaining
 why such permit is consistent with the requirements of this section.
 `(5) STATE AND LOCAL GRANTS- Upon application of State and local air
 pollution control agencies, the Administrator may make grants, subject
 to such terms and conditions as the Administrator deems appropriate, to
 such State or local agency for the purpose of assisting in developing and
 implementing a program under this subsection. Programs assisted under this
 paragraph may include program elements relating to air pollutants other
 than those specifically subject to this section.
 `(6) MONITORING REPORTS, ETC- Each State administering a program under this
 section shall make available to the Administrator or require the permittee
 to transmit to the Administrator each permit issued by the State and each
 monitoring report, report of results of a safety inspection under subsection
 (k), and certification under subsection (n) received by the State.
 `(7) SAVINGS PROVISION- Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the
 Administrator from enforcing any applicable emission standard or requirement
 under this section.
 `(w) PROTECTION OF GREAT LAKES-
 `(1) STUDY AND REPORT TO CONGRESS- The Administrator shall investigate the
 sources of atmospheric deposition of hazardous air pollutants (and their
 atmospheric transformation products) on the Great Lakes and tributary
 waters and evaluate the adverse effects to human health and the adverse
 environmental effects, including such effects resulting from indirect
 exposure pathways, caused by such deposition. Such investigation and
 evaluation shall include monitoring of listed substances in the ambient
 air, biological sampling for such substances (or their organic forms)
 in fish and wildlife within the Great Lakes and tributary waters, and an
 analysis to characterize the sources of such substances. The Administrator
 shall report to Congress on the results of the investigation and evaluation
 within 5 years after enactment of the Air Toxics Control Act of 1989.
 `(2) ADDITIONAL REGULATION- As part of the report to Congress, the
 Administrator shall determine whether the other provisions of this section
 are adequate to prevent serious adverse effects to human health and serious
 or widespread environmental effects, including such effects resulting from
 indirect exposure pathways, associated with atmospheric deposition on the
 Great Lakes and tributary waters of hazardous air pollutants (and their
 atmospheric transformation products). The Administrator shall promulgate
 such further emissions standards or control measures as may be necessary
 to prevent such effects.
 `(x) OTHER REQUIREMENTS- No emissions standards or other requirement
 promulgated under this section shall be interpreted, construed, or applied
 to diminish or replace the requirements of a more stringent emission
 limitation or other applicable requirement established pursuant to any
 other authority of this Act or pursuant to State law. No amendment to this
 section made by the Air Toxics Control Act of 1989 shall affect the continued
 application of any emission standard for a hazardous air pollutant to any
 major emitting facility which has been promulgated prior to the enactment
 of such Act (or within 1 year thereafter in the case of radionuclides)
 until such facility is required to comply with a new standard applicable
 to such emissions under the amendments made by such Act.
 `(y) REPORTS- Not later than 1 year after the enactment of the Air Toxics
 Control Act of 1989, and annually thereafter, the Administrator shall prepare
 and transmit to the Congress a comprehensive report on the measures taken by
 the Agency and by the States to implement the provisions of this section and
 section 129. The Administrator shall maintain a database on pollutants and
 sources subject to the provisions of this section and section 129 and shall
 include aggregate information from the database in each annual report. The
 report shall include, but not be limited to, each of the following--
 `(1) a status report on standard-setting under this section and section 129;
 `(2) information with respect to compliance with such standards including
 the costs of compliance experienced by major emitting facilities, area
 sources, and covered facilities within the meaning of section 129;
 `(3) development and implementation of the area source program; and
 `(4) such recommendations for additional legislation to achieve the purposes
 of this section and section 129 as the Administrator may deem appropriate.
The reports shall also identify specific metropolitan areas which experience
high risks to human health as the result of emissions of hazardous air
pollutants and identify the sources of such emissions.
 `(z) GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS-
 `(1) AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION- All permits, reports, and other documents
 submitted pursuant to this section to the permitting authority shall be
 made available to the public in accordance with section 114(c).
 `(2) OBTAINING INFORMATION- The Administrator shall take such steps as
 necessary to assure that adequate data on the health and environmental
 effects of any hazardous air pollutant emitted by major emitting facilities
 in a category subject to a risk evaluation under subsection (f) are available
 at the commencement of such evaluation. For such purposes, and whenever
 the Administrator finds that information on the health or environmental
 effects of a substance is not sufficient to make any determination under
 this section, the Administrator is authorized to use such authority as is
 available to him under section 114 of this Act, under the Toxic Substances
 Control Act, under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation,
 and Liability Act of 1980, and under other provisions of law administered
 by him.
 `(3) AIR TOXIC CLEARINGHOUSE- The Administrator shall establish and
 maintain an air toxic clearinghouse, control technology center, and risk
 information center to provide technical assistance and information to the
 States and local agencies on measures, methods, practices and techniques
 effective in reducing the emissions of air pollutants subject to this
 section or section 129 and on the health and environmental effects of such
 air pollutants. All information collected under this paragraph shall be
 available to the public.'.
SEC. 3. GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT.
 Title III of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following new
 section after section 326 and by redesignating section 327 as 328:
`SEC. 327. RISK ASSESSMENT.
 `(a) GUIDELINES- In order to provide such additional guidance as may be
 necessary pursuant to this section and section 112, within 18 months after
 the enactment of this section, the Administrator, in consultation with
 the Clean Air Science Advisory Committee, shall review, and as necessary
 revise, the Administrator's guidelines for the techniques and procedures
 used for risk evaluations under section 112 of the Clean Air Act. The
 guidelines shall be reviewed not less frequently than every 5 years after
 the enactment of this section.
 `(b) RISK ASSESSMENT- Risk evaluations under section 112 of the Clean Air Act
 shall include an evaluation of both direct exposure pathways and potentially
 important indirect exposure pathways. Such risk evaluations shall utilize
 techniques and assumptions for conservatively evaluating potential risks
 and shall identify the nature and magnitude of any uncertainties in the
 risk assessment procedures and any assumptions used.
 `(c) CERTIFICATION OF RISK ASSESSORS- The Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency shall establish standards and procedures for the
 certification of persons preparing risk evaluations under the provisions
 of section 112 of the Clean Air Act. To the extent feasible, following
 establishment of such standards and procedures, only persons certified
 pursuant to such standards shall prepare the risk evaluations required
 under such provisions.'.
SEC. 3. MOTOR VEHICLE AIR TOXICS.
 Title II of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following new
 section at the end thereof:
`SEC. 217. HAZARDOUS AIR POLLUTANTS FROM MOTOR VEHICLES.
 `(a) LIST OF POLLUTANTS- Within 18 months after the enactment of this
 section, the Administrator shall publish a list of those air pollutants
 which are--
 `(1) emitted from a motor vehicle or motor vehicle part into the ambient air
 or into the interior of the motor vehicle, including emissions attributable
 to evaporation or refueling; and
 `(2) cause or contribute to air pollution which may reasonably be expected
 to result in serious adverse effects to human health or serious or widespread
 adverse environmental effects.
The Administrator shall include benzene, diesel particulates, formaldahyde,
and 1,3-butadiene on such list. If the Administrator has failed to act
within the required period, as of the date 18 months after the enactment
of this section the list shall be deemed to include such substances by
operation of law. Carbon monoxide, volatile organic compounds as a general
class, and oxides of nitrogen shall not be included on the list under this
subsection. Any person may petition the Administrator to modify the list
under this subsection by adding or deleting a substance. Within 12 months
after receipt of such a petition the Administrator shall either grant the
petition or publish a written explanation of why the petition should not
be granted. The Administrator may not deny such a petition solely on the
basis of inadequate resources or time for review. The Administrator shall,
from time to time, but not less often than every 5 years, review and revise
the list established by this subsection.
 `(b) REGULATION- Within 2 years after the inclusion of any air pollutant on
 a list under subsection (a), the Administrator shall promulgate regulations
 for that air pollutant under either section 211, section 202, or both, to
 reduce the emissions of such air pollutant to the lowest achievable emission
 rate, taking costs into account. Any such regulation under section 202(a)
 shall take effect with respect to the third model year beginning after
 the model year in which the standard is promulgated. Any such regulation
 under section 211 shall take effect upon the commencement of the third
 year following the year in which the regulation is promulgated.
 `(c) RESIDUAL RISK EVALUATION- Not later than 4 years following promulgation
 of any regulation under subsection (b) for any air pollutant listed under
 this section, the Administrator shall evaluate the risks to human health and
 the environment remaining after application of such regulation. Pursuant
 to such evaluation, the Administrator shall revise the regulation as may
 be necessary to prevent emissions of the air pollutant from causing or
 contributing to serious adverse effects to human health or serious or
 widespread adverse environmental effects.
 `(d) DIESEL PARTICULATES- In the case of emissions of diesel particulates,
 the standards promulgated under section 202 shall be at least as stringent
 as the following:
TABLE 1
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Vehicle or engine type Model years
 Standard*
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Passenger vehicles and trucks weighing less than 10,000 lbs 1992 and after
 0.08 gpm.
 Trucks (10,000 lbs or more) 1991-3
 0.25 gbh.
 Trucks (10,000 lbs or more) 1994 and after
 0.1 gbh.
 Heavy duty buses 1991 and after
 0.1 gbh.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*Standards are expressed in grams per mile (gpm) or grams per brake horsepower
hour (gbh).
The weights specified in the table above shall be based upon the loaded
vehicle weight as determined by the Administrator.
 `(e) LEAD- Effective on the later of one year after the enactment of this
 section or January 1, 1991, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell,
 offer for sale, or introduce into commerce, for use as fuel in any motor
 vehicle any gasoline which contains lead or lead additives.'.
 `(f) PARTICULATES FROM BUSES- The Administrator shall, not later than 2
 years after the enactment of this section, promulgate regulations for the
 reduction of particulates from existing diesel buses. Such regulations shall
 require the use of reasonably available retrofit technology, including,
 where appropriate, the use of low emissions fuels, such as methanol,
 ethanol, or natural gas, for particulate reduction. The requirements
 applicable under such regulations to municipal transit buses may be more
 stringent than the requirements applicable to other buses.
 `(g) USE OF TERMS- The terms `serious adverse effects to human health'
 and `adverse environmental effects' have the same meaning when used in
 this section as when used in section 112.'.
SEC. 5. ACCIDENTAL RELEASES INTO THE AIR.
 Title I of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following new section
 at the end:
`SEC. 129. PREVENTION OF ACCIDENTAL RELEASES INTO THE AIR.
 `(a) PURPOSE- The purpose of this section is to prevent or reduce the
 potential for the accidental release directly or indirectly to the ambient
 air of any substance listed pursuant to subsection (b), to provide for a
 prompt response to any such release, and to minimize the consequences of
 any such release.
 `(b) DEFINITION- As used in this section--
 `(1) The term `release' means the direct or indirect introduction of any
 substance into the ambient air.
 `(2) The term `accidental release' means a release which is not routine
 and which is not authorized pursuant to any permit or emission limitation
 or standard under any other provision of this Act or any other Federal law.
 `(3) The term `facility' means all buildings, structures, installations,
 or stationary pollutant emitting activities which (A) belong to the same
 industrial grouping, (B) are located on one or more contiguous or adjacent
 properties, and (C) are under the control of the same person (or persons
 under common control).
 `(4) The term `covered facility' means a facility at which a substance
 listed under this section is present in quantities in excess of a de
 minimus quantity established by the Administrator.
 `(5) The terms `serious adverse effects to human health' and `adverse
 environmental effects' have the same meaning when used in this section as
 when used in section 112.'.
 `(c) LIST OF SUBSTANCES-
 `(1) INITIAL LIST- The Administrator shall, not later than 12 months after
 the date of enactment of this section, propose and, not later than 24 months
 after such date, promulgate, a list of substances which, as the result of
 accidental release, are known to cause or may reasonably be anticipated
 to cause serious adverse effects to human health or serious or widespread
 adverse environmental effects. The initial list shall include at least
 the 100 substances which pose the greatest risk of causing such effects.
 `(2) CRITERIA- In listing substances under this subsection, the Administrator
 shall consider each of the following criteria:
 `(A) The severity of any acute adverse health effects or chronic adverse
 health effects associated with accidental releases of the substance.
 `(B) The likelihood of accidental releases of the substance.
 `(C) The potential magnitude of human exposure to accidental releases of
 the substance.
 `(D) The severity of any adverse environmental effects associated with
 accidental releases of the substance.
 `(3) DEFAULT LIST- If the Administrator has not listed at least 100
 substances by the date specified in paragraph (1), the liquids and gases
 identified by the Secretary of Transportation to be toxic by inhalation
 shall, as of such date, be treated as listed under this section by operation
 of law.
 `(4) OTHER LISTED SUBSTANCES- Within 3 years after the enactment of this
 section the Administrator shall complete a review of the substances which
 are not listed under this section but which are on the list established
 by section 302 of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act
 of 1986, the list established under section 112, and the list of liquids
 and gases identified by the Secretary of Transportation to be toxic by
 inhalation and, for each such substance, determine whether it should be
 added to the list under this subsection.
 `(5) PETITION FOR MODIFICATION OF LIST- Any person may petition the
 Administrator to modify the list under this subsection by adding or
 deleting a substance. Within 12 months after receipt of such a petition
 the Administrator shall either grant the petition or publish a written
 explanation of why the petition should not be granted. The Administrator
 may not deny such a petition solely on the basis of inadequate resources
 or time for review.
 `(6) ADDITIONS TO LIST- (A) The Administrator shall add a substance to
 the list upon a showing by the petitioner, or on the Administrator's own
 determination, that the substance is an air pollutant which, as the result
 of accidental release, is known to cause or may reasonably be anticipated
 to cause serious adverse effects to human health or serious or widespread
 adverse environmental effects.
 `(B) No air pollutant for which a national primary ambient air quality
 standard has been established shall be included on this list under this
 subsection but specific air pollutants in a general class of air pollutants
 for which such a standard has been established may be included.
 `(C) No substance, practice, process, or activity regulated under part B
 of this Act shall be subject to regulation under this section solely due
 to its adverse effects on ozone in the stratosphere.
 `(7) DELETIONS FROM LIST- The Administrator shall remove a substance from
 the list under this subsection upon a showing by the petitioner, or on the
 Administrator's own determination, that there is adequate data on the health
 and environmental effects of the substance to determine that the substance
 is not an air pollutant which, as the result of accidental release, is known
 to cause or may reasonably be anticipated to cause serious adverse effects
 to human health or serious or widespread adverse environmental effects.
 `(8) REVIEW AND REVISIONS OF LIST- The Administrator shall, from time to
 time, but not less often than every 5 years review and revise the list
 established by this subsection.
 `(9) DE MINIMUS QUANTITY- At the time any substance is placed on the list
 under this section, the Administrator shall establish a de minimus quantity
 for the substance, taking into account the toxicity (including short-
 and long-term health effects), reactivity, volatility, dispersibility,
 combustibility, or flammability of the substance and the likelihood of an
 accidental release of the substance.
 `(d) ACCIDENT PREVENTION, DETECTION, AND RESPONSE REGULATIONS- Not later
 than 3 years after the enactment of this section, the Administrator shall
 promulgate regulations to provide for prevention and detection of accidental
 releases of substances listed pursuant to subsection (b) from covered
 facilities and for response to such releases by the owners or operators
 of such facilities. Such regulations shall include each of the following:
 `(1) Requirements for the proper installation, operation and maintenance
 of equipment for the control of accidental releases of such substances
 from covered facilities.
 `(2) Requirements for monitoring and inspection adequate to detect accidental
 releases of such substances from such facilities.
 `(3) A requirement that all malfunctions in devices and systems at covered
 facilities which could result in accidental releases of such substance
 shall be immediately repaired or replaced to prevent such releases.
 `(4) A requirement that the owner or operator of each covered facility
 carry out a safety inspection of the facility every 2 years.
 `(5) A requirement that covered facilities use the best available devices
 for controlling leaks of such substances, taking costs into account.
 `(6) Requirements for emergency response by the facility owner or operator
 to minimize the potential adverse effects to human health and the environment
 from accidental releases of such substances.
In addition, such regulations shall include, as necessary and appropriate,
record-keeping, reporting, training, vapor recovery, secondary containment,
and other design, equipment, work practice and operational requirements. Such
regulations may also include restrictions on amounts of substances listed
under this section which may be in storage units at covered facilities. The
requirements established under this section shall be implemented in a manner
consistent with other applicable law and consolidated to the maximum extent
practicable with similar requirements applicable under other authority of
law. The regulations under this section shall take effect 3 years after the
date of promulgation thereof or 3 years after the listing of the substance
concerned under this section, whichever is later.
 `(e) RISK MANAGEMENT PLANS- The regulations under this section shall require
 the owner or operator of each covered facility to prepare and implement a
 risk management plan to detect and prevent or minimize accidental releases
 of substances listed under this section from the facility and to provide a
 prompt emergency response to any such releases in order to protect human
 health and the environment. Such plan shall provide for compliance with
 subsection (d) and shall also include each of the following:
 `(1) HAZARD ASSESSMENT- A hazard assessment to assess the potential for
 an accidental release of any substance listed under this section from the
 facility. The assessment shall include each of the following:
 `(A) Identification of the substances listed under this section that are
 present at the facility.
 `(B) An identification of previous accidental releases of any such substance
 from the facility for which records are available.
 `(C) An identification of the potential for accidental releases of
 such substances from the facility, including an estimate of the size,
 concentration, and duration of such potential releases.
 `(D) Assessment of the adverse effects to human health and the environment
 potentially resulting from accidental releases of such substances, including
 a determination of potential exposure (including the concentration and
 duration of exposure) for all persons who may be put at risk as the result
 of such an accidental release from the facility.
 `(3) PREVENTION PROGRAM- A program for preventing accidental releases of
 substances listed under this section. The program shall include each of
 the following:
 `(A) Specific safety precautions and maintenance, monitoring and operating
 procedures to be employed at the facility with respect to the storage,
 processing, handling or use of each such substance.
 `(B) A schedule for reviewing the mechanical and structural integrity
 of the equipment used for the storage, processing, handling, capture and
 control of listed substances at the facility.
 `(C) Requirements for employee training to ensure that each employee with
 access to a listed substance receives training on the proper methods of
 handling such substances prior to engaging in activities involving such
 substance.
 `(4) RESPONSE PROGRAM- A response program providing for specific actions
 to be taken in response to an accidental release of a listed substance so
 as to protect human health and the environment. The program shall include
 each of the following:
 `(A) Emergency health treatment procedures and protocols for each substance
 listed under this section.
 `(B) Measures to inform the public of an accidental release of any substance
 listed under this section.
 `(C) Requirements for employee training in emergency response procedures
 for responding to such accidental releases.
 `(D) Designation of on-site facility emergency response coordinators
 responsible for interaction with local and State personnel responsible
 for local emergency response.
At the time regulations are promulgated under this section, the Administrator
shall promulgate guidelines to assist covered facilities in the preparation
of risk management plans. The guidelines shall, to the extent practicable,
include model risk management plans.
 `(f) COMPLIANCE WITH RISK MANAGEMENT PLAN- The owner or operator of each
 covered facility shall register a risk management plan prepared under this
 section with the Administrator before the effective date of regulations
 under this section in such form and manner as the Administrator shall, by
 rule, require. Plans prepared pursuant to this subsection shall also be
 submitted to the Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board, to the
 State in which the facility is located and to any local agency or entity
 having responsibility for planning for or responding to accidental releases
 which may occur at such facility, and shall be available to the public
 under section 114(c). The Administrator shall review and, if necessary,
 require revisions in the plan to assure that the plan complies with this
 section. Each such plan shall be updated periodically as required by the
 Administrator, by rule.
 `(g) ENFORCEMENT- Each requirement in effect under rules promulgated under
 this section shall, for purposes of section 113, 114, 304, and 307, be
 treated as a standard in effect under section 112. No permit may be issued
 under section 112 for the construction, modification, or operation of any
 major emitting facility unless the permitting authority has determined
 that the facility is in compliance with any applicable requirements of
 this section.
 `(h) OTHER AUTHORITY- Nothing in the section shall be construed to affect
 or impair any other requirement applicable to a covered facility under
 any other authority of law. Nothing in this section shall preclude, deny
 or limit any right of a State or political subdivision thereof to adopt or
 enforce any regulation, requirement or standard (including any procedural
 requirement) that is more stringent than a regulation, requirement or
 standard in effect under this section or that applies to a substance not
 subject to this section.
 `(i) CHEMICAL SAFETY AND HAZARD INVESTIGATION BOARD-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT- The President shall establish within the Environmental
 Protection Agency an independent safety board to be known as the Chemical
 Safety and Hazard Investigation Board (hereinafter in this section referred
 to as the `Board').
 `(2) MEMBERSHIP- The Board shall consist of 5 members including a
 chairperson, all of whom shall be appointed by the President, by and
 with the advice and consent of the Senate. With the exception of the
 chairperson, members may be designated from personnel of agencies of the
 United States. Members of the Board shall be appointed on the basis of
 technical qualification, professional standing, and demonstrated knowledge
 in the fields of accident reconstruction, safety engineering, human factors,
 chemical safety, toxicology, or chemical regulation.
 `(3) TERMS- The terms of office of members of the Board shall be 5
 years. Any member of the Board may be removed for inefficiency, neglect
 of duty, or malfeasance in office.
 `(4) CHAIRPERSON- The chairperson shall be the chief executive officer of
 the Board and shall exercise the executive and administrative functions
 of the Board.
 `(5) DUTIES OF BOARD- The Board shall--
 `(A) investigate or cause to be investigated (in such detail as it shall
 prescribe), and determine the facts, conditions, and circumstances and
 the cause or probable cause or causes of any accidental release from a
 facility resulting in, or potentially resulting in, serious adverse effects
 to human health or serious or widespread adverse environmental effects and
 provide for the appropriate participation by other Federal agencies in any
 such investigation, except that such agencies may not participate in the
 Board's determination of the probable cause of the accident; nothing in
 this section impairs the authority of other Federal agencies to conduct
 investigations of an accident under applicable provisions of law or to
 obtain information directly from parties involved in, and witnesses to,
 the transportation accident;
 `(B) report in writing on the facts, conditions, and circumstances of
 each accidental release investigated pursuant to paragraph (1) of this
 subsection and cause such reports to be made available to the public at
 reasonable cost and to cause notice of the issuance and availability of
 such reports to be published in the Federal Register;
 `(C) issue periodic reports to the Congress, Federal, State, and local
 agencies concerned with accidental releases from facilities, and other
 interested persons recommending and advocating meaningful responses to
 reduce the likelihood of recurrence of accidental releases similar to those
 investigated by the Board and proposing corrective steps to make facilities
 as safe and free from risk of injury from accidental releases as is possible;
 `(D) initiate and conduct special studies and special investigations
 on matters pertaining to prevention and detection of and responses to
 accidental releases from facilities;
 `(E) assess and reassess techniques and methods of investigation of
 accidental releases from facilities and prepare and publish from time to
 time recommended procedures for such investigations;
 `(F) establish by regulation requirements binding on persons reporting
 accidental releases subject to the Board's investigatory jurisdiction
 under this subsection;
 `(G) evaluate, assess the effectiveness, and publish the findings of the
 Board with respect to the safety consciousness and efficacy in preventing
 accidental releases from facilities of other Government agencies.
 `(6) POWERS OF BOARD-
 `(A) The Board, or upon the authority of the Board, any member thereof,
 any administrative law judge employed by or assigned to the Board, or any
 officer or employee duly designated by the Chairman, may, for the purpose
 of carrying out this chapter, hold such hearings, sit and act at such times
 and places, administer such oaths, and require by subpoena or otherwise
 the attendance and testimony of such witnesses and the production of such
 evidence as the Board or such officer or employee deems advisable. Subpoenas
 shall be issued under the signature of the Chairman, or his delegate, and
 may be served by any person designated by the Chairman. Witnesses summoned
 to appear before the Board shall be paid the same fees and mileage that
 are paid witnesses in the courts of the United States. Such attendance of
 witnesses and production of evidence may be required from any place in the
 United States to any designated place of such hearing in the United States.
 `(B) Any employee of the Board, upon presenting appropriate credentials
 and a written notice of inspection authority, is authorized to enter any
 facility wherein an accidental release has occurred and do all things
 therein necessary for a proper investigation. The employee may inspect,
 at reasonable times, records, files, papers, processes, controls, and
 facilities relevant to the investigation of such accidental release. Each
 inspection, examination, or test shall be commenced and completed with
 reasonable promptness and the results of such inspection, examination,
 or test made available.
 `(C) In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena, an order, or an
 inspection notice of the Board, or of any duly designated employee thereof,
 by any person who resides, is found, or transacts business within the
 jurisdiction of any district court of the United States, such district
 court shall, upon the request of the Board, have jurisdiction to issue to
 such person an order requiring such person to comply forthwith. Failure
 to obey such an order is punishable by such court as a contempt of court.
 `(D) The Board is authorized to enter into without regard to section 5
 of title 41, such contracts, leases, cooperative agreements, or other
 transactions as may be necessary in the conduct of the functions and the
 duties of the Board under this chapter, with any government entity or
 any person.
 `(E) The Board is authorized to obtain, and shall be furnished, with or
 without reimbursement, a copy of the report of the autopsy performed by
 State or local officials on any person who dies as a result of having been
 involved in an accidental release within the jurisdiction of the Board and,
 if necessary, the Board may order the autopsy or seek other tests of such
 persons as may be necessary to the investigation of the accident: Provided,
 That to the extent consistent with the need of the accident investigation,
 provisions of local law protecting religious beliefs with respect to
 autopsies shall be observed.
 `(F) The Board is authorized to (i) use, on a reimbursable basis or
 otherwise, when appropriate, available services, equipment, personnel,
 and facilities of the Environmental Protection Agency and of other civilian
 or military agencies and instrumentalities of the Federal Government; (ii)
 confer with employees and use available services, records, and facilities of
 State, municipal, or local governments and agencies; (iii) employ experts
 and consultants in accordance with section 3109 of title 5; (iv) appoint
 one or more advisory committees composed of qualified private citizens or
 officials of Federal, State, or local governments as it deems necessary
 or appropriate, in accordance with the Federal Advisory Committee Act;
 (v) accept voluntary and uncompensated services notwithstanding any other
 provision of law; (vi) accept gifts or donations of money or property
 (real, personal, mixed, tangible, or intangible); and (vii) enter into
 contracts with public and private nonprofit entities for the conduct of
 studies related to any of its functions.
 `(G) Whenever the Board submits or transmits any budget estimate, budget
 request, supplemental budget estimate, or other budget information,
 legislative recommendation, prepared testimony for congressional hearings,
 or comment on legislation to the President or to the Office of Management and
 Budget, it shall concurrently transmit a copy thereof to the Congress. No
 officer or agency of the United States shall have any authority to
 require the Board to submit its budget requests or estimates, legislative
 recommendations, prepared testimony for congressional hearings, or comments
 on legislation to any officer or agency of the United States for approval,
 comments, or review, prior to the submission of such recommendations,
 testimony, or comments to the Congress.
 `(H) The Board is empowered to designate representatives to serve or assist
 on such committees as the Chairman determines to be necessary or appropriate
 to maintain effective liaison with other Federal agencies, and with State
 and local government agencies, and with independent standard-setting bodies
 carrying out programs and activities related to transportation safety.
 `(I) The Board, or an employee of the Board duly designated by the Chairman,
 may conduct an inquiry to secure data with respect to any matter pertinent
 to accidental releases from facilities, upon publication of notice of such
 inquiry in the Federal Register; and may require, by special or general
 orders, Federal, State, and local government agencies and other persons
 to submit written reports and answers to such requests or questions as
 are propounded with respect to any matter pertinent to any function of
 the Board. Such reports and answers shall be submitted to the Board or
 to such employee within such reasonable period of time and in such form
 as the Board may determine. Copies thereof shall be made available for
 inspection by the public.
 `(J) The Board may establish such rules and regulations as may be necessary
 to the exercise of its functions.
 `(7) USE OF REPORTS AS EVIDENCE- No part of any report of the Board,
 relating to any accidental release or the investigation thereof, shall
 be admitted as evidence or used in any suit or action for damages growing
 out of any matter mentioned in such report or reports.
 `(8) JUDICIAL REVIEW- Any order, affirmative or negative, issued by the Board
 under this chapter shall be subject to review by the appropriate court of
 appeals of the United States or the United States Court of Appeals for the
 District of Columbia, upon petition filed within 60 days after the entry
 of such order, by any person disclosing a substantial interest in such
 order. Such review shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions
 of chapter 7 of of title 5.
 `(9) GENERAL- Copies of any communication, document, investigation,
 or other report, or information received or sent by the Board, or any
 member or employee of the Board, shall be made available to the public
 upon identifiable request, and at reasonable cost, unless such information
 may not be publicly released pursuant to paragraph (10). Nothing contained
 in this section shall be deemed to require the release of any information
 described by subsection (b) of section 552 of title 5, or which is otherwise
 protected by law from disclosure to the public.
 `(10) EXCEPTION- The Board shall not disclose information obtained under
 this chapter which concerns or relates to a trade secret referred to in
 section 1905 of title 18, except that such information may be disclosed
 in a manner designed to preserve confidentiality--
 `(A) upon request, to other Federal Government departments and agencies
 for official use;
 `(B) upon request, to any committee of Congress having jurisdiction over
 the subject matter to which the information relates;
 `(C) in any judicial proceeding under a court order formulated to preserve
 the confidentiality of such information without impairing the proceedings;
 and
 `(D) to the public in order to protect health and safety, after notice to
 any interested person to whom the information pertains and an opportunity
 for such person to comment in writing, or orally in closed session, on
 such proposed disclosure (if the delay resulting from such notice and
 opportunity for comment would not be detrimental to health and safety).
 `(11) RESPONSE TO BOARD RECOMMENDATIONS-
 `(A) ADMINISTRATOR'S DUTY TO RESPOND; CONTENTS OF RESPONSE; PUBLICATION;
 PUBLIC AVAILABILITY OF COPIES- Whenever the Board submits a recommendation
 regarding accidental releases from facilities to the Administrator, he
 shall respond to each such recommendation formally and in writing not
 later than 90 days after receipt thereof. The response to the Board by
 the Administrator shall indicate his intention to--
 `(i) initiate and conduct procedures for adopting such recommendations in
 full, pursuant to a proposed timetable, a copy of which shall be included;
 `(ii) initiate and conduct procedures for adopting such recommendation
 in part, pursuant to a proposed timetable, a copy of which shall be
 included. Such response shall set forth in detail the reasons for the
 refusal to proceed as to the remainder of such recommendation; or
 `(iii) refuse to initiate or conduct procedures for adopting such
 recommendation. Such response shall set forth in detail the reasons for
 such refusal.
The Board shall cause notice of the issuance of each such recommendation and
of each receipt to a response thereto to be published in the Federal Register,
and shall make copies thereof available to the public at reasonable cost.
 `(B) ANNUAL REPORT TO CONGRESS- The Administrator shall submit a report
 to the Congress on January 1 of each year setting forth all the Board's
 recommendations to the Administrator during the preceding year regarding
 accidental releases from facilities and a copy of the Administrator's
 response to each such recommendations.
 `(j) AUTHORIZATION- There are authorized to be appropriated to the
 Administrator such sums as may be necessary to carry out the provisions
 of this section.'.
SEC. 6. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
 The following provisions of the Clean Air Act are each amended as follows:
 (1) Section 111(d)(1) is amended by striking `112(b)(1)(A)' and inserting
 in lieu thereof `112(b)'.
 (2) Section 111 is amended by striking subsections (g)(5) and (g)(6)
 and redesignating the succeeding paragraphs accordingly. Such section is
 further amended by striking `or section 112' in subsection (g)(7).
 (3) Section 113(c)(1) is amended by striking `shall be punished' and
 all that follows through the end of the paragraph and inserting in lieu
 thereof `shall be punished by a fine of not less than $5,000 nor more than
 $50,000 per day of violation, or by imprisonment for not more than 3 years,
 or by both. If a conviction of such person is for a violation committed
 after a first conviction of such person under this paragraph, punishment
 shall be by a fine of not more than $100,000 per day of violation, or by
 imprisonment of not more than 6 years, or by both.'.
 (4) Section 113(c)(2) is amended by striking `$10,000' and inserting in
 lieu thereof `$50,000'; and by striking `six months' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `3 years'.
 (5) Section 113 is amended by striking `112(c)' wherever it occurs and
 inserting in lieu thereof `112'.
 (6) Section 113 is amended by inserting `section 129 (relating to accidental
 releases),' before `or 119(g)' in subsection (a)(3). Such section is further
 amended by inserting `section 129 (relating to accidental releases),'
 before subsection (d)(5) in subsection (b)(3). Such section is further
 amended by inserting `section 129, or' at the end of subsection (c)(1)(C).
 (7) Section 114(a) is amended by striking `or' after `section 111,' and
 by inserting `, or any regulation under section 129,' after `section 112'.
 (8) Section 118(b) is amended by striking `112(c)' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `112(s) (relating to Presidential exemption)'.
 (9) Section 302(k) is amended by adding before the period at the end thereof
 `, and any design, equipment, work practice, or operational standard
 authorized by this Act'.
 (10) Section 304(a)(1) is amended by inserting before `(A)' the words
 `or to have violated'.
 (11) Section 304(a)(3) is amended by striking out `or constructs' and
 inserting `, constructs, or has constructed' and by striking out `part
 C of title I (relating to significant deterioration of air quality) or
 part D of title I (relating to nonattainment) or who is alleged to be in
 violation of' and inserting `title I or who is alleged to be in violation
 of or to have violated'.
 (12) Section 304(a)(2) is amended by adding after `, or' the following:
 `where the Administrator has unreasonably delayed in performing any act
 or duty, or'.
 (13) Section 304(a) is amended by striking the period at the end thereof
 and inserting `or to apply any appropriate civil penalties under this Act.'.
 (14) Section 304(b)(1) is amended by striking `112(c)(1)(B)' and inserting
 in lieu thereof `112'.
 (15) Section 307(b)(1) is amended by striking `112(c)' and inserting in
 lieu thereof `112'.
 (16) Section 307(b) is amended by adding the following at the end thereof:
 `(3) Where a final decision by the Administrator undertakes to perform an
 action, but defers such performance to a later time, any interested person
 may either challenge the deferral pursuant to paragraph (1) or bring an
 action at any time under section 304(a)(2) to compel such performance.'.
 (17) Section 307 is amended by adding the following new subsection at the
 end thereof:
 `(h) PETITIONS- Any person may petition the Administrator to issue, amend,
 reconsider, or repeal any regulation or order issued under the authority
 of this Act. Within 12 months the Administrator shall either grant the
 petition or issue a final decision denying the petition, except that in
 the case of a petition for reconsideration under section 307(d)(7)(B), the
 Administrator shall grant or deny the petition within 4 months. In any case
 in which the Administrator grants a petition, the Administrator shall take
 final action in response to any such petition within a reasonable time.'.