HR 1636 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1636
To establish uniform standards for product liability actions.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
MARCH 23, 1989
Mr. RITTER (for himself, Mr. BARTON of Texas, Mr. DANNEMEYER, Mr. NIELSON of
Utah, and Mr. WHITTAKER) introduced the following bill; which was referred
jointly to the Committees on Energy and Commerce and the Judiciary
A BILL
To establish uniform standards for product liability actions.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Uniform Product Liability Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. PURPOSES.
 It is the purpose of this Act--
 (1) to establish uniform liability standards for products sold in interstate
 commerce,
 (2) to promote increased safety in the manufacture and use of such products
 through the imposition of such standards,
 (3) to foster innovation and development of new products by reducing
 the uncertainty of the risk of liability of manufacturers for product
 liability actions,
 (4) to allow insurers and self-insurers to base their rates for product
 liability insurance on predictable and uniform standards of liability, and
 (5) to permit the States to develop alternative methods for resolving
 product liability disputes which will reduce the costs of such disputes
 to manufacturers and consumers.
SEC. 3. PREEMPTION.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) This Act--
 (A) governs any product liability action brought in any State or Federal
 court against a manufacturer or product seller for personal injury,
 property damage, or commercial loss, and
 (B) supersedes any State law regarding recovery for any injury or damage
 caused by a product only to the extent that this Act establishes a rule
 of law applicable to any such recovery.
 (2) A civil action brought against a manufacturer or product seller
 for commercial loss caused by a product shall be governed by applicable
 commercial or contract law.
 (b) LIMITATIONS- No person may bring a civil action with respect to a
 product to recover damages for--
 (1) any illness, injury, death, or mental anguish or emotional harm, or
 (2) physical damage to property,
which does not constitute harm.
 (c) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this Act shall be construed to--
 (1) waive or affect any defense of sovereign immunity asserted by any
 State under any law,
 (2) supersede any Federal law, except the Federal Employees Compensation
 Act and except as provided in section 10,
 (3) waive or affect any defense of sovereign immunity asserted by the
 United States,
 (4) affect the applicability of the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976
 (28 U.S.C. 1602 et seq.),
 (5) preempt State choice-of-law rules with respect to claims brought by
 a foreign nation or a citizen of a foreign nation,
 (6) affect the right of any court to transfer venue or to apply the law of
 a foreign nation or to dismiss a claim of a foreign nation or of a citizen
 of a foreign nation on the ground of inconvenient forum, or
 (7) supersede any statutory or common law, including an action to abate a
 nuisance, that authorizes a State or person to institute an action for civil
 damages or civil penalties, cleanup costs, injunctions, restitution, cost
 recovery, punitive damages, or any other form of relief from contamination
 or pollution of the environment or the threat of such contamination or
 pollution.
As used in paragraph (7), the term `environment' has the meaning given to
such term in section 101(14) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601(14)).
 (d) ALTERNATIVES- Nothing in this Act shall prohibit States from developing
 or implementing alternative procedures, standards, or systems, which are
 not inconsistent with this Act, for--
 (1) expediting product liability claims,
 (2) resolving product liability disputes, or
 (3) compensating product liability damages.
SEC. 4. MANUFACTURER LIABILITY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- In a product liability action, a manufacturer shall not
 be liable for harm which was caused--
 (1) by an unreasonable or unforeseeable use or alteration of a product,
 including any use or alteration of the product which the manufacturer
 specifically prohibited, warned, or instructed against, or
 (2) by a danger that was an aspect of the product that cannot be made safe
 and that would be known to the person who ordinarily uses or consumes the
 product with ordinary knowledge common to such persons or the community
 within which such persons reside.
 (b) LIMITATION- In a product liability action, a manufacturer shall not
 be liable for harm which was caused--
 (1) by a product design unless it is established that, at the time of
 manufacture, knowledge of the danger that caused the harm and a practicable
 means to eliminate the danger were reasonably available or obtainable in
 light of existing scientific, technical, or medical information, or
 (2) by a failure to provide adequate warnings or instructions unless it
 is established that, at the time of manufacture--
 (A) knowledge of the danger that caused the harm was reasonably available
 or obtainable in light of existing scientific, technical, or medical
 information, and
 (B) the manufacturer failed to take reasonable steps to provide adequate
 warnings or instructions (i) to persons who ordinarily use or consume the
 product or to persons who could be expected to take action to avoid the
 harm, or (ii) in the case of products used or dispensed only by a licensed
 practitioner, to such practitioners.
SEC. 5. PRODUCT SELLER LIABILITY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- In a product liability action, a product seller shall be
 liable to a claimant only if the claimant establishes by a preponderance
 of the evidence that--
 (1)(A) the individual product unit which allegedly caused the harm
 complained of was sold by the product seller, (B) the product seller failed
 to exercise reasonable care with respect to the product, and (C) such failure
 to exercise reasonable care was a proximate cause of the claimant's harm, or
 (2)(A) the product seller made an express warranty applicable to the
 individual product unit which allegedly caused the harm complained of,
 independent of any express warranty made by a manufacturer as to the same
 product, (B) the product failed to conform to the warranty, (C) the failure
 of the product to conform to the warranty caused the claimant's harm.
 (b) CONSTRUCTION- For purposes of subsection (a)(1)(B)--
 (1) a product seller shall not be considered to have failed to exercise
 reasonable care with respect to a product based upon an alleged failure
 to provide warnings or instructions unless the claimant establishes that,
 when the product left the possession and control of the product seller,
 the product seller failed--
 (A) to provide to the person to whom the product seller relinquished
 possession and control of the product any written warnings or instructions
 received while the product was in the product seller's possession and
 control, or
 (B) to make reasonable efforts to provide users with those warnings and
 instructions which it received after the product left its possession and
 control, and
 (2) a product seller shall not be considered to have failed to exercise
 reasonable care with respect to a product based upon an alleged failure to
 inspect a product where there was no reasonable opportunity to inspect the
 product in a manner which would or should, in the exercise of reasonable
 care, have revealed the aspect of the product which allegedly caused the
 claimant's harm.
 (c) LIMITATION- In a product liability action, a product seller shall be
 liable for harm to the claimant caused by such product as if the product
 seller were the manufacturer of such product if--
 (1) the manufacturer is not subject to service of process under the laws
 of any State in which the action might have been brought, or
 (2) the court determines that the claimant would be unable to enforce a
 judgment against the manufacturer.
SEC. 6. DEFENSES.
 (a) DESIGNS AND WARNINGS-
 (1) Except as provided in paragraph (3), a manufacturer or product seller
 shall not be liable for any injury related to a defect in the design of
 a product or to a failure to provide an adequate warning or instruction
 as to any danger associated with the use of a product if the manufacturer
 or seller establishes that, at the time the product was made, the aspect
 of the product that is the subject of the claim was in compliance in all
 material respects with standards, conditions, or specifications in Federal
 law or adopted by an agency of the Federal Government responsible for the
 design, formulation, labeling, or performance of the product.
 (2) A determination by an agency of the Federal Government that a product
 is in compliance with its standards, conditions, or specifications is
 conclusive evidence of such compliance.
 (3) Paragraph (1) shall not apply if the claimant establishes that a person
 exercising reasonable care could and would have taken additional precautions.
 (b) ALCOHOL AND DRUGS- (1) In any product liability action subject to
 this Act in which all defendants are manufacturers or product sellers, a
 manufacturer or product seller shall not be liable if the individual whose
 injury or death was the subject of the action and with respect to whom
 the action was brought was under the influence of intoxicating alcohol or
 any drug and such condition was more than 50 percent responsible for the
 individual's harm.
 (2) In any product liability action subject to this Act in which not all
 defendants are manufacturers or product sellers and the trier of fact
 determines that no liability exists against those defendants who are not
 manufacturers or product sellers, a manufacturer or product seller shall
 not be liable if it is proved that the individual whose injury or death was
 the subject of the action and with respect to whom the action was brought
 was under the influence of intoxicating alcohol or any drug and that such
 condition was more than 50 percent responsible for the individual's harm.
 (3)(A) For the purposes of paragraphs (1) and (2), the determination of
 whether an individual was under the influence of intoxicating alcohol
 shall be made pursuant to applicable State law.
 (B) As used in paragraphs (1) and (2), the term `drug' means any
 non-over-the-counter drug which has not been prescribed by a physician.
SEC. 7. LIABILITY OF CODEFENDANTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b), in a product liability
 action, the trier of fact shall determine, with respect to each person
 responsible for the harm, the percentage of that person's responsibility
 for the harm for which the action was brought. If damages are awarded to
 the claimant in such action, a defendant shall be liable only for that
 percentage of the damages which equals the percentage of that defendant's
 responsibility for the harm for which the action was brought.
 (b) APPLICATION-
 (1) Subsection (a) shall not apply with respect to persons engaged in
 concerted action which proximately caused the harm complained of by the
 claimant.
 (2) For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `concerted action' means the
 participation in joint conduct by 2 or more persons who consciously and
 deliberately agreed to jointly participate in such conduct with actual
 knowledge of the wrongfulness of the conduct.
SEC. 8. PUNITIVE DAMAGES.
 (a) IN GENERAL--Except as provided in subsection (e), punitive damages may,
 if otherwise permitted by applicable law, be awarded to any claimant who
 establishes, by clear and convincing evidence, that the harm suffered was
 the result of conduct manifesting a manufacturer's or product seller's
 conscious, flagrant indifference to the safety of those persons who might
 be harmed by a product and constituting an extreme departure from accepted
 standards of conduct. A failure to exercise reasonable care in choosing
 among alternative product designs, formulations, instructions, or warnings
 is not of itself such conduct. Punitive damages may not be awarded in the
 absence of a compensatory award.
 (b) TRIER OF FACT CONSIDERATIONS- In determining whether punitive damages
 are to be awarded, the trier of fact shall consider--
 (1) the likelihood at the relevant time that serious harm would arise from
 the manufacturer's or product seller's conduct described in subsection (a),
 (2) the degree of the manufacturer's or product seller's awareness of
 that likelihood,
 (3) the duration of the conduct and any concealment of it by the manufacturer
 or product seller,
 (4) the attitude and action of the manufacturer or product seller upon
 discovery of the conduct and whether the conduct has been terminated, and
 (5) whether the harm suffered by the claimant was also the result of the
 claimant's own reckless disregard for personal safety.
 (c) DAMAGES- If a manufacturer or product seller is found liable for
 punitive damages, the court shall determine the amount of such damages
 taking into account--
 (1) the factors described in subsection (b),
 (2) the profitability to the manufacturer or product seller of the conduct
 for which punitive damages are to be awarded,
 (3) the financial condition of the manufacturer or product seller, and
 (4) the total effect of other punishment imposed or likely to be imposed upon
 the manufacturer or product seller as a result of the conduct, including
 punitive damage awards to persons similarly situated to the claimant and
 the severity of criminal penalties to which the manufacturer or product
 seller has been or may be subjected.
 (d) CONSTRUCTION- Subsections (a) through (c) do not establish a rule of
 law applicable to the award of punitive damages in a product liability
 action brought for death if the applicable State law only provides for
 punitive damages in such action.
 (e) LIMITATION-
 (1) Punitive damages may not be awarded against a manufacturer or product
 seller of a drug or medical device which caused the claimant's harm if--
 (A) the drug (as defined in section 201(g)(1) of the Federal Food,
 Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321(g)(1)) or medical device (as
 defined under section 201(h) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
 (21 U.S.C. 321(h))) was subject to premarket approval by the Secretary
 of Health and Human Services under section 505 or 515 of such Act with
 respect to the safety of the formulation or performance of the aspect of
 such drug or device which caused the claimant's harm or the adequacy of
 the packaging or labeling of such drug or device and was approved by the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, or
 (B) the drug is generally recognized as safe and effective pursuant to
 conditions established by the Secretary of Health and Human Services under
 regulations, including packaging and labeling regulations.
This paragraph shall not apply in any case in which the defendant withheld
from or misrepresented to the Secretary of Health and Human Services or
any other agency or official of the Federal Government information that is
material and relevant to the safety or performance of a drug or device.
 (2) Punitive damages may not be awarded against a manufacturer of an
 aircraft which caused the claimant's harm if--
 (A) such aircraft was subject to premarket certification by the Secretary
 of Transportation with respect to the safety of the design or performance of
 the aspect of such aircraft which caused the claimant's harm or the adequacy
 of the warnings regarding the operation or maintenance of such aircraft, and
 (B) the aircraft was certified by the Secretary of Transportation under
 the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 App. U.S.C. 1301 et seq.).
This paragraph shall not apply in any case in which the defendant withheld
from or misrepresented to the Federal Aviation Administration information
that is material and relevant to the safety, performance, maintenance,
or operation of an aircraft.
SEC. 9. TIME LIMITATION ON LIABILITY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Any product liability action shall be barred unless the
 complaint is filed within 2 years of the time the claimant discovered or,
 in the exercise of reasonable care, should have discovered the harm for
 which the action is brought and its cause.
 (b) LIMITATION-
 (1) Notwithstanding subsection (a), any product liability action for
 damages (other than damages for a toxic harm) caused by a product which
 is a capital good shall be barred unless the complaint in such action is
 served and filed within 12 years of the date of the delivery of the product
 to its first purchaser or lessee who was not engaged in the business of
 selling or leasing the product or using the product as a component in the
 manufacture of another product.
 (2) For purposes of paragraph (1)--
 (A) the term `capital good'--
 (i) means any product, or any component of such product, which is of a
 character subject to allowance for depreciation under the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 and is--
 (I) used in a trade or business,
 (II) held for the production of income, or
 (III) sold, leased, or donated to a governmental or private entity for
 the production of goods for training, for demonstration, or other similar
 purposes, and
 (ii) does not mean a motor vehicle, vessel, aircraft, or railroad car used
 primarily to transport passengers for hire, and
 (B) the term `toxic harm' means harm which is functional impairment,
 illness, or death of a human being resulting from repeated or continuing
 exposure to an object, substance, mixture, raw material, or physical agent
 of particular chemical composition.
 (c) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this section shall affect the right of any
 person who is subject to liability for harm under this Act to seek and
 obtain contribution or indemnity from any other person who is responsible
 for such harm.
 (d) AIRCRAFT-
 (1) No product liability action arising out of a general aviation accident
 which is brought against a general aviation manufacturer may be brought
 for harm which is alleged to have been caused by an aircraft or a system,
 component, subassembly, or other part of an aircraft and which occurs--
 (A) more than 12 years from--
 (i) the date of delivery of the aircraft to its first purchaser or lessee,
 if delivered directly from the manufacturer, or
 (ii) the date of first delivery of the aircraft to a person engaged in
 the business of selling or leasing such an aircraft, or
 (B) with respect to any system, component, subassembly, or other part
 which replaced another product in, or which was added to, the aircraft,
 and which is alleged to have caused the claimant's harm, more than 12
 years from the date of the replacement or addition.
 (2) Paragraph (1) does not apply in the case of harm to a claimant which
 occurs after the period set forth in paragraph (1) if the general aviation
 manufacturer or the seller of the product that caused the claimant's
 harm gave an express written warranty that the product would be suitable,
 for the purpose for which it was intended, for a longer period of time.
 (3) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to alter a person's duty
 to provide, after the sale or lease of an aircraft, to aircraft owners, and
 to repair facilities to which a license or certificate to perform repairs
 has been issued by the Administrator, additional or modified warnings
 or instructions regarding the use or maintenance of that aircraft or any
 system, component, or other part of that aircraft.
 (4) For purposes of this subsection--
 (A) the term `general aviation aircraft' means both--
 (i) any aircraft for which a type certificate and an airworthiness
 certificate have been issued by the Administrator, which, at the time such
 certificates were originally issued, had a maximum seating capacity of
 fewer than 20 passengers, and which is not engaged in scheduled passenger
 carrying operations as defined in regulations issued under the Federal
 Aviation Act of 1958, and
 (ii) any aircraft for which a type certificate and an airworthiness
 certificate have been issued by the Administrator, and which, at the time
 such certificates were originally issued, had a maximum seating capacity
 of fewer than 6 passengers;
 (B) the term `general aviation accident' means any accident which arises
 out of the operation of any general aviation aircraft and which results
 in harm, and
 (C) the term `general aviation manufacturer' means--
 (i) the builder or manufacturer of the airframe of a general aviation
 aircraft,
 (ii) the manufacturer of the engine of a general aviation aircraft, and
 (iii) the manufacturer of any system, component, subassembly, or other
 part of a general aviation aircraft.
SEC. 10. WORKERS' COMPENSATION OFFSET.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- In any product liability action subject to this Act in
 which damages are sought for harm for which the person injured is or would
 have been entitled to receive compensation under any State or Federal
 workers' compensation law--
 (1) the action shall, on application of the claimant made at claimant's
 sole discretion, be stayed until such time as the full amount payable
 as workers' compensation benefits has been finally determined under such
 workers' compensation law, and
 (2) any damages awarded shall, where the employer or the workers'
 compensation insurance carrier of the employer does not have a lien against
 the claimant's recovery in a product liability action against a manufacturer
 or product seller, be reduced by the sum of the amount paid as workers'
 compensation benefits to which the employee is or would be entitled for
 such harm.
The determination of workers' compensation benefits by the trier of fact in
a product liability action subject to this Act shall have no binding effect
on and shall not be used as evidence in any other proceeding.
 (b) SUBROGATION, CONTRIBUTION, INDEMNITY, LIEN-
 (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), unless the manufacturer or product
 seller has expressly agreed to indemnify or hold an employer harmless for
 harm to an employee, neither the employer nor the workers' compensation
 insurance carrier of the employer shall have a right of subrogation,
 contribution, or implied indemnity against the manufacturer or product
 seller or a lien against the claimant's recovery from the manufacturer
 or product seller if the harm is one for which a product liability action
 may be brought pursuant to this Act.
 (2)(A) Except in jurisdictions which allocate payment of workers'
 compensation benefits among all responsible employers, if the claimant's
 injury arose as a result of exposure to workplace conditions with multiple
 employers, paragraph (1) shall not apply if the employer or the workers'
 compensation insurer of the employer establishes, and the trier of fact
 determines, that the claimant's harm was not in any way caused by the
 fault of any of such employers or coemployees.
 (B) In all other circumstances, paragraph (1) shall not apply if the
 employer or the workers' compensation insurer of the employer establishes,
 and the trier of fact determines, that the claimant's harm was not in any
 way caused by the fault of the claimant's employer or coemployee.
 (c) THIRD-PARTY CLAIM TORTFEASOR-
 (1) Except as provided in subsection (d), in any product liability action
 subject to this Act in which damages are sought for harm for which the
 person injured is or would have been entitled to receive compensation
 under any State or Federal workers' compensation law, no third-party claim
 tortfeasor may maintain any action for implied indemnity or contribution
 against the employer, any coemployee, or the exclusive representative of
 the person who was injured.
 (2) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to affect any provision of a
 State or Federal workers' compensation law which prohibits a person who
 is or would have been entitled to receive compensation under any such law,
 or any other person whose claim is or would have been derivative from such
 a claim, from recovering for harm in any action other than a workers'
 compensation claim against a present or former employer or workers'
 compensation insurer of the employer, any coemployee, or the exclusive
 representative of the person who was injured. Any action other than such
 a workers' compensation claim shall be prohibited, except that nothing
 in this Act shall be construed to affect any State or Federal workers'
 compensation law which permits recovery based on a claim of an intentional
 tort by the employer or coemployee, where the claimant's harm was caused
 by such an intentional tort.
 (d) NONAPPLICABILITY OF SUBSECTION- Subsection (c) shall not apply
 and applicable State law shall control if the employer of the workers'
 compensation insurer of the employer, in a product liability action subject
 to this part, asserts or attempts to assert, because of subsection (b),
 a right of subrogation, contribution, or implied indemnity against the
 manufacturer or product seller or a lien against the claimant's recovery
 from the manufacturer or product seller.
SEC. 11. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act--
 (1) the term `claimant' means any person--
 (A) who has suffered harm from a product and who brings a product liability
 action, or
 (B) who brings such an action on behalf of any person who has suffered harm
 from a product or who brings such an action because a person suffered harm
 from a product,
 (2) with respect to a product liability action brought against a manufacturer
 or product seller of a product the term `commercial loss' means economic
 injury, whether direct, incidental, or consequential, including property
 damage and damage to the product itself,
 (3)Òthe term `harm'--
 (A) means--
 (i) personal physical illness, injury, or death of the claimant,
 (ii) mental anguish or emotional harm of the claimant caused by the
 claimant's personal physical illness or injury, or
 (iii) physical damage to property other than the product itself, and
 (B) does not mean commercial loss,
 (4) with respect to a product, the term `manufacturer' means--
 (A) any person who is engaged in a business to produce, create, make,
 or construct the product and who designs or formulates the product or has
 engaged another person to design or formulate the product,
 (B) a product seller of the product who, before placing the product in
 the stream of commerce--
 (i) designs or formulates or has engaged another person to design or
 formulate an aspect of the product after the product was initially made
 by another, and
 (ii) produces, creates, makes, or constructs such aspect of the product, or
 (C) any product seller not described in subparagraph (B) which holds itself
 out as a manufacturer to the user of the product,
 (5) the term `product'--
 (A) includes any object, substance, mixture, or raw material in a gaseous,
 liquid, or solid state--
 (i) which is capable of delivery itself, in a mixed or combined state,
 or as a component part or ingredient,
 (ii) which is produced for introduction into trade or commerce,
 (iii) which has intrinsic economic value, and
 (iv) which is intended for sale or lease to persons for commercial or
 personal use, and
 (B) does not include--
 (i) electricity, water delivered by a utility, natural gas, or steam, or
 (ii) human tissue, organs, blood, and blood products unless considered a
 product under otherwise applicable State law,
 (6) the term `product liability action' means a civil action brought
 against a manufacturer or product seller, on any theory, for personal
 injury, property damage, or commercial loss which is caused by a product,
 (7) with respect to a product, the term `product seller'--
 (A) means a person--
 (i) who sells, distributes, leases, prepares, blends, packages, or labels
 such product or is otherwise involved in placing such product in the stream
 of commerce, or
 (ii) who installs, repairs, or maintains the harm-causing aspect of such
 product, and
 (B) does not include--
 (i) a seller or lessor of real property,
 (ii) a provider of professional services in any case in which the sale or
 use of a product is incidental to the transaction and the essence of the
 transaction is the furnishing of judgment, skill, or services,
 (iii) any person who acts in only a financial capacity with respect to
 the sale of a product, or
 (iv) any person who leases a product under a lease arrangement in which
 the selection, possession, maintenance, and operation of the product are
 controlled by a person other than the lessor, and
 (8) the term `State' means any State of the United States, the District
 of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam,
 American Samoa, the Northern Mariana Islands, the Trust Territory of the
 Pacific Islands, and any other territory or possession of the United States,
 or any political subdivision thereof.
SEC. 12. OPPORTUNITY FOR ALTERNATE DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
 (a) NONBINDING ARBITRATION- A court in which a product liability action is
 brought shall provide the parties to the action the opportunity to engage
 in nonbinding arbitration with respect to the claim for which the action
 was brought.
 (b) COMPLIANCE WITH PROCEDURES- The nonbinding arbitration made available
 under subsection (a) shall comply with the procedures described in this
 section.
 (c) REQUIRED ARBITRATION- If a party to a product liability action decides
 to engage in nonbinding arbitration, the other parties to the action shall
 be required by the court in which the action was brought to also engage
 in the arbitration.
 (d) AWARD OR DECISION-
 (1) In nonbinding arbitration there shall be an award or decision with
 respect to each claim involved in the product liability action subject to
 the arbitration. Parties who engaged in arbitration shall be notified if
 an award or decision is not unanimous.
 (2)(A) If a party rejects an unanimous award of an arbitration panel and the
 other party accepts the award and if there is a subsequent verdict in the
 product liability action subject to arbitration, the party who rejected the
 award shall, upon request of the other party, pay the other party's costs
 unless the verdict is more favorable to the party who rejected the award.
 (B) For purposes of subparagraph (A)--
 (i) the term `costs' means those costs and fees which may be imposed in
 the product liability action under applicable State or Federal law and
 reasonable attorney fees and witness expenses, and
 (ii) a verdict shall be considered more favorable to a party if--
 (I) such party is the claimant and the amount of the verdict is at least
 10 percent more than the award of the arbitration panel, or
 (II) such party is the defendant and the amount of the verdict is at least
 10 percent less than the award of the arbitration panel.
 (C) A court may, upon application of a party or on its own motion, reduce
 the costs payable by the party if payment of the costs would impose an
 undue economic hardship on the party.
 (e) ORAL STATEMENTS AND ARGUMENTS- Oral statements and arguments made in a
 nonbinding arbitration under this section and written summaries and briefs
 presented in the arbitration shall not be admissible in evidence in any
 court or in any other evidentiary proceeding.