HR 5561 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5561
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to establish provisions
regarding the composition and labeling of dietary supplements.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
July 7, 1992
Mr. DANNEMEYER introduced the following bill; which was referred to the
Committee on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to establish provisions
regarding the composition and labeling of dietary supplements.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Health Freedom Act of 1992'.
SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.
 (a) DIETARY SUPPLEMENT- Section 201 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
 Act (21 U.S.C. 321) is amended by adding at the end the following new
 paragraph:
 `(ff) The term `dietary supplement' means an article that--
 `(1) includes, and is intended to supplement the diet with--
 `(A) a vitamin;
 `(B) a mineral;
 `(C) an herb; or
 `(D) another similar nutritional substance, including a concentrate or
 extract of an item described in clause (A), (B), or (C); and
 `(2)(A) is intended for ingestion in a form described in paragraph (1)(B)(i)
 or (2) of section 411(c), or another similar form; or
 `(B) complies with section 411(c)(1)(B)(ii).'.
 (b) DRUG- Section 201(g)(1) of such Act is amended by adding at the end
 the following: `A dietary supplement shall not be considered to be a drug
 solely because of the potency of a substance in the dietary supplement. A
 dietary supplement shall not be considered to be a drug under clause (B)
 solely because the labeling or advertising for the supplement contains a
 claim, or provides information, that is described in section 413(b) and
 meets the requirements specified in paragraphs (1) and (2) of such section,
 or that concerns the potency of a substance in the supplement.'.
 (c) FOOD ADDITIVE- Section 201(s) of such Act is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (1) through (5) as clauses (A) through
 (E), respectively;
 (2) by inserting `(1)' after `(s)'; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 `(2) A substance in a dietary supplement is not a food additive if the
 substance is identified in the labeling of the dietary supplement as a
 substance provided by the product to supplement the diet.'.
SEC. 3. DIETARY SUPPLEMENTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Chapter IV of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
 (21 U.S.C. 341 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new section:
`SEC. 413. LABELING AND ADVERTISING OF DIETARY SUPPLEMENTS.
 `(a) DESCRIPTION- Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act,
 an article that is a dietary supplement may be described as a dietary
 supplement in labeling or advertising.
 `(b) RELATIONSHIP TO DISEASE OR HEALTH-RELATED CONDITION- Notwithstanding
 any other provision of this Act, labeling or advertising for a dietary
 supplement may include a claim or other information that characterizes the
 relationship of the dietary supplement, or of one or more of the substances
 provided by the dietary supplement, or of the absence of one or more of
 the substances, to a disease or health-related condition, if--
 `(1) such claim or other information is truthful and not misleading; and
 `(2) there is scientific evidence, whether published or unpublished,
 that provides a reasonable basis for such claim or other information.
Uniformity of scientific opinion is not required by paragraph (2).
 `(c) PROHIBITION ON PRIOR APPROVAL OR REGULATION- Notwithstanding any other
 provision of this Act, the Secretary shall not establish any requirement
 that such a claim or other information that meets the requirements specified
 in paragraph (1) and (2) of subsection (b) shall be approved by or conform
 to a regulation issued by the Secretary before the claim or information
 may be used.
 `(d) ACTIONS-
 `(1) RIGHT OF ACTION- If the Secretary asserts that labeling or advertising
 for a dietary supplement includes such a claim or other information that
 fails to comply with paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (b), whether the
 Secretary makes the assertion in a warning letter issued by an officer
 or employee of the Department, or in connection with another action to
 enforce a provision of this Act, the manufacturer, processor, packer,
 distributor, or retailer, of the dietary supplement, or other person to
 whom the assertion is addressed, may--
 `(A) bring an action in a United States district court in any appropriate
 judicial district under section 1391 of title 28, United States Code,
 to secure a declaratory judgment regarding the validity of the assertion; and
 `(B) obtain any other means of judicial review authorized by law.
 `(2) INFERENCE- The absence of any action described in subparagraph (A)
 or (B) in paragraph (1) with respect to an assertion shall not establish
 any inference that the assertion is valid.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 403(r)(5) of such Act (21 U.S.C. 343(r)(5))
 is amended by striking clause (D).