S 3047 IS
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 3047
To amend the antitrust laws in order to preserve and promote wholesale and
retail competition in the retail gasoline market.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
September 13 (legislative day, SEPTEMBER 10), 1990
Mr. DECONCINI (for himself and Mr. METZENBAUM) introduced the following bill;
which was read twice and referred to the Committee on the Judiciary
A BILL
To amend the antitrust laws in order to preserve and promote wholesale and
retail competition in the retail gasoline market.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Motor Fuel Consumer Protection Act of 1990'.
SEC. 2. WHOLESALE PURCHASE OF GASOLINE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding any other provision of law and except
 as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any producer or
 refiner, directly or indirectly, to require any retail motor fuel dealer
 to purchase more than 70 per centum of the monthly retail sales of motor
 fuel from such producer or refiner or to prohibit the use or conversion
 of storage tanks and dispensers as provided in subsection (c).
 (b) CONTRACT, COMBINE, OR CONSPIRACY- It shall be a violation of this Act
 for any producer or refiner to contract, combine, or conspire with any
 other producer or refiner for the purpose of violating subsection (a).
 (c) WHOLESALER- It shall be unlawful for any producer or refiner, directly
 or indirectly, to restrain any retail motor fuel dealer from purchasing any
 or all of the retail motor fuel dealers requirements of motor fuel from a
 wholesaler of the motor fuel produced or refined by such producer or refiner.
 (d) RETAIL MOTOR FUEL DEALER- It shall be unlawful for any retail motor
 fuel dealer, at a motor fuel service station displaying a trademark, trade
 name, or other identifying symbol or name owned by a refiner or producer,
 to sell motor fuel which is not provided by or for such producer or refiner
 without providing reasonable notice at the point of sale that motor fuel
 dispensed by one or more dispensers is not refined by or for such producer
 or refiner, except that a dealer may convert one or more existing storage
 tanks and dispensers or establish new storage tanks and dispensers for
 sale of motor fuel supplied by other than the owner of the trademark,
 trade name, or identifying symbol displayed at the station.
SEC. 3. OPERATION OF MOTOR FUEL SERVICE STATIONS.
 It shall be unlawful for any large integrated refiner to operate any motor
 fuel service station in the United States.
SEC. 4. EXCEPTIONS.
 SEC. 4. Notwithstanding section 3, it shall not be a violation of this
 Act for a large integrated refiner to own all or part of the assets of
 a motor fuel service station so long as such producer does not engage in
 the business of selling motor fuel at such station through any--
 (1) employee;
 (2) commissioned agent;
 (3) person acting on behalf of the refiner or under the refiner's
 supervision; or
 (4) person operating such station pursuant to a contract with the refiner
 which provides that the refiner has substantial or effective control over
 the motor fuel operations of the station.
SEC. 5. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this Act the term--
 (1) `producer' means any person who is engaged, directly or indirectly,
 in the production of crude oil;
 (2) `refiner' means any person engaged, directly or indirectly, in the
 refining of motor fuel or any producer who contracts with another to refine
 petroleum products for purposes of sale of motor fuel by the producer;
 (3) `large integrated refiner' means any person who for the most recent
 calendar year for which data are available--
 (A) produced, directly or indirectly, more than 30 per centum of the
 domestic and imported crude oil supplied to its refinery; and
 (B) whose total refinery capacity exceeds one hundred and seventy-five
 thousand barrels per day;
 (4) `motor fuel' means gasoline, diesel fuel, alcohol, or any mixture of
 them sold for use in automobiles and related vehicles;
 (5) `motor fuel service station' means any facility at which motor fuel
 is sold at retail;
 (6) `person' includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
 corporations, legal representatives, joint-stock companies, trustees and
 receivers in bankruptcy and reorganization, common law trusts, and any
 organized group, whether or not incorporated;
 (7) `United States' means the several States, the District of Columbia,
 and any territory or possession of the United States.
SEC. 6. ENFORCEMENT AND EFFECTIVE DATE.
 (a) FTC ENFORCEMENT- The Federal Trade Commission may commence a civil
 action for appropriate relief, including a permanent or temporary injunction,
 whenever the Federal Trade Commission has reason to believe that any person
 has violated or is violating any provision of this Act, or any regulations
 promulgated thereunder. Any action under this paragraph may be brought
 in the district court of the United States for the district in which the
 defendant is located, resides, or is doing business, and such court shall
 have jurisdiction to restrain such violation and to require compliance, to
 impose monetary penalties under the same terms and conditions as provided
 in section 5(m)(2)(A) of the Federal Trade Commission Act, and to order
 such additional equitable relief as it deems appropriate.
 (b) PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION-
 (1) If any person fails to comply with the requirements of this section,
 any other person affected by such failure may maintain a civil action
 against such person failing to comply with such requirements for damages and
 appropriate equitable relief, including temporary and permanent injunctive
 relief. If the plaintiff prevails in any action under this section, the
 plaintiff shall be entitled to reasonable attorney and expert witness fees
 to be paid by the defendant, except that in any case in which the court
 determines that only nominal damages are to be awarded to the plaintiff,
 the court may, in its discretion, determine not to direct that such fees
 be paid by the defendant.
 (2) An action brought pursuant to this section may be brought, without
 regard to the amount in controversy, in the district court of the United
 States in any judicial district in which the plaintiff resides or is doing
 business or in which the defendant resides or is doing business.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- Sections 2 and 3 of this Act shall take effect one
 year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (d) REGULATIONS-
 (1) The Federal Trade Commission shall prescribe regulations for the
 collection of information necessary for the determinations specified
 in section 3 and for the manner of complying with the requirements of
 section 2(d).
 (2) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, information related
 to section 3 need not be provided by private persons if reliable and timely
 information is available from published sources.
 (3) Regulations promulgated pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be promulgated,
 after notice and a reasonable period for comment by the public, no later
 than one hundred eighty days after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (4) No section of this Act shall supersede any comparable State law to the
 extent that compliance with the State law can be accomplished consistent
 with this Act.