S 1245 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1245
To amend the Federal Meat Inspection Act to expand the meat inspection
programs of the United States by establishing a comprehensive inspection
program to ensure the quality and wholesomeness of all fish products intended
for human consumption in the United States, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
June 22 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. MITCHELL (for himself, Mr. COCHRAN, Mr. LEAHY, Mr. LUGAR, Mr. BREAUX,
Mr. DASCHLE, Mr. COHEN, Mr. LOTT, Mr. BOSCHWITZ, Mr. MCCONNELL, Mr. PRYOR,
Mr. GRAHAM, and Mr. CHAFEE) introduced the following bill; which was read
twice and referred to the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry
A BILL
To amend the Federal Meat Inspection Act to expand the meat inspection
programs of the United States by establishing a comprehensive inspection
program to ensure the quality and wholesomeness of all fish products intended
for human consumption in the United States, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Federal Fish Inspection Act'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
 (a) FINDINGS- Congress finds that--
 (1) fish are an important component of the meat supply of the United States
 and are harvested, processed, and marketed by a large and diverse industry;
 (2) the wholesomeness and safety of fish and fish products are important
 to the health and well-being of the people of the United States and proper
 nutrition;
 (3) the Department of Agriculture currently conducts inspection programs
 for all meat products other than fish and has the technical expertise and
 workforce capacity necessary to rapidly expand meat inspection programs
 to cover fish and fish products;
 (4) heightened public awareness of the health benefits associated with
 eating fish, and the availability of a greater diversity of products made
 from fish, have raised consumption rates and the demand for wholesome,
 high quality fish products;
 (5) current Federal inspection and monitoring programs carried out by the
 Department of Agriculture for meat and meat products are insufficient to
 ensure public confidence in the wholesomeness, safety, and quality of fish
 and fish products; and
 (6) better information on, and inspection of, fish and fish products would
 improve the health and well-being of American consumers and increase public
 confidence in all meat products and the overall food supply.
 (b) PURPOSES- It is the purpose of this Act to--
 (1) expand inspection programs for meat and meat products to include fish
 and fish products;
 (2) improve the wholesomeness and safety of fish and fish products and
 thereby increase the health benefits of consuming fish and fish products;
 (3) enhance public confidence in the wholesomeness and safety of fish and
 protect markets through a comprehensive inspection program specifically
 designed for fish;
 (4) designate the Secretary of Agriculture as the Federal official
 responsible for the inspection of all meat products, including fish; and
 (5) increase public awareness and education of proper handling and
 preparation of fish products.
SEC. 3. FISH INSPECTION PROGRAM.
 The Federal Meat Inspection Act (21 U.S.C. 601 et seq.) is amended by
 adding at the end thereof the following new title:
`TITLE V--FISH INSPECTION PROGRAM
`SEC. 501. DEFINITIONS.
 `As used in this title:
 `(1) FISH- The term `fish' includes all meat from freshwater or marine
 fin fish, mollusks, crustaceans, and other forms of aquatic animal life,
 whether from wild or cultured sources, including amphibians.
 `(2) FISH PRODUCT- The term `fish product' means any product intended
 for human consumption derived in whole or in substantial part from fish,
 including unprocessed fish.
 `(3) HAZARD ANALYSIS CRITICAL CONTROL POINT METHOD- The term `Hazard
 Analysis Critical Control Point method' means the system of food inspection
 described and endorsed by the National Research Council in `An Evaluation
 of the Role of Microbiological Criteria for Foods and Food Ingredients'
 published in May, 1985 by the National Academy Press.
 `(4) SECRETARY- The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
`SEC. 502. FISH INSPECTION PROGRAM.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary shall establish an inspection program
 designed to ensure the safety and wholesomeness of fish and fish products.
 `(b) SCOPE- The inspection program shall--
 `(1) cover the processing, storage, and handling of meat from fish and
 fish products;
 `(2) provide for the inspection of imported and domestic fish products on
 an equal basis;
 `(3) provide for the registration and inspection of facilities and vessels
 that process fish products; and
 `(4) identify geographic areas producing fish and fish products that exceed
 the safety standards developed in accordance with this title.
 `(c) STANDARDS- The Secretary shall establish standards governing--
 `(1) the maintenance of sanitary conditions and good processing, storage,
 and handling practices;
 `(2) the safety and wholesomeness of meat from fish and fish products; and
 `(3) the packaging and labeling of fish products, including the use of
 common names.
`SEC. 503. ENFORCEMENT.
 `(a) MONITORING AND SURVEILLANCE- The Secretary shall develop and carry out
 a comprehensive system of monitoring and surveillance to assure compliance
 with the standards established under section 502(c).
 `(b) ADMINISTRATION- The compliance system shall--
 `(1) be developed and carried out in accordance with the Hazard Analysis
 Critical Control Point method;
 `(2) provide for the appointment and training of authorized inspection
 officers;
 `(3) contain appropriate reporting and record keeping requirements that,
 among other things, will assist the Secretary in locating sources of
 contaminated fish and fish products; and
 `(4) provide for the enforcement of this title and the imposition of
 appropriate civil and criminal penalties on a person who violates this title.
`SEC. 504. RESEARCH AND EDUCATION.
 `(a) RESEARCH- The Secretary shall conduct and support research with
 respect to--
 `(1) testing the methodology for biological and chemical contaminants;
 `(2) techniques and procedures for inspecting fish and fish products; and
 `(3) sanitation practices for the processing, transportation, and storage
 of fish and fish products.
 `(b) EDUCATION- The Secretary shall conduct and support education programs
 to increase public awareness in furtherance of the purposes of this title.
`SEC. 505. INTERAGENCY COOPERATION.
 `(a) FEDERAL PROGRAMS- The Secretary, in consultation with other appropriate
 Federal agencies, shall develop and carry out the inspection program
 established under this title in a manner that--
 `(1) avoids duplication of Federal and State efforts; and
 `(2) to the extent practicable, minimizes disruption in the fish industry
 consistent with ensuring the safety and wholesomeness of fish and fish
 products.
 `(b) INTERAGENCY CONSULTATION- The Secretary, in carrying out this title,
 shall consult with other Federal agencies that have developed expertise
 in areas covered by this title.
 `(c) STATES- The Secretary shall provide technical, advisory, and financial
 assistance to encourage States to establish and maintain inspection programs
 for fish products consistent with this title.
 `(d) FOREIGN NATIONS- The Secretary shall ensure that arrangements with
 foreign nations are established to ensure, to the extent practicable,
 mutual acceptance of standards and inspection programs for fish products.
`SEC. 506. ADMINISTRATION.
 `(a) REGULATIONS- The Secretary shall issue such regulations as are
 necessary to carry out this title.
 `(b) NONAPPLICABILITY- Titles I through IV shall not apply to this title.
`SEC. 507. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 `There are authorized to be appropriated for each fiscal year such sums
 as are necessary to carry out this title.'.