S 833 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 833
To amend the Cable Act regarding cable communications, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
April 18 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. METZENBAUM (for himself and Mr. LIEBERMAN) introduced the following bill;
which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation
A BILL
To amend the Cable Act regarding cable communications, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act may be cited as the
 `Cable Television Subscriber Protection Act of 1989'.
 SEC. 2. (a) Section 602 of the Act entitled the Cable Communications Policy
 Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. 522) is amended by--
 (1) striking out `and' at the end of paragraph (15);
 (2) striking out the period at the end of paragraph (16) and inserting in
 lieu thereof a semicolon; and
 (3) adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(17) the term `cable community' means the geographic area in which a
 cable system provides cable service;
 `(18) the term `multichannel household' means a household to which cable
 service is available and which subscribes to cable service or a competing
 multichannel video programming distributor;
 `(19) the term `multichannel video programming distributor' means a person
 such as, but not limited to, a cable system, a multichannel multipoint
 distribution service, or a television receive-only satellite program
 distributor, who makes available for purchase, by subscribers or customers,
 multiple channels of video programming; and
 `(20) the term `available to a household' or `available to a home' when
 used with reference to a multichannel video programming distributor means a
 particular household which is a subscriber or customer of the distributor
 or a particular household which is actively and currently sought as a
 subscriber or customer by a multichannel video programming distributor.'.
 SEC. 3. Section 623(b) of the Act entitled the Cable Communications Policy
 Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. 543(b)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(b)(1) A franchising authority shall be authorized to regulate the rates
 for the provision of basic cable service and for installing or renting
 equipment necessary for the receipt of basic service if it finds that a
 cable system is not subject to effective competition.
 `(2) For purposes of rate regulation under this subsection a cable system
 shall be presumed to be subject to effective competition if a franchising
 authority finds that the cable community is served by more than one
 multichannel video programming distributor.
 `(3) A cable community shall be considered as served by more than one
 multichannel video programming distributor if comparable video programming
 is available to at least 67 percent of the multichannel households from a
 competing cable system, multichannel multipoint distribution service (MMDS),
 direct broadcast satellite (DBS), program distributor, television receive
 only satellite (TVRO) program distributor, or other competing multichannel
 video programming distributor and the number of households subscribing
 to programming services offered by such competing multichannel video
 programming distributor, or combination of distributors, exceeds, in the
 aggregate, 30 percent of the multichannel households in the cable community.
 `(4) No competing multichannel video programming distributor serving
 multichannel households in a cable community which, either directly or
 through its parent or affiliates, is owned, controlled, or affiliated
 through substantial common ownership with, the cable system in that cable
 community, shall be included in any determination regarding effective
 competition under this subsection.
 `(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, a cable system shall
 be presumed to be subject to effective competition if less than 30 percent of
 the households to which cable service is available subscribe to such service.
 `(6) A franchising authority authorized to regulate basic cable rates
 under this subsection shall periodically review its effective competition
 findings to determine whether changing market conditions in the local
 cable community render a cable system subject to effective competition as
 defined in this subsection.
 `(7) A cable operator who has been adversely affected by a finding by a
 franchising authority that the cable system is not subject to effective
 competition may seek judicial review in accordance with the procedures of
 section 635. A court may set aside such a finding if the cable operator
 demonstrates that the finding is not supported by substantial evidence.'.
 SEC. 4. Section 623(c) of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984
 (47 U.S.C. 543(c)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(c) A franchising authority authorized to regulate rates under this
 subsection shall, in consultation with the local cable system and other
 relevant parties, establish a method for such regulation.'.