HR 2462 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2462
To amend title 10, United States Code, to prohibit senior civilian officials
of the Department of Defense and general and flag officers of the Armed
Forces from working for defense contractors for a period of two years after
leaving service in the Department of Defense.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
May 24, 1989
Mr. BENNETT (for himself, Mrs. BOXER, Mr. AUCOIN, and Mr. PENNY) introduced
the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Armed Service.
A BILL
To amend title 10, United States Code, to prohibit senior civilian officials
of the Department of Defense and general and flag officers of the Armed
Forces from working for defense contractors for a period of two years after
leaving service in the Department of Defense.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. LIMITATION ON POST-GOVERNMENT EMPLOYMENT BY SENIOR DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE CIVILIAN OFFICIALS AND GENERAL AND FLAG OFFICERS.
 (a) TWO-YEAR BAR ON EMPLOYMENT BY DEFENSE CONTRACTORS- (1) Chapter 141 of
 title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 2397c
 the following new section:
`Sec. 2397d. Former senior defense officials and general and flag officers:
two-year prohibition on employment by contractors
 `(a)(1) A person who is a former senior civilian official of the Department
 of Defense may not accept compensation from a contractor during the
 two-year period beginning on the date of such person's separation from
 service in the Department of Defense. A person who is a retired general
 officer or a retired Navy flag officer may not accept compensation from
 a defense contractor during the two-year period beginning on the date of
 such officer's initial release from active duty as a retired officer.
 `(2) For purposes of paragraph (1), a senior civilian official of the
 Department of Defense is a civilian officer or employee serving in a position
 for which the rate of pay is greater than or equal to the minimum rate of
 pay payable for a position in the Senior Executive Service.
 `(b) In the application of subsection (a) to a former official of the
 Department of Defense or a former or retired officer, a person's status
 as a contractor shall be determined as of the date of the separation from
 service from the Department of Defense of the official or officer involved.
 `(c)(1) The provisions of subsection (b) of section 2397b of this title
 shall apply with respect to violations of subsection (a) in the same manner
 as those provisions apply to violations of subsection (a)(1) of that section.
 `(2) A person shall not be subject to a fine under subsection (b) of section
 2397b of this title and under paragraph (2) with respect to the same conduct.
 `(e) The provisions of subsection (e) of section 2397b of this title,
 and the definitions prescribed in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection
 (f) of that section, apply to this section.'.
 (2) The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by
 inserting after the item relating to section 2397c the following new item:
`2397d. Former senior defense officials and general and flag officers:
two-year prohibition on employment by contractors.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- (1) Subject to paragraph (2), section 2397d of title
 10, United States Code, as added by subsection (a), shall take effect 60
 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2)(A) That section--
 (i) does not preclude the continuation of employment that began before the
 effective date specified in paragraph (1) or the acceptance of compensation
 for that employment; and
 (ii) does not, except as provided in subparagraph (B), apply to a person
 whose service in the Department of Defense terminates before the effective
 date specified in paragraph (1).
 (B) Subparagraph (A)(ii) does not preclude the application of that section
 to a person with respect to service in the Department of Defense by such
 person on or after the effective date specified in paragraph (1).