S 645 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 645
To regulate interstate commerce by providing for uniform standards of
liability for harm arising out of general aviation accidents.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
March 13 (legislative day, FEBRUARY 6), 1991
Mrs. KASSEBAUM (for herself, Mr. BOND, Mr. BURNS, Mr. CHAFEE, Mr. COATS,
Mr. CRAIG, Mr. DANFORTH, Mr. DOLE, Mr. EXON, Mr. GARN, Mr. GORTON,
Mr. GRASSLEY, Mr. HEINZ, Mr. KASTEN, Mr. KERRY, Mr. MCCAIN, Mr. MURKOWSKI,
Mr. NICKLES, Mr. PELL, Mr. RUDMAN, Mr. SIMPSON, Mr. SMITH, Mr. SYMMS,
Mr. WALLOP, and Mr. HATCH) introduced the following bill; which was read
twice and referred to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
A BILL
To regulate interstate commerce by providing for uniform standards of
liability for harm arising out of general aviation accidents.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act may be cited as the
 `General Aviation Accident Liability Standards Act of 1991'.
FINDINGS AND PURPOSE
 SEC. 2. (a) The Congress finds that--
 (1) transportation by air of passengers continues to comprise an increasingly
 important component of the Nation's overall transportation system;
 (2) although the incidence of injuries to passengers in general aviation
 accidents has decreased, the number of general aviation accident liability
 claims against general aviation aircraft manufacturers and the amount of
 damages sought in such claims is increasing at disproportionate rates, beyond
 any relationship to the quality of the aircraft manufactured and in use;
 (3) the current system for determining liability and damages for compensating
 individuals injured in general aviation accidents is inadequate;
 (4) competent general aviation manufacturers and component part manufacturers
 are ceasing or limiting production of general aviation aircraft or some
 models of such aircraft because of the increasing costs and unavailability
 of product liability insurance;
 (5) the increase in the number of liability claims and the size of awards and
 settlements, and the excessive time and expense devoted to the resolution
 of such claims, impose a substantial economic burden on general aviation
 manufacturers and their dealers;
 (6) the Federal Government has an interest in the general aviation
 accident liability system because the Federal Government has established
 a comprehensive system for regulating general aviation, including--
 (A) establishing standards for design, construction, and certification of
 general aviation aircraft,
 (B) establishing standards for maintenance of aircraft, licensing of repair
 facilities, and licensing of persons who may perform or approve maintenance,
 repairs, and inspections,
 (C) establishing standards for training and licensing of pilots,
 (D) establishing a comprehensive air control system,
 (E) conducting investigations to determine the probable cause of aviation
 accidents and prevent future accidents, and
 (F) conducting other activities necessary to assure a safe air transportation
 system;
and this Federal system is the exclusive legal authority for regulating
aviation operations and safety;
 (7) it is in the national interest to reduce unnecessary expenditures
 related to general aviation accident liability claims while providing more
 rapid and more efficient compensation for individuals harmed in general
 aviation accidents; and
 (8) Federal action to reform the general aviation accident liability system
 will result in--
 (A) the maintenance of airworthy general aviation aircraft; and
 (B) a more rational general aviation accident liability system.
 (b) It is the purpose of this Act to establish standards for determining
 liability for harm arising out of general aviation accidents.
DEFINITIONS
 SEC. 3. As used in this Act, the term--
 (1) `Administrator' means the Administrator of the Federal Aviation
 Administration;
 (2) `claimant' means any person who brings a general aviation accident
 liability action subject to this Act, and any person on whose behalf such
 an action is brought, including--
 (A) the claimant's decedent; and
 (B) the claimant's parent or guardian, if the action is brought through
 or on behalf of a minor or incompetent;
 (3) `general aviation accident' means any accident which arises out of
 the operation of any general aviation aircraft and which results in harm;
 (4) `general aviation aircraft' means any powered aircraft for which a
 type certificate or an airworthiness certificate has been issued by the
 Administrator under the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 App. U.S.C. 1301
 et seq.) which, at the time such certificate was originally issued, had
 a maximum seating capacity of fewer than twenty passengers, and which is
 not, at the time of the accident, engaged in scheduled passenger carrying
 operations as defined in regulations issued under the Federal Aviation
 Act of 1958 (49 App. U.S.C. 1301 et seq.);
 (5) `general aviation manufacturer' means--
 (A) the builder or manufacturer of the airframe of a general aviation
 aircraft;
 (B) the manufacturer of the engine of a general aviation aircraft; and
 (C) the manufacturer of any system, component, subassembly, or other part
 of a general aviation aircraft;
 (6) `harm' means--
 (A) property damage or bodily injury sustained by a person;
 (B) death resulting from such bodily injury;
 (C) pain and suffering which is caused by such bodily injury; and
 (D) emotional harm (including bereavement and loss of affection, care,
 or society) which is caused by such bodily injury;
 (7) `product' means a general aviation aircraft and any system, component,
 subassembly, or other part of a general aviation aircraft; and
 (8) `property damage' means physical injury to tangible property, including
 loss of use of tangible property.
PREEMPTION; APPLICABILITY
 SEC. 4. (a) This Act supersedes any State law regarding recovery, under
 any legal theory, for harm arising out of a general aviation accident, to
 the extent that this Act establishes a rule of law or procedure applicable
 to the claim.
 (b) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to supersede or to waive or affect
 any defense of sovereign immunity asserted by the United States or any State.
 (c) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to affect the liability of a
 manufacturer, owner, or operator of any aircraft that is not a general
 aviation aircraft, or a person who repairs, maintains, or provides any
 other support for any aircraft that is not a general aviation aircraft,
 for damages for harm arising out of the operation of an aircraft that is
 not a general aviation aircraft.
 (d) No right of action for harm exists under this Act if that right would be
 inconsistent with the provisions of any applicable workers' compensation law.
 (e) The provisions of this Act shall apply only to--
 (1) any manufacturer, owner, or operator of any general aviation aircraft,
 and any person who repairs, maintains, or provides any other support for
 such an aircraft;
 (2) any occupant of a general aviation aircraft at the time of a general
 aviation accident, and any person who brings an action for harm caused by
 such accident on behalf of such occupant; and
 (3) any nonoccupant of a general aviation aircraft at the time of a general
 aviation accident, only if such nonoccupant is bringing an action for
 harm caused by such accident which arises out of the harm to an occupant
 of such aircraft at the time of such accident.
UNIFORM STANDARDS OF LIABILITY FOR GENERAL AVIATION ACCIDENTS
 SEC. 5. (a) Any person claiming damages for harm arising out of a general
 aviation accident may bring an action against a party and may recover
 damages from such party, if such party was negligent and such negligence
 is a proximate cause of the claimant's harm.
 (b)(1) Any person claiming damages for harm arising out of a general aviation
 accident may bring an action against a general aviation manufacturer of a
 product and may recover damages from such general aviation manufacturer if--
 (A) the product, when it left the control of the manufacturer, was in
 a defective condition unreasonably dangerous for its intended purpose,
 according to engineering and manufacturing practices which were reasonably
 feasible;
 (B) the defective condition is a proximate cause of the claimant's harm; and
 (C) the general aviation aircraft was being used at the time of the accident
 for a purpose and in a manner for which it was designed and manufactured.
 (2) Any person claiming damages for harm arising out of a general aviation
 accident may bring an action against a general aviation manufacturer of a
 product and may recover damages from such general aviation manufacturer if--
 (A) at the time the product left the control of the manufacturer, the
 manufacturer--
 (i) knew, or in the exercise of reasonable care should have known, about
 a danger connected with the product that caused the claimant's harm; and
 (ii) failed to provide the warnings or instructions that a person exercising
 reasonable care would have provided with respect to the danger which caused
 the harm alleged by the claimant, unless such warnings or instructions,
 if provided, would not have materially affected the conduct of the user
 of the product; or
 (B) after the product left the control of the general aviation manufacturer,
 the manufacturer--
 (i) knew, or in the exercise of reasonable care should have known, about
 the danger which caused the claimant's harm; and
 (ii) failed to take reasonable steps to provide warnings or instructions,
 after the manufacture of the product, which would have been provided by a
 person exercising reasonable care, unless such warnings or instructions, if
 provided, would not have materially affected the conduct of the product user;
and the failure to provide warnings or instructions described in subparagraph
(A) or (B) of this paragraph is a proximate cause of the claimant's harm.
 (3) Any person claiming damages for harm arising out of general aviation
 accident may bring an action against a general aviation manufacturer of a
 product and may recover damages from such general aviation manufacturer if--
 (A) the manufacturer made an express warranty with respect to the product;
 (B) such warranty relates to that aspect of the product which caused
 the harm;
 (C) the product failed to conform to such warranty; and
 (D) the failure of the product to conform to such warranty is a proximate
 cause of the claimant's harm.
 (c)(1) In an action governed by subsection (b) of this section, a general
 aviation manufacturer shall not be liable if such manufacturer proves,
 by a preponderance of the evidence, that--
 (A) the defective condition could have been corrected by compliance with
 action described in an airworthiness directive issued by the Administrator;
 and
 (B) such directive was issued at a reasonable time before the date of the
 accident and after the product left the control of the general aviation
 manufacturer.
 (2) In any action governed by subsection (b) of this section, evidence of
 compliance with standards, conditions or specifications established, adopted
 or approved by the Federal Aviation Administration shall be admissible
 with regard to whether the product was defective and unreasonably dangerous
 for its intended purpose.
COMPARATIVE RESPONSIBILITY
 SEC. 6. (a) All actions for harm arising out of a general aviation
 accident shall be governed by the principles of comparative
 responsibility. Comparative responsibility attributed to the claimant's
 conduct shall not bar recovery in an action under this Act, but shall
 reduce any damages awarded to the claimant in an amount proportionate
 to the responsibility of the claimant. The trier of fact shall determine
 comparative responsibility by making findings indicating the percentage of
 total responsibility for the claimant's harm attributable to the claimant,
 each defendant, each third-party defendant, and any other person not a
 party to the action.
 (b) Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, a defendant is
 severally but not jointly liable in any action for harm arising out of a
 general aviation accident, and the liability of any defendant in any such
 action shall be determined on the basis of such defendant's proportionate
 share of responsibility for the claimant's harm.
 (c) In any action for harm arising out of a general aviation accident--
 (1) a general aviation manufacturer who is the builder or manufacturer
 of the airframe of the general aviation aircraft involved is jointly
 and severally liable for harm caused by a defective system, component,
 subassembly, or other part of such aircraft that the manufacturer installed
 or certified as part of the original type design for such aircraft; and
 (2) a general aviation manufacturer who is the manufacturer of a system
 or component of the general aviation aircraft involved is jointly and
 severally liable for damages caused by a defective subassembly or other
 part of such system or component.
 (d) A general aviation manufacturer and any other person jointly liable
 under subsection (c) of this section shall have the right to bring an
 action for indemnity or contribution against any person with whom they
 are jointly liable under subsection (c) of this section.
TIME LIMITATION ON LIABILITY
 SEC. 7. (a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, no
 civil action for harm arising out of a general aviation accident which is
 brought against a general aviation manufacturer may be brought for harm
 which is alleged to have been caused by an aircraft or a system, component,
 subassembly, or other part of an aircraft and which occurs more than--
 (1) twenty years from--
 (A) the date of delivery of the aircraft to its first purchaser or lessee,
 if delivered directly from the manufacturer; or
 (B) the date of first delivery of the aircraft to a person engaged in the
 business of selling or leasing such an aircraft; or
 (2) with respect to any system, component, subassembly, or other part
 which replaced another product in, or which was added to, the aircraft,
 and which is alleged to have caused the claimant's harm, twenty years from
 the date of the replacement or addition.
 (b) Subsection (a) of this section does not apply in the case of harm
 to a claimant which occurs after the period set forth in subsection (a)
 of this section if the general aviation manufacturer or the seller of
 the product that caused the claimant's harm gave an express warranty that
 the product would be suitable, for the purpose for which it was intended,
 for a longer period of time.
 (c) Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect a person's duty to
 provide, after the sale or lease of an aircraft, to aircraft owners, and
 to repair facilities to which a license or certificate to perform repairs
 has been issued by the Administrator, additional or modified warnings
 or instructions regarding the use or maintenance of such aircraft or any
 system, component, or other part of such aircraft.
SUBSEQUENT REMEDIAL MEASURES
 SEC. 8. In any general aviation accident liability action governed by this
 Act, evidence of any measure taken after an event which, if taken previously,
 would have made the event less likely to occur is not admissible to provide
 liability. Such evidence is admissible to the extent permitted under rule
 407 of the Federal Rules of Evidence.
ADMISSIBILITY OF CERTAIN EVIDENCE
 SEC. 9. In an action governed by this Act, evidence of Federal, State,
 or local income tax liability or any Social Security or other payroll tax
 liability attributable to past or future earnings, support, or profits and
 the present value of future earnings, support, or profits alleged to have
 been lost or diminished because of harm arising out of a general aviation
 accident is admissible regarding proof of the claimant's harm.
PUNITIVE DAMAGES
 SEC. 10. (a) Punitive damages may be awarded in an action under this Act
 for harm arising out of a general aviation accident only if the claimant
 establishes by clear and convincing evidence that the harm suffered was the
 direct result of conduct manifesting a conscious, flagrant indifference
 to the safety of those persons who might be harmed by use of the general
 aviation aircraft involved.
 (b) Evidence regarding the financial worth of a defendant or the defendant's
 profits or any other evidence relating solely to a claim for punitive
 damages under this Act is not admissible unless the claimant establishes,
 before any such evidence is offered, that the claimant can present evidence
 that will establish prima facie proof of conduct manifesting a conscious,
 flagrant indifference to the safety of those persons who might be harmed
 by use of the general aviation aircraft involved.
TIME LIMITATION ON BRINGING ACTIONS
 SEC. 11. Any action for harm arising out of a general aviation accident
 shall be barred, notwithstanding any State law, unless--
 (1) the complaint is filed within two years after the date on which the
 accident occurred which caused the claimant's harm; and
 (2) the summons and complaint are properly served upon the defendant within
 one hundred and twenty days after the filing of such complaint, unless
 the party on whose behalf such service is required can show good cause
 why such service was not made within such one-hundred-and-twenty-day period.
Paragraph (2) of this subsection shall not apply to service of process in a
foreign country pursuant to rule 4(i) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure
or any similar State law.
SANCTIONS
 SEC. 12. It is the intent of Congress that, with respect to any action
 governed by this Act, the sanctions for violation of rule 11 of the Federal
 Rules of Civil Procedure, including orders to pay to the other party or
 parties the amount of their reasonable expenses, including a reasonable
 attorney's fee, be strictly enforced.
JURISDICTION
 SEC. 13. (a) The district courts of the United States, concurrently with the
 State courts, shall have original jurisdiction, in all civil actions where
 the matter in controversy exceeds the sum or value of $50,000, exclusive
 of interest and costs, for harm arising out of a general aviation accident
 and in all actions for indemnity or contribution described in section 6(d)
 of this Act.
 (b) A civil action which is brought in a State court, and may be removed
 to the district court of the United States for the district embracing the
 place where the action is pending, without the consent of any other party,
 by any defendant against whom a claim in such action is asserted for harm
 arising out of a general aviation accident.
 (c) In any case commenced in or removed to a district court of the United
 States under subsection (a) or (b) of this section, the court shall have
 jurisdiction to determine all claims under State law that arise out of
 the same general aviation accident, if a substantial question of fact is
 common to the claims under State law and to the Federal claim, defense,
 or counterclaim.
 (d)(1) A civil action in which the district courts of the United States
 have jurisdiction under subsection (a) of this section may be brought only
 in a district in which--
 (A) the accident giving rise to the claim occurred; or
 (B) any plaintiff or defendant resides.
 (2) In an action pending in a district court of the United States under
 paragraph (1) of this subsection, a district court may, on motion of any
 party or its own motion, transfer the action to any other district for
 the convenience of parties and witnesses in the interest of justice.
 (3) For purposes of this subsection, a corporation shall be considered to
 be a resident of any State in which it is incorporated or licensed to do
 business or is doing business.
SEVERABILITY
 SEC. 14. If any provision of this Act or the application of the provision
 to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this Act
 and the application of the provision to any other person or circumstance
 shall not be affected by such invalidation.
EFFECTIVE DATE
 SEC. 15. (a) This Act shall apply to any civil action for harm arising
 out of a general aviation accident which is filed on or after the date of
 enactment of this Act.
 (b) If an action governed by this Act is filed within one hundred and eighty
 days after the date of enactment of this Act, liberal leave shall be given
 to a party to amend any pleading, motion, statement of jurisdiction or
 venue, or other matter to conform to the provisions of this Act.