S 211 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 211
To protect the cable consumer.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
January 15 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1991
Mr. LIEBERMAN introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
A BILL
To protect the cable consumer.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SHORT TITLE
 SECTION 1. This Act may be cited as the `Cable Consumer Protection Act
 of 1991'.
FINDINGS
 SEC. 2. The Congress finds and declares the following:
 (1) Although the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 was intended to
 `promote competition in cable communications', competition has failed to
 develop. Very few consumers can now choose between two multichannel video
 programming distributors.
 (2) The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as implemented by
 the Federal Communications Commission, prohibits any direct scrutiny
 of rates by States and franchising authorities in 97 percent of all
 cable franchises. Cable consumers therefore are not protected by either
 competition or regulation.
 (3) Since 1986, when the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 became fully
 effective thereby restricting States' and franchising authorities' ability
 to directly regulate the rates charged by the cable television industry,
 cable customers have been adversely affected by increased prices. According
 to the General Accounting Office, between 1986 and December 31, 1989,
 the monthly price for the lowest priced cable service increased 43.1% and
 the most popular cable service increased 39.4%. During the same period,
 the Consumer Price Index increased only approximately 12%. During 1989
 alone, the monthly price for both the lowest priced and most popular cable
 services increased by approximately 10%--twice the rate of inflation.
 (4) Customers have also continually complained about the quality of service
 they receive from cable operators in the absence of competition from another
 multichannel video provider. The FCC has concluded that `there currently
 is insufficient competition to provide a check on the quality of service
 offered by cable operators and responsive measures thus are necessary to
 ensure that consumers receive adequate service quality.'.
 (5) There is a substantial governmental and First Amendment interest in
 promoting a diversity of views provided through multiple technology media.
 (6) Since nearly 59% of households in the United States with televisions
 now subscribe to cable television, and since this percentage is almost
 certain to continue to increase, it is now essential to the survival of
 local broadcast television stations, both commercial and noncommercial,
 that they be carried by local cable systems. There is a substantial
 governmental interest in ensuring that cable subscribers have access to
 these stations and in thereby ensuring the survival of these stations.
 (7) The cable operators derive substantial benefit from the compulsory
 license of broadcast programming granted them pursuant to the Copyright
 Act of 1976. Continued receipt of these benefits should be contingent upon
 their providing their subscribers with access to local broadcast television
 stations through their cable systems.
DEFINITIONS
 SEC. 3. (a) Section 602(5) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 522(5)), is amended by deleting `and' at the end of subparagraph
 (A), and by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(C) the installation, rental or sale of equipment (including, but not
 limited to converters and remotes) used for the receipt or use of video
 or other programming services, and
 `(D) other cable-related services (including, but not limited to, changes
 in service packages or tiers, disconnection and reconnection, additional
 outlets, and service and repair calls).'.
 (b) Section 602 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 522), as amended
 by this section, is amended by deleting `and' at the end of paragraph
 (15); by deleting the period at the end of paragraph (16) and inserting
 in lieu thereof a semicolon; and by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(17) the term `effective competition' means that--
 `(A) fewer than 30 percent of the households in the cable community
 subscribe to the cable service of such cable system; or
 `(B) the cable community is--
 `(i) served by at least two unaffiliated multichannel video programming
 distributors each of which make available comparable video programming to
 at least 80 percent of the households in the cable community; and
 `(ii) the number of households subscribing to programming services offered
 by multichannel video programming distributors other than the largest
 multichannel video programming distributor exceeds 30 percent of the
 households in the cable community;
 `(18) the term `available to a household' when used in reference to
 a multichannel video programming distributor means (A) a particular
 household which is a subscriber or customer of the distributor or (B)
 a particular household which is actively and currently sought as a
 subscriber or customer by a multichannel video programming distributor
 and which is capable of receiving the service offered by the multichannel
 video programming distributor;
 `(19) the term `cable community' means all of the households in the
 geographic area in which a cable system has been granted a franchise to
 provide cable service;
 `(20) the term `multichannel video programming distributor' means a person
 such as, but not limited to, a cable operator, multichannel multipoint
 distribution service, a direct broadcast satellite service, or a television
 receive-only satellite program distributor, who makes available for purchase,
 by subscribers or customers, multiple channels of video programming; and
 `(21) the term `video programmer' means a person engaged in the production,
 creation, or wholesale distribution of a video programming service for
 sale.'.
PROTECTION AGAINST MONOPOLY RATES
 SEC. 4. Section 623 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 543)
 is amended to read as follows:
`REGULATION OF RATES
 `SEC. 623. (a) Any Federal agency, State, or franchising authority may
 not regulate the rates (including, but not limited to, all fees, charges,
 and deposits) for the provision of cable service, except to the extent
 provided under this section and section 612.
 `(b)(1) A State, upon written application to and certification by the
 Commission, may regulate rates (including, but not limited to, all fees,
 charges, and deposits) for cable service in any cable system within that
 State which is not subject to effective competition to ensure that they
 are reasonable.
 `(2) The Commission shall ensure that the rates (including, but not limited
 to, all fees, charges, and deposits) for cable service in any cable system
 not subject to effective competition and not subject to regulation by a
 State pursuant to subsection (b)(1), are reasonable.
 `(3) The Commission shall certify a State to regulate rates for cable
 service pursuant to subsection (b)(1), if--
 `(A) the State has filed a written application with the Commission;
 `(B) the State has administrative structures or procedures in place that
 ensure that uniform standards will be applied in a consistent manner in
 determining whether rates for cable service are reasonable; provided that
 any State that designates one agency of the State to determine whether
 rates for cable service are reasonable shall be conclusively presumed to
 have satisfied the requirements of this subparagraph;
 `(C) the State procedural laws and regulations applicable to determinations
 concerning rates for cable service permit judicial review of determinations
 that are arbitrary, capricious, or otherwise not in accordance with the
 law; and
 `(D) State procedural laws and regulations applicable to determinations
 of whether rates for cable service are reasonable, provide a reasonable
 opportunity for comment by interested parties and provide at least the
 level of protection to consumers as provided by the Commission.
Upon receipt of a written application by a State to regulate rates for cable
service pursuant to this subsection, the Commission shall publish a notice
of such request in the Federal Register and solicit comment by interested
parties. If the Commission has not denied the State's application for
certification within 90 days of receipt at the Commission, the application
shall be deemed approved and may not be challenged except pursuant to
paragraph (6), and the State shall be deemed to have been certified by
the Commission to regulate rates for cable service pursuant to subsection
(b)(1). If the Commission disapproves a State application for certification,
the Commission shall notify the State of any revisions or modifications
necessary to obtain approval.
 `(4) In determining whether the rate for a cable service offered by a
 cable operator is reasonable, the Commission or a State shall consider,
 among other factors, the following:
 `(A) the number of signals included in the service for which a rate is
 being established;
 `(B) the direct cost, if any, paid by the cable operator to obtain, transmit,
 or otherwise provide the signals included in each service for which a rate
 is being established, and changes in such costs;
 `(C) the revenues, if any, received by a cable operator from a supplier
 of programming or advertising carried as a part of the service for which
 a rate is being established, and changes in such revenues;
 `(D) such portion of the joint and common costs of the cable operator
 (including the costs of constructing, maintaining, and improving cable system
 facilities, meeting customer service and signal quality requirements, and
 fulfilling the cable operator's obligations pursuant to section 611 of the
 Communications Act of 1934 and other provisions of the franchise agreement
 not attributable to a particular service) as is properly allocable to
 providing the signals included in the cable service for which a rate is
 being established, and changes in such costs;
 `(E) the profitability of the cable service for which a rate is being
 established, and profitability of the cable system (including a reasonable
 profit for the cable operator on the operation of the cable system);
 `(F) whether the cable operator has substantially complied with the terms
 and conditions of the franchise agreement;
 `(G) the rates charged by the cable operator for other cable services in
 the franchise area; and
 `(H) local conditions that may affect the reasonableness of a rate.
 `(5) A cable operator or other interested party, after two years following
 certification of a State by the Commission pursuant to subsection (b)(3)
 of this section, may file a petition challenging regulation of rates for
 cable service rates by a State. If the petition establishes a prima facie
 case that the State has willfully and repeatedly acted inconsistently
 with the requirements in paragraph (3), the Commission shall review such
 regulation of rates for cable service by the State. If the Commission finds,
 after notice to the State and a reasonable opportunity for the State to
 comment, that the State has willfully and repeatedly acted inconsistently
 with the requirements in paragraph (3), the Commission shall so inform
 the State and shall inform the State that its right to regulate rates
 may be revoked if such inconsistency is not cured. After such notice
 and a reasonable period and opportunity to cure any inconsistency, the
 Commission may order such relief, including decertification of the State,
 as it shall deem proper. A State whose right to regulate rates is revoked
 under this paragraph may apply for recertification pursuant to paragraph
 (3) six months from the effective date of the Commission's determination.
 `(6) Nothing in this title shall be construed as prohibiting a State from
 delegating its authority, pursuant to subsection (b)(1), to regulate rates
 for cable service to any agency or subdivision, including a franchising
 authority.
 `(c) It shall be unlawful for any cable operator, directly or indirectly,
 to unreasonably discriminate among subscribers or potential subscribers of
 cable service in connection with the services offered or the rates charged
 for those services; provided that nothing in this subsection shall be
 construed to prohibit a franchising authority from enforcing ordinance
 or franchise provisions established pursuant to this title, including,
 but not limited to sections 611, 624 and 632 of this title.
 `(d) Nothing in this title shall be construed as forbidding any Federal
 agency, State, or franchising authority from--
 `(1) prohibiting discrimination among customers of cable service; or
 `(2) requiring and regulating the installation, sale or rental of
 equipment which facilitates the reception of cable service by persons
 with disabilities.
 `(e) Within 180 days of the date of enactment of the Cable Consumer
 Protection Act of 1991, the Commission shall, by regulation, require
 cable operators to file, on at least an annual basis, such financial
 information as may be needed for purposes of administering and enforcing
 this section. A cable operator shall provide all such financial information
 to a State certified to regulate rates pursuant to subsections (b)(1)
 and (b)(3). Nothing in this title shall prohibit a State from requiring a
 cable operator to furnish such additional information as may be necessary
 to ensure that cable rates are reasonable. Nothing in this title shall
 prohibit a State or franchising authority from requiring a cable operator
 to provide financial information for any other lawful purpose.
 `(f) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit the power of a State
 or franchising authority to impose and enforce customer service standards
 which may cover items described in subsection 602(5)(D).'.
SIGNAL QUALITY
 SEC. 5. Section 624(e) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 544(e))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(e) Within one year after the date of enactment of the Cable Consumer
 Protection Act of 1991, the Commission shall, after notice and opportunity
 for comment, issue rules that establish minimum technical standards relating
 to cable systems' technical operation and signal quality, including testing
 procedures and protocols used to measure compliance with such standards. The
 Commission periodically shall update such standards and procedures to reflect
 improvements in technology. A franchising authority may require as part
 of a franchise (including the modification, renewal, or transfer thereof),
 or a State may require as a matter of State law or regulation, provisions
 for the enforcement of the standards and procedures prescribed by the
 Commission under this subsection. Nothing in this section shall prohibit--
 `(1) a franchising authority, as part of a franchise (including the
 modification, renewal, or transfer thereof), or
 `(2) a State, as a matter of State law or regulation,
from establishing and enforcing technical standards and procedures that
exceed the standards prescribed by the Commission under this subsection or
are not addressed by the standards or procedures set by the Commission under
this section.
CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS
 SEC. 6. (a) Section 632(a) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 552(a)) is amended by inserting immediately after the word `authority'
 the words `may establish and'; and by inserting immediately after the word
 `operator' the first time it appears, `that (A) either exceed the standards
 set by the Commission under this section or address matters not addressed
 by the standards set by the Commission under this section, or (B) exist
 prior to the adoption by the Commission of rules pursuant to subsection
 (d)(1) of this section'.
 (b) Section 632 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 552) is
 amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(d)(1) The Commission, within 180 days after the date of enactment
 of this subsection, shall, after notice and an opportunity for comment,
 issue rules that establish customer service standards that ensure that all
 subscribers are fairly served. Such standards shall include, at a minimum,
 requirements governing--
 `(A) cable system office hours and customer service representative
 availability (whether in person or by telephone);
 `(B) installations, outages, service calls, and response time to service
 complaints and requests (whether in person or by telephone);
 `(C) billing and collection practices between the cable operator and
 the customer (including, but not limited to, standards governing bills,
 refunds, credits and service terminations);
 `(D) disclosure of all available services, tiers, prices, rates, and
 rights available to customers, and changes in such services, tiers, prices,
 rates and rights; and
 `(E) subscriber complaint resolution procedures, including notifying
 cable subscribers of grievance procedures and of regulatory bodies with
 the right to review customer complaints.
Thereafter the Commission shall regularly review the standards and make such
modifications as may be necessary to ensure that subscribers are fairly
served. A franchising authority may enforce the standards adopted by the
Commission.
 `(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) and this subsection,
 nothing in this title shall be construed to prevent the enforcement of--
 `(A) any municipal ordinance, or
 `(B) any State law,
concerning customer service that imposes customer service requirements that
exceed the standards set by the Commission under this section, or address
matters not addressed by the standards set by the Commission under this
section.'.
NONDISCRIMINATION WITH RESPECT TO VIDEO PROGRAMMING
 SEC. 7. Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 521 et
 seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new section:
`NONDISCRIMINATION WITH RESPECT TO VIDEO PROGRAMMING
 `SEC. 640. (a) A video programmer in which a cable operator has an
 attributable interest and who licenses video programming for distribution--
 `(1) shall not unreasonably refuse to deal with any multichannel video
 programming distributor;
 `(2) shall not discriminate in the price, terms, and conditions in the sale
 of the video programmer's programming among cable systems, cable operators,
 or other multichannel video programming distributors if such action would
 have the effect of impeding retail competition.
 `(b) A video programmer in which a cable operator has an attributable
 interest and who licenses video programming for distribution shall make
 programming available on similar price, terms, and conditions to all
 cable systems, cable operators, other multichannel video programming
 distributors or their agents or buying groups; provided however, that such
 video programmer may--
 `(1) impose reasonable requirements for credit-worthiness, offering of
 service, and financial stability;
 `(2) establish different price, terms, and conditions to take into account
 differences in cost in the creation, sale, delivery, or transmission of
 video programming;
 `(3) establish price, terms, and conditions which take into account
 economies of scale or other cost savings reasonably attributable to the
 number of subscribers served by the distributor; and
 `(4) permit price differentials which are made in good faith to meet the
 equally low price of a competitor.
 `(c) No cable operator, cable system, or its affiliate may discriminate
 against any unaffiliated video programmer or require a financial interest in
 a video programmer or video programming service as a condition of carriage
 on a cable system.
 `(d) The Commission shall prescribe rules and regulations to implement
 this section. The Commission's rules shall--
 `(1) provide for an expedited review of any complaints made pursuant to
 this section; and
 `(2) provide for penalties to be assessed against any person filing a
 frivolous complaint pursuant to this section.
 `(e) This section shall not apply to the signal of an affiliate of a national
 television broadcast network or other television broadcast signal that is
 retransmitted by satellite and shall not apply to any internal satellite
 communication of any broadcaster, broadcast network, or cable network.'.
LIMITATION OF FRANCHISING AUTHORITY LIABILITY
 SEC. 8. Part III of title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 621
 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new section:
`LIMITATION OF LIABILITY
 `SEC. 628. (a) In any court proceeding pending on the date of enactment of
 this section, or initiated after such date, involving any claim against a
 franchising authority or other governmental entity, or any official, member,
 employee, or agent of such authority or entity, arising from the regulation
 of cable services or a decision of approval or disapproval with respect
 to a grant, renewal, transfer or amendment of a franchise, any relief,
 to the extent such relief is required by any other provision of Federal,
 State or local law, shall be limited to injunctive and declaratory relief.
 `(b) Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the relief
 authorized with respect to any claim against a franchising authority or
 other governmental entity, of any official, member, employee or agent of
 such authority or entity, to the extent such claim involves discrimination
 on the basis of race, color, sex, age, religion, national origin or handicap.
 `(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed as creating or authorizing
 liability of any kind, under the Constitution of the United States or any
 law, for any action or failure to act relating to cable services or the
 granting of a franchise by any franchising authority or other governmental
 entity, or any official, member, employee, or agent of such authority
 or entity.'.
FRANCHISE RENEWAL
 SEC. 9. (a) Section 626(a) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 546(a)) is amended by adding at the end of the subsection the
 following:
`If a franchising authority does not initiate proceedings under this
subsection on its own initiative, submission of a timely written renewal
notice by the cable operator specifically requesting a franchising authority
to initiate the formal renewal process under this section is required for the
cable operator to invoke the renewal procedures set forth in subsections (a)
through (g) of this section; except that nothing in this section requires a
franchising authority to commence the renewal proceedings during the 6-month
period which begins with the 36th month before the franchise expiration.'.
 (b) Section 626(b)(1) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 546(b)(1))
 is amended by deleting all after the first comma, and inserting in lieu
 thereof the following: `as determined by the franchising authority, the
 franchising authority shall issue a written request for a renewal proposal.'.
 (c)(1) Section 626(c)(1) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 546(c)(1)) is amended--
 (A) by adding after `franchise' the first time it appears the words
 `submitted in response to a written request for a renewal proposal issued
 pursuant to, and in conformance with, subsection (b)';
 (B) by striking the words `completion of any proceedings under subsection
 (a)' and inserting in lieu thereof `date of the submission of the cable
 operator's proposal in response to a written request for a renewal proposal
 issued pursuant to, and in conformance with, subsection (b)'; and
 (C) by deleting `and' at the end of subparagraph (C), by deleting the period
 at the end of subparagraph (D) and inserting in lieu thereof a semicolon
 and the word `and', and by adding at the end thereof the following new
 subparagraph:
 `(E) any other factors reasonably determined by the franchising authority
 to be relevant to the public interest in cable service.'.
 (2) Section 626(c)(1)(A) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 546(c)(1)(A)) is amended--
 (A) by deleting the word `has' and inserting in lieu thereof the words
 `and its predecessors have'; and
 (B) by inserting before the semicolon the words `throughout the franchise
 term'.
 (3) Section 626(c)(1)(B) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 546(c)(1)(B)) is amended--
 (A) by inserting after `operator's' the words `and its predecessor's';
 (B) by deleting `, quality, or level' and inserting in lieu thereof `or
 quality'; and
 (C) by inserting before the semicolon the words `throughout the franchise
 term'.
 (d) Section 626(d) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 546(d))
 is amended--
 (1) by inserting after the word `renewal' the first time it appears the
 words `which has been submitted in response to a request for a renewal
 proposal issued pursuant to, and in conformance with, subsection (b)'; and
 (2) by amending the second sentence thereof to read as follows: `A
 franchising authority may not base denial of renewal on a failure to
 substantially comply with the material terms of the franchise under
 subsection (c)(1)(A) of this section if--
 `(1) the franchising authority specifically, expressly and in writing waives
 its right to object to the conduct constituting a failure to substantially
 comply with the material terms of the franchise which is the grounds for
 denying renewal of the franchise, or
 `(2) if the cable operator demonstrates by a preponderance of the evidence
 that it had no actual knowledge, and no reason to know, that its conduct
 failed substantially to comply with the material terms of the franchise,
 and that its lack of knowledge or reason to know that its conduct failed
 substantially to comply with the material terms of the franchise actually
 prejudiced its ability to comply with those material terms.'.
 (e) Section 626(e)(2) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 546(e)(2))
 is amended--
 (1) by inserting immediately before the semicolon in subparagraph (A)
 the words `and such failure to comply actually prejudiced the cable
 operator'; and
 (2) by deleting the words `not supported by a preponderance of the evidence'
 in subparagraph (B) and inserting in lieu thereof `arbitrary and capricious'.
 (f) Section 626(h) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 546(h))
 is amended by inserting immediately after the second sentence the following
 new sentence: `In addition, the provisions of subsections (a) through (g)
 of this section do not apply to any renewal proceeding which has not been
 commenced pursuant to subsection (a).'.
 (g) Section 626 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 546) is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsections:
 `(i) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) through (h) of this
 section, a franchising authority may, at any time after it determines the
 proceedings under subsection (a)(1) are completed, solicit and receive
 competitive proposals for a franchise and may grant any such competitive
 proposal and, subject to the provisions of subsection (c), deny renewal
 to the incumbent cable operator if the franchising authority reasonably
 determines that the person(s) submitting the competitive proposal(s)
 has the financial, legal and technical ability to provide the proposed
 cable service and (1) the incumbent cable operator has failed to satisfy
 the standards in subsection (c)(1)(A) or subsection (c)(1)(B); or (2)
 the selection of the competing proposal(s) will better serve the public
 interest with respect to the factors set forth in subsections (c)(1)(C),
 (c)(1)(D), or (c)(1)(E); provided, however, that nothing herein shall
 preclude a franchising authority from awarding one or more cable franchises
 at any time pursuant to section 621(a)(1) or require a franchising authority
 to grant any competitive proposal pursuant to this subsection (i) or any
 other proposal for a franchise.
 `(j) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) through (h), any
 lawful action to revoke a cable operator's franchise for cause shall not
 be negated by the initiation of renewal proceedings by the cable operator
 under this section.'.
MUST-CARRY REQUIREMENTS
 SEC. 10. (a) Section 111(c) of title 17, United States Code, is amended
 in paragraph (1) by striking out `where the carriage of the signals' and
 all that follows through the end of such paragraph and inserting in lieu
 thereof the following:
 `where--
 `(A) the carriage of the signals is permissible under the rules, regulations,
 or authorizations of such Commission; and
 `(B) the cable system complies with section 641 of the Communications Act
 of 1934.'.
 (b) Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 521 et seq.) is
 amended by adding at the end the following new section:
`COMPLIANCE WITH MUST-CARRY REQUIREMENTS
 `SEC. 641. (a) A cable system complies with the requirements of this section
 if the Federal Communications Commission certifies that the cable system--
 `(1) carries, as part of the basic tier of cable service regularly provided
 to all subscribers at the minimum charge and to each television receiver
 on which subscribers receive cable service, in full and in their entirety,
 the signals of television broadcast stations in accordance with sections
 76.5 and 76.51 through 76.62 of title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations
 as in effect on December 10, 1987; and
 `(2) carries each such station on the cable channel on which it was carried
 on July 19, 1985, or on the channel number assigned to such station by the
 Commission, at the election of the television broadcast station, or on such
 other cable channel as may be acceptable to the television broadcast station.
 `(b) The requirements of this section shall not be subject to an expiration
 date.'.