101st CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 324
AN ACT
To establish a national energy strategy for the United States that reflects
concern for the global environmental consequences of current trends in
atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases, and for other purposes.
S 324 ES
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 324
AN ACT
To establish a national energy strategy for the United States that reflects
concern for the global environmental consequences of current trends in
atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
 SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE- This Act, together with the following table of
 contents, may be cited as the `National Energy Policy Act of 1990'.
 SEC. 2. TABLE OF CONTENTS-
Sec. 1. Short title.
Sec. 2. Table of contents.
Sec. 3. Findings.
Sec. 4. Purposes.
Sec. 5. Goals.
Sec. 6. Definitions.
TITLE I--ENERGY POLICY INITIATIVES
Subtitle A--National Energy Strategy
Sec. 101. Least-cost energy strategy.
Sec. 102. Conforming amendments.
Subtitle B--Director of Climate Protection
Sec. 111. Appointment.
Subtitle C--National Academies of Science and Engineering
Sec. 121. Review.
Sec. 122. Report to the Congress.
TITLE II--ENERGY EFFICIENCY INITIATIVES
Subtitle A--Energy Efficiency
Sec. 201. Report.
Sec. 202. Energy-intensive industries.
Sec. 203. Federal energy management amendments.
Sec. 204. Fuel cells.
Sec. 205. Repeal of prohibitions on supply and installation of residential
energy conservation measures by utilities.
Sec. 206. Energy efficiency labeling for windows and window systems.
Sec. 207. Energy efficiency information.
Sec. 208. Compact fluorescent lamps in Federal facilities.
Sec. 209. Demonstration.
Sec. 210. Home energy efficiency ratings.
Subtitle B--Amendments to the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978
Sec. 211. Encouragement of investments in conservation and energy efficiency
resources and study of certain State ratemaking policies.
Subtitle C--Fuel Cells
Sec. 221. Amendment.
Subtitle D--Solar, Wind, Waste and Geothermal Electric Power Production
Sec. 231. PURPA amendments.
Sec. 232. Federal Power Act amendments.
Sec. 233. FERC regulations.
TITLE III--ENERGY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVES
Subtitle A--General
Sec. 301. Energy research and development priorities.
Sec. 302. Management plan.
Sec. 303. Joint ventures.
Subtitle B--Engine and Vehicle Fuel Research
Sec. 311. Vehicle engine fuel research.
Sec. 312. High efficiency heat engines.
Sec. 313. Natural gas cofiring research, development and demonstration.
Subtitle C--Hydrogen Research
Sec. 321. Short title.
Sec. 322. Purpose and definition.
Sec. 323. Comprehensive management plan.
Sec. 324. Research and development.
Sec. 325. Demonstrations.
Sec. 326. Technology Transfer Program.
Sec. 327. Coordination and consultation.
Sec. 328. Technical panel.
Sec. 329. Authorizations.
Subtitle D--Fusion
Sec. 331. Programs.
Subtitle E--Coal
Sec. 341. Coal Program Goals.
Sec. 342. Non Fuel Use of Coal.
Sec. 343. Authorizations.
Subtitle F--Natural Gas and Other Alternative Fuels
Sec. 351. Mass Transit Program.
Sec. 352. Natural Gas and Other Alternative Fuel Use in Fleet Vehicles.
Sec. 353. Training Program.
Sec. 354. Vehicle Research, Development, and Demonstration Program.
Sec. 355. Natural Gas Recovery Research, Development and Demonstration Program.
Sec. 356. Natural gas and electric heating and cooling technologies.
Sec. 357. Vehicle and Battery Research, Development, and Demonstration Program.
Sec. 358. Definitions.
Subtitle G--Hydropower
Sec. 361. Program.
Sec. 362. Report.
Subtitle H--Electric Vehicle Technology Development and Demonstration
Sec. 371. Short title.
Sec. 372. Findings.
Sec. 373. Definitions.
Sec. 374. Identification of nonattainment areas.
Sec. 375. Applications from manufacturers.
Sec. 376. Selection of manufacturers.
Sec. 377. Discounts to purchasers.
Sec. 378. Reports to Congress.
Sec. 379. Authorizations.
Subtitle I--Advanced Nuclear Reactor Study
Sec. 381. Report.
Subtitle J--Technology Development Program
Sec. 391. Program.
Sec. 392. Authorizations.
TITLE IV--MISCELLANEOUS
Subtitle A--Methane Assessment
Sec. 401. Objective.
Sec. 402. Domestic methane source inventory and control options.
Sec. 403. International studies.
Subtitle B--Committee on Renewable Energy Commerce and Trade
Sec. 411. Duties of CORECT.
Sec. 412. Additional duties of CORECT.
Sec. 413. Outreach.
Sec. 414. Comprehensive energy technology evaluation.
Sec. 415. Joint ventures in developing, demonstrating, and marketing energy
efficient and renewable energy technologies in key lesser developed countries.
Sec. 416. Authorizations.
Subtitle C--Fuel Cycle Costs Analysis
Sec. 421. Program.
Sec. 422. Report.
Subtitle D--United Nations Conference
Sec. 431. 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development.
TITLE V--NATURAL RESOURCE POLICY
Sec. 501. Ecological and environmental resource study.
Sec. 502. National forestation initiative.
Sec. 503. Urban forestry and energy savings.
 SEC. 3. FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) scientific evidence indicates that the atmosphere of the Earth is
 being affected by the generation from natural and manmade sources of carbon
 dioxide and other greenhouse gases;
 (2) trends in the concentration of such greenhouse gases in the atmosphere
 may result in global changes in climate, with potentially significant
 economic, social and environmental implications for human-kind, including
 effects on agricultural production, water supplies, wetlands, weather,
 and human health and welfare;
 (3) a scientific understanding of the causes and economic effects of global
 climate change is necessary to formulate effective policies;
 (4) the formulation of domestic and international energy and natural
 resource policies may be necessary in order to reduce the generation
 of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases and mitigate or adapt to
 potential adverse consequences of human-induced global climate change;
 (5) the formulation of such policies by the Government will include an
 effort involving the private sector and the laboratories of the Department
 of Energy; and
 (6) the United States should pursue a framework convention on global
 climate change by the year 1992 through the Intergovernmental Panel on
 Climate Change (IPCC) of the United Nations Environmental Program and the
 World Meteorological Organization.
 SEC. 4. PURPOSES- The overall purpose of this Act is to establish a national
 energy policy that will fully consider the contribution of energy use
 to potential changes in global climate and will include cost-effective
 strategies to lessen the generation of energy-related greenhouse gases
 consistent with the achievement of other domestic energy, economic, social,
 and environmental goals. The specific purposes of the Act are to--
 (1) improve scientific understanding of the natural and manmade sources of
 greenhouse gases and their relative contributions to global climate change;
 (2) evaluate the environmental, social, and economic consequences of global
 climate change;
 (3) evaluate the environmental, social, and economic consequences of
 domestic and international policies for mitigating or adapting to global
 climate change;
 (4) identify the actions required to mitigate current trends in
 atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases and analyze their relative
 cost-effectiveness;
 (5) identify the actions necessary to mitigate or adapt to adverse
 consequences of gloal climate change;
 (6) identify and evaluate the domestic policies required to mitigate
 or adapt to the possible adverse social and economic consequences of a
 reduction or stabilization in the generation of greenhouse gases;
 (7) encourage the formulation of effective domestic and international energy
 and natural resource policies that will mitigate adverse consequences of
 human-induced global climate change;
 (8) foster the development of technologies that will advance the goals and
 purposes of the Act and the transfer of such technologies to lesser-developed
 countries; and
 (9) establish programs within the Department of Energy for the achievement
 of these purposes.
 SEC. 5. GOALS- (a) The goals of this Act are to--
 (1) foster the identification of an appropriate mix of policies referred
 to in subsection (b) that have the potential, if fully implemented, to
 stabilize the generation of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in
 the United States;
 (2) assess the feasibility of further limiting, or reducing, the generation
 of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases not controlled by the 1987
 Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer;
 (3) investigate the feasibility and economic, energy, social, and
 environmental implications of achieving a 20 per centum reduction in the
 generation of carbon dioxide by the year 2005 as recommended by the 1988
 Toronto Scientific World Conference on the Changing Atmosphere;
 (4) investigate the feasibility and economic, energy, social, and
 environmental implications of stabilizing carbon dioxide emissions by the
 year 2005; and
 (5) evaluate the potential social, economic, energy, and environmental
 implications of implementing the policies mentioned in paragraphs (1),
 (2), (3), and (4) in order to enable the United States to comply with
 any obligations under an international global climate change framework
 convention or agreement.
 (b) Policies to be considered in section 5(a) for the stabilization or
 reduction in the generation of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases
 include, but are not limited to, policies that--
 (1) implement standards for more efficient use of fossil fuels;
 (2) increase the energy efficiency of existing technologies;
 (3) encourage technologies, including clean coal technologies, that generate
 lower levels of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases;
 (4) promote the use of renewable energy resources, including solar,
 geothermal, sustainable biomass, hydropower, and wind energy;
 (5) affect the development and consumption of energy and energy efficiency
 resources and electricity through tax policy;
 (6) encourage investment in energy efficient equipment and technology;
 (7) encourage the development of energy technologies, such as advanced
 nuclear fission and nuclear fusion, that produce energy without carbon
 dioxide and other greenhouse gases as a byproduct, and encourage the
 deployment of nuclear electric generating capacity; and
 (8) encourage afforestation and reforestation.
 (c) The reduction of the generation of chlorofluorocarbons shall be in
 accordance with the provisions of the Montreal Protocol, unless subsequent
 Federal legislation is enacted establishing new guidelines for the reduction
 or elimination of the use of chlorofluorocarbons.
 (d) In order to promote international cooperation in addressing potential
 global climate change, it is the goal of the United States to established
 by 1992, an international framework convention on global climate change
 through the activities of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
 of the United Nations International Environmental Program and the World
 Meteorological Organization and secure the commitment of the community of
 nations to such convention.
 SEC. 6. DEFINITIONS- For the purposes of this Act, the term--
 (1) `Department' means the Department of Energy;
 (2) `energy efficiency resource' means energy saved through improvements
 in the efficiency of energy production, transportation, or utilization;
 (3) `energy resources' includes, but is not limited to, supplies of
 natural gas, crude oil and petroleum products, coal, nuclear energy,
 and renewable energy;
 (4) `global climate change' means changes in the climate of the Earth that
 result from increases in the atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases;
 (5) `greenhouse gases' means carbon dioxide and other gases such as
 chlorofluorocarbons, methane, ozone, and nitrous oxides that contribute
 to global climate change;
 (6) `lesser-developed countries' shall include, but not be limited to,
 Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union; and
 (7) `Secretary' means the Secretary of Energy.
TITLE I--ENERGY POLICY INITIATIVES
Subtitle A--National Energy Strategy
 SEC. 101. LEAST-COST ENERGY STRATEGY- (a)(1) The first National Energy Policy
 Plan (the `Plan') under section 801 of the Department of Energy Organization
 Act (42 U.S.C. 7321) prepared and submitted by the President to Congress
 after the date of the enactment of this Act, and each subsequent such Plan,
 shall include a least-cost energy strategy prepared by the Secretary.
 (2) The Secretary need not prepare and submit a least-cost energy strategy
 with the National Energy Plan scheduled to be submitted in April of 1991.
 (b)(1) The least-cost energy strategy shall identify Federal priorities for
 the encouragement of the use of energy and energy efficiency resources. In
 developing the least-cost energy strategy, the Secretary shall take into
 consideration the economic, energy, social, and environmental consequences
 of his choices. Such strategy shall be designed to achieve to the maximum
 extent practicable and at least-cost to the Nation--
 (A) the energy production, utilization, and conservation objectives of
 the Plan; and
 (B) the stabilization and eventual reductions in the generation of carbon
 dioxide and other greenhouse gases mentioned in section 5(a).
 (2) The least-cost energy strategy shall include--
 (A) a comprehensive inventory of available energy and energy efficiency
 resources and their projected costs, taking into account all costs of
 production, transportation, and utilization of such resources, including--
 (i) coal, clean coal technologies, coal seam methane, and underground
 coal gasification;
 (ii) energy efficiency, including existing technologies for increased
 efficiency in production, transportation, and utilization of energy, and
 other technologies that are anticipated to be available through further
 research and development; and
 (iii) other energy resources, such as renewable energy, solar energy,
 nuclear fission, fusion, geothermal, biomass, fuel cells, and hydropower;
 (B) a proposed two-year program for assuring adequate supplies of energy
 and energy efficiency resources under paragraph (1), and an identification
 of actions that can be undertaken within existing Federal authority; and
 (C) recommendations for any new Federal authority needed to achieve the
 purposes of this Act.
 (c)(1) The relative costs of energy and energy efficiency resources under
 this section shall be determined based upon a comparison of the estimated
 system costs of other similarly reliable and available resources.
 (2) System costs under paragraph (1) are all direct and quantifiable net
 costs for the resource over its available life, including the cost of
 production, transportation, utilization, waste management, environmental
 compliance, and, in the case of imported energy resources, maintaining
 access to foreign sources of supply.
 (3) When comparing an energy efficiency resource to an energy resource,
 a higher priority shall be assigned to the energy efficiency resource
 whenever its estimated system cost is equal to the estimated system cost
 of the energy resource.
 SEC. 102. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- (a) Section 801 of Public Law 95-91
 is amended in subsection (c)(1) by inserting `cost estimates,' after
 `whatever data and analysis are necessary to support the'.
 (b) Title III of the Energy Security Act (42 U.S.C. 7361, et seq.) is
 hereby repealed.
Subtitle B--Director of Climate Protection
 SEC. 111. APPOINTMENT- (a) Within six months after the date of the enactment
 of this Act, the Secretary shall appoint within the Department, a Director
 of Climate Protection (the `Director'). The Director shall:
 (1) in the absence of the Secretary, serve as his representative for
 interagency and multilateral policy discussions of global climate change;
 (2) monitor domestic and international policies for their effects on the
 generation of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases; and
 (3) have the authority to participate in the planning activities in relevant
 Departmental programs.
 (b) Beginning eighteen months after the date of the enactment of this Act,
 and annually thereafter, the Director shall participate in the formulation
 of the least-cost energy strategy under section 101, research and development
 priorities under section 301, and the management plan under section 302.
Subtitle C--National Academies of Science and Engineering
 SEC. 121. REVIEW- (a) Within ninety days after his appointment under
 section 111, the Director, in consultation with the Office of Science and
 Technology Policy (the `Office'), shall seek to enter into an agreement with
 the National Research Council to use the services of the National Academy
 of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering (the `Academies')
 to conduct an on-going review of current knowledge regarding--
 (1) trends in the atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases, including
 current capabilities to model such trends with sufficient reliability to
 support international, domestic, and regional policy formulation;
 (2) the causes of global climate change and the relative contribution
 of various sources of greenhouse gases including, but not limited to,
 fossil fuel production and use, forest management practices, agricultural
 practices, and other sources;
 (3) the climatic, physical, economic, social and environmental consequences
 of current trends in atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gases;
 (4) actions that might be taken to mitigate or adapt to possible adverse
 economic, social, and environmental consequences of global climate change
 and the relative cost-effectiveness of these actions;
 (5) the generation and disposition of greenhouse gases into the environment
 including the relative contribution of the oceans, clouds, and biosphere; and
 (6) current knowledge on the relationship between those policies that
 mitigate or abate stratospheric ozone depletion and those policies that
 mitigate or abate global climate change.
 (b) In conducting such review, the Academies are encouraged to consult
 with international scientific and technical entities to determine where
 there is a consensus in current knowledge with respect to paragraphs (a)(1)
 through (6).
 (c) The Secretary, the Secretary of Commerce, the Secretary of the
 Interior, the Secretary of Transportation, the Secretary of Agriculture,
 the Administration of the Environmental Protection Agency, and the Director
 of the National Science Foundation shall, upon request, furnish to the
 Office and the National Research Council any information that such Office
 or Council determines to be necessary for purposes of conducting the review
 required under subsection (a).
 SEC. 122. REPORT TO THE CONGRESS- (a) Within one year after the date of the
 enactment of this section and periodically thereafter the Academies shall
 submit a report containing the findings and recommendations resulting from
 the review conducted under section 121 to the Office and the Congress. The
 findings and recommendations contained in such report shall not be subject
 to any prior clearance or review, nor shall any prior clearance conditions
 be imposed on the National Research Council, as part of the agreement made
 by the Office.
 (b) Within six months after the transmission of such report to the
 Congress, the President shall transmit to the Congress his assessment of
 the findings and recommendations in the report pursuant to subsection
 (a) and any recommendations therein.
TITLE II--ENERGY EFFICIENCY INITIATIVES
Subtitle A--Energy Efficiency
 SEC. 201 REPORT- The Secretary, in consultation with the Council of Economic
 Advisors, shall submit to the Congress within one year after the date of
 the enactment of this subtitle, and every three years thereafter through
 the year 2003, a report evaluating energy efficiency policy options that
 would be necessary to produce decreases of one, two, three, and four
 per centum per year in overall United States, energy use per unit of GNP
 through the year 2005. These policy options shall be ranked according to
 their cost-effectiveness and feasibility of implementation.
 SEC. 202. ENERGY-INTENSIVE INDUSTRIES- (a) The Secretary, acting in
 accordance with authority contained in the Federal Nonnuclear Energy
 Research and Development Policy Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5901-5920) and
 other laws applicable to the Secretary, shall--
 (1) pursue a research and development program intended to improve energy
 efficiency and productivity in energy-intensive industries and industrial
 processes; and
 (2) undertake joint ventures to encourage commercialization of technologies
 developed under paragraph (1).
 (b)(1) The Secretary shall--
 (A) conduct a competitive solicitation for proposals from specialized private
 firms and investors for such joint ventures under subsection (a)(2); and
 (B) provide financial assistance to at least five such joint ventures.
 (2) The purpose of the joint ventures shall be to design, test and
 demonstrate changes to industrial processes that will result in improved
 energy efficiency and productivity. The joint ventures may also demonstrate
 other improvements of benefit to such industries so long as demonstration
 of energy efficiency improvements is the principal objective of this
 joint venture.
 (3) In evaluating proposals for financial assistance and joint ventures
 under this section, the Secretary shall consider--
 (A) whether the research and development efforts under this section (i)
 improve the quality and efficiency of industrial processes, and (ii)
 reduce the generation of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases into
 the atmosphere; and
 (B) the regional distribution of energy-intensive industries and whether
 the joint-venture projects are located in the region in which the
 energy-intensive industries are located.
 (c) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary $5,000,000
 for fiscal year 1992, $15,000,000 for fiscal year 1993, and $25,000,000
 for fiscal year 1994.
 SEC. 203. FEDERAL ENERGY MANAGEMENT AMENDMENTS- Part 3 of title V of the
 National Energy Conservation Policy Act (NECPA) (42 U.S.C. 8251 et seq.),
 as amended, is further amended as follows:
 (a) In section 543:
 (1) Strike subsection (a) and insert the following new text in lieu thereof:
 `(a) ENERGY MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENT FOR FEDERAL BUILDINGS- (1) Not later
 than January 1, 2000, each Federal agency shall, to the maximum extent
 practicable, install in Federal buildings under the control of such agency in
 the United States, all energy conservation measures with payback periods of
 less than ten years as calculated using the methods and procedures developed
 pursuant to section 544. By January 1, 1993, each agency shall submit to
 the Secretary a list of projects meeting the ten-year payback criterion,
 the energy that each project will save and total energy and cost savings
 involved. Subject to the availability of appropriated funds, each Federal
 agency shall have substantially completed at least 25 per centum of the
 projects on the list or projects on the list that would account for 25
 per centum of total energy savings, by January 1, 1995. If any agency has
 not met this requirement, such agency shall spend no funds in States where
 this requirement has not been met for the construction or acquisition of a
 Federal building except to meet the requirements of this section. If any
 agency has not met the requirements of this section for the year 2000,
 then such agency shall spend no funds in States where this requirement
 has not been met for the construction or acquisition of a Federal building
 except to meet the requirements of this section. The Secretary may waive the
 requirements of this section if the Secretary finds that an agency is taking
 all practicable steps to meet the requirement and that the sanctions of this
 section will pose an unacceptable burden upon the agency. If the Secretary
 waives the requirements of this section, he shall notify Congress promptly.
 `(2) An agency may exclude from the requirements of paragraph (1) any
 Federal building or collection of Federal buildings, and the associated
 energy consumption and gross square footage, if the head of such agency
 finds that compliance with the requirements of paragraph (1) would be
 impractical. A finding of impracticability shall be based on the energy
 intensiveness of activities carried out in such Federal buildings or
 collection of Federal buildings, the type and amount of energy consumed,
 the technical feasibility of making the desired changes, and the unique
 character of many facilities operated by the Departments of Defense and
 Energy. Each agency shall identify and list in each report made under
 section 548 the Federal buildings designated by it for such exclusion. The
 Secretary of Energy shall review such findings for consistency with the
 impracticability standards set forth herein, and may within ninety days
 after receipt of the findings, reverse a finding of impracticability,
 in which case, the agency shall comply with the requirements of paragraph
 (1). This section shall not apply to an agency's facilities that generate
 or transmit electric energy, nor to the uranium enrichment facilities
 operated by the Department of Energy.';
 (2) In subsection (b):
 (A) after the words `subsection (a),' insert the following:
 `The Secretary of Energy shall consult with the Secretary of Defense and
 the Administrator of the General Services Administration in developing
 guidelines for the implementation of this part, and';
 (B) strike the phrase `Federal Energy Management Improvement Act of 1988,'
 in paragraph (1) and insert in lieu thereof `National Energy Policy Act
 of 1990, and submit to the Secretary of Energy';
 (C) after the words `high priority projects;' insert the following: `and such
 plan shall include steps to take maximium advantage of contracts authorized
 under title VIII of this Act (42 U.S.C. 8287 et seq.), financial incentives,
 and other services provided by utilities for efficiency investment and
 other forms of financing to reduce the direct costs to the government;';
 (D) at the end of paragraph (2), strike the semicolon and insert the
 following: `, and update such surveys periodically, but not less than
 every three years;';
 (E) replace paragraph (3) with the following new paragraph:
 `(3) using such surveys, determine the cost and payback period of energy
 conservation measures likely to achieve the goals of this section;'; and
 (F) insert a new paragraph (4) as follows, and renumber paragraphs (4)
 and (5):
 `(4) install those energy conservation measures that will attain the
 requirements of this section in a cost-effective manner as defined in
 section 544, and'.
 (b) In section 544:
 (1) Strike `National Bureau of Standards,' in subsection (a) and insert
 in lieu thereof `National Institute of Standards and Technology,'; and
 (2) strike all after word `each', in paragraph (b)(2) and insert in lieu
 thereof: `agency shall, after January 1, 1994, fully consider the energy
 efficiency of all potential building space at the time of renewing or
 entering into a new lease. Further, all government owned and leased space
 constructed after January 1, 1994, shall meet model Federal building
 standards for energy efficiency.'.
 (c) In section 545, add after the word `measures' the following: `as needed
 to meet the requirements of section 543.'.
 (d) in section 546, strike the text of subsection (b) and insert in lieu
 thereof the following:
 `IMPLEMENTATION- To facilitate the financing of energy conservation energy
 measures, each Federal agency shall promote the use of contracts authorized
 by title VIII of this Act (42 U.S.C. 8287 et seq.). The Secretary, in
 consultation with the Secretary of Defense and the Administrator of the
 General Services Administration, within six months after the date of
 the enactment of the National Energy Policy Act of 1990, shall develop
 appropriate procedures and methods for use by Federal agencies to select
 energy service contractors that will achieve the intent of this section in
 a cost-effective manner. Notwithstanding any other procurement laws and
 regulations, such procedures and methods shall apply to the selection of
 energy service contractors by each Federal agency.'.
 (e) In section 548:
 (1) strike the word `Each' in subsection (a) and insert in lieu thereof
 the following:
 `In addition to the plan required to be submitted to the Secretary pursuant
 to section 543(b)(1), each';
 (2) insert the phrase `by April 2 of each year,' after the word `annually'
 in subsection (b); and
 (3) insert the words `by each agency', after the words `under this part'
 in subsection (b)(1).
 SEC. 204. FUEL CELLS- Subsection 6(c) of the Renewable Energy and Energy
 Efficiency Technology Competitiveness Act of 1989 (Public Law 101-218)
 is amended by adding a new paragraph (6) as follows:
 `(6)(A) The Secretary shall solicit proposals for, and provide financial
 assistance to, at least one joint venture for the demonstration of fuel
 cells technology in accordance with the provisions of this paragraph.
 `(B) The purpose of joint ventures supported under this paragraph shall
 be to design, test, and demonstrate critical enabling technologies for
 the production of electric energy from fuel cells in order to accelerate
 commercial application of fuel cells.
 `(C) There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary not to exceed
 $3,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1992, 1993, and 1994 to carry out
 this paragraph.'.
 SEC. 205. REPEAL OF PROHIBITIONS ON SUPPLY AND INSTALLATION OF RESIDENTIAL
 ENERGY CONSERVATION MEASURES BY UTILITIES- Section 216 of the National
 Energy Conservation Policy Act (42 U.S.C. 8217) is repealed and subsequent
 sections are renumbered accordingly.
 SEC. 206. ENERGY EFFICIENCY LABELING FOR WINDOWS AND WINDOW SYSTEMS- (a)(1)
 The Secretary shall provide financial assistance to support a voluntary,
 national window rating program to develop energy ratings and labels for
 windows and window systems. The rating program shall be developed in order
 to be implemented by December 31, 1992. The rating program shall include
 specifications and guidelines that will enable all window buyers to make
 more informed purchasing decisions about the energy efficiency of windows
 and window systems. The rating program shall also contain information that
 allows window buyers to assess the energy consumption and potential cost
 savings of alternative window products.
 (2) The rating program shall be administered by the National Fenestration
 Rating Council. The National Fenestration Rating Council shall periodically
 report to Congress and the Secretary on the progress being made toward
 establishing the voluntary, national window rating program.
 (b) The Secretary shall monitor and evaluate the efforts of the National
 Fenestration Rating Council and make determinations whether the voluntary,
 national window rating system established within the National Fenestration
 Rating Council is consistent with subsection (a) of this section.
 (c)(1) If the objectives of subsection (a) are not met by December 31,
 1992, the Secretary shall, in consultation with the National Institute
 of Standards and Technology, develop, within one year, rating procedures
 under section 323 of the Energy Policy and Conservation Act (42 U.S.C. 6293)
 for windows and window systems.
 (2) The Federal Trade Commission (hereafter in this section, the
 `Commission') shall prescribe labeling rules under section 324 of said Act
 (42 U.S.C. 6294) for windows and window systems except to the extent that
 with respect to any type of window or window system (or class thereof),
 the Commission determines that labeling in accordance with this section
 is not technologically or economically feasible or is not likely to assist
 consumers in making purchasing decisions; and
 (3) For purposes of sections 323 and 324 of said Act, windows and window
 systems shall be considered covered products under section 322 of such Act
 (42 U.S.C. 6292).
 (d) There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary $750,000
 for each of the fiscal years 1992, 1993, and 1994 for the purposes of
 this section.
 SEC. 207. ENERGY EFFICIENCY INFORMATION- (a) Within one year after the
 date of the enactment of this section, the Administrator of the Energy
 Information Administration shall report to Congress on the information being
 collected or otherwise acquired by the Administrator with respect to the
 efficiency of energy consumption. The report shall estimate future needs
 for collection of additional information related to energy efficiency and
 environmental impacts. The report shall also consider the feasibility of--
 (1) increasing the frequency of collection of information on the utilization
 of energy;
 (2) including additional energy-using classes and sectors in surveys
 conducted; and
 (3) collecting additional information to assist in the analysis of barriers
 to improvement in energy efficiency.
 (b) The report shall take into account reporting burdens and the protection
 of proprietary information under law.
 (c) The Administrator shall periodically publish measures of energy
 efficiency in classes, sectors, and regions that consume significant
 amounts of energy.
 SEC. 208. COMPACT FLUORESCENT LAMPS IN FEDERAL FACILITIES- Not later than
 one hundred and eighty days after the date of the enactment of this section,
 the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report on the feasibility and
 effectiveness of requiring some or all Federal facilities to use compact
 fluorescent lamps instead of incandescent lamps in order to reduce the use
 of electrical energy and thereby reduce the generation of carbon dioxide
 and sulfur dioxide.
 SEC. 209. DEMONSTRATION- (a) Within one year after the date of the
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit a plan to Congress for
 the demonstration in Federal facilities, or by Federal agencies, of energy
 and energy efficiency resource technologies that have received Federal
 financial assistance for research and development. The technologies shall
 be those that are ready for commercial demonstration but are not widely
 commercially available. The Plan shall include--
 (1) a listing of those technologies with specific candidate sites for
 the demonstration;
 (2) the energy, environmental, cost savings or other expected benefits;
 (3) a timetable for implementation; and
 (4) a process for evaluation of the performance of the technologies.
 (b) The Plan shall be updated every two years.
 SEC. 210. HOME ENERGY EFFICIENCY RATINGS- (a) Title II of the National
 Energy Conservation Policy Act is amended by adding a new part 6 as follows:
`PART 6--RESIDENTIAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY RATINGS
 `SEC. 271. RATINGS- (a) Within twelve months after the date of the enactment
 of the National Energy Policy Act of 1990, the Secretary, in consultation
 with the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and State governments,
 shall, by rule, promulgate guidelines for procedures to be implemented by
 State governments that would enable the assignment of an energy efficiency
 rating to residential buildings.
 `(b) The rule under subsection (a) shall--
 `(1) provide for a numerical rating of the efficiency with which any
 residential building may be supplied with heating and cooling energy on
 an annual basis, and evaluate the practicality of including major energy
 consuming appliances in such rating;
 `(2) provide that all residential buildings can receive a rating at time
 of sale;
 `(3) ensure that the rating is prominently communicated to potential buyers
 and renters; and
 `(4) ensure that the rating system is designed to facilitate its use by
 lenders and the secondary mortgage markets to promote energy efficiency.
 `(c) For purposes of the rule under subsection (a), supply of energy to
 any residential building from renewable sources shall not result in a
 reduction in the energy efficiency rating of such building.
 `SEC. 272. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE- Within twelve months of the date of
 the enactment of this section the Secretary shall establish a program to
 provide technical assistance for State and local governments adopting energy
 efficiency rating systems or building codes. The program shall utilize
 the Federal Government's experience in developing Federal building energy
 performance standards and shall provide compliance methods, educational
 materials for builders and code officials, and other technical support.
 `SEC. 273. AUTHORIZATION- There are hereby authorized to be appropriated
 such funds as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this subtitle.'.
 (b) The National Energy Conservation Policy Act should be further amended
 by adding in the table of contents at the end of Title II--Residential
 Energy Conservation, the following items:
`PART 6--Residential Energy Efficiency Ratings
`Sec. 271. Ratings.
`Sec. 272. Technical Assistance.
`Sec. 273. Authorization.'.
Subtitle B--Amendments to the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978
 SEC. 211. ENCOURAGEMENT OF INVESTMENTS IN CONSERVATION AND ENERGY
 EFFICIENCY RESOURCES AND STUDY OF CERTAIN STATE RATEMAKING POLICIES-
 (a) The Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 (92 Stat. 3117),
 as amended, is further amended by inserting the following new paragraph
 at the end of section 111:
 `(7) Encouragement of Investments in Conservation and Energy Efficiency
 Resources-
 `(A) The rates allowed to be charged by a State-regulated electric utility
 shall be such that the utility's investments in and expenditures for energy
 conservation, energy efficiency resources, and other demand side management
 measures are as profitable as its investments in and expenditures for the
 construction of new generation facilities.
 `(B) For purposes of implementing the provisions of this paragraph, any
 reference contained in this title to the date of enactment of the Public
 Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 shall be deemed to be a reference
 to the date of enactment of the National Energy Policy Act of 1990.'.
 (b) Not later than two years after the date of the enactment of this Act,
 the Secretary shall submit a report to the President and to the Congress
 containing--
 (1) a survey of all State laws, regulations, practices, and policies under
 which State regulatory authorities require or permit rates charged by an
 electric utility to reflect least-cost planning;
 (2) an evaluation by the Secretary of whether, and to what extent, least-cost
 planning is likely to result in: (A) higher or lower electricity costs to
 an electric utility's ultimate consumers or to classes or groups of such
 consumers, (B) enhanced or reduced reliability of electric service, and
 (C) increased or decreased dependence on particular energy resources; and
 (3) an evaluation by the Secretary of whether, and to what extent,
 ratemaking methodologies implementing least-cost planning adequately take
 into account the impact of such measures on electric utilities' costs,
 operations, and rate of return on investment.
 (c) For purposes of this subtitle, the term `least-cost planning'
 means any standard, regulation, practice, or policy by which a State
 regulatory agency considers, or requires an electric utility to consider,
 actions (including, but not limited to, the construction of or purchase
 of electric energy from new generation facilities and investment in or
 expenditures for conservation, energy efficiency resources, or other
 demand side management measures) taken by a State regulated utility to
 provide adequate and reliable service to its electric consumers with the
 incurrence of lowest costs by such utility and its customers.
Subtitle C--Fuel Cells
 SEC. 221. AMENDMENT- `Title V of the National Energy Conservation Policy
 Act (42 U.S.C. 8251-8261) is amended by adding the following new part
 after section 569:
`PART 5--FUEL CELLS
 `SEC. 571. DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this subtitle the term:
 `(1) `Federal building' shall mean `Federal building' as defined by section
 549(6); and
 `(2) `Task Force' shall mean the Interagency Energy Management Task Force
 established pursuant to section 547, except that, for purposes of this
 subtitle, the term `Task Force' shall include the Environmental Protection
 Agency.
 `SEC. 572. FUEL CELL PROGRAM- The Secretary, in consultation with the Task
 Force, shall conduct a program to promote the early commercial application
 of fuel cell systems for the production of electricity by the demonstration
 of such systems in Federal buildings.
 `SEC. 573. PURPOSES- The purposes of this program are to:
 `(1) improve the efficiency and reduce the environmental consequences of
 the Nation's electric generation capability;
 `(2) stimulate the creation of new industries and job opportunities in
 efficient and environmentally sound energy technologies; and
 `(3) develop cost, efficiency, performance, environmental, and reliability
 data on fuel cell systems used in the production of electricity.
 `SEC. 574. IMPLEMENTATION AND ACQUISITION- (a) In preparing or updating the
 plan required by section 543(b)(1), each agency on the Task Force shall
 identify at least two potential projects for the demonstration of the
 application of fuel cell systems for the production of energy to satisfy
 electrical and other energy requirements of such buildings.
 `(b) Not later than 6 months after the submission to the Secretary of such
 plan, including the list of potential projects required under subsection
 (a), the Secretary, in consultation with the Task Force, shall identify
 a minimum of ten projects for implementation pursuant to subsection (c)
 and shall make a report of his selection including the basis therefor,
 to the Congress.
 `(c) The Secretary may provide financial assistance to agencies sponsoring
 projects, identified under subsection (b), to acquire and install fuel cell
 systems manufactured in the United States and any associated equipment
 which may be necessary for the implementation of any of the listed
 projects. In order to receive financial assistance from the Secretary,
 a project identified under subsection (b) must meet the ten-year payback
 criterion of section 543. The calculation of such ten-year payback period
 shall take account of cost benefits associated with cogenerated energy to
 the extent provided under section 544. In selecting qualified projects
 for financial assistance, the Secretary, in consultation with the Task
 Force, shall also consider the cost of the electricity to be generated;
 the extent of cost-sharing provided by other agencies for the acquisition of
 new equipment; the appropriateness of the locations, sites, and structures
 in question; the adaptability of facilities to program requirements; whether
 Federal buildings undergoing new construction or renovation offer advantages
 of cost-efficiency or ease of installation over existing Federal buildings;
 and such other factors that, in the judgment of the Secretary and the Task
 Force, may affect the benefits or costs of the fuel cell program.
 `(d) Not later than January 1, 1996, the Secretary, in consultation with
 the Task Force, shall submit a report to Congress on the program authorize
 by this subtitle, which shall include information comparing the cost,
 efficiency, performance, environmental advantages, and reliability of fuel
 cells to other existing technological means of generating electricity,
 using data obtained from the operation of fuel cells acquired under this
 program. Such report shall also contain a discussion of all technical and
 economic issues which, in the judgment of the Secretary, might prevent
 the commercial use of fuel cells or restrict the use of fuel cells in
 certain applications and an analysis, including recommendations, of the
 steps needed to overcome such restrictions. A copy of such report shall be
 provided to each agency for further implementation of fuel cell projects
 consistent with the provisions of section 543(a), as appropriate
 `SEC. 575. AUTHORIZATION- There is authorized to be appropriated to carry
 out the provisions of this subtitle a total of $15,000,000 for fiscal
 years 1992 through 1994.'.
Subtitle D--Solar, Wind, Waste and Geothermal Electric Power Production
 SEC. 231. PURPA AMENDMENTS- Section 210 of the Public Utility Regulatory
 Policies Act of 1978 is amended as follows:
 (a) In subsection (a), strike out `, and to encourage geothermal small
 power production facilities of not more than 80 megawatts capacity,'.
 (b) In subsection (e)(2), insert `(other than a qualifying small power
 production facility which is a solar, wind, waste or geothermal facility as
 defined in section 3(17)(E) of the Federal Power Act)' after `facility'
 where it first appears, and by striking out `, or 80 megawatts for a
 qualifying small power production facility using geothermal energy as its
 primary energy source,'.
 SEC. 232. FEDERAL POWER ACT AMENDMENTS- (a) Section 3(17)(A) of the Federal
 Power Act is amended by inserting `a facility which is a solar, wind, waste
 or geothermal facility, or' after `small power production facility' means'.
 (b) Section 3(17) of such Act is further amended by inserting at the end
 thereof the following new subparagraph:
 `(E) `solar, wind, waste or geothermal facility' means a facility which
 produces electric energy solely by the use, as a primary energy source,
 of solar energy, wind energy, waste resource or geothermal resources;'.
 SEC. 233. FERC REGULATIONS- (a) Within 30 days of the date of enactment
 of this Act, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission shall issue such
 proposed modifications to its regulations as may be necessary to implement
 the amendments made by this subtitle, and within 90 days of such date,
 the Commission shall issue final regulations.
 (b) Until regulations described in subsection (a) are final and effective,
 any solar, wind, waste or geothermal facility (as defined in section
 3(17)(E) of the Federal Power Act), which is a qualifying small power
 production facility as defined in subparagraph (C) of section 3(17)
 of the Federal Power Act (as such section 3(17) is amended by this Act),
 (A) shall be considered a qualifying small power production facility under
 part 292 of title 18 of the Code of Federal Regulations, notwithstanding
 any size limitations contained in such part, and (B) shall not be subject
 to the size limitation contained in section 292.601(b) of such part.
 (c) The provisions of subtitle C shall apply to a solar, wind, waste or
 geothermal facility only if--
 (1) either of the following is submitted to the Federal Energy Regulatory
 Commission during the two year period beginning on the date of enactment
 of this Act:
 (A) an application for certification of the facility as a qualifying small
 power production facility; or
 (B) notice that the facility meets the requirements for qualification; and
 (2) construction of such facility commences within five years of the date of
 such application or notice and reasonable dilligence is exercised towards
 the completion of such facility taking into account all factors relevant
 to the construction of the facility.
TITLE III--ENERGY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVES
Subtitle A--General
 SEC. 301. ENERGY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES- In establishing
 research and development priorities, the Secretary shall include
 consideration of the following criteria:
 (a) the potential to reduce generation of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse
 gases sooner than alternative projects;
 (b) the projected cost-effectiveness of the energy or energy efficiency
 resource to be produced or saved, including an evaluation of the likelihood
 of the research contributing to the achievement of the purposes of this Act;
 (c) the comparative environmental and public health impacts of the energy
 to be produced or saved by the specific research;
 (d) the national security impact of the energy produced or saved, including
 its projected contribution to the reduction of oil imports and to the
 diversity of the domestic energy resource mix;
 (e) the obstacles inherent in private industry's development of new
 energy technologies and steps necessary for establishing or maintaining
 technological leadership in the area of energy and energy efficiency
 resource technologies, including, but not limited to, solar, fuel cells,
 fusion, clean-coal technologies, and hydrogen;
 (f) the contribution of a given research activity to fundamental scientific
 knowledge;
 (g) the anticipated impact of the results of research activities on special
 or targeted populations, including low-income or aged persons; and
 (h) the contribution to United States competitiveness.
 SEC. 302. MANAGEMENT PLAN- (a) The Secretary, in consultation with the
 Energy Advisory board to the Secretary, shall prepare a management plan
 for the conduct of research, development, and commercialization of energy
 technologies that is consistent with the purposes of this Act and guided
 by the priorities set forth in section 301.
 (b) The management plan under subsection (a) shall contain proposals for--
 (1) investigation of promising but unproven energy and energy efficiency
 resource technologies that have been identified as potentially significant
 future contributors to the least-cost energy strategy under section 101;
 (2) development of contingency energy and energy efficiency resource
 technologies that have the potential to mimimize adverse impacts on the
 environment, the global climate, and the economy; and
 (3) creation of opportunities for export of energy and energy efficiency
 resource technologies from the United States that can make a substantial
 contribution to reducing the impact on the global climate of the energy
 resource supply and use patterns of foreign nations.
 (c) Within one year after the date of the enactment of this section,
 the Secretary shall submit the first management plan under this section
 to Congress. Thereafter, the Secretary shall submit a revised management
 plan biennially at the time of submittal of the President's annual budget
 submission to the Congress.
 SEC. 303. JOINT VENTURES- Joint ventures authorized under this Act shall be
 conducted pursuant to the Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Technology
 Competitiveness Act of 1989 (Public Law 101-218).
Subtitle B--Engine and Vehicle Fuel Research
 SEC. 311. VEHICLE ENGINE FUEL RESEARCH- The Secretary shall establish and
 carry out a program of research, development, and demonstration on advanced
 vehicle engine systems (including engine systems that rely on alternative
 fuels, reformulated gasoline, or advanced, high efficiency materials)
 that offer the potential to reduce the generation of greenhouse gases and
 improve the efficiency of energy in transportation uses.
 SEC. 312. HIGH EFFICIENCY HEAT ENGINES- (a) In carrying out a program
 of research, development, and demonstration on high efficiency heat
 engines, the Secretary shall emphasize advanced gas turbine cycles, and the
 incorporation of energy efficient materials in advanced gas turbine cycles
 for high efficiency electric and automotive power generation, such as--
 (1) advanced combined cycle turbines;
 (2) steam-injected gas turbines (STIG); and
 (3) intercooled steam-injected gas turbines (ISTIG).
 (b) The Secretary may enter into joint ventures with the appropriate
 parties to construct and demonstrate high efficiency heat engines.
 (c) There is authorized to be appropriated not more than $25,000,000 for
 each of the fiscal years 1992, 1993, and 1994, for purposes of this section.
 SEC. 313. NATURAL GAS COFIRING RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND DEMONSTRATION-
 (a) DEFINITIONS- For the purposes of this section, the term--
 (1) `cofiring' means the injection of natural gas and pulverized coal into
 the primary combustion zone of an electric utility unit or an industrial
 boiler and shall include gas reburn technologies; and
 (2) `gas reburn' means the injection of natural gas into the upper furnace
 region of an electric utility unit or an industrial boiler to produce a
 fuel-rich zone thereby reducing nitrogen oxide emissions.
 (b) The Secretary shall conduct a program of research, development and
 demonstration of cofiring in electric utility units and large industrial
 boilers in order to determine optimal natural gas injection levels for
 both environmental and operational benefits.
 (c) The Secretary may provide financial assistance under this section to
 public entities or interested or affected private firms to perform the
 research, development and demonstration of cofiring technologies.
 (d) The Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with, and provide
 financial assistance under this section to, public entities or interested
 or affected private firms willing to provide at least 50 per centum
 of the costs of such programs to perform the research, development and
 demonstration of confiring technologies.
 (e) For purposes of this section, there is authorized to be appropriated to
 the Secretary not more than $9,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1992,
 1993 and 1994.
Subtitle C--Hydrogen Research
 SEC. 321. SHORT TITLE- This subtitle may be referred to as the `Spark
 M. Matsunaga Hydrogen Research and Development Act of 1990'.
 SEC. 322. PURPOSE AND DEFINITION- (a) The purposes of this subtitle are--
 (1) to direct the Secretary to prepare a comprehensive five-year program
 management plan that will identify and resolve critical technical issues
 necessary for the realization of a domestic capability to produce,
 distribute, and use hydrogen economically within the shortest time
 practicable;
 (2) to direct the Secretary to develop a technology assessment and
 information transfer program among the Federal agencies and aerospace,
 transportation, energy, and other entities; and
 (3) to develop renewable energy resources as a primary source of energy
 for the production of hydrogen.
 (b) As used in this subtitle, the term `critical technology' or `critical
 technology issue' means a technology or issue that, in the opinion of the
 Secretary, requires understanding and development in order to take the
 next needed step in the development of hydrogen as an economic fuel or
 storage medium.
 SEC. 323. COMPREHENSIVE MANAGEMENT PLAN- (a) The Secretary shall prepare a
 comprehensive five-year program management plan for research and development
 activities, which shall be conducted over a period of no less than five
 years and shall be consistent with the provisions of sections 324 and
 325. In the preparation of such plan, the Secretary shall consult with
 the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
 the Secretary of Transportation, the Hydrogen Technical Advisory Panel,
 and the heads of such other Federal agencies and such public and private
 organizations as he deems appropriate. The plan shall be structured to
 identify and address areas of research critical to the realization of a
 domestic hydrogen production capability within the shortest time practicable.
 (b) Within one hundred and eighty days after the date of the enactment of
 this Act, the Secretary shall transmit the comprehensive program management
 plan to the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology of the United States
 House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
 of the United States Senate. Subsequent plans shall be incorporated in
 the management plan under section 302. The plan shall include--
 (1) a prioritization of research areas critical to the economic use of
 hydrogen as a fuel and energy storage medium;
 (2) the program elements, management structure, and activities, including
 program responsibilities of individual agencies and individual institutional
 elements;
 (3) the program strategies including technical milestones to be achieved
 toward specific goals during each fiscal year for all major activities
 and projects;
 (4) the estimated costs of individual program items, including current
 as well as proposed funding levels for each of the five years of the plan
 for each of the participating agencies;
 (5) a description of the methodology of coordination and technology
 transfer; and
 (6) the proposed participation by industry and academia in the planning
 and implementation of the program.
 (c) The Secretary shall, in consultation with the Secretary of
 Transportation, the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space
 Administration, and the Hydrogen Technical Advisory Panel, also prepare
 a comprehensive large-scale hydrogen demonstration plan with respect
 to demonstrations carried out pursuant to section 325. Subsequent plans
 shall be incorporated in the management plan under section 302. Such plan
 shall include--
 (1) a description of the necessary research and development activities that
 must be completed before initiation of a large-scale hydrogen production
 and storage demonstration program;
 (2) an assessment of the appropriateness of a large-scale demonstration
 immediately upon completion of the necessary research and development
 activities;
 (3) an implementation schedule with associated budget and program management
 resource requirements; and
 (4) a description of the role of the private sector in carrying out the
 demonstration program.
 SEC. 324. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT- (a) The Secretary shall conduct a
 research and development program, consistent with the comprehensive five-year
 program management plan under section 323, to ensure the development of
 a domestic hydrogen fuel production capability within the shortest time
 practicable consistent with market conditions.
 (b)(1) Particular attention shall be given to developing and understanding
 and resolution of all critical technical issues preventing the introduction
 of hydrogen into the marketplace.
 (2) The Secretary shall initiate research or accelerate existing research
 in critical technical issues that will contribute to the development of
 more economic hydrogen production and use, including, but not limited
 to, critical technical issues with respect to production, liquefaction,
 transmission, distribution, storage, and use (including use of hydrogen
 in surface transportation).
 (c) The Secretary shall give priority to those production techniques
 that use renewable energy resources as their primary source of energy for
 hydrogen production.
 (d) The Secretary shall, for the purpose of performing his responsibilities
 pursuant to this subtitle, solicit proposals for and evaluate any reasonable
 new or improved technology that could lead or contribute to the development
 of economic hydrogen production storage and utilization.
 (e) The Secretary shall conduct evaluations, arrange for tests and
 demonstrations, and disseminate to developers information, data, and
 materials necessary to support efforts undertaken pursuant to this section,
 consistent with section 336.
 SEC. 325. DEMONSTRATIONS- (a) The Secretary shall conduct demonstrations
 of critical technologies, preferably in self-contained locations, so that
 technical and non-technical parameters can be evaluated to best determine
 commercial applicability of the technology.
 (b) Concurrently with activities conducted pursuant to section 324, the
 Secretary shall conduct small-scale demonstrations of hydrogen technology
 at self-contained sites.
 SEC. 326. TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER PROGRAM- (a) The Secretary shall conduct a
 program designed to accelerate wider application of hydrogen production,
 storage, utilization, and other technologies available in near term as
 a result of aerospace experience as well as other research progress by
 transferring critical technologies to the private sector. The Secretary
 shall direct the program with the advice and assistance of the Hydrogen
 Technical Advisory Panel. The objective in seeking this advice is to increase
 participation of private industry in the demonstration of near commercial
 applications through cooperative research and development arrangements, joint
 ventures or other appropriate arrangements involving the private sector.
 (b) The Secretary, in carrying out the program authorized by subsection
 (a), shall--
 (1) undertake an inventory and assessment of hydrogen technologies and
 their commercial capability to economically produce, store, or utilize
 hydrogen in aerospace, transportation, electric utilities, petrochemical,
 chemical, merchant hydrogen, and other industrial sectors; and
 (2) develop a National Aeronautics Space Administration, Department of
 Energy, and industry information exchange programs to improve technology
 transfer for--
 (A) application of aerospace experience by industry;
 (B) application of research progress by industry and aerospace;
 (C) application of commercial capability of industry by aerospace; and
 (D) expression of industrial needs to research organizations.
 The information exchange program may consist of workshops, publications,
 conferences, and a data base for the use by the public and private sectors.
 SEC. 327. COORDINATION AND CONSULTATION- (a) The Secretary shall have
 overall management responsibility for carrying out programs under this
 subtitle. In carrying out such programs, the Secretary, consistent with
 such overall management responsibility--
 (1) shall use the expertise of the National Aeronautics and Space
 Administration and the Department of Transportation; and
 (2) may use the expertise of any other Federal agency in accordance with
 subsection (b) in carrying out any activities under this subtitle, to the
 extent that the Secretary determines that any such agency has capabilities
 which would allow such agency to contribute to the purpose of this subtitle.
 (b) The Secretary may, in accordance with subsection (a), obtain the
 assistance of any department, agency, or instrumentality of the Executive
 branch of the Federal Government upon written request, on a reimbursable
 basis or otherwise and with the consent of such department, agency,
 or instrumentality. Each such request shall identify the assistance the
 Secretary deems necessary to carry out any duty under this subtitle.
 (c) The Secretary shall consult with the Administrator of the National
 Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency, the Secretary of Transportation, and the Hydrogen
 Technical Advisory Panel established under section 328 in carrying out
 his authorities pursuant to this subtitle.
 SEC. 328. TECHNICAL PANEL- (a) There is hereby established a technical panel,
 to be known as the Hydrogen Technical Advisory Panel (the `technical panel'),
 to advise the Secretary on the programs under this subtitle.
 (b) The technical panel shall be appointed by the Secretary and
 shall be comprised of such representatives from domestic industry,
 universities, professional societies, Government laboratories, financial,
 environmental, and other organizations as the Secretary deems appropriate
 based on his assessment of the technical and other qualifications of such
 representatives. Appointments to the technical panel shall be made within
 ninety days after the enactment of this subtitle. The technical panel shall
 have a chairman, who shall be elected by the members from among their number.
 (c) The heads of the departments, agencies, and instrumentalities of
 the Executive branch of the Federal Government shall cooperate with the
 technical panel in carrying out the requirements of this section and shall
 furnish to the technical panel such information as the technical panel
 deems necessary to carry out this section.
 (d) The technical panel shall review and make any necessary recommendations
 to the Secretary on the following items--
 (1) the implementation and conduct of programs under this subtitle;
 (2) the economic, technological, and environmental consequences of the
 deployment of hydrogen production and use systems; and
 (3) comments on and recommendations for improvements in the comprehensive
 five year program management plan required under section 323.
 (e) The Secretary shall provide such staff, funds and other support as
 may be necessary to enable the technical panel to carry out the functions
 described in this section.
 SEC. 329. AUTHORIZATIONS- There is hereby authorized to be appropriated
 to carry out the purposes of this subtitle (in addition to any amounts
 made available for such purposes pursuant to other Acts)--
 (1) $3,000,000 for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 1992;
 (2) $7,000,000 for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 1993; and
 (3) $10,000,000 for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 1994.
Subtitle D--Fusion
 SEC. 331. PROGRAMS- (a) The Secretary shall conduct research, development,
 and demonstration programs to address in a timely fashion questions
 concerning the development of magnetic and inertial confinement fusion
 for the production of electricity consistent with the purposes of this
 Act. Such programs shall include by the year 2010--
 (1) a demonstration of the achievement of ignition conditions in both
 magnetic and inertial confinement fusion test facilities; and
 (2) a demonstration of the technological feasibility of magnetic and
 inertial confinement fusion for the production of electricity.
 (b) In the event such feasibility is determined for a fusion technology
 pursuant to subsection (a), the Secretary shall prepare a design for a
 prototype commercial fusion reactor using such technologies, including
 associated cost estimates and specifications shall be in sufficient detail
 to permit bids for construction.
Subtitle E--Coal
 SEC. 341. COAL PROGRAM GOALS- (a) The Secretary shall establish research,
 development, and demonstration goals to asssure the timely development of
 technologies for the production, transportation, and utilization of coal
 consistent with this Act.
 (b) The Secretary shall establish a research, development, and demonstration
 program within the Department designed to assure the timely development
 of cost-effective advanced coal based technologies to be available for
 widespread commercial use after the year 2010, which are capable of achieving
 the control of sulfur oxides and oxides of nitrogen at levels of proficiency
 greater than currently available commercial control technology. The coal
 technology development program shall also be designed to assure the timely
 development of cost-effective technologies or energy production processes or
 systems utilizing coal which achieve greater efficiency in the conversion
 of coal to useful energy when compared to currently available commercial
 technology for the use of coal and the control of emissions from coal.
 (c) The Secretary shall develop the program described herein, for
 technologies that include, but are not limited to, the following:
 (1) advanced integrated gasification combined cycle;
 (2) pressurized fluidized bed combustion technology capable of achieving
 higher conversion efficiency than can be achieved through on-going
 demonstration projects;
 (3) direct and indirect coal-fired turbines;
 (4) coal refining processes capable of efficiently producing or utilizing
 the energy contained in coal and also utilizing the by-products thereof;
 (5) technologies for the cost-effective control and disposition of carbon
 dioxide produced during the combustion of coal;
 (6) magnetohydrodynamics;
 (7) molten carbonate and solid oxide fuel cells; and
 (8) other coal based technologies or processes on systems that are capable of
 achieving conversion efficiency greater than currently available technology.
 SEC. 342. NON-FUEL USE OF COAL- (a) Not later than one hundred and twenty
 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall
 submit to Congress a plan for research, development, and demonstration
 with respect to technologies for non-fuel use of coal, including--
 (1) production of coke and other carbon products derived from coal;
 (2) production of coal-derived, carbon-based chemical intermediates that
 are precursors of value-added chemicals and polymers;
 (3) production of chemicals from coal-derived synthesis gas;
 (4) coal treatment processes, including methodologies such as
 solvent-extraction techniques that produce low ash, low sulfur, coal-based
 chemical feedstocks; and
 (5) waste utilization, including recovery, processing, and marketing of
 products derived from sulfur, carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and ash from coal.
 (b) As part of the plan under subsection (a), the Secretary may propose
 specific joint ventures to accelerate the development and commercialization
 of technologies for non-fuel uses of coal.
 (c) The plan under subsection (a) shall address and evaluate:
 (1) the known and potential products and processes for the use of coal
 for products in the chemical, utility, fuel, and carbon-based materials
 industries;
 (2) the costs, benefits and economic feasibility of using coal products
 in the chemical and materials industries, including value-added chemicals,
 carbon-based products, coke, and waste derived from coal;
 (3) the economics of co-production of products from coal in conjunction
 with production of electric power, thermal energy, and fuel;
 (4) the economics of coal utilization in comparison with other feedstocks
 that might be used for the same purposes;
 (5) the steps that can be taken by the public and private sectors to
 bring about commercialization of research results produced by the research
 program recommended; and
 (6) the past development, current status, and future potential of coal
 products and processes associated with non-fuel use of coal.
 (d) The Secretary shall conduct a program of research and development
 under the plan under subsection (a).
 (e) The Secretary may provide financial assistance for a research project
 under the plan using funds authorized by section 343(b) to the extent he
 finds that such project--
 (1) furthers achievement of the goals and purposes of this Act;
 (2) offers promise for commercial application; and
 (3) has a reasonable prospect of support in at least 50 per centum of its
 direct costs from non-Federal funds.
 (f) In preparing the plan and carrying out research under this section,
 including evaluating the technical progress, feasibility, and most effective
 means for utilizing the results of research, the Secretary shall consult
 with the private sector.
 SEC. 343. AUTHORIZATIONS- (a) There is authorized to be appropriated such
 sums as are necessary for each of fiscal years 1992, 1993, and 1994 for
 purposes of implementing the program pursuant to section 341.
 (b) There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out section 342,
 a total of $20,000,000 for fiscal years 1992 through 1994.
Subtitle F--Natural Gas and Other Alternative Fuels
 SEC. 351. MASS TRANSIT PROGRAM- (a)(1) The Secretary, consistent with this
 Act, in consultation with the Administrator of the Urban Mass Transit
 Administration, may, consistent with the Alternative Motor Fuels Act of
 1988 (Public Law 100-404), enter into cooperative agreements and joint
 ventures with any municipal, county, or regional transit authority in an
 urban area with a population over 100,000 (according to latest available
 census information) to demonstrate the feasibility, including safety of
 specific vehicle design, of using natural gas or other alternative fuels
 for mass transit.
 (2) The program of the Secretary to implement the agreements under paragraph
 (1) may include interested or affected private firms willing to provide
 assistance in cash, or in kind, for any such demonstration.
 (b)(1) The Secretary may not enter into any agreement or joint venture under
 subsection (a) with any municipal, county or regional transit authority
 unless such government body agrees to provide at least 25 per centum of
 the costs of such demonstration.
 (2)(A) A transit authority may petition the Secretary for priority in
 allocating financial assistance under this section.
 (B) The Secretary, at his discretion, may grant such priority under this
 section to any authority that demonstrates that the use of natural gas or
 other alternative fuels used for transportation would have a significant
 effect on the ability of an air quality region to comply with applicable
 regulations governing ambient air quality.
 (c) There is authorized to be appropriated not more than $30,000,000 for
 each of fiscal years 1992, 1993, and 1994 for purposes of this section.
 SEC. 352. NATURAL GAS AND OTHER ALTERNATIVE FUEL USE IN FLEET VEHICLES-
 (a) The Secretary, consistent with the Alternative Motor Fuels Act of
 1988 (Public Law 100-494), and in consultation with the Administrator
 of the United States Environmental Protection Agency and the Secretary
 of Transportation, shall establish and carry out a program, and provide
 financial assistance to encourage the development and commercialization
 of natural gas and other alternative fuels for use in passenger fleets,
 light-duty trucks, and heavy-duty trucks consistent with the purposes of
 this Act. Such assistance shall provide for the purchase and construction
 of vehicles dedicated to the use of natural gas or other alternative fuels
 and of vehicles dually fueled by natural gas or other alternative fuels
 and gasoline or diesel, and associated refueling equipment.
 (b) Public and private fleets may be eligible for financial assistance
 under this section. A public or private fleet operator may petition the
 Secretary for priority in allocating financial assistance under this section.
 (c) The Secretary, at this discretion, may grant such priority to those
 fleets where the use of natural gas and other alternative transportation
 fuels would have a significant effect on the ability of an air quality
 region to comply with applicable regulations governing ambient air quality.
 (d) To facilitate the use of natural gas and other alternative fueled
 vehicles, the conversion of a vehicle from either gasoline or diesel
 alone to natural gas or other alternative fuels alone, or to natural gas
 or other alternative fuels and either gasoline or diesel, shall not be
 considered a violation of any anti-tampering provisions of the Federal
 law and implementing regulations, provided that the conversion complies
 with emissions standards issued by the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency.
 (e) Any program established under this section that applies to existing
 vehicles shall take into consideration the safety of specific vehicle
 design and the compatibility of natural gas and other alternative fuel
 use with the original components of such existing vehicles.
 (f) There is authorized to be appropriated not more than $30,000,000 for
 each of fiscal years 1992, 1993, and 1994, for purposes of this section.
 SEC. 353. TRAINING PROGRAM- (a) The Secretary of the Department of Labor
 shall establish and carry out a training and certification program for
 technicians who are responsible for vehicle installation of equipment
 that converts gasoline or diesel-fueled vehicles to the capability to
 run on natural gas or other alternative fuels alone, or on natural gas or
 other alternative fuels and either diesel fuel or gasoline, and for the
 maintenance of such converted vehicles. Such training and certification
 programs shall provide these technicians with instruction on the correct
 installation procedures and techniques, adherence to specifications,
 vehicle operating procedures, emissions testing, and other appropriate
 mechanical concerns applicable to these vehicle conversions.
 (b) The Secretary, may enter into cooperative agreements with, and provide
 financial assistance, under this section, to appropriate parties to provide
 training programs that will ensure the proper operation and performance
 of conversion equipment.
 (c) The program under this section shall be consistent with the Alternative
 Motor Fuels Act of 1988 (Public Law 100-494).
 (d) There is authorized to be appropriated not more than $5,000,000 for
 each of the fiscal years 1992, 1993, and 1994 for purposes of this section.
 SEC. 354. VEHICLE RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM-
 The Secretary shall carry out a program of research, development, and
 demonstration on techniques related to improving natural gas and other
 alternative fueled vehicle technology including, but not limited to,
 the following areas--
 (1) fuel injection;
 (2) carburetion;
 (3) manifolding;
 (4) combustion;
 (5) power optimization;
 (6) efficiency;
 (7) lubricants and detergents;
 (8) engine durability;
 (9) ignition, including fuel additives to assist ignition;
 (10) multifuel engines;
 (11) emissions control, including catalysts;
 (12) novel gas compression concepts;
 (13) advanced storage systems;
 (14) advanced gaseous fueling technologies; and
 (15) the incorporation of advanced materials in these areas.
 (b) The Secretary, consistent with the Alternative Motor Fuels Act of
 1988 (Public Law 100-494), may enter into cooperative agreements with,
 and provide financial assistance under this section to, public entities or
 interested or affected private firms willing to provide 50 per centum of
 the costs of such programs to perform the research and development necessary
 to improve natural gas vehicle and other alternative fuel vehicle technology.
 (c) There is authorized to be appropriated not more than $10,000,000 for
 each of the fiscal years 1992, 1993, and 1994 for purposes of this section.
 SEC. 355. NATURAL GAS RECOVERY, RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND DEMONSTRATION
 PROGRAM- (a) The Secretary shall expand and continue a program of research,
 development, and demonstration on techniques to increase the availability
 of natural gas from--
 (1) intensive recovery of natural gas in place in discovered reservoirs
 or formations; and
 (2) economic recovery of unconventional natural gas, including gas from
 tight sands, Eastern shales, gas from less permeable formations, coal-bed
 methane, and geopressured reservoirs.
 (b) The Secretary shall seek to enter into joint ventures with persons
 engaged in the production, transportation, distribution, or major use of
 natural gas to implement the program under subsection (a).
 (c) There is authorized to be appropriated not more than $25,000,000 for
 each of the fiscal years 1992, 1993, and 1994 for purposes of this section.
 SEC. 356. NATURAL GAS AND ELECTRIC HEATING AND COOLING TECHNOLOGIES-
 (a) The Secretary shall expand the program for research, development, and
 demonstration for natural gas and electric heating and cooling technologies
 for residential and commercial buildings.
 (b) The natural gas heating and cooling program shall increase research
 on thermally-activated heat pumps including:
 (1) absorption heat pumps; and
 (2) engine-driven heat pumps.
 (c) The electric heating and cooling program shall increase research on:
 (1) advanced heat pumps;
 (2) thermal storage; and
 (3) advanced electrically-driven HVAC (heating, ventilation, and cooling)
 and refrigeration systems that utilize replacements for chlorofluorocarbons,
 including HCFC-22.
 (d) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary, not more than
 $15,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1992, 1993, and 1994 for purposes
 of this section in addition to current authorizations.
 SEC. 357. VEHICLE AND BATTERY RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEMONSTRATION
 PROGRAM- (a) The Secretary shall conduct a program of research, development,
 and demonstration on techniques related to improving electric vehicle and
 battery technology including, but not limited to, the following areas:
 (1) high efficiency electric power trains, including advanced motors and
 hybrid power trains for vehicle range improvement;
 (2) light-weight body structures for vehicle weight reduction;
 (3) advanced batteries with high specific energy and specific power for
 electric vehicle application; and
 (4) primary batteries and fuel cells for hybrid vehicle application.
 (b) The Secretary shall enter into joint ventures with, and provide financial
 assistance under this section to, public entities or interested or affected
 private firms willing to provide at least 50 per centum of the costs of
 the joint ventures.
 (c) There is authorized to be appropriated not more than $10,000,000 for
 each of the fiscal years 1992, 1993, and 1994 for purposes of this section.
 SEC. 358. DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this subtitle natural gas includes
 natural gas derived fuels.
Subtitle G--Hydropower
 SEC. 361. PROGRAM- The Secretary, in consultation with the Federal Energy
 Regulatory Commission, the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of the
 Army, the Secretary of Agriculture, and the Secretary of Commerce shall
 undertake an assessment of the statutory, economic, and regulatory barriers
 to expanded hydroelectric capacity development at existing dams. The
 assessment shall quantify the contribution that expanded hydroelectric
 power development could reasonably be expected to make to national energy
 needs and a reduction in the generation of greenhouse gases.
 SEC. 362. REPORT- The Secretary will submit a report to Congress containing
 the results of the assessment by December 31, 1991.
Subtitle H--Electric Vehicle Technology Development and Demonstration
 SEC. 371. SHORT TITLE- This subtitle may be cited as the `Electric Vehicle
 Technology Development and Demonstration Act of 1990'.
 SEC. 372. FINDINGS- The Congress finds that:
 (1) electric vehicles may be recharged primarily during times of nonpeak
 use of electricity, which will permit the most efficient utilization of
 electrical generating capacity, produce economic benefits for purchasers
 and producers of electricity, and improve the quality of air;
 (2) the development, demonstration, and commercialization of electric
 vehicles in the United States will enhance the energy security of the United
 States and will encourage electric vehicle production in the United States;
 (3) the use of electric vehicles rather than vehicles powered by
 conventionally fueled internal combustion engines could significantly improve
 the quality of air by allowing areas of the country that have not attained
 a quality of air that meets minimum health standards to meet such standards;
 (4) because initial production of electric vehicles will not have economies
 of scale associated with mass production, the price to a user or owner
 may be so high as to discourage vehicle purchase and use; and
 (5) because the substantial potential environmental and domestic energy
 security benefits that will result from the commercialization of electric
 vehicles are so great for the United States, it is in the public interest for
 the United States Government to assist in the development, demonstration,
 and commercialization of domestically produced, cost competitive, electric
 vehicles.
 SEC. 373. DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this Act, the term--
 (1) `Administrator' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
 Agency;
 (2) `conventionally fueled vehicle' means a vehicle powered by an internal
 combustion engine that utilizes gasoline or diesel fuel as its fuel source;
 (3) `electric vehicle' means a vehicle powered by an electric motor that
 draws current from rechargeable storage batteries, fuel cells, or other
 portable sources of electrical current, and that may include a nonelectrical
 source of power designed to charge batteries and components;
 (4) `eligible nonattainment area' means a nonattainment area that the
 Secretary designates as an eligible nonattainment area under section 374(b);
 (5) `life cycle costs' means all costs associated with the purchase,
 operation, maintenance, and disposal of a vehicle; and
 (6) `nonattainment area' means a nonattainment area identified by
 the Administrator pursuant to section 107(d) of the Clean Air Act (42
 U.S.C. 7407(d)).
 SEC. 374. IDENTIFICATION OF NONATTAINMENT AREAS- (a) The Secretary, in
 consultation with the Administrator, shall identify, not later than thirty
 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the nonattainment areas
 in the United States in which the use of conventionally fueled vehicles
 contributes significantly to that nonattainment and in which the use of
 electric vehicles could contribute to attainment of applicable National
 Ambient Air Quality Standards.
 (b) The Secretary, after consultation with the Administrator and not later
 than thirty days after notification of the nonattainment areas identified
 under subsection (a), shall designate nonattainment areas eligible to
 participate in the program authorized by this subtitle. Geographical
 diversity shall be among the factors to be considered by the Secretary in
 making such designations.
 SEC. 375. APPLICATIONS FROM MANUFACTURERS- (a) Not later than thirty
 days after the Secretary designated the eligible nonattainment areas under
 section 374(b), the Secretary shall make an initial request for applications
 from manufacturers to develop, demonstrate, certify, manufacture, sell,
 warranty, and service electric vehicles in one or more eligible nonattainment
 areas. Additional requests for applications may be made if the Secretary
 determines that the responses to the initial request are inadequate.
 (b) The request for applications shall require a manufacturer to identify
 the following:
 (1) SALES AREA- Any eligible nonattainment area in which the electric
 vehicles will be sold;
 (2) QUANTITY- The quantity of vehicles that will be available for sale in
 each area;
 (3) DISTRIBUTION- The dealership network or other means to be used by a
 manufacturer to distribute, market, and sell vehicles;
 (4) TYPE- The type of vehicle (which may include light to medium duty
 cargo or passenger vehicles);
 (5) CHARACTERISTICS- The specifications and performance characteristics
 of each vehicle;
 (6) SERVICE- The maintenance and other support services that will be
 available to a purchaser;
 (7) PRICE- The selling price of a manufacturer for varying volumes of
 production of each type of vehicle;
 (8) LIFE CYCLE COSTS- Information regarding the life cycle costs, including
 projected costs of operating and maintaining an electric vehicle in
 comparison with operating and maintaining a conventionally fueled vehicle;
 (9) STATE AND LOCAL INVOLVEMENT- The level of involvement (cost-sharing
 or otherwise), if any, that State or local government entities will have
 in the manufacturer's proposal, and how that involvement will affect the
 level of Federal cost-sharing required; and
 (10) OTHER- Other information that the Secretary deems necessary.
 SEC. 376. SELECTION OF MANUFACTURERS- (a) After consulting with the Secretary
 of Commerce, the Secretary of Transportation, and the Administrator,
 and not later than one hundred and eighty days after the initial request
 for applications is made under section 375, the Secretary may select one
 or more manufacturers eligible to receive reimbursement payments for the
 development, demonstration, manufacture, and sale of electric vehicles.
 (b) The Secretary shall select a manufacturer based upon the overall
 quality of the proposal, including the following:
 (1) CAPABILITY- The ability of a manufacturer, directly or indirectly,
 to develop, demonstrate, manufacture, distribute, sell and service a
 significant number of electric vehicles;
 (2) GEOGRAPHIC DIVERSITY- The commitment of the manufacturer to distribute,
 sell and service electric vehicles in various regions of the country;
 (3) SUITABILITY- The suitability of the vehicles for use as a cargo or
 passenger vehicle;
 (4) SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFIT- The quality of the vehicle with
 respect to safety and environmental considerations;
 (5) VIABILITY- The long-term technical viability of the vehicle, and
 the ability of the manufacturer to incorporate subsequent advancements,
 modifications, and technology;
 (6) LIFE CYCLE COST REDUCTION- The ability and commitment of a manufacturer
 to reduce the life cycle costs of electric vehicles over a period of five
 years or less after selection to a level at least equal to comparable
 conventionally fueled vehicles;
 (7) PRICE- The selling price of a manufacturer for varying volumes of
 production of vehicles, the proposed discount (as defined in section 377),
 and life cycle costs of the electric vehicles;
 (8) STATE AND LOCAL SUPPORT- The extent to which the involvement of state
 or local government in the program will permit the reduction of the Federal
 costs share per vehicle to be supported or will otherwise be used to leverage
 the Federal cost-sharing to be provided among a greater number of vehicles;
 (9) OTHER- Other criteria that the Secretary deems necessary.
 SEC. 377. DISCOUNTS TO PURCHASERS- (a) A manufacturer selected by the
 Secretary shall offer a purchaser a discount equal to either:
 (1) LIFE CYCLE COST DIFFERENTIAL- An amount which represents the excess
 of the estimated life cycle costs of the electric vehicle over the life
 cycle costs of a conventionally fueled vehicle of comparable type; or
 (2) PURCHASE PRICE COST DIFFERENTIAL- An amount by which the selling
 price of the electric vehicle exceeds the suggested retail price of a
 conventionally fueled vehicle of comparable type.
In no case shall the discount be greater than 50 per centum of the selling
price by varying volumes of production.
 (b) The Secretary, not later than thirty days after a manufacturer has
 provided notice in the form and manner specified by the Secretary of the
 sale of an electric vehicle, shall pay a manufacturer a payment not to
 exceed the discount for each electric vehicle sold.
 (c) To be eligible for payment subsection (b), a manufacturer shall certify
 to the Secretary the following:
 (1) PURCHASER DISCOUNT LIMITATION- The discount to the purchaser does not
 lower the selling price of each electric vehicle below the suggested retail
 price of a conventionally fueled vehicle of comparable type;
 (2) DISCOUNT PASSTHROUGH- The actual selling price of the vehicle is
 equal to the selling price specified in the manufacturer's proposal
 to the Secretary reduced by the full amount of the discount received,
 calculated as specified above, unless the Secretary agrees to a request by
 the manufacturer to adjust the selling price as specified in the contract
 to reflect higher costs actually incurred in production;
 (3) NONATTAINMENT AREA USE- The vehicle will be used primarily in the
 eligible nonattainment area in which the vehicle will be purchased;
 (4) INFORMATION FROM PURCHASER- The purchaser has agreed to provide
 the manufacturer with information regarding operation, maintenance, and
 usability of the vehicle for five years after purchase; and
 (5) INFORMATION FROM MANUFACTURER- The manufacturer will povide such
 information regarding the development, demonstration, manufacture, sale,
 and maintenance of electric vehicles that the Secretary requests for a
 period of five years, beginning in fiscal year 1992.
 (d) The Secretary may enter into contracts with manufacturers of electric
 vehicles for purposes of carrying out this Act.
 SEC. 378. REPORTS TO CONGRESS- The Secretary shall report to Congress in
 fiscal years 1992 and 1994 on the programs and projects supported under
 this subtitle and the progress being made toward accomplishing the goals
 of this subtitle.
 SEC. 379. AUTHORIZATIONS- There is authorized to be appropriated for
 purposes of this subtitle $10,000,000 for each of the five fiscal years
 following the date of enactment of this Act.
Subtitle I--Advanced Nuclear Reactor Study
 SEC. 381. REPORT- Within one hundred and eighty days after the date of
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall transmit to the Congress a
 report on whether, and to what extent, continued or increased use of energy
 generated from nuclear fission can contribute substantially to safe and
 reliable supplies of electricity and reduce the generation of carbon dioxide
 and other greenhouse gases in the United States and internationally. The
 report shall include data on the extent to which additional increments of
 nuclear-generated electricity can reduce the generation of greenhouse gases
 and over what period of time. In preparing such report, the Secretary shall
 consider and make recommendations on the appropriate level of Federal support
 for research, development, and demonstration of advanced nuclear reactor
 technologies to support these objectives. Such report shall also include
 the recommendations of the Secretary regarding the necessary restructuring
 of existing nuclear fission research programs to achieve these objectives
 and the role of joint funding and cost-sharing in these activities.
Subtitle J--Technology Development Program
 SEC. 391. PROGRAM- The Secretary shall establish a program to develop
 technologies originating with the Department that is directed at the stage
 of technology development beyond the basic research stage. The purpose of
 such program shall be to develop technologies, determined by the Secretary
 to have significant promise for commercial and public benefit to the Nation,
 to a point where private industry will undertake further scientific and
 commercial development. Technology development programs may be conducted
 at any Department facility and would be intended to enhance the commercial
 development and transfer to private industry of technologies originating
 with the Department, consistent with the technology transfer mission of the
 Department. As a condition for supporting specific projects, the Secretary
 may require a private sector commitment to future, and wholly non-Federal,
 funding of commercial development of particular technologies.
 SEC. 392. AUTHORIZATIONS- For the purposes of carrying out this subtitle,
 there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary for
 fiscal years 1992, 1993, and 1994.
TITLE IV--MISCELLANEOUS
Subtitle A--Methane Assessment
 SEC. 401. OBJECTIVE- The objective of this subtitle is to identify and
 analyze options to reduce the risks of global climate change by--
 (1) reducing worldwide generation of methane;
 (2) identifying and analyzing the relationships between methane and other
 greenhouse gases to determine the synergies that may contribute to global
 climate change;
 (3) promoting additional analyses of the factors causing methane
 concentrations to increase, and of the sources of methane generation,
 and the opportunities for reducing such generation; and
 (4) identifying options for the reduction of methane generation that are
 economically as well as environmentally advantageous.
 SEC. 402. DOMESTIC METHANE SOURCE INVENTORY AND CONTROL OPTIONS- (a)
 Not later than two years after the date of the enactment of this Act,
 the Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of Agriculture and the
 Secretary of the Interior, shall submit to the Congress reports on:
 (1) methane emissions from biogenic sources such as:
 (A) tropical, temperate, and subarctic forests;
 (B) tundra; and
 (C) freshwater and saltwater wetlands;
 (2) changes in the generation of methane from biogenic sources that may
 occur as a result of predicted increases in temperatures and atmospheric
 concentrations of carbon dioxide;
 (3) methane operation associated with natural gas extraction, transportation,
 distribution, storage and use, including an inventory of methane generation
 associated with such activities within the United States, information on
 accidental and intentional methane releases from natural gas and oil wells,
 pipelines, processing facilities, and gas burners;
 (4) methane generation associated with coal extraction, transportation,
 storage, and utilization, including, but not limited to, an inventory
 of methane generation associated with such activities within the United
 States, information on accidental and intentional releases from mining
 shafts, degasification wells, gas recovery wells and equipment, and from
 the processing and use of coal; and
 (5) other sources of methane generation associated with human activities
 that are deemed by the Secretary to be significant.
 (b) Not later than two years after the date of the enactment of this
 Act, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report that outlines
 measures that could be implemented to reduce the growth in atmospheric
 concentrations of methane from sources within the United States. This
 report shall identify and evaluate the technical options for reducing
 the generation of methane from each of the sources listed in paragraph
 (a) as well as other sources deemed by the Secretary to be significant,
 and shall include an evaluation of costs.
 SEC. 403. INTERNATIONAL STUDIES- Not later than two years after the date
 of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in consultation with the
 Secretary of State, shall submit to Congress a report on methane emissions
 from countries other than the United States. Such report shall include
 inventories of methane generation associated with the activities listed
 in section 402(a). The report shall also identify the United States and
 international lending agency programs, and an itemization of the costs of
 each category of reductions, that may be used to induce lesser-developed
 countries to undertake measures that could reduce the generation of methane
 and the resource needs of such programs.
Subtitle B--Committee on Renewable Energy Commerce and Trade
 SEC. 411. DUTIES OF CORECT- The Committee on Renewable Energy Commerce and
 Trade (CORECT) shall seek to enhance economic development in lesser-developed
 countries by expanding the transfer of energy efficient and renewable
 energy technologies to such countries.
 SEC. 412. ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF CORECT- (a) CORECT shall promote the
 development and application in lesser-developed countries of energy and
 energy efficiency resource technologies that--
 (1) promote more efficient use of fossil fuels;
 (2) may reduce dependence on the importation of fossil fuels by encouraging
 the use of sustainable biomass, wind power, hydropower, solar, geothermal
 and other energy and energy efficiency resource technologies;
 (3) foster rural and urban energy development and energy self-sufficiency
 through the use of reliable and economical renewable energy and energy
 efficiency resource technologies;
 (4) explore mechanisms for assisting United States manufacturers,
 particularly smaller manufacturers, of energy-efficient and renewable
 energy technologies, in exporting their goods and services; and
 (5) increase staffing to support the new authority and responsibilities
 described in this section.
 (b) In furthering the purposes of this section, CORECT shall--
 (1) provide aggressive in-country technical training for local users and
 international development personnel;
 (2) establish feasibility and loan guarantee programs to facilitate access
 to capital and credit; and
 (3) support, through financial incentives, private sector efforts to
 commercialize and export renewable energy and energy efficiency resource
 technologies.
 (c) CORECT shall be responsible for the development of a comprehensive
 data base and information dissemination system. The system shall provide
 information on the specific energy technology needs of lesser-developed
 countries, the technical and economic competitiveness of various renewable
 energy and energy efficiency resource technologies, and the status of ongoing
 technology assistance programs. CORECT shall make such information available
 to industry, Federal and multilateral lending agencies, non-governmental
 organizations, host-country and donor-agency officials, and such others
 as the Secretary deems necessary.
 SEC. 413. OUTREACH- CORECT may establish renewable energy industry outreach
 offices in the Pacific Rim and in the Caribbean Basin for the purpose
 of providing information concerning renewable energy technologies and
 industries of the United States to governments, industries, and others
 outside of the continental United States.
 SEC. 414. COMPREHENSIVE ENERGY TECHNOLOGY EVALUATION- (a) Not later than
 June 1, 1991, and biennially thereafter, the Secretary shall prepare and
 submit to Congress, a comprehensive report evaluating the full range of
 energy and environmental technologies necessary to meet the energy needs
 of developing countries while reducing the generation of carbon dioxide
 and other greenhouse gases. This report shall also provide information on
 the specific needs of lesser-developed countries, an inventory of United
 States technologies and services to meet those needs, and an update on
 the status of ongoing bilateral and multilateral technology assistance
 and renewable energy resource programs.
 (b) The report should also include an evaluation of current programs and
 recommendations for future programs that--
 (1) develop and promote sustainable use of indigenous renewable energy
 resources in lesser-developed countries in order to reduce the generation
 of greenhouse gases that may contribute to global climate change;
 (2) given the credit and capital restrictions in lesser-developed countries,
 focus on technologies that are both appropriate and economically viable;
 (3) meet the needs of lesser-developed countries for energy rather than
 creating new needs, in order to ensure immediate income-generating use of
 the power generated;
 (4) work with local individuals to assure that programs and projects meet
 specific national and local needs;
 (5) use indigenous materials and associated hardware, wherever possible,
 in order to reduce costs and ensure project duplication;
 (6) provide examples of cost-effective systems and applications for
 in-country non-governmental organizations and project technical personnel;
 (7) provide mechanisms for assisting U.S. manufacturers, particularly
 smaller manufacturers, of energy-efficient and renewable energy technologies,
 in exporting their goods and services;
 (8) expand technical and administrative training programs, as well as
 distribution of multilingual technical training manuals and related
 materials; and
 (9) examine the potential for using economic incentives to promote technology
 transfer (e.g. shared savings contracts, loan guarantees, tax incentives,
 etc.) to lesser-developed countries.
 SEC. 415. JOINT VENTURES IN DEVELOPING, DEMONSTRATING, AND MARKETING
 ENERGY EFFICIENT AND RENEWABLE ENERGY TECHNOLOGIES IN KEY LESSER DEVELOPED
 COUNTRIES- (a) FIVE YEAR PLAN- The management plan under section 9(b) of
 the Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Technology Competitiveness Act of
 1989 (Public Law 101-218), shall include a five-year implementation plan for:
 (1) pursuing joint ventures with United States manufacturers for the
 development, demonstration, or marketing of energy efficient and renewable
 energy technologies for application of use in key lesser-developed
 countries; and
 (2) providing mechanisms to assist United States manufacturers, particularly
 smaller manufacturers of energy efficient and renewable energy technologies,
 in identifying and pursuing opportunities for sales or joint ventures.
 In developing the implementation plan required under this subsection,
 the Secretary shall consult with the Agency for International Development.
 (b) The Secretary shall solicit proposals for joint ventures in the areas
 described in subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) as if such joint ventures were
 required by, and subject to the requirements set forth in, section 6 of
 Public Law 101-218. The Secretary shall select a total of at least three
 joint ventures, except that the Secretary may reduce this requirement
 to the extent that the proposals received do not meet the Secretary's
 qualifications.
 (c) For the purposes of this section, a lesser-developed country shall be
 considered a key lesser-developed country if direct export or use of United
 States manufactured energy efficient and renewable energy technologies in
 such country is inhibited by cultural, or other factors.
 SEC. 416. AUTHORIZATIONS- (a) There is authorized to be appropriated
 $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1992, and such sums as may be necessary for
 fiscal years 1993 and 1994 to carry out the purposes of this subtitle
 except for section 413.
 (b) There is authorized to be appropriated for the purposes of section 413,
 in addition to the amount specified in the previous sentence, $2,750,000
 for fiscal year 1992, and such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years
 1993 and 1994.
 (c) There is authorized to be appropriated for the purposes of section 415,
 in addition to the amount specified in sections (a) and (b), $1,000,000
 for fiscal years 1992, 1993, and 1994.
Subtitle C--Fuel Cycle Costs Analysis
 SEC. 421. PROGRAM- The Secretary shall undertake a comparative analysis of
 United States, European, and Asian fuel cycle costs. The analysis shall
 be undertaken for five fuel cycles: coal, oil, natural gas, nuclear, and
 renewable energy. The renewable energy fuel cycle shall include solar, hydro,
 wind, and biomass. The analysis shall be based on comparable assumptions,
 data, and methodologies and will explicitly address the extent to which
 environmental and other externalities are, or are not, reflected in the
 energy prices paid by consumers in the United States, Western Europe,
 and in the market economies of Asia.
 SEC. 422. REPORT- The Secretary will submit a report to Congress containing
 the results of the comparative fuel cycle cost analysis by December 31, 1991.
Subtitle D--United Nations Conference
 SEC. 431. 1992 UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT-
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development will
 play a crucial role in advancing efforts to protect the global environment;
 (2) international preparations for 1992 Conference have already begun; and
 (3) the effectiveness of U.S. participation in the 1992 Conference would be
 greatly enhanced by the establishment of a secretariat within the Department
 of State to coordinate United States preparations for the Conference.
 (b) AUTHORIZATION- There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary
 of State for fiscal year 1991, $350,000 for the purpose of establishing
 within the Department of State a secretariat to prepare for the 1992 United
 Nations Conference on Environment and Development. Such funds shall remain
 available until expended.
TITLE V--NATURAL RESOURCE POLICY
 SEC. 501. ECOLOGICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE STUDY- (a) The Secretary
 of the Interior, in consultation with the Secretary of Agriculture, shall
 conduct a study of the ecological and environmental resources in the United
 States that could be affected by a global climate change. The study should
 include implications for wildlife habitat preservation, coastal protection,
 inland rivers and lakes, irrigation and reclamation, ground water protection,
 and the natural resources within the boundaries of the Nation's Wildlife
 refuges and parks, national forests, and other Federal lands.
 (b) The study should--
 (1) include specific regional climatic and resource base information useful
 in anticipatory and mitigatory planning;
 (2) identify actions that, if taken, could help mitigate the effects of
 global climate change; and
 (3) evaluate the cost-effectiveness, including the environmental effects
 of possible action.
 SEC. 502. NATIONAL FORESTATION INITIATIVE- The Secretary of Agriculture,
 in cooperation with the Secretary of the Interior, shall report to the
 President and the Congress on the feasibility of a National Reforestation
 Initiative. Such report shall include--
 (a) in coordination with the Resources Planning Act of 1974, an inventory
 of Federal, State, and private forested lands;
 (b) an evaluation of the status of timber harvesting on those lands,
 including the extent to which those lands are being reforested;
 (c) an assessment of the extent to which Federal, State, and private lands
 can be reforested, including lands not necessarily suitable for timber
 harvesting such as urban areas;
 (d) an evaluation of the potential of a national reforestation initiative
 for mitigating climate change, and the measures needed to achieve that
 potential; and
 (e) an assessment of the potential economic and environmental benefits and
 costs of such an initiative, the measures available to mitigate such costs,
 and an evaluation of the effectiveness of such measures.
 SEC. 503. URBAN FORESTRY AND ENERGY SAVINGS- (a) The Secretary, in
 consultation with the Secretary of Agriculture, and other relevant Federal
 agencies, shall conduct a study of the potential for reducing carbon dioxide
 emissions by undertaking targeted urban tree and vegetative plantings,
 including landscaping and the use of natural windbreaks, designed to reduce
 the air-conditioning and heating needs of buildings. The study shall provide
 estimates of the cost-effectiveness of such a program and shall outline
 a range of Federal, State, and local public policies and incentives that
 would encourage public and private efforts to undertake such plantings.
 (b) Within eighteen months after the date of enactment, the Secretary
 shall complete the study and transmit it to the Congress.
Passed the Senate August 4 (legislative day, July 10), 1990.
Attest:
Secretary.
S 324 ES----2
S 324 ES----3
S 324 ES----4
S 324 ES----5
S 324 ES----6
S 324 ES----7
S 324 ES----8
S 324 ES----9
S 324 ES----10
S 324 ES----11
S 324 ES----12
S 324 ES----13
S 324 ES----14
S 324 ES----15
S 324 ES----16
S 324 ES----17