[Congressional Bills 103th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]
[H.R. 518 Committee Discharged House (CDH)]

 Union Calendar No. 279

103d CONGRESS

 2d Session

 H. R. 518

 [Report No. 103-498]

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To designate certain lands in the California Desert as wilderness, to 
 establish the Death Valley and Joshua Tree National Parks and the 
 Mojave National Monument, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 May 11, 1994

Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries discharged; committed to the 
 Committee of the Whole House on the State of the Union and ordered to 
 be printed

 Union Calendar No. 279
103d CONGRESS
 2d Session
 H. R. 518

 [Report No. 103-498]

 To designate certain lands in the California Desert as wilderness, to 
 establish the Death Valley and Joshua Tree National Parks and the 
 Mojave National Monument, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 January 21, 1993

 Mr. Lehman (for himself, Mr. Miller of California, Mr. Vento, Mr. 
 Stark, Mr. Owens, Mr. Olver, Mr. Mfume, Ms. Pelosi, Mr. Mineta, Mr. 
 McDermott, Mr. Brown of California, Mr. Frank of Massachusetts, Mr. 
 Waxman, Mr. Stokes, Mr. DeFazio, Mrs. Maloney, and Mr. Hinchey) 
 introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on 
 Natural Resources

 June 18, 1993

 Additional sponsors: Mr. Bacchus of Florida, Mr. Kildee, Mr. Conyers, 
 Mr. Clay, Mr. Berman, Mr. Beilenson, Mr. Edwards of California, Mr. 
 Becerra, Mr. Skaggs, Ms. Woolsey, Mr. Bonior, Mr. Dellums, Ms. Eshoo, 
 Mr. Evans, Mr. Torres, Mr. Cooper, Mr. Towns, Ms. Slaughter, Mr. 
Blackwell, Mr. Filner, Mr. Fazio, Mr. Payne of New Jersey, Mr. Studds, 
 Mr. Torricelli, Mr. Rangel, Mr. Shays, Mr. Reynolds, Mr. Hamburg, Mr. 
Levin, Mr. Neal of North Carolina, Mr. Smith of New Jersey, Mr. Moran, 
 Mr. Porter, Mr. Richardson, Ms. Roybal-Allard, Mr. Borski, Mr. 
 Gejdenson, Mr. Coppersmith, Mr. Hughes, Mr. Meehan, Mr. Ackerman, Ms. 
 Harman, Mr. Price of North Carolina, Mr. Gilchrest, Mr. Dixon, Mr. 
 Lantos, Mr. Fingerhut, Mr. Hoagland, Mr. Johnston of Florida, Ms. 
 Schenk, Mr. Valentine, and Ms. Shepherd

 May 10, 1994

Additional sponsors: Mr. Swett, Mrs. Unsoeld, Ms. Norton, Mr. Kreidler, 
 Mr. Bryant, Mr. Spratt, Mr. Yates, Miss Collins of Michigan, Mr. 
Matsui, Mr. Nadler, Mr. Andrews of Maine, Mr. Klug, Mr. Traficant, Mr. 
 Deutsch, Mr. Ravenel, Mr. Barca of Wisconsin, Mr. Bilbray, Mr. 
Kopetski, Mr. Markey, Mr. Ford of Michigan, Mr. Sanders, Mr. Sabo, Mr. 
Gutierrez, Mr. Pallone, Ms. Kaptur, Mr. Farr of California, Mr. Wheat, 
 Mrs. Byrne, Mr. Zimmer, Mr. Neal of Massachusetts, Mrs. Roukema, Mr. 
 Coleman, Ms. Furse, Mr. Wynn, Mr. Wyden, Ms. DeLauro, Ms. English of 
 Arizona, Mr. Machtley, Mr. Brown of Ohio, Mr. Lewis of Georgia, Mrs. 
 Meek, Mr. Barrett of Wisconsin, and Mr. Klein

 May 10, 1994

 Reported with an amendment, committed to the Committee of the Whole 
 House on the State of the Union and ordered to be printed
 [Strike out all after the enacting clause and insert the part printed 
 in italic]

 May 11, 1994

 Discharged from the Union Calendar and referred to the Committee on 
 Merchant Marine and Fisheries for a period ending not later than May 
 11, 1994, for consideration of such provisions of the bill and 
amendment as fall within the jurisdiction of that committee pursuant to 
 clause 1(m) of rule X

 May 11, 1994

Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries discharged; committed to the 
 Committee of the Whole House on the State of the Union and ordered to 
 be printed
[For text of introduced bill, see copy of bill as introduced on January 
 21, 1993]

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To designate certain lands in the California Desert as wilderness, to 
 establish the Death Valley and Joshua Tree National Parks and the 
 Mojave National Monument, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act may be 
cited as the ``California Desert Protection Act of 1994''.

 findings and policy

 Sec. 2. (a) The Congress finds and declares that--
 (1) the federally owned desert lands of Southern California 
 constitute a public wildland resource of extraordinary and 
 inestimable value for this and future generations;
 (2) these desert wildlands display unique scenic, 
 historical, archeological, environmental, ecological, wildlife, 
 cultural, scientific, educational, and recreational values used 
 and enjoyed by millions of Americans for hiking and camping, 
 scientific study and scenic appreciation;
 (3) the public land resources of the California desert now 
 face and are increasingly threatened by adverse pressures which 
 would impair, dilute, and destroy their public and natural 
 values;
 (4) the California desert, embracing wilderness lands, 
 units of the National Park System, other Federal lands, State 
 parks and other State lands, and private lands, constitutes a 
 cohesive unit posing unique and difficult resource protection 
 and management challenges;
 (5) through designation of national monuments by 
 Presidential proclamation, through enactment of general public 
 land statutes (including section 601 of the Federal Land Policy 
 and Management Act of 1976, 90 Stat. 2743, 43 U.S.C. 1701 et 
 seq.) and through interim administrative actions, the Federal 
 Government has begun the process of appropriately providing for 
 protection of the significant resources of the public lands in 
 the California desert; and
 (6) statutory land unit designations are needed to afford 
 the full protection which the resources and public land values 
 of the California desert merit.
 (b) In order to secure for the American people of this and future 
generations an enduring heritage of wilderness, national parks, and 
public land values in the California desert, it is hereby declared to 
be the policy of the Congress that--
 (1) appropriate public lands in the California desert shall 
 be included within the National Park System and the National 
 Wilderness Preservation System, in order to--
 (A) preserve unrivaled scenic, geologic, and 
 wildlife values associated with these unique natural 
 landscapes;
 (B) perpetuate in their natural state significant 
 and diverse ecosystems of the California desert;
 (C) protect and preserve historical and cultural 
 values of the California desert associated with ancient 
 Indian cultures, patterns of western exploration and 
 settlement, and sites exemplifying the mining, ranching 
 and railroading history of the Old West;
 (D) provide opportunities for compatible outdoor 
 public recreation, protect and interpret ecological and 
 geological features and historic, paleontological, and 
 archeological sites, maintain wilderness resource 
 values, and promote public understanding and 
 appreciation of the California desert; and
 (E) retain and enhance opportunities for scientific 
 research in undisturbed ecosystems.

 TITLE I--WILDERNESS ADDITIONS

 findings

 Sec. 101. The Congress finds and declares that--
 (1) wilderness is a distinguishing characteristic of the 
 public lands in the California desert, one which affords an 
 unrivaled opportunity for experiencing vast areas of the Old 
 West essentially unaltered by man's activities, and which 
 merits preservation for the benefit of present and future 
 generations;
 (2) the wilderness values of desert lands are increasingly 
 threatened by and especially vulnerable to impairment, 
 alteration, and destruction by activities and intrusions 
 associated with incompatible use and development; and
 (3) preservation of desert wilderness necessarily requires 
 the highest forms of protective designation and management.

 designation of wilderness

 Sec. 102. In furtherance of the purpose of the Wilderness Act (78 
Stat. 890, 16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.), and sections 601 and 603 of the 
Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (90 Stat. 2743, 43 
U.S.C. 1701 et seq.), the following lands in the State of California, 
as generally depicted on maps referenced herein, are hereby designated 
as wilderness, and therefore, as components of the National Wilderness 
Preservation System:
 (1) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately seventy-four thousand eight hundred and ninety 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Argus Range 
 Wilderness--Proposed 1'', dated May 1991, and two maps entitled 
 ``Argus Range Wilderness--Proposed 2'' and ``Argus Range 
 Wilderness--Proposed 3'', dated January 1989, and which shall 
 be known as the Argus Range Wilderness.
 (2) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately ten thousand three hundred and eighty acres, as 
 generally depicted on a map entitled ``Bigelow Cholla Garden 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated July 1993, and which shall be 
 known as the Bigelow Cholla Garden Wilderness.
 (3) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, and within the San 
 Bernardino National Forest, which comprise approximately 
 thirty-nine thousand two hundred acres, as generally depicted 
 on a map entitled ``Bighorn Mountain Wilderness--Proposed'', 
 dated September 1991, and which shall be known as the Bighorn 
 Mountain Wilderness.
 (4) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area and the Yuma District, of the Bureau of Land Management, 
 which comprise approximately forty-seven thousand five hundred 
 and seventy acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled 
 ``Big Maria Mountains Wilderness--Proposed'', dated February 
 1986, and which shall be known as the Big Maria Mountains 
 Wilderness.
 (5) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately thirteen thousand nine hundred and forty acres, 
 as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Black Mountain 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated July 1993, and which shall be 
 known as the Black Mountain Wilderness.
 (6) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately nine thousand five hundred and twenty acres, as 
 generally depicted on a map entitled ``Bright Star Wilderness--
 Proposed'', dated May 1991, and which shall be known as the 
 Bright Star Wilderness.
 (7) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately sixty-eight thousand five hundred and fifteen 
 acres, as generally depicted on two maps entitled ``Bristol 
 Mountains Wilderness--Proposed 1'', and ``Bristol Mountains 
 Wilderness--Proposed 2'', dated September 1991, and which shall 
 be known as Bristol Mountains Wilderness.
 (8) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately thirty-nine thousand seven hundred and forty 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Cadiz Dunes 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated July 1993, and which shall be 
 known as the Cadiz Dunes Wilderness.
 (9) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately eighty-four thousand four hundred acres, as 
 generally depicted on a map entitled ``Cady Mountains 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated July 1993, and which shall be 
 known as the Cady Mountains Wilderness.
 (10) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area and Eastern San Diego County, of the Bureau of Land 
 Management, which comprise approximately fifteen thousand seven 
 hundred acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled 
 ``Carrizo Gorge Wilderness--Proposed'', dated February 1986, 
 and which shall be known as the Carrizo Gorge Wilderness.
 (11) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area and Yuma District, of the Bureau of Land Management, which 
 comprise approximately sixty-four thousand three hundred and 
 twenty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled 
 ``Chemehuevi Mountains Wilderness--Proposed'', dated July 1993, 
 and which shall be known as the Chemehuevi Mountains 
 Wilderness.
 (12) Certain lands in the Bakersfield District, of the 
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately 
 thirteen thousand seven hundred acres, as generally depicted on 
 two maps entitled ``Chimney Peak Wilderness--Proposed 1'' and 
 ``Chimney Peak Wilderness--Proposed 2'', dated May 1991, and 
 which shall be known as the Chimney Peak Wilderness.
 (13) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately one hundred fifty-eight thousand nine hundred and 
 fifty acres, as generally depicted on two maps entitled 
 ``Chuckwalla Mountains Wilderness--Proposed 1'' and 
 ``Chuckwalla Mountains Wilderness--Proposed 2'', dated January 
 1989, and which shall be known as the Chuckwalla Mountains 
 Wilderness.
 (14) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise thirty-
 four thousand three hundred and eighty acres, as generally 
 depicted on a map entitled ``Cleghorn Lakes Wilderness--
 Proposed'', dated September 1991, and which shall be known as 
 the Cleghorn Lakes Wilderness. The Secretary may, pursuant to 
 an application filed by the Department of Defense, grant a 
 right-of-way for, and authorize construction of, a road within 
 the area depicted as ``non-wilderness road corridor'' on such 
 map.
 (15) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately forty thousand acres, as generally depicted on a 
 map entitled ``Clipper Mountain Wilderness--Proposed'', dated 
 May 1991, and which shall be known as Clipper Mountain 
 Wilderness.
 (16) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately fifty thousand five hundred and twenty acres, as 
 generally depicted on a map entitled ``Coso Range Wilderness--
 Proposed'', dated May 1991, and which shall be known as Coso 
 Range Wilderness.
 (17) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately seventeen thousand acres, as generally depicted 
 on a map entitled ``Coyote Mountains Wilderness--Proposed'', 
 dated July 1993, and which shall be known as Coyote Mountains 
 Wilderness.
 (18) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately eight thousand six hundred acres, as generally 
 depicted on a map entitled ``Darwin Falls Wilderness--
 Proposed'', dated May 1991, and which shall be known as Darwin 
 Falls Wilderness.
 (19) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area and the Yuma District, of the Bureau of Land Management, 
 which comprise approximately forty-eight thousand eight hundred 
 and fifty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Dead 
 Mountains Wilderness--Proposed'', dated October 1991, and which 
 shall be known as Dead Mountains Wilderness.
 (20) Certain lands in the Bakersfield District, of the 
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately thirty-
 six thousand three hundred acres, as generally depicted on two 
 maps entitled ``Domeland Wilderness Additions--Proposed 1'' and 
 ``Domeland Wilderness Additions--Proposed 2'', dated February 
 1986 and which are hereby incorporated in, and which shall be 
 deemed to be a part of, the Domeland Wilderness as designated 
 by Public Laws 93-632 and 98-425.
 (21) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately twenty-three thousand seven hundred and eighty 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``El Paso 
 Mountains Wilderness--Proposed'', dated July 1993, and which 
 shall be known as the El Paso Mountains Wilderness.
 (22) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately twenty-five thousand nine hundred and forty 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Fish Creek 
 Mountains Wilderness--Proposed'', dated July 1993, and which 
 shall be known as Fish Creek Mountains Wilderness.
 (23) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately twenty-eight thousand one hundred and ten acres, 
 as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Funeral Mountains 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated May 1991, and which shall be 
 known as Funeral Mountains Wilderness.
 (24) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately thirty-seven thousand seven hundred acres, as 
 generally depicted on a map entitled ``Golden Valley 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated February 1986 and which shall be 
 known as Golden Valley Wilderness.
 (25) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately thirty-one thousand seven hundred and twenty 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Grass Valley 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated February 1986 and which shall be 
 known as the Grass Valley Wilderness.
 (26) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately twenty-two thousand two hundred and forty acres, 
 as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Hollow Hills 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated May 1991, and which shall be 
 known as the Hollow Hills Wilderness.
 (27) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately twenty-six thousand four hundred and sixty acres, 
 as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Ibex Wilderness--
 Proposed'', dated May 1991, and which shall be known as the 
 Ibex Wilderness.
 (28) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately thirty-four thousand and fifty-five acres, as 
 generally depicted on a map entitled ``Indian Pass Wilderness--
 Proposed'', dated May 1994, and which shall be known as the 
 Indian Pass Wilderness.
 (29) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area and the Bakersfield District, of the Bureau of Land 
 Management, and within the Inyo National Forest, which comprise 
 approximately two hundred five thousand and twenty acres, as 
 generally depicted on three maps entitled ``Inyo Mountains 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', numbered in the title one through 
 three, and dated May 1991, and which shall be known as the Inyo 
 Mountains Wilderness.
 (30) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately thirty-three thousand six hundred and seventy 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Jacumba 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated July 1993, and which shall be 
 known as the Jacumba Wilderness.
 (31) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately one hundred and twenty-nine thousand five hundred 
 and eighty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled 
 ``Kelso Dunes Wilderness--Proposed 1'', dated October 1991, a 
 map entitled ``Kelso Dunes Wilderness--Proposed 2'', dated May 
 1991, and a map entitled ``Kelso Dunes Wilderness--Proposed 
 3'', dated September 1991, and which shall be known as the 
 Kelso Dunes Wilderness.
 (32) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, and the Sequoia 
 National Forest, which comprise approximately eighty-eight 
 thousand two hundred and ninety acres, as generally depicted on 
 a map entitled ``Kiavah Wilderness--Proposed 1'', dated 
 February 1986, and a map entitled ``Kiavah Wilderness--Proposed 
 2'', dated May 1991, and which shall be known as the Kiavah 
 Wilderness.
 (33) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately two hundred forty-nine thousand three hundred and 
 sixty-eight acres, as generally depicted on four maps entitled 
 ``Kingston Range Wilderness--Proposed'', numbered in the title 
 one through four dated May 1994, and which shall be known as 
 the Kingston Range Wilderness.
 (34) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately twenty-nine thousand eight hundred and eighty 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Little 
 Chuckwalla Mountains Wilderness--Proposed'', dated May 1991, 
 and which shall be known as the Little Chuckwalla Mountains 
 Wilderness.
 (35) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area and the Yuma District, of the Bureau of Land Management, 
 which comprise approximately thirty-three thousand six hundred 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Little Picacho 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated July 1993, and which shall be 
 known as the Little Picacho Wilderness.
 (36) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately thirty-two thousand three hundred and sixty 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Malpais Mesa 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated September 1991, and which shall 
 be known as the Malpais Mesa Wilderness.
 (37) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately sixteen thousand one hundred and five acres, as 
 generally depicted on a map entitled ``Manly Peak Wilderness--
 Proposed'', dated October 1991, and which shall be known as the 
 Manly Peak Wilderness.
 (38) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately twenty-four thousand two hundred acres, as 
 generally depicted on a map entitled ``Mecca Hills Wilderness--
 Proposed'', dated July 1993, and which shall be known as the 
 Mecca Hills Wilderness.
 (39) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately forty-seven thousand three hundred and thirty 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Mesquite 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated May 1991, and which shall be 
 known as the Mesquite Wilderness.
 (40) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately twenty-two thousand nine hundred acres, as 
 generally depicted on a map entitled ``Newberry Mountains 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated February 1986, and which shall be 
 known as the Newberry Mountains Wilderness.
 (41) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately one hundred ten thousand eight hundred and sixty 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Nopah Range 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated July 1993, and which shall be 
 known as the Nopah Range Wilderness.
 (42) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately thirty-two thousand two hundred and forty acres, 
 as generally depicted on a map entitled ``North Algodones Dunes 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated October 1991, and which shall be 
 known as the North Algodones Dunes Wilderness.
 (43) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately twenty-five thousand five hundred and forty 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``North Mesquite 
 Mountains Wilderness--Proposed'', dated May 1991, and which 
 shall be known as the North Mesquite Mountains Wilderness.
 (44) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately one hundred forty-six thousand and seventy acres, 
 as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Old Woman Mountains 
 Wilderness--Proposed 1'', dated May 1994 and a map entitled 
 ``Old Woman Mountains Wilderness--Proposed 2'', dated October 
 1991, and which shall be known as the Old Woman Mountains 
 Wilderness.
 (45) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately fifty-seven thousand four hundred and eighty 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Orocopia 
 Mountains Wilderness--Proposed'', dated May 1994, and which 
 shall be known as the Orocopia Mountains Wilderness.
 (46) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area and the Bakersfield District, of the Bureau of Land 
 Management, which comprise approximately seventy-four thousand 
 six hundred and forty acres, as generally depicted on a map 
 entitled ``Owens Peak Wilderness--Proposed 1'', dated February 
 1986, and two maps entitled ``Owens Peak Wilderness--Proposed 
 2'' dated February 1986 and ``Owens Peak Wilderness--Proposed 
 3'', dated May 1991, and which shall be known as the Owens Peak 
 Wilderness.
 (47) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately seventy-four thousand eight hundred acres, as 
 generally depicted on a map entitled ``Pahrump Valley 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated February 1986 and which shall be 
 known as the Pahrump Valley Wilderness.
 (48) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately two hundred seventy thousand six hundred and 
 twenty-nine acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled 
 ``Palen/McCoy Wilderness--Proposed 1'', dated July 1993, and a 
 map entitled ``Palen/McCoy Wilderness--Proposed 2'', dated July 
 1993, and which shall be known as the Palen/McCoy Wilderness.
 (49) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately thirty-two thousand three hundred and ten acres, 
 as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Palo Verde Mountains 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated July 1993, and which shall be 
 known as the Palo Verde Mountains Wilderness.
 (50) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately seven thousand seven hundred acres, as generally 
 depicted on a map entitled ``Picacho Peak Wilderness--
 Proposed'', dated May 1991, and which shall be known as the 
 Picacho Peak Wilderness.
 (51) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately seventy-two thousand six hundred acres, as 
 generally depicted on a map entitled ``Piper Mountain 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated May 1991, and which shall be 
 known as the Piper Mountain Wilderness.
 (52) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately thirty-six thousand eight hundred and forty 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Piute 
 Mountains Wilderness--Proposed'', dated July 1993, and which 
 shall be known as the Piute Mountains Wilderness.
 (53) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately seventy-eight thousand eight hundred and sixty-
 eight acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Resting 
 Spring Range Wilderness--Proposed'', dated May 1991, and which 
 shall be known as the Resting Spring Range Wilderness.
 (54) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately forty thousand eight hundred and twenty acres, as 
 generally depicted on a map entitled ``Rice Valley Wilderness--
 Proposed'', dated May 1991, and which shall be known as the 
 Rice Valley Wilderness.
 (55) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area and the Yuma District, of the Bureau of Land Management, 
 which comprise approximately twenty-two thousand three hundred 
 eighty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled 
 ``Riverside Mountains Wilderness--Proposed'', dated May 1991, 
 and which shall be known as the Riverside Mountains Wilderness.
 (56) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately twenty-seven thousand seven hundred acres, as 
 generally depicted on a map entitled ``Rodman Mountains 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated January 1989, and which shall be 
 known as the Rodman Mountains Wilderness.
 (57) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area and the Bakersfield District, of the Bureau of Land 
 Management, which comprise approximately fifty-one thousand 
 nine hundred acres, as generally depicted on two maps entitled 
 ``Sacatar Trail Wilderness--Proposed 1'' and ``Sacatar Trail 
 Wilderness--Proposed 2'', dated May 1991, and which shall be 
 known as the Sacatar Trail Wilderness.
 (58) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately one thousand four hundred and forty acres, as 
 generally depicted on a map entitled ``Saddle Peak Hills 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated July 1993, and which shall be 
 known as the Saddle Peak Hills Wilderness.
 (59) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately thirty-seven thousand nine hundred and eighty 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``San Gorgonio 
 Wilderness Additions--Proposed'', dated July 1993, and which 
 are hereby incorporated in, and which shall be deemed to be a 
 part of, the San Gorgonio Wilderness as designated by Public 
 Laws 88-577 and 98-425.
 (60) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately sixty-four thousand three hundred and forty 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Santa Rosa 
 Wilderness Additions--Proposed'', dated March 1994, and which 
 are hereby incorporated in, and which shall be deemed to be 
 part of, the Santa Rosa Wilderness designated by Public Law 98-
 425.
 (61) Certain lands in the California Desert District, of 
 the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately 
 thirty-five thousand and eighty acres, as generally depicted on 
 a map entitled ``Sawtooth Mountains Wilderness--Proposed'', 
 dated July 1993, and which shall be known as the Sawtooth 
 Mountains Wilderness.
 (62) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately one hundred seventy-four thousand eight hundred 
 acres, as generally depicted on two maps entitled ``Sheep Hole 
 Valley Wilderness--Proposed 1'', dated July 1993, and ``Sheep 
 Hole Valley Wilderness--Proposed 2'', dated July 1993, and 
 which shall be known as the Sheephole Valley Wilderness.
 (63) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately forty-four thousand four hundred and ten acres, 
 as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Slate Range 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated October 1991, and which shall be 
 known as the Slate Range Wilderness.
 (64) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately sixteen thousand seven hundred and eighty acres, 
 as generally depicted on a map entitled ``South Nopah Range 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated February 1986, and which shall be 
 known as the South Nopah Range Wilderness.
 (65) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately seven thousand and fifty acres, as generally 
 depicted on a map entitled ``Stateline Wilderness--Proposed'', 
 dated May 1991, and which shall be known as the Stateline 
 Wilderness.
 (66) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately eighty-one thousand six hundred acres, as 
 generally depicted on a map entitled ``Stepladder Mountains 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated February 1986, and which shall be 
 known as the Stepladder Mountains Wilderness.
 (67) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately twenty-nine thousand one hundred and eighty 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Surprise 
 Canyon Wilderness--Proposed'', dated September 1991, and which 
 shall be known as the Surprise Canyon Wilderness.
 (68) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately seventeen thousand eight hundred and twenty 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Sylvania 
 Mountains Wilderness--Proposed'', dated February 1986, and 
 which shall be known as the Sylvania Mountains Wilderness.
 (69) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately thirty-three thousand seven hundred and twenty 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Trilobite 
 Wilderness--Proposed'', dated May 1991, and which shall be 
 known as the Trilobite Wilderness.
 (70) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately one hundred forty-four thousand five hundred 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Turtle 
 Mountains Wilderness--Proposed 1'', dated February 1986 and a 
 map entitled ``Turtle Mountains Wilderness--Proposed 2'', dated 
 May 1991, and which shall be known as the Turtle Mountains 
 Wilderness.
 (71) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation 
 Area and the Yuma District, of the Bureau of Land Management, 
 which comprise approximately seventy-seven thousand five 
 hundred and twenty acres, as generally depicted on a map 
 entitled ``Whipple Mountains Wilderness--Proposed'', dated July 
 1993, and which shall be known as the Whipple Mountains 
 Wilderness.

 administration of wilderness areas

 Sec. 103. Subject to valid existing rights, each wilderness area 
designated under section 102 shall be administered by the appropriate 
Secretary in accordance with the provisions of the Wilderness Act, 
except that any reference in such provisions to the effective date of 
the Wilderness Act shall be deemed to be a reference to the effective 
date of this title and any reference to the Secretary of Agriculture 
shall be deemed to be a reference to the Secretary who has 
administrative jurisdiction over the area.

 grazing

 Sec. 104. Within the wilderness areas designated under section 102, 
the grazing of livestock, where established prior to the enactment of 
this Act, shall be permitted to continue subject to such reasonable 
regulations, policies, and practices as the Secretary deems necessary, 
as long as such regulations, policies, and practices fully conform with 
and implement the intent of Congress regarding grazing in such areas as 
such intent is expressed in the Wilderness Act and section 108 of 
Public Law 96-560 (16 U.S.C. 133 note).

 buffer zones

 Sec. 105. The Congress does not intend for the designation of 
wilderness areas in section 102 of this Act to lead to the creation of 
protective perimeters or buffer zones around any such wilderness area. 
The fact that nonwilderness activities or uses can be seen or heard 
from areas within a wilderness shall not, of itself, preclude such 
activities or uses up to the boundary of the wilderness area.

 mining claim validity review

 Sec. 106. The Secretary of the Interior shall not approve any plan 
of operation prior to determining the validity of the unpatented mining 
claims, mill sites, and tunnel sites affected by such plan within any 
wilderness area designated under section 102, and shall submit to 
Congress recommendations as to whether any valid or patented claims 
should be acquired by the United States, including the estimated 
acquisition costs of such claims, and a discussion of the environmental 
consequences of the extraction of minerals from these lands.

 filing of maps and descriptions

 Sec. 107. As soon as practicable after enactment of section 102, a 
map and a legal description on each wilderness area designated under 
this title shall be filed by the Secretary concerned with the Committee 
on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on 
Natural Resources of the House of Representatives, and each such map 
and description shall have the same force and effect as if included in 
this title, except that the Secretary may correct clerical and 
typographical errors in each such legal description and map. Each such 
map and legal description shall be on file and available for public 
inspection in the office of the Director of the Bureau of Land 
Management, Department of the Interior, or the Chief of the Forest 
Service, Department of Agriculture, as is appropriate.

 wilderness review

 Sec. 108. (a) The Congress hereby finds and directs that except for 
those areas provided for in subsection (b), the public lands in the 
California Desert Conservation Area, managed by the Bureau of Land 
Management, not designated as wilderness or wilderness study areas by 
this Act, have been adequately studied for wilderness designation 
pursuant to section 603 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act 
of 1976 (90 Stat. 2743, 43 U.S.C. 1782), and are no longer subject to 
the requirements of section 603(c) of the Federal Land Policy and 
Management Act of 1976 pertaining to the management of wilderness study 
areas in a manner that does not impair the suitability of such areas 
for preservation as wilderness.
 (b) The following areas shall continue to be subject to the 
requirements of section 603(c) of the Federal Land Policy and 
Management Act of 1976, pertaining to the management of wilderness 
study areas in a manner that does not impair the suitability of such 
areas for preservation as wilderness:
 (1) Certain lands which comprise approximately sixty-one 
 thousand three hundred and twenty acres, as generally depicted 
 on a map entitled ``Avawatz Mountains Wilderness--Proposed'', 
 dated May 1991.
 (2) Certain lands which comprise approximately eighty 
 thousand four hundred and thirty acres, as generally depicted 
 on two maps entitled ``Soda Mountains Wilderness--Proposed 1'', 
 dated May 1991, and ``Soda Mountains Wilderness--Proposed 2'', 
 dated January 1989.
 (3) Certain lands which compromise approximately twenty-
 three thousand two hundred and fifty acres, as generally 
 depicted on a map entitled ``South Avawatz Mountains--
 Proposed'', dated May 1991.
 (4) Certain lands which comprise approximately eight 
 thousand eight hundred acres, as generally depicted on a map 
 entitled ``Great Falls Basin Wilderness--Proposed'', dated 
 February 1986.
 (c) Subject to valid existing rights, the Federal lands referred to 
in subsection (b) are hereby withdrawn from all forms of entry, 
appropriation, or disposal under the public land laws; from location, 
entry, and patent under the United States mining laws; and from 
disposition under all laws pertaining to mineral and geothermal 
leasing, and mineral materials, and all amendments thereto, and shall 
be administered by the Secretary in accordance with the provisions of 
section 603(c) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 
(43 U.S.C. 1782).

 designation of wilderness study area

 Sec. 109. In furtherance of the provisions of the Wilderness Act, 
certain public lands in the California Desert Conservation Area of the 
Bureau of Land Management which comprise eleven thousand two hundred 
acres as generally depicted on a map entitled ``White Mountains 
Wilderness Study Area--Proposed'', dated May 1991, are hereby 
designated the White Mountains Wilderness Study Area and shall be 
administered by the Secretary in accordance with the provisions of 
section 603(c) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976.

 suitability report

 Sec. 110. The Secretary is required, ten years after the date of 
enactment of this Act, to report to Congress on current and planned 
exploration, development or mining activities on, and suitability for 
future wilderness designation of, the lands as generally depicted on 
maps entitled ``Surprise Canyon Wilderness--Proposed'', ``Middle Park 
Canyon Wilderness--Proposed'', and ``Death Valley National Park 
Boundary and Wilderness 15'', dated September 1991 and a map entitled 
``Manly Peak Wilderness--Proposed'', dated October 1991.

 wilderness designation and management in the national wildlife refuge 
 system

 Sec. 111. (a) In furtherance of the purposes of the Wilderness Act, 
the following lands are hereby designated as wilderness and therefore, 
as components of the National Wilderness Preservation System:
 (1) Certain lands in the Havasu National Wildlife Refuge, 
 California, which comprise approximately three thousand one 
 hundred and ninety-five acres, as generally depicted on a map 
 entitled ``Havasu Wilderness--Proposed'', and dated October 
 1991, and which shall be known as the Havasu Wilderness.
 (2) Certain lands in the Imperial National Wildlife Refuge, 
 California, which comprise approximately five thousand eight 
 hundred and thirty-six acres, as generally depicted on two maps 
 entitled ``Imperial Refuge Wilderness--Proposed 1'' and 
 ``Imperial Refuge Wilderness--Proposed 2'', and dated October 
 1991, and which shall be known as the Imperial Refuge 
 Wilderness.
 (b) Subject to valid existing rights, the wilderness areas 
designated under this section shall be administered by the Secretary in 
accordance with the provisions of the Wilderness Act governing areas 
designated by that Act as wilderness, except that any reference in such 
provisions to the effective date of the Wilderness Act (or any similar 
reference) shall be deemed to be a reference to the date of enactment 
of this Act and any reference to the Secretary of Agriculture shall be 
deemed to be a reference to the Secretary of the Interior.
 (c) As soon as practicable after enactment of this section, the 
Secretary shall file a map and a legal description of each wilderness 
area designated under this section with the Committees on Energy and 
Natural Resources and Environment and Public Works of the Senate and 
Natural Resources and Merchant Marine and Fisheries of the House of 
Representatives. Such map and description shall have the same force and 
effect as if included in this Act, except that correction of clerical 
and typographical errors in such legal description and map may be made. 
Such map and legal description shall be on file and available for 
public inspection in the Office of the Director, United States Fish and 
Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior.

 TITLE II--DEATH VALLEY NATIONAL PARK

 findings

 Sec. 201. The Congress hereby finds that--
 (1) proclamations by Presidents Herbert Hoover in 1933 and 
 Franklin Roosevelt in 1937 established and expanded the Death 
 Valley National Monument for the preservation of the unusual 
 features of scenic, scientific, and educational interest 
 therein contained;
 (2) Death Valley National Monument is today recognized as a 
 major unit of the National Park System, having extraordinary 
 values enjoyed by millions of visitors;
 (3) the Monument boundaries established in the 1930's 
 exclude and thereby expose to incompatible development and 
 inconsistent management, contiguous Federal lands of essential 
 and superlative natural, ecological, geological, archeological, 
 paleontological, cultural, historical and wilderness values;
 (4) Death Valley National Monument should be substantially 
 enlarged by the addition of all contiguous Federal lands of 
 national park caliber and afforded full recognition and 
 statutory protection as a national park; and
 (5) the wilderness within Death Valley should receive 
 maximum statutory protection by designation pursuant to the 
 Wilderness Act.

 establishment of death valley national park

 Sec. 202. There is hereby established the Death Valley National 
Park, as generally depicted on 23 maps entitled ``Death Valley National 
Park Boundary and Wilderness--Proposed'', numbered in the title one 
through twenty-three, and dated May 1994 or prior, which shall be on 
file and available for public inspection in the offices of the 
Superintendent of the Park and the Director of the National Park 
Service, Department of the Interior. The Death Valley National Monument 
is hereby abolished as such, the lands and interests therein are hereby 
incorporated within and made part of the new Death Valley National 
Park, and any funds available for purposes of the monument shall be 
available for purposes of the park.

 transfer and administration of lands

 Sec. 203. Upon enactment of this title, the Secretary shall 
transfer the lands under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land 
Management depicted on the maps described in section 202 of this title, 
without consideration, to the administrative jurisdiction of the 
Director of the National Park Service for administration as part of the 
National Park System. The boundaries of the public lands and the 
national parks shall be adjusted accordingly. The Secretary shall 
administer the areas added to the National Park System by this title in 
accordance with the provisions of law generally applicable to units of 
the National Park System, including the Act entitled ``An Act to 
establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes'', approved 
August 25, 1916 (39 Stat. 535; 16 U.S.C. 1-4).

 maps and legal description

 Sec. 204. Within six months after the enactment of this title, the 
Secretary shall file maps and a legal description of the park 
designated under this title with the Energy and Natural Resources 
Committee of the Senate and the Natural Resources Committee of the 
House of Representatives. Such maps and legal description shall have 
the same force and effect as if included in this title, except that the 
Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors in such legal 
description and in the maps referred to in section 202. The maps and 
legal description shall be on file and available for public inspection 
in the offices of the Superintendent of the Park and the Director of 
the National Park Service, Department of the Interior.

 withdrawal

 Sec. 205. Subject to valid existing rights, the Federal lands and 
interests therein added to the National Park System by this title are 
withdrawn from disposition under the public land laws and from entry or 
appropriation under the mining laws of the United States, from the 
operation of the mineral leasing laws of the United States, and from 
operation of the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970.

 study as to validity of mining claims

 Sec. 206. The Secretary shall not approve any plan of operation 
prior to determining the validity of the unpatented mining claims, mill 
sites, and tunnel sites affected by such plan within the additions to 
the park and shall submit to Congress recommendations as to whether any 
valid or patented claims should be acquired by the United States, 
including the estimated acquisition costs of such claims, and a 
discussion of the environmental consequences of the extraction of 
minerals from these lands.

 grazing

 Sec. 207. (a) The privilege of grazing domestic livestock on lands 
within the park shall continue to be exercised at no more than the 
current level, subject to applicable laws and National Park Service 
regulations.
 (b) If a person holding a grazing permit referred to in subsection 
(a) informs the Secretary that such permittee is willing to convey to 
the United States any base property with respect to which such permit 
was issued and to which such permittee holds title, the Secretary shall 
make the acquisition of such base property a priority as compared with 
the acquisition of other lands within the park, provided agreement can 
be reached concerning the terms and conditions of such acquisition. Any 
such base property which is located outside the park and acquired as a 
priority pursuant to this section shall be managed by the Federal 
agency responsible for the majority of the adjacent lands in accordance 
with the laws applicable to such adjacent lands.

 TITLE III--JOSHUA TREE NATIONAL PARK

 findings

 Sec. 301. The Congress hereby finds that--
 (1) a proclamation by President Franklin Roosevelt in 1936 
 established Joshua Tree National Monument to protect various 
 objects of historical and scientific interest;
 (2) Joshua Tree National Monument today is recognized as a 
 major unit of the National Park System, having extraordinary 
 values enjoyed by millions of visitors;
 (3) the Monument boundaries as modified in 1950 and 1961 
 exclude and thereby expose to incompatible development and 
 inconsistent management, contiguous Federal lands of essential 
 and superlative natural, ecological, archeological, 
 paleontological, cultural, historical and wilderness values;
 (4) Joshua Tree National Monument should be enlarged by the 
 addition of contiguous Federal lands of national park caliber, 
 and afforded full recognition and statutory protection as a 
 national park; and
 (5) the nondesignated wilderness within Joshua Tree should 
 receive statutory protection by designation pursuant to the 
 Wilderness Act.

 establishment of joshua tree national park

 Sec. 302. There is hereby established the Joshua Tree National 
Park, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Joshua Tree National 
Park Boundary--Proposed'', dated May 1991, and four maps entitled 
``Joshua Tree National Park Boundary and Wilderness'', numbered in the 
title one through four, and dated October 1991 or prior, which shall be 
on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the 
Superintendent of the Park and the Director of the National Park 
Service, Department of the Interior. The Joshua Tree National Monument 
is hereby abolished as such, the lands and interests therein are hereby 
incorporated within and made part of the new Joshua Tree National Park, 
and any funds available for purposes of the monument shall be available 
for purposes of the park.

 transfer and administration of lands

 Sec. 303. Upon enactment of this title, the Secretary shall 
transfer the lands under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land 
Management depicted on the maps described in section 302 of this title, 
without consideration, to the administrative jurisdiction of the 
Director of the National Park Service for administration as part of the 
National Park System. The boundaries of the public lands and the 
national parks shall be adjusted accordingly. The Secretary shall 
administer the areas added to the National Park System by this title in 
accordance with the provisions of law generally applicable to units of 
the National Park System, including the Act entitled ``An Act to 
establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes'', approved 
August 25, 1916 (39 Stat. 535; 16 U.S.C. 1-4).

 maps and legal description

 Sec. 304. Within six months after the enactment of this title, the 
Secretary shall file maps and legal description of the park designated 
by this title with the Energy and Natural Resources Committee of the 
Senate and the Natural Resources Committee of the House of 
Representatives. Such maps and legal description shall have the same 
force and effect as if included in this title, except that the 
Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors in such legal 
description and in the maps referred to in section 302. The maps and 
legal description shall be on file and available for public inspection 
in the offices of the Superintendent of the Park and the Director of 
the National Park Service, Department of the Interior.

 withdrawal

 Sec. 305. Subject to valid existing rights, Federal lands and 
interests therein added to the National Park System by this title are 
withdrawn from disposition under the public lands laws and from entry 
or appropriation under the mining laws of the United States, from the 
operation of the mineral leasing laws of the United States, and from 
the operation of the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970.

 utility rights-of-way

 Sec. 306. Nothing in this title shall have the effect of 
terminating any validly issued right-of-way or customary operation 
maintenance, repair, and replacement activities in such right-of-way, 
issued, granted, or permitted to the Metropolitan Water District 
pursuant to the Boulder Canyon Project Act (43 U.S.C. 617-619b), which 
is located on lands included in the Joshua Tree National Park, but 
outside lands designated as wilderness under section 501(2). Such 
activities shall be conducted in a manner which will minimize the 
impact on park resources. Nothing in this title shall have the effect 
of terminating the fee title to lands or customary operation, 
maintenance, repair, and replacement activities on or under such lands 
granted to the Metropolitan Water District pursuant to the Act of June 
18, 1932 (47 Stat. 324), which are located on lands included in the 
Joshua Tree National Park, but outside lands designated as wilderness 
under section 501(2). Such activities shall be conducted in a manner 
which will minimize the impact on park resources. The Secretary shall 
prepare within 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, in 
consultation with the Metropolitan Water District, plans for emergency 
access by the Metropolitan Water District to its lands and rights-of-
way.

 study as to validity of mining claims

 Sec. 307. The Secretary shall not approve any plan of operation 
prior to determining the validity of the unpatented mining claims, mill 
sites, and tunnel sites affected by such plan within the park and shall 
submit to Congress recommendations as to whether any valid or patented 
claims should be acquired by the United States, including the estimated 
acquisition costs of such claims, and a discussion of the environmental 
consequences of the extraction of minerals from these lands.

 TITLE IV--MOJAVE NATIONAL PARK

 findings

 Sec. 401. The Congress hereby finds that--
 (1) Death Valley and Joshua Tree National Parks, as 
 established by this Act, protect unique and superlative desert 
 resources, but do not embrace the particular ecosystems and 
 transitional desert type found in the Mojave Desert area lying 
 between them on public lands now afforded only impermanent 
 administrative designation as a national scenic area;
 (2) the Mojave Desert area possesses outstanding natural, 
 cultural, historical, and recreational values meriting 
 statutory designation and recognition as a unit of the National 
 Park System;
 (3) the Mojave Desert area should be afforded full 
 recognition and statutory protection as a national park;
 (4) the wilderness within the Mojave Desert should receive 
 maximum statutory protection by designation pursuant to the 
 Wilderness Act; and
 (5) the Mojave Desert area provides an outstanding 
 opportunity to develop services, programs, accommodations and 
 facilities to ensure the use and enjoyment of the area by 
 individuals with disabilities, consistent with section 504 of 
 the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Public Law 101-336, the 
 Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12101), and 
 other appropriate laws and regulations.

 establishment of the mojave national park

 Sec. 402. There is hereby established the Mojave National Park, 
comprising approximately one million four hundred and forty-eight 
thousand acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Mojave 
National Park Boundary--Proposed'', dated May 1994, which shall be on 
file and available for inspection in the appropriate offices of the 
Director of the National Park Service, Department of the Interior.

 transfer of lands

 Sec. 403. Upon enactment of this title, the Secretary shall 
transfer the lands under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land 
Management depicted on the maps described in section 402 of this title, 
without consideration, to the administrative jurisdiction of the 
Director of the National Park Service. The boundaries of the public 
lands shall be adjusted accordingly.

 maps and legal description

 Sec. 404. Within six months after the enactment of this title, the 
Secretary shall file maps and a legal description of the park 
designated under this title with the Energy and Natural Resources 
Committee of the Senate and the Natural Resources Committee of the 
House of Representatives. Such maps and legal description shall have 
the same force and effect as if included in this title, except that the 
Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors in such legal 
description and in the maps referred to in section 402. The maps and 
legal description shall be on file and available for public inspection 
in the offices of the National Park Service, Department of the 
Interior.

 abolishment of scenic area

 Sec. 405. The East Mojave National Scenic Area, designated on 
January 13, 1981 (46 FR 3994), and modified on August 9, 1983 (48 FR 
36210), is hereby abolished.

 administration of lands

 Sec. 406. The Secretary shall administer the park in accordance 
with this title and with the provisions of law generally applicable to 
units of the National Park System, including the Act entitled ``An Act 
to establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes'', 
approved August 25, 1916 (39 Stat. 535; 16 U.S.C. 1-4).

 withdrawal

 Sec. 407. Subject to valid existing rights, Federal lands within 
the park, and interests therein, are withdrawn from disposition under 
the public land laws and from entry or appropriation under the mining 
laws of the United States, from the operation of the mineral leasing 
laws of the United States, and from operation of the Geothermal Steam 
Act of 1970.

 study as to validity of mining claims

 Sec. 408. The Secretary shall not approve any plan of operation 
prior to determining the validity of the unpatented mining claims, mill 
sites, and tunnel sites affected by such plan within the park and shall 
submit to Congress recommendations as to whether any valid or patented 
claims should be acquired by the United States, including the estimated 
acquisition costs of such claims, and a discussion of the environmental 
consequences of the extraction of minerals from these lands.

 grazing

 Sec. 409. (a) The privilege of grazing domestic livestock on lands 
within the park shall continue to be exercised at no more than the 
current level, subject to applicable laws and National Park Service 
regulations.
 (b) If a person holding a grazing permit referred to in subsection 
(a) informs the Secretary that such permittee is willing to convey to 
the United States any base property with respect to which such permit 
was issued and to which such permittee holds title, the Secretary shall 
make the acquisition of such base property a priority as compared with 
the acquisition of other lands within the park, provided agreement can 
be reached concerning the terms and conditions of such acquisition. Any 
such base property which is located outside the park and acquired as a 
priority pursuant to this section shall be managed by the Federal 
agency responsible for the majority of the adjacent lands in accordance 
with the laws applicable to such adjacent lands.

 utility rights of way

 Sec. 410. (a)(1) Nothing in this title shall have the effect of 
terminating any validly issued right-of-way or customary operation, 
maintenance, repair, and replacement activities in such right-of-way, 
issued, granted, or permitted to Southern California Edison Company, 
which is located on lands included in the Mojave National Park, but 
outside lands designated as wilderness under section 501(3). Such 
activities shall be conducted in a manner which will minimize the 
impact on park resources.
 (2) Nothing in this title shall have the effect of prohibiting the 
upgrading of an existing electrical transmission line for the purpose 
of increasing the capacity of such transmission line in the Southern 
California Edison Company validly issued Eldorado-Lugo Transmission 
Line right-of-way and Mojave-Lugo Transmission Line right-of-way, or in 
a right-of-way if issued, granted, or permitted by the Secretary 
adjacent to the existing Mojave-Lugo Transmission Line right-of-way 
(hereafter in this section referred to as ``adjacent right-of-way''), 
including construction of a replacement transmission line: Provided, 
That--
 (A) in the Eldorado-Lugo Transmission Line rights-of-way 
 (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``Eldorado 
 rights-of-way'') at no time shall there be more than three 
 electrical transmission lines,
 (B) in the Mojave-Lugo Transmission Line right-of-way 
 (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``Mojave right-
 of-way'') and adjacent right-of-way, removal of the existing 
 electrical transmission line and reclamation of the site shall 
 be completed no later than three years after the date on which 
 construction of the upgraded transmission line begins, after 
 which time there may be only one electrical transmission line 
 in the lands encompassed by Mojave right-of-way and adjacent 
 right-of-way,
 (C) if there are no more than two electrical transmission 
 lines in the Eldorado rights-of-way, two electrical 
 transmission lines in the lands encompassed by the Mojave 
 right-of-way and adjacent right-of-way may be allowed,
 (D) in the Eldorado rights-of-way and Mojave right-of-way 
 no additional land shall be issued, granted, or permitted for 
 such upgrade unless an addition would reduce the impacts to 
 park resources,
 (E) no more than 350 feet of additional land shall be 
 issued, granted, or permitted for an adjacent right-of-way to 
 the south of the Mojave right-of-way unless a greater addition 
 would reduce the impacts to park resources, and
 (F) such upgrade activities, including helicopter aided 
 construction, shall be conducted in a manner which will 
 minimize the impact on park resources.
 (3) The Secretary shall prepare within 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, in consultation with the Southern California 
Edison Company, plans for emergency access by the Southern California 
Edison Company to its rights-of-way.
 (b)(1) Nothing in this title shall have the effect of terminating 
any validly issued right-of-way, or customary operation, maintenance, 
repair, and replacement activities in such right-of-way; prohibiting 
the upgrading of and construction on existing facilities in such right-
of-way for the purpose of increasing the capacity of the existing 
pipeline; or prohibiting the renewal of such right-of-way issued, 
granted, or permitted to the Southern California Gas Company, its 
successors or assigns, which is located on lands included in the Mojave 
National Park, but outside lands designated as wilderness under section 
501(3). Such activities shall be conducted in a manner which will 
minimize the impact on park resources.
 (2) The Secretary shall prepare within one hundred and eighty days 
after the date of enactment of this title, in consultation with the 
Southern California Gas Company, plans for emergency access by the 
Southern California Gas Company to its rights-of-way.
 (c) Nothing in this title shall have the effect of terminating any 
validly issued right-of-way or customary operation, maintenance, 
repair, and replacement activities of existing facilities issued, 
granted, or permitted for communications cables or lines, which are 
located on lands included in the Mojave National Park, but outside 
lands designated as wilderness under section 501(3). Such activities 
shall be conducted in a manner which will minimize the impact on park 
resources.
 (d) Nothing in this title shall have the effect of terminating any 
validly issued right-of-way or customary operation, maintenance, 
repair, and replacement activities of existing facilities issued, 
granted, or permitted to Molybdenum Corporation of America; Molycorp, 
Incorporated; or Union Oil Company of California (d/b/a Unocal 
Corporation); or its successors or assigns, or prohibiting renewal of 
such right-of-way, which is located on lands included in the Mojave 
National Park, but outside lands designated as wilderness under section 
501(3). Such activities shall be conducted in a manner which will 
minimize the impact on park resources.

 preparation of management plan

 Sec. 411. Within three years after the date of enactment of this 
title, the Secretary shall submit to the Energy and Natural Resources 
Committee of the Senate and the Natural Resources Committee of the 
House of Representatives a detailed and comprehensive management plan 
for the park. Such plan shall place emphasis on historical and cultural 
sites and ecological and wilderness values within the boundaries of the 
park. Any development, including road improvements, proposed by such 
plan shall be strictly limited to that which is essential and 
appropriate for the administration of the park and shall be designed 
and located so as to maintain the primitive nature of the area and to 
minimize the impairment of park resources or ecological values. To the 
extent practicable, administrative facilities, employee housing, 
commercial visitor services, accommodations, and other park-related 
development shall be located or provided for outside of the boundaries 
of the park. Such plan shall evaluate the feasibility of using the 
Kelso Depot and existing railroad corridor to provide public access to 
and a facility for special interpretive, educational, and scientific 
programs within the park. Such plan shall specifically address the 
needs of individuals with disabilities in the design of services, 
programs, accommodations and facilities consistent with section 504 of 
the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Public Law 101-336, the Americans with 
Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12101), and other appropriate laws 
and regulations.

 granite mountains natural reserve

 Sec. 412. (a) There is hereby designated the Granite Mountains 
Natural Reserve within the park comprising approximately nine thousand 
acres as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Mojave National Park 
Boundary and Wilderness--Proposed 6'', dated May 1991.
 (b) Upon enactment of this title, the Secretary of the Interior 
shall enter into a cooperative management agreement with the University 
of California for the purposes of managing the lands within the Granite 
Mountains Natural Reserve. Such cooperative agreement shall ensure 
continuation of arid lands research and educational activities of the 
University of California, consistent with the provisions of law 
generally applicable to units of the National Park System.

 construction of visitor center

 Sec. 413. The Secretary is authorized to construct a visitor center 
in the park for the purpose of providing information through 
appropriate displays, printed material, and other interpretive 
programs, about the resources of the park.

 acquisition of lands

 Sec. 414. The Secretary is authorized to acquire all lands and 
interest in lands within the boundary of the park by donation, 
purchase, or exchange, except that--
 (1) any lands or interests therein within the boundary of 
 the park which are owned by the State of California, or any 
 political subdivision thereof, may be acquired only by donation 
 or exchange except for lands managed by the California State 
 Lands Commission; and
 (2) lands or interests therein within the boundary of the 
 park which are not owned by the State of California or any 
 political subdivision thereof may be acquired only with the 
 consent of the owner thereof unless the Secretary determines, 
 after written notice to the owner and after opportunity for 
 comment, that the property is being developed, or proposed to 
 be developed, in a manner which is detrimental to the integrity 
 of the park or which is otherwise incompatible with the 
 purposes of this title.

 acquired lands be made part of mojave national park

 Sec. 415. Any lands acquired by the Secretary under this title 
shall become part of the Mojave National Park.

 TITLE V--NATIONAL PARK WILDERNESS

 designation of wilderness

 Sec. 501. The following lands are hereby designated as wilderness 
in accordance with the Wilderness Act (78 Stat. 890; 16 U.S.C. 1131 et 
seq.) and shall be administered by the Secretary of the Interior in 
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Wilderness Act:
 (1) Death Valley National Park Wilderness, comprising 
 approximately three million one hundred seventy-nine thousand 
 four hundred and eighteen acres, as generally depicted on 23 
 maps entitled ``Death Valley National Park Boundary and 
 Wilderness'', numbered in the title one through twenty-three, 
 and dated May 1994 or prior, and three maps entitled ``Death 
 Valley National Park Wilderness'', numbered in the title one 
 through three, and dated May 1994 or prior, and which shall be 
 known as the Death Valley Wilderness.
 (2) Joshua Tree National Park Wilderness Additions, 
 comprising approximately one hundred thirty-one thousand seven 
 hundred and eighty acres, as generally depicted on four maps 
 entitled ``Joshua Tree National Park Boundary and Wilderness--
 Proposed'', numbered in the title one through four, and dated 
 October 1991 or prior, and which are hereby incorporated in, 
 and which shall be deemed to be a part of the Joshua Tree 
 Wilderness as designated by Public Law 94-567.
 (3) Mojave National Park Wilderness, comprising 
 approximately six hundred ninety-four thousand acres, as 
 generally depicted on ten maps entitled ``Mojave National Park 
 Boundary and Wilderness--Proposed'', numbered in the title one 
 through ten, and dated May 1994 or prior, and seven maps 
 entitled ``Mojave National Park Wilderness--Proposed'', 
 numbered in the title one through seven, and dated May 1994 or 
 prior, and which shall be known as the Mojave Wilderness.
 (4) Upon cessation of all uses prohibited by the Wilderness 
 Act and publication by the Secretary in the Federal Register of 
 notice of such cessation, potential wilderness, comprising 
 approximately six thousand eight hundred and forty acres, as 
 described in ``1988 Death Valley National Monument Draft 
 General Management Plan Draft Environmental Impact Statement'' 
 (hereafter in this title referred to as ``Draft Plan'') and as 
 generally depicted on a map in the Draft Plan entitled 
 ``Wilderness Plan Death Valley National Monument'', dated 
 January 1988, shall be deemed to be a part of the Death Valley 
 Wilderness as designated in paragraph (1). Lands identified in 
 the Draft Plan as potential wilderness shall be managed by the 
 Secretary insofar as practicable as wilderness until such time 
 as said lands are designated as wilderness.

 filing of maps and descriptions

 Sec. 502. Maps and a legal description of the boundaries of the 
areas designated in section 501 of this title shall be on file and 
available for public inspection in the Office of the Director of the 
National Park Service, Department of the Interior, and in the Office of 
the Superintendent of each area designated in section 501. As soon as 
practicable after this title takes effect, maps of the wilderness areas 
and legal descriptions of their boundaries shall be filed with the 
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the 
Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives, and 
such maps and descriptions shall have the same force and effect as if 
included in this title, except that the Secretary may correct clerical 
and typographical errors in such maps and descriptions.

 administration of wilderness areas

 Sec. 503. The areas designated by section 501 of this title as 
wilderness shall be administered by the Secretary in accordance with 
the applicable provisions of the Wilderness Act governing areas 
designated by that title as wilderness, except that any reference in 
such provision to the effective date of the Wilderness Act shall be 
deemed to be a reference to the effective date of this title, and where 
appropriate, and reference to the Secretary of Agriculture shall be 
deemed to be a reference to the Secretary of the Interior.

 TITLE VI--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

 transfer of lands to red rock canyon state park

 Sec. 601. Upon enactment of this title, the Secretary of the 
Interior shall transfer to the State of California certain lands within 
the California Desert Conservation Area, California, of the Bureau of 
Land Management, comprising approximately twenty thousand five hundred 
acres, as generally depicted on two maps entitled ``Red Rock Canyon 
State Park Additions 1'' and ``Red Rock Canyon State Park Additions 
2'', dated May 1991, for inclusion in the State of California Park 
System. Should the State of California cease to manage these lands as 
part of the State Park System, ownership of the lands shall revert to 
the Department of the Interior to be managed as part of the California 
Desert Conservation Area to provide maximum protection for the area's 
scenic and scientific values.

 desert lily sanctuary

 Sec. 602. (a) There is hereby established the Desert Lily Sanctuary 
within the California Desert Conservation Area, California, of the 
Bureau of Land Management, comprising approximately two thousand forty 
acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Desert Lily 
Sanctuary'', dated February 1986. The Secretary of the Interior shall 
administer the area to provide maximum protection to the desert lily.
 (b) Subject to valid existing rights, Federal lands within the 
sanctuary, and interests therein, are withdrawn from disposition under 
the public land laws and from entry or appropriation under the mining 
laws of the United States, from the operation of the mineral leasing 
laws of the United States, and from operation of the Geothermal Steam 
Act of 1970.

 land tenure adjustments

 Sec. 603. In preparing land tenure adjustment decisions within the 
California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, 
the Secretary shall give priority to consolidating Federal ownership 
within the national park units and wilderness areas designated by this 
Act.

 disposal prohibition

 Sec. 604. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary 
of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture may not dispose of any 
lands within the boundaries of the wilderness or parks designated under 
this Act or grant a right-of-way in any lands within the boundaries of 
the wilderness designated under this Act. Further, none of the lands 
within the boundaries of the wilderness or parks designated under this 
Act shall be granted to or otherwise made available for use by the 
Metropolitan Water District and any other agencies or persons pursuant 
to the Boulder Canyon Project Act (43 U.S.C. 617-619b) or any similar 
acts.

 management of newly acquired lands

 Sec. 605. Any lands within the boundaries of a wilderness area 
designated under this Act which are acquired by the Federal Government 
shall become part of the wilderness area within which they are located 
and shall be managed in accordance with all the provisions of this Act 
and other laws applicable to such wilderness area.

 native american uses

 Sec. 606. In recognition of the past use of the parks and 
wilderness areas designed under this Act by Indian people for 
traditional cultural and religious purposes, the Secretary shall ensure 
access to such parks and wilderness areas by Indian people for such 
traditional cultural and religious purposes. In implementing this 
section, the Secretary, upon the request of an Indian tribe or Indian 
religious community, shall temporarily close to the general public use 
of one or more specific portions of park or wilderness areas in order 
to protect the privacy of traditional cultural and religious activities 
in such areas by Indian people. Such access shall be consistent with 
the purpose and intent of Public Law 95-341 (42 U.S.C. 1996) commonly 
referred to as the ``American Indian Religious Freedom Act'', and with 
respect to areas designated as wilderness, the Wilderness Act (78 Stat. 
890; 16 U.S.C. 1131).

 water rights

 Sec. 607. (a) With respect to each wilderness area designated by 
this Act, Congress hereby reserves a quantity of water sufficient to 
fulfill the purposes of this Act. The priority date of such reserved 
water rights shall be the date of enactment of this Act.
 (b) The Secretary of the Interior and all other officers of the 
United States shall take all steps necessary to protect the rights 
reserved by this section, including the filing by the Secretary of a 
claim for the quantification of such rights in any present or future 
appropriate stream adjudication in the courts of the State of 
California in which the United States is or may be joined and which is 
conducted in accordance with section 208 of the Act of July 10, 1952 
(66 Stat. 560, 43 U.S.C. 666; commonly referred to as the McCarran 
Amendment).
 (c) Nothing in this Act shall be construed as a relinquishment or 
reduction of any water rights reserved or appropriated by the United 
States in the State of California on or before the date of enactment of 
this Act.
 (d) The Federal water rights reserved by this Act are specific to 
the wilderness areas located in the State of California designated 
under this Act. Nothing in this Act related to the reserved Federal 
water rights shall be construed as establishing a precedent with regard 
to any future designations, nor shall it constitute an interpretation 
of any other Act or any designation made thereto.

 state school lands

 Sec. 608. (a) Upon request of the California State Lands Commission 
(hereinafter in this section referred to as the ``Commission''), the 
Secretary shall enter into negotiations for an agreement to exchange 
Federal lands or interests therein on the list referred to in 
subsection (b)(2) for California State School Lands (hereinafter in 
this section referred to as ``State School Lands'') or interests 
therein which are located within the boundaries of one or more of the 
wilderness areas or park units designated by this Act. The Secretary 
shall negotiate in good faith to reach a land exchange agreement 
consistent with the requirements of section 206 of the Federal Land 
Policy and Management Act of 1976.
 (b) Within six months after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
Secretary shall send to the Commission and to the Committees a list of 
the following:
 (1) The State School Lands or interests therein (including 
 mineral interests) which are located within the boundaries of 
 the wilderness areas or park units designated by this Act.
 (2) Lands under the Secretary's jurisdiction to be offered 
 for exchange, including in the following priority:
 (A) Lands with mineral interests, including 
 geothermal, which have the potential for commercial 
 development but which are not currently under mineral 
 lease or producing Federal mineral revenues.
 (B) Federal lands in California managed by the 
 Bureau of Reclamation that the Secretary determines are 
 not needed for any Bureau of Reclamation project.
 (C) Any public lands in California that the 
 Secretary, pursuant to the Federal Land Policy and 
 Management Act of 1976, has determined to be suitable 
 for disposal through exchange.
 (c)(1) If an agreement under this section is for an exchange 
involving five thousand acres or less of Federal land or interests 
therein, or Federal lands valued at less than $5,000,000, the Secretary 
may carry out the exchange in accordance with the Federal Land Policy 
and Management Act of 1976.
 (2) If an agreement under this section is for an exchange involving 
more than five thousand acres of Federal land or interests therein, or 
Federal land valued at more than $5,000,000, the agreement shall be 
submitted to the Committees, together with a report containing--
 (A) a complete list and appraisal of the lands or interests 
 in lands proposed for exchange; and
 (B) a determination that the State School Lands proposed to 
 be acquired by the United States do not contain any hazardous 
 waste, toxic waste, or radioactive waste.
 (d) An agreement submitted under subsection (c)(2) shall not take 
effect unless approved by a joint resolution enacted by the Congress.
 (e) If exchanges of all of the State School Lands are not completed 
by October 1, 2004, the Secretary shall adjust the appraised value of 
any remaining inholdings consistent with the provisions of section 206 
of the Federal Land Management Policy Act of 1976. The Secretary shall 
establish an account in the name of the Commission in the amount of 
such appraised value. Title to the State School Lands shall be 
transferred to the United States at the time such account is credited.
 (f) The Commission may use the credit in its account to bid, as any 
other bidder, for excess or surplus Federal property to be sold in the 
State of California in accordance with the applicable laws and 
regulations of the Federal agency offering such property for sale. The 
account shall be adjusted to reflect successful bids under this section 
or payments or forfeited deposits, penalties, or other costs assessed 
to the bidder in the course of such sales. In the event that the 
balance in the account has not been reduced to zero by October 1, 2009, 
there are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary for payment to 
the California State Lands Commission funds equivalent to the balance 
remaining in the account as of October 1, 2009.
 (g) As used in this section, the term ``Committees'' means the 
Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives and the 
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate.

 exchanges

 Sec. 609. (a) Upon request of the Catellus Development Corporation, 
its subsidiaries or successors in interest (hereafter in this section 
referred to as ``Catellus''), the Secretary shall enter into 
negotiations for an agreement or agreements to exchange Federal lands 
or interests therein on the list referred to in subsection (b)(2) of 
this section for lands of Catellus or interests therein which are 
located within the boundaries of one or more of the wilderness areas or 
park units designated by this Act.
 (b) Within six months after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
Secretary shall send to Catellus and to the Committees a list of the 
following:
 (1) Lands of Catellus or interests therein (including 
 mineral interests) which are located within the boundaries of 
 the wilderness areas or park units designated by this Act.
 (2) Lands under the Secretary's jurisdiction to be offered 
 for exchange, in the following priority:
 (A) Lands, including lands with mineral and 
 geothermal interests, which have the potential for 
 commercial development but which are not currently 
 under lease or producing Federal revenues.
 (B) Federal lands managed by the Bureau of 
 Reclamation that the Secretary determines are not 
 needed for any Bureau of Reclamation project.
 (C) Any public lands that the Secretary, pursuant 
 to the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976, 
 has determined to be suitable for disposal through 
 exchange.
 (c)(1) If an agreement under this section is for (A) an exchange 
involving lands outside the State of California, (B) more than 5,000 
acres of Federal land or interests therein in California, or (C) 
Federal lands in any State valued at more than $5,000,000, the 
Secretary shall provide to the Committees a detailed report of each 
such land exchange agreement.
 (2) All land exchange agreements shall be consistent with the 
Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976.
 (3) Any report submitted to the Committees under this subsection 
shall include the following:
 (A) A complete list and appraisal of the lands or interests 
 in land proposed for exchange.
 (B) A complete list of the lands, if any, to be acquired by 
 the United States which contain any hazardous waste, toxic 
 waste, or radioactive waste which requires removal or remedial 
 action under Federal or State law, together with the estimated 
 costs of any such action.
 (4) An agreement under this subsection shall not take effect unless 
approved by a joint resolution enacted by the Congress.
 (d) The Secretary shall provide the California State Lands 
Commission with a one hundred eighty-day right of first refusal to 
exchange for any Federal lands or interests therein, located in the 
State of California, on the list referred to in subsection (b)(2). Any 
lands with respect to which a right of first refusal is not noticed 
within such period or exercised under this subsection shall be 
available to Catellus for exchange in accordance with this section.
 (e) On January 3, 1999, the Secretary shall provide to the 
Committees a list and appraisal consistent with the Federal Land Policy 
and Management Act of 1976 of all Catellus lands eligible for exchange 
under this section for which an exchange has not been completed. With 
respect to any of such lands for which an exchange has not been 
completed by October 1, 2004 (hereafter in this section referred to as 
``remaining lands''), the Secretary shall establish an account in the 
name of Catellus (hereafter in this section referred to as the 
``exchange account''). Upon the transfer of title by Catellus to all or 
a portion of the remaining lands to the United States, the Secretary 
shall credit the exchange account in the amount of the appraised value 
of the transferred remaining lands at the time of such transfer.
 (f) Catellus may use the credit in its account to bid, as any other 
bidder, for excess or surplus Federal property to be sold in the State 
of California in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations of 
the Federal agency offering such property for sale. The account shall 
be adjusted to reflect successful bids under this section or payments 
or forfeited deposits, penalties, or other costs assessed to the bidder 
in the course of such sales. Upon approval by the Secretary in writing, 
the credits in Catellus's exchange account may be transferred or sold 
in whole or in part by Catellus to any other party, thereby vesting 
such party with all the rights formerly held by Catellus. The exchange 
account shall be adjusted to reflect successful bids under this section 
or payments or forfeited deposits, penalties, or other costs assessed 
to the bidder in the course of such sales.
 (g)(1) The Secretary shall not accept title pursuant to this 
section to any lands unless such title includes all right, title, and 
interest in and to the fee estate.
 (2) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the Secretary may accept title 
to any subsurface estate where the United States holds title to the 
surface estate.
 (3) This subsection does not apply to easements and rights-of-way 
for utilities or roads.
 (h) In no event shall the Secretary accept title under this section 
to lands which contain any hazardous waste, toxic waste, or radioactive 
waste which requires removal or remedial action under Federal or State 
law unless such remedial action has been completed prior to the 
transfer.
 (i) For purposes of the section, any appraisal shall be consistent 
with the provisions of section 206 of the Federal Land Policy and 
Management Act of 1976.
 (j) As used in this section, the term ``Committees'' means the 
Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives and the 
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate.

 TITLE VII--DEFINITIONS AND AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS

 definitions

 Sec. 701. For the purposes of this Act:
 (1) The term ``Secretary'', unless specifically designated 
 otherwise, means the Secretary of the Interior.
 (2) The term ``public lands'' means any land and interest 
 in land owned by the United States and administered by the 
 Secretary of the Interior through the Bureau of Land 
 Management.

 authorization of appropriations

 Sec. 702. There are hereby authorized to be appropriated such sums 
as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
HR 518 CDH----2
HR 518 CDH----3
HR 518 CDH----4
HR 518 CDH----5