HR 1192 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1192
To amend the provisions of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970
relating to criminal penalties, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
February 28, 1991
Mr. LANTOS (for himself, Mr. FRANK of Massachusetts, Ms. PELOSI, Mr. TOWNS,
Mr. MCDERMOTT, Mr. FROST, Mr. OWENS of Utah, and Mr. WISE) introduced the
following bill, which was referred to the Committee on Education and Labor
A BILL
To amend the provisions of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970
relating to criminal penalties, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; REFERENCE.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `OSHA Criminal Penalty
 Reform Act'.
 (b) REFERENCE- Whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in
 terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the
 reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision
 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 651 et seq.).
SEC. 2. CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
 Section 17 (29 U.S.C. 666) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (e)--
 (A) by striking out `fine of not more than $10,000' and inserting in
 lieu thereof `fine in accordance with section 3571 of title 18, United
 States Code,',
 (B) by striking out `six months' and inserting in lieu thereof `10 years',
 (C) by striking out `fine of not more than $20,000' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `fine in accordance with section 3571 of title 18, United States
 Code,', and
 (D) by striking out `one year' and inserting in lieu thereof `20 years',
 (2) in subsection (f), by striking out `fine of not more than $1,000 or by
 imprisonment for not more than six months,' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `fine in accordance with section 3571 of title 18, United States Code,
 or by imprisonment for not more than 2 years,',
 (3) in subsection (g), by striking out `fine of not more than $10,000,
 or by imprisonment for not more than six months,' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `fine in accordance with section 3571 of title 18, United States
 Code, or by imprisonment for not more than 1 year,',
 (4) by inserting after subsection (g) the following (and by redesignating
 subsections (h) through (l) as subsections (j) through (n), respectively):
 `(h) Any employer who willfully violates any standard, rule, or order
 promulgated pursuant to section 6, or any regulation prescribed pursuant to
 this Act, and that violation causes serious bodily injury to any employee but
 does not cause death to any employee, shall, upon conviction, be punished
 by a fine in accordance with section 3571 of title 18, United States Code,
 or by imprisonment for not more than 7 years, or by both, except that if
 the conviction is for a violation committed after a first conviction of
 such person, punishment shall be by a fine in accordance with section 3571
 of title 18, United States Code, or by imprisonment for not more than 14
 years, or by both.
 `(i) Any employer who willfully violates any standard, rule, or order
 promulgated pursuant to section 6, or any regulation prescribed pursuant to
 this Act, and that violation recklessly endangers human life but does not
 cause serious bodily injury or death to an employee, shall, upon conviction,
 be punished by a fine in accordance with section 3571 of title 18, United
 States Code, or by imprisonment for not more than 5 years, or by both,
 except that if the conviction is for a violation committed after a first
 conviction of such person, punishment shall be by a fine in accordance
 with section 3571 of title 18, United States Code, or by imprisonment for
 not more than 10 years, or by both.', and
 (5) by adding at the end the following:
 `(o)(1) Any director, officer, or agent of an employer who willfully
 authorizes, orders, acquiesces, or carries out a violation, failure, or
 refusal to comply with safety or health standards under this Act shall be
 subject to the same criminal fines and imprisonment that may be imposed
 on a person under the applicable provisions of this section.
 `(2) If a penalty or fine is imposed on a director, officer, or agent of
 an employer under paragraph (1), such penalty or fine shall not be paid
 (directly or indirectly) out of the assets of the employer on behalf of
 that individual.'.
SEC. 3. DEFINITION.
 Section 3 (29 U.S.C. 652) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(15) The term `serious bodily injury' means bodily injury which involves
 a substantial risk of death, unconsciousness, extreme physical pain,
 protracted and obvious physical disfigurement, or protracted loss or
 impairment of the function of a bodily member, organ, or mental faculty.'.
SEC. 4. JURISDICTION FOR PROSECUTION UNDER STATE AND LOCAL CRIMINAL LAWS.
 Section 17 (29 U.S.C. 666), as amended by section 2 of this Act, is amended
 by adding at the end the following:
 `(p) Nothing in this Act shall preclude State and local law enforcement
 agencies from conducting criminal prosecutions in accordance with the laws
 of such State or locality.'.