[Congressional Bills 103th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]
[H.R. 5092 Introduced in House (IH)]

103d CONGRESS
 2d Session
 H. R. 5092

 To establish rules governing product liability actions against raw 
materials and bulk component suppliers to medical device manufacturers, 
 and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 September 23, 1994

Mr. Pastor (for himself, Mr. Kyl, Mr. Boehlert, Mr. Canady, Mrs. Meek, 
 Mr. Serrano, and Mr. McCloskey) introduced the following bill; which 
was referred jointly to the Committees on the Judiciary and Energy and 
 Commerce

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To establish rules governing product liability actions against raw 
materials and bulk component suppliers to medical device manufacturers, 
 and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Biomaterials Access Assurance Act of 
1994''.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS.

 Congress finds and declares the following:
 (1) Every year millions of Americans depend on the 
 availability of life-saving or life-enhancing permanently 
 implantable medical devices.
 (2) A continued supply of raw materials and component parts 
 is necessary to the invention, development, improvement and 
 maintenance of the supply of such devices.
 (3) Most of these devices are made with raw materials and 
 component parts that are not designed or manufactured 
 specifically for use in implantable devices, but which have 
 uses in a variety of nonmedical products as well.
 (4) Small quantities of these raw materials and component 
 parts are used, so that sales of raw materials and component 
 parts for medical devices are an extremely small portion of the 
 overall market for such raw materials and medical devices.
 (5) Manufacturers of medical devices are required under the 
 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to demonstrate that their 
 products are safe and effective, including being properly 
 designed and having adequate warnings or instructions, and 
 existing tort law requires manufacturers of medical devices to 
 ensure they are properly designed and have adequate warnings.
 (6) Notwithstanding the fact that raw materials and 
 component parts suppliers do not design, produce, or test the 
 final implant, they have been sued in cases alleging inadequate 
 design and testing of, or warnings related to the use of, 
 permanently implanted medical devices.
 (7) Even though raw materials and component parts suppliers 
 have almost never been held liable in such suits, because the 
 cost of litigating such suites to a favorable judgment far 
 exceeds the total potential sales of such raw materials and 
 component parts to the medical device industry, raw materials 
 and component parts suppliers have begun to cease supplying 
 such raw materials and component parts for use in permanently 
 implanted medical devices.
 (8) The unavailability of raw materials and component parts 
 will, unless alternate sources of supply can be found, lead to 
 unavailability of life-saving and life-enhancing medical 
 devices.
 (9) The prospects for development of new sources of supply 
 for the full range of threatened raw materials and component 
 parts are remote, as other suppliers around the world are 
 refusing to sell raw materials or component parts for use in 
 manufacturing permanently implantable medical devices in the 
 United States, and it is unlikely that such a small market 
 could support the large investment needed to develop new 
 suppliers and attempts to do so will raise the cost of medical 
 devices.
 (10) Courts that have considered the issue have generally 
 found that raw materials and component part suppliers do not 
 have a duty to evaluate the safety and efficacy of the use of a 
 raw material or component part in a medical device, and also do 
 not have a duty to warn concerning the safety and effectiveness 
 of a medical device.
 (11) Attempts to impose such duties will cause more harm 
 than good by driving raw materials and component part suppliers 
 to cease supplying manufacturers of permanently implantable 
 medical devices.
 (12) In order to safeguard the availability of a wide 
 variety of life-saving and life-enhancing medical devices, 
 immediate action is needed to clarify the permissible bases of 
 liability for suppliers of raw materials and component parts 
 used in the manufacture of permanently implantable medical 
 devices and to provide expeditious procedures to dispose of 
 unwarranted suits against those suppliers so as to minimize 
 litigation costs.

SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.

 As used in this Act, the term--
 (1) ``biomaterials supplier'' means an entity that directly 
 or indirectly supplies a component part or raw material for use 
 in the manufacture of an implant, and includes persons that 
 have submitted master files to the Food and Drug Administration 
 for purposes of pre-market approval of medical devices, but 
 does not include a manufacturer or seller of an implant;
 (2) ``claimant'' means any person who brings a civil 
 action, or on whose behalf a civil action is brought, arising 
 from harm allegedly caused directly or indirectly by an 
 implant, and includes persons other than the individual into 
 whose body, or in contact with whose blood or tissue, the 
 implant is placed, if such person claims to have suffered harm; 
 if such an action is brought through or on behalf of an estate, 
 the term includes the claimant's decedent, or if it is brought 
 through or on behalf of a minor or incompetent, the term 
 includes the claimant's parent or guardian; the term does not 
 include--
 (A) a provider of professional services in any case 
 in which the sale or use of an implant is incidental to 
 the transaction and the essence of the transaction is 
 the furnishing of judgment, skill, or services; or
 (B) a manufacturer, seller, or biomaterials 
 supplier;
 (3) ``component part'' means a manufactured piece of an 
 implant and includes a manufactured piece that has significant 
 nonimplant applications and that by itself has no implant value 
 or purpose, but when combined with other component parts and 
 materials, constitutes an implant;
 (4) ``harm'' means any injury to or damage suffered by an 
 individual, any illness, disease, or death of that individual 
 resulting from that injury or damage, and any loss to that 
 individual or any other individual resulting from that injury 
 or damage; the term does not include commercial loss or loss of 
 or damage to an implant itself;
 (5) ``implant'' means a medical device that (A) is placed 
 into a surgically or naturally formed or existing cavity of the 
 body or which contacts blood or internal human tissue; and (B) 
 which (i) is intended by the manufacturer to remain in contact 
 with the body or internal tissue of the humans continuously for 
 a period of thirty days or more, or (ii) has labeling which 
 does not contraindicate implantation or contact for thirty days 
 or more;
 (6) ``manufacturer'' means any person who, with respect to 
 any particular implant--
 (A) is engaged in the manufacture, preparation, 
 propagation, compounding, or processing, as defined in 
 section 510(a)(1) of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
 Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 360(a)(1)), of an implant; and
 (B) is required under section 510 of the Federal 
 Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 360), and the 
 regulations issued thereunder, to register with the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services and to include 
 the implant on a list of devices filed with the 
 Secretary pursuant to section 510(j) of the Federal 
 Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 360(j)), and 
 the regulations issued thereunder;
 (7) ``medical device'' means a medical device as defined in 
 section 201(h) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
 U.S.C. 321(h));
 (8) ``qualified specialist'' means a person who is 
 qualified by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or 
 education in the specialty areas that are the subject of the 
 action;
 (9) ``raw material'' means a substance or product that has 
 a generic use and that may be used in applications other than 
 implants; and
 (10) ``seller'' means a person who, in the course of a 
 business conducted for that purpose, sells, distributes, 
 leases, packages, labels, or otherwise places an implant in the 
 stream of commerce; the term does not include--
 (A) a seller or lessor of real property;
 (B) a provider of professional services in any case 
 in which the sale or use of an implant is incidental to 
 the transaction and the essence of the transaction is 
 the furnishing of judgment, skill, or services; or
 (C) any person who acts in only a financial 
 capacity with respect to the sale of an implant.

SEC. 4. APPLICABILITY; PREEMPTION.

 (a) Applicability.--This Act applies to any civil action brought by 
a claimant, whether in State or Federal court, against a manufacturer, 
seller, or biomaterials supplier, or against licensors of biomaterials 
suppliers, on any theory, for harm caused by an implant. A civil action 
brought by a purchaser of a medical device for use in providing 
professional services against a manufacturer, seller, or biomaterials 
supplier for loss or damage to an implant itself or for commercial loss 
to the purchaser is not subject to this Act and shall be governed by 
applicable commercial or contract law.
 (b) Scope of Preemption.--This Act supersedes any State law 
regarding recovery for harm caused by an implant only to the extent 
that this Act establishes a rule of law applicable to any such 
recovery. Any issue arising under this Act that is not governed by any 
such rule of law shall be governed by applicable State or Federal law.
 (c) Effect on Other Laws.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed 
to--
 (1) affect any defense available under other provisions of 
 State or Federal law to a defendant in an action alleging harm 
 caused by an implant; or
 (2) create a cause of action or Federal court jurisdiction 
 pursuant to section 1331 or 1337 of title 28, United States 
 Code, that otherwise would not exist under applicable State or 
 Federal law.

SEC. 5. ACTIONS AGAINST BIOMATERIALS SUPPLIERS.

 (a)(1) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this Act, no 
claimant may bring an action for harm caused by an implant against a 
person, who has not registered with the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services, pursuant to section 510 of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act, and the regulations issued thereunder, and included the 
implant on a list of devices filed with the Secretary pursuant to 
section 510(j) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and the 
regulations issued thereunder.
 (2) Notwithstanding subparagraph (1), a claimant may bring an 
action, other than as provided in subsection (b) of this Act, against a 
person who, with respect to claimant's implant, is the subject of a 
declaration issued by the Secretary under section 6(a) of this Act, or 
is a seller of the implant that allegedly caused harm to the claimant.
 (b) No claimant may bring an action for harm caused by an implant 
against a biomaterials supplier, and no biomaterials supplier shall be 
liable for harm to a claimant caused by an implant, unless the claimant 
shows, by a preponderance of the evidence, that--
 (1) the raw materials or component parts delivered by the 
 biomaterials supplier either were not the product described in 
 the contract between the biomaterials supplier and the person 
 who contracted for delivery of the product, or failed to meet 
 any specifications that were--
 (A) provided to the biomaterials supplier and not 
 expressly repudiated by the biomaterials supplier prior 
 to acceptance of delivery of the raw materials or 
 component parts;
 (B) published by the biomaterials supplier, 
 provided to the manufacturer by the biomaterials 
 supplier, or contained in a master file submitted by 
 the biomaterials supplier to the Food and Drug 
 Administration, and currently maintained by the 
 biomaterials supplier, for purposes of pre-market 
 approval of medical devices; or
 (C)(i) included in the manufacturer's submissions 
 for purposes of pre-market approval or review by the 
 Food and Drug Administration under sections 510, 513, 
 515, or 520 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act 
 (21 U.S.C. 360, 360c, 360e, or 360j) that have received 
 clearance from the Food and Drug Administration;
 (ii) that were provided by the manufacturer to the 
 biomaterials supplier and not expressly repudiated by 
 the biomaterials supplier prior to the manufacturer's 
 acceptance of delivery of the raw materials or 
 component parts; and
 (2) such conduct was an actual and proximate cause of the 
 claimant's harm.
 (c) No claimant may bring an action for harm caused by an implant 
against a person who licenses a biomaterials supplier to produce raw 
materials or component parts.
 (d) The applicable statute of limitations shall be tolled during 
any period in which claimant has filed a petition with the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services under section 6 of this Act.

SEC. 6. REVIEW BY THE SECRETARY OF NON-REGISTRATION.

 (a) The Secretary may, on its own motion or upon petition by any 
person, after notice to the affected persons and affording an 
opportunity for an informal hearing, issue a declaration that a person, 
with respect to the implant that allegedly caused claimant's harm--
 (1) should have registered with the Secretary under section 
 510 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 
 360), and the regulations issued thereunder, but failed to do 
 so, or
 (2) should have included the implant on a list of devices 
 filed with the Secretary pursuant to section 510(j) of the 
 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 360(j)), but 
 failed to do so.
 (b) Any petition filed pursuant to subsection (a) shall be 
immediately docketed by the Secretary, and the Secretary shall issue a 
final decision within 180 days of the filing of the petition.

SEC. 7. PROCEDURES FOR ACTIONS AGAINST A BIOMATERIALS SUPPLIER.

 (a) In General.--The procedural requirements set forth in 
subsection (b) shall apply to any action by a claimant against a 
biomaterials supplier.
 (b) Procedural Requirements.--
 (1) A claimant may not bring an action against a 
 biomaterials supplier unless the manufacturer of the implant is 
 named as a party, except if the manufacturer is subject to 
 service of process in no jurisdiction in which the biomaterials 
 supplier or is also subject to service of process or unless 
 litigation against the manufacturer is barred by applicable 
 law.
 (2) No action may be brought by any claimant against a 
 biomaterials supplier unless, at the time the claimant brings 
 the action, the claimant submits an affidavit--
 (A) declaring that the claimant has consulted and 
 reviewed the facts of the action with qualified 
 specialists, whose qualifications the claimant shall 
 disclose;
 (B) including a written determination by a 
 qualified specialist that the raw materials or 
 component parts actually used in the manufacture of 
 claimant's implant were raw materials or component 
 parts described in section 5(b)(1), together with a 
 statement of the basis for such a determination;
 (C) including a written determination by a 
 qualified specialist that, after a review of the 
 medical record and other relevant material, the raw 
 material or component part supplied by the biomaterials 
 supplier and actually used in the manufacture of 
 claimant's implant was a cause of claimant's harm, 
 together with a statement of the basis for the 
 determination; and
 (D) on the basis of the qualified specialists' 
 review and consultation, that the claimant (or the 
 claimant's attorney) has concluded that there is a 
 reasonable and meritorious cause for the filing of the 
 action against the biomaterials supplier.
 (c) Dismissal.--
 (1) In any action subject to this Act, a defendant may, at 
 any time at which a motion to dismiss may be filed under 
 applicable law, move to dismiss the action on the grounds that 
 the defendant is a biomaterials supplier and--
 (A) claimant has failed to satisfy the conditions 
 in section 5(a) that would permit claimant to bring an 
 action against defendant;
 (B) defendant was not a seller of the implant which 
 allegedly caused harm to the claimant; or
 (C) claimant has failed to comply with the 
 provisions of subsection (b).
 (2) Defendant may submit affidavits demonstrating that 
 defendant has not included the implant on a list, if any, filed 
 with the Secretary pursuant to section 510(j) of the Federal 
 Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 360). Claimant may, in 
 response to such a motion, submit affidavits demonstrating that 
 the Secretary has, with respect to the defendant and the 
 implant that allegedly caused claimant's harm, issued a 
 declaration pursuant to section 6(a) of this Act, or that 
 defendant was a seller of the implant.
 (3) No discovery shall be permitted against the defendant 
 who has filed a motion to dismiss under subparagraph (1), other 
 than discovery necessary to determine a motion to dismiss for 
 lack of jurisdiction, until the court has ruled on the motion 
 to dismiss filed pursuant to subsection (1).
 (4) A defendant shall conclusively be deemed to be a 
 biomaterials supplier and not to be subject to suit except 
 pursuant to section 5(b) of this Act, and a motion to dismiss 
 under subsections (c)(1)(A) or (c)(1)(B) shall be granted, 
 unless the claimant submits valid affidavits demonstrating--
 (A) with respect to a motion under subsection 
 (c)(1)(A), that the Secretary has, with respect to the 
 defendant and the implant that allegedly caused harm to 
 the claimant, issued a declaration pursuant to section 
 6(a) of this Act; or
 (B) with respect to a motion under subsection 
 (c)(1)(B), that the biomaterials supplier was a seller 
 which held title to the implant as a result or 
 purchasing or selling the implant after the implant was 
 manufactured and entered the stream of commerce.
 (5) The court shall rule on the motion to dismiss filed 
 under subsection (c) solely on the basis of the pleadings and 
 any affidavits, including affidavits submitted under paragraph 
 (2). If the pleadings and affidavits raise genuine issues as to 
 material facts with respect to a motion under (c)(1)(C), the 
 motion may be treated as a motion for summary judgment pursuant 
 to subsection (d) of this section.
 (d) Summary Judgment.--
 (1) A biomaterials supplier shall be entitled to entry of 
 judgment without trial if there is no genuine issue as to any 
 material fact as to each element set forth in section 5(b). A 
 genuine issue of material fact shall exist only if the evidence 
 submitted by claimant, if found by a jury to be credible, would 
 be sufficient to allow a reasonable jury to reach a verdict for 
 the claimant.
 (2) In the event that the court, under applicable rules, 
 may permit discovery prior to ruling on a motion for summary 
 judgment, such discovery shall be limited solely to 
 establishing whether a genuine issue of material fact exists.
 (e) A biomaterials supplier shall be subject to discovery in 
connection with a motion under subsection (c) or (d) solely to the 
extent permitted by the applicable State or Federal rules for discovery 
against nonparties.
 (f) In the event claimant has filed a petition for a declaration 
pursuant to section 6(a) with respect to a defendant, and the Secretary 
has not issued a final decision thereon, the court shall stay all 
proceedings with respect to that defendant until the Secretary has 
issued a final decision.
 (g) The manufacturer of the implant shall be permitted to file and 
conduct the proceeding on any motion filed pursuant to subsection (c) 
or (d) if the manufacturer and the other defendant(s) have entered into 
a valid and applicable contractual agreement in which the manufacturer 
agrees to bear the cost of or to conduct such proceeding.
 (h) The court shall require the claimant to compensate the 
biomaterials supplier (or a manufacturer appearing in lieu of a 
supplier pursuant to subsection (g)) for attorney fees and costs, if 
the claimant named or joined the biomaterials supplier, but the court 
found the claim against the biomaterials supplier to be without merit 
and frivolous.

SEC. 8. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 This Act shall take effect on the date of its enactment and shall 
apply to all civil actions pursuant to this Act commenced on or after 
such date, including any action in which the harm or the conduct which 
caused the harm occurred before the effective date of this Act.

SEC. 9. SEVERABILITY.

 If any provision of this Act, or the application of such provision 
to any person or circumstances is held to be unconstitutional, the 
remainder of this Act and application of the provisions of such to any 
person or circumstance shall not be affected thereby.

 <all>

HR 5092 IH----2