HR 5384 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5384
To permit interstate banking.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
July 26, 1990
Mr. SCHUMER introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs
A BILL
To permit interstate banking.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. INTERSTATE BANKING.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 3(d) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956
 (12 U.S.C. 1842(d)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(d) INTERSTATE ACQUISITIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Board may approve an application under this section
 for a bank holding company to acquire, directly or indirectly, any voting
 shares of, interest in, or all or substantially all of the assets of any
 additional bank located outside of the State in which the operations of
 such bank holding company's banking subsidiaries were principally conducted
 on July 1, 1966, or the date on which such company became a bank holding
 company, whichever is later, without regard to whether the laws of the
 State in which such bank is located permit or authorize the acquisition.
 `(2) DE NOVO BANKS- Until January 1, 1993, the Board may not approve an
 application described in paragraph (1) to acquire a bank that was not in
 operation prior to April 1, 1990, to be owned by a bank holding company
 and to be located outside of the State in which the operations of the bank
 holding company's banking subsidiaries were principally conducted on July
 1, 1966, or the date on which such company became a bank holding company,
 whichever is later, unless the acquisition of such bank by an out-of-State
 bank holding company is specifically authorized by the laws of the State
 in which such bank is located, by language to that effect and not merely
 by implication. For purposes of this paragraph, a bank that is chartered
 for the purpose of effecting the acquisition of another bank or a savings
 association that was in operation prior to April 1, 1990, shall be deemed
 to have been in operation prior to April 1, 1990.
 `(3) STATE LAWS- Any acquisition described in paragraph (1) and any
 acquisition by a foreign bank that has been approved under this section
 may be consummated notwithstanding any State law that would prohibit
 or otherwise limit such acquisition on the basis of the location of the
 acquiring banks or bank holding company or any factor that has the effect
 of directly or indirectly prohibiting or limiting the acquisition of shares
 or control of a bank or bank holding company located in that State by an
 out-of-State bank holding company or foreign bank without having a similar
 effect on such acquisitions by bank holding companies located in that State.
 `(4) STATE IN WHICH BANKING SUBSIDIARIES' OPERATIONS ARE PRINCIPALLY
 CONDUCTED- For the purposes of this section, the State in which
 the operations of a bank holding company's banking subsidiaries are
 principally conducted is that State in which total deposits of all such
 banking subsidiaries are largest.'.
 (b) FOREIGN BANK DEFINED- Section 2 of the Bank Holding Company Act of
 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1841) is amended by adding at the end the following new
 subsection:
 `(n) FOREIGN BANK- For purposes of this Act, the term `foreign bank' has
 the meaning given to such term in section 1(b)(7) of the International
 Banking Act of 1978.'.
 (c) COMMENTS- Section 3(b)(1) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956
 (12 U.S.C. 1842(b)(1)) is amended by inserting after the first sentence
 the following new sentence: `The Board shall also give notice of any
 application received under this section to the appropriate supervisory
 authority of each interested State.'.
 (d) REPEALER- Effective January 1, 1993, section 3(d) of the Bank Holding
 Company Act of 1956 is amended--
 (1) by striking paragraph (2), and
 (2) by redesignating paragraphs (3) and (4) as paragraphs (2) and (3),
 respectively.
 (e) AMENDMENT TO THE INTERNATIONAL BANKING ACT OF 1978- Section 5(a)(5) of
 the International Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3103(a)(5)) is amended to
 read as follows: `(5) no foreign bank may directly or indirectly acquire more
 than 5 percent of the voting shares of, or all or substantially all of the
 assets of a bank holding company or bank located outside of its home State
 without the approval of the Board under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company
 Act where such approval would be required for a bank holding company as if
 the foreign bank were a bank holding company the operations of whose banking
 subsidiaries were principally conducted in the foreign bank's home State.'.
SEC. 2. PROHIBITION ON INTERSTATE BRANCHING WITHOUT STATE AUTHORIZATION.
 (a) PROVISION GOVERNING BRANCHING BY INSURED BANKS- Section 18 of the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1828) is amended by adding at
 the end the following new subsection:
 `(o) BRANCHING-
 `(1) Prior to January 1, 1994, an insured bank may not establish or maintain
 branches (as defined in section 5155(f) of the Revised Statutes) or change
 the location of any office to a location, outside the State in which the
 insured bank is located, unless--
 `(A) such branch was established or such relocation occurred before the
 date of enactment of this subsection, or
 `(B) the statute laws of the State in which the branch is or will be located
 specifically authorize the establishment of a branch in that State by an
 insured bank located in any other State, by language to that effect and
 not merely by implication.
 `(2) After December 31, 1993, an insured bank may establish and maintain
 branches (as defined in section 5155(f) of the Revised Statutes) in any
 State outside of the State in which the bank is located, unless, on or
 after January 1, 1990, and prior to January 1, 1994, the State in which
 the branch will be located enacts a statute that prohibits or limits the
 establishment of a branch in that State by all insured banks located in
 all other States and that State statute remains in effect at the time the
 insured bank seeks to establish the branch.
 `(3) Notwithstanding paragraph (1)(B) or (2), any insured bank located in
 any State, which State does not permit the establishment and maintenance
 of branches in that State by insured banks located in all other States,
 shall not be permitted to establish or maintain a branch outside of the
 State in which such bank is located.
 `(4) A branch established and maintained by an out-of-State bank pursuant
 to this subsection shall be established and maintained in accordance with
 the relevant statute laws of the host State governing the establishment
 and maintenance of branches by State banks located in that State as if
 the out-of-State insured bank were a State bank located in the host State
 with its head office at the location of the first branch established in
 the host State by the out-of-State insured bank.
 `(5) Nothing in this subsection shall prevent any State from exercising
 such powers and jurisdiction that it may have to limit the establishment
 of branches by insured banks located in another State in the same manner
 as the State limits the establishment of branches by insured banks located
 in that State.
 `(6) For purposes of this subsection, an insured bank is located in the
 State in which it was originally chartered.
 `(7) For purposes of this subsection, the term `insured bank' shall not
 include an insured branch.'.
 (b) INTERSTATE BRANCHING BY NATIONAL BANKS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The 1st sentence of section 5155(c) of the Revised Statutes
 (12 U.S.C. 36(c)) is amended--
 (A) by striking `; and (2)' and inserting `; (2)'; and
 (B) by striking the period and inserting the following: `(3) prior to January
 1, 1994, at any point within any other State to the extent permitted in
 paragraph (2) as if the association were situated in that State with its
 main office at the location at which it seeks to establish its first branch
 office in that State, if the statute laws of the State in which the branch
 is or will be located specifically authorize the establishment and operation
 of a branch in that State by an insured bank located in any other State, by
 language to that effect and not merely by implication; and (4) after December
 31, 1993, at any point within any State to the extent permitted in paragraph
 (2) as if the association were situated in that State with its main office
 at the location at which it seeks to establish its first branch office in
 that State, unless, on or after January 1, 1990, and prior to January 1,
 1994, the State in which the branch will be located or the State in which
 the association is located enacts a statute that prohibits or limits the
 establishment of a branch in that State by all insured banks located in
 all other States and that State statute remains in effect at the time the
 association seeks to establish the branch. Notwithstanding paragraph (3)
 or (4) of the preceding sentence, any national bank located in any State,
 which State does not permit the establishment and maintenance of branches
 in that State by national banks located in all other States, shall not be
 permitted to establish or maintain a branch outside of the State in which
 such bank is located.'.
 (2) DEFINITIONS- Section 5155 of the Revised Statutes (12 U.S.C. 36)
 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsections:
 `(i) INSURED BANK DEFINED- For purposes of this section, the term `insured
 bank' means any national bank, State chartered commercial bank, or District
 bank, the deposits of which are insured in accordance with the provisions
 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, and does not include any savings and
 loan association, building and loan association, homestead association,
 cooperative bank, industrial bank, credit union, or similar institution.
 `(j) STATE DEFINED- For purposes of this section, the term `State' includes
 the District of Columbia.'.
 (3) TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENT- The last sentence of section
 5155(c) of the Revised Statutes (12 U.S.C. 36(c)) is amended by striking
 `preceding sentence' and inserting `preceding sentences'.
 (c) INTERSTATE BRANCHING BY FOREIGN BANKS- Section 5(b) of the International
 Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3101(b)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `(b) Unless' and inserting `(b) Interstate Branching-
 `(1) Unless'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(2) INTERSTATE BRANCHING BY FOREIGN BANKS-
 `(A) Prior to January 1, 1994, a foreign bank may establish and operate a
 branch in any State outside of its home State if the statute laws of the
 State in which the branch is or will be located specifically authorize the
 establishment of a branch in that State by an insured bank located in any
 other State, by language to that effect and not merely by implication.
 `(B) After December 31, 1993, a foreign bank may establish and operate
 a branch in any State outside of its home State, unless, prior to that
 date, the State in which the branch will be located enacts a statute that
 prohibits or limits the establishment of a branch in that State by all
 insured banks located in all other States and that State statute remains
 in effect at the time the foreign bank seeks to establish the branch.
 `(C) Any State branch established and operated pursuant to this subsection
 must be established and operated in accordance with the relevant statute
 laws of the host State governing the establishment and operation of branches
 by State banks located in that State as if the foreign bank were a State
 bank located in the host State with its head office at the location of
 the first branch established in the host State by the foreign bank.
 `(D) Notwithstanding subparagraph (A) or (B), any foreign bank located in
 any State, which State does not permit the establishment and maintenance
 of branches in that State by insured banks located in all other States,
 shall not be permitted to establish or maintenance a branch outside of
 the State in which such bank is located.
 `(E) Nothing in this paragraph shall prevent any State from exercising
 such powers and jurisdiction that it may have to limit the establishment
 of branches by foreign banks in the same manner as the State limits the
 establishment of branches by insured banks located in that State.
 `(F) For purposes of this paragraph, the term `insured bank' means any
 national bank, State chartered commercial bank, or District bank which
 is an insured bank (as defined in section 3(h) of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act) and does not include any savings and loan association,
 building and loan association, homestead association, cooperative bank,
 industrial bank, credit union, or similar institution.'.
SEC. 3. INTERSTATE ACQUISITIONS BY SAVINGS AND LOAN HOLDING COMPANIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 10(e)(3) of the Home Owners' Loan Act (12
 U.S.C. 1467a(e)(3)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(3) INTERSTATE ACQUISITIONS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Director may approve an application under this section
 for a savings and loan holding company to acquire, directly or indirectly,
 any voting shares of, interest in, or all or substantially all of the
 assets of any additional savings association located outside of the State
 in which the savings and loan holding company is located without regard
 to whether the statute laws of the State in which such savings association
 is located permit or authorize the acquisition.
 `(B) DE NOVO ASSOCIATIONS- Until January 1, 1993, the Director may not
 approve an application described in subparagraph (A) involving a savings
 association that was not in operation prior to April 1, 1990, unless the
 acquisition of such savings association by an out-of-State savings and loan
 holding company is specifically authorized by the statute laws of the State
 in which such savings association is located, by language to that effect
 and not merely by implication. For purposes of this paragraph, a savings
 association that is chartered for the purpose of effecting the acquisition
 of another savings association that was in operation prior to April 1,
 1990, shall be deemed to have been in operation prior to April 1, 1990.
 `(C) STATE LAWS- Any acquisition by a savings and loan holding company
 described in subparagraph (A) and any acquisition by a bank holding
 company or foreign bank that has been approved under this subsection may be
 consummated notwithstanding any State law that would prohibit or otherwise
 limit such acquisition on the basis of the location of the acquiring savings
 and loan holding company, savings and loan association, bank holding company,
 or foreign bank, or any factor that has the effect of directly or indirectly
 prohibiting or limiting the acquisition of shares or control of a savings
 association or savings and loan holding company located in that State by
 an out-of-State savings and loan holding company, bank holding company,
 or foreign bank without having a similar effect on such acquisitions by
 savings and loan holding companies located in that State.
 `(D) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this paragraph--
 `(i) STATE- The term `State' includes the District of Columbia.
 `(ii) FOREIGN BANK- The term `foreign bank' has the meaning given to such
 term in section 1(b)(7) of the International Banking Act of 1978.'.
 (b) REPEALER- Effective January 1, 1993, section 10(e)(3) of the Home
 Owners' Loan Act (as amended by subsection (a) of this section) is amended--
 (1) by striking subparagraph (B), and
 (2) by redesignating subparagraphs (C) and (D) as subparagraphs (B) and
 (C), respectively.
SEC. 4. RESTATEMENT OF EXISTING LAW REGARDING EMERGENCY ACQUISITION
AUTHORITIES.
 No amendment made by this Act to any other provision of law shall be
 construed as limiting the authority of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation to authorize extraordinary or emergency acquisitions under
 subsections (f) or (k) of section 13 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
SEC. 5. RESIDENCE OF DIRECTORS.
 The first sentence of section 5146 of the Revised Statutes (12 U.S.C. 72)
 is amended by striking `and at least two-thirds' and all that follows
 through `continuance in office,'.