HR 2564 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2564
To exempt agriculture from certain requirements under the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
June 6, 1991
Mr. ALEXANDER introduced the following bill; which was referred to the
Committee on Public Works and Transportation
A BILL
To exempt agriculture from certain requirements under the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Agricultural Wetlands Exemption Act.'
SEC. 2. AMENDMENT OF FEDERAL WATER POLLUTION CONTROL ACT.
 Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended
 (33 U.S.C. 1344), is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 subsection:
 `(u)(1) This section shall not apply to the discharge of dredged or fill
 material into any wetland:
 `(A) which was used for agricultural production on any calendar date during
 the twenty-four months prior to the date of enactment of this subsection; and
 `(B) which was used for agricultural production for at least one year in the
 period between January 1, 1972, and the date of enactment of this subsection,
so long as such land shall be used for agricultural production.
 `(2) For purposes of this subsection, the term `agricultural production'
 shall include, but not be limited to, production of row crops; horticulture;
 vintniculture; silviculture; acquaculture; mariculture; grazing; haying;
 apiculture; hydroponics; production of tree fruits or nuts; raising
 of cattle, horses, poultry, swine, sheep, goats, and other livestock;
 storage of surface water for agricultural production; distribution
 of water for agricultural production; conserving uses required as a
 condition of enrollment in an acreage reduction program administered by
 the Secretary of Agriculture under the Agricultural Act of 1949 or any
 amendments thereto; all other activities identified in section 404(f)(1)
 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1344) as of July
 31, 1989, and the construction, expansion, improvement, maintenance and
 operation of farm residences and facilities.'