S 430 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 430
To modify the antitrust exemption applicable to the business of insurance.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
February 20 (legislative day, FEBRUARY 6), 1991
Mr. METZENBAUM (for himself, Mr. SIMON, Mr. BIDEN, and Mr. KENNEDY) introduced
the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on
the Judiciary
A BILL
To modify the antitrust exemption applicable to the business of insurance.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Insurance Competitive Pricing Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. AMENDMENTS.
 Section 2 of the Act of March 9, 1945 (59 Stat. 34; 15 U.S.C. 1012),
 commonly known as the McCarran Ferguson Act, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)--
 (A) by striking `: Provided, That after June 30, 1948,: and inserting
 `except that',
 (B) by inserting `section 5 of' after `Clayton Act, and',
 (C) by inserting `as such section 5 relates to monopolies, attempts to
 monopolize, and unlawful restraints of trade,' after `Commission Act,
 as amended,', and
 (D) by striking `that such Business' and all that follows through `law.' and
 inserting the following:
`that--
 `(1) such business is not regulated by State law; or
 `(2) the conduct of a person engaged in such business involves--
 `(A) price fixing;
 `(B) allocation with a competitor a geographical area in which, or persons
 to whom, insurance will be offered for sale;
 `(C) unlawful tying the sale or purchase of--
 `(i) one type of insurance to the sale or purchase of another type of
 insurance; or
 `(ii) any type of insurance to the sale or purchase of any other service
 or product; or
 `(D) monopolizing, or attempting to monopolize, any part of the business
 of insurance.', and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 `(c) The conduct referred to in subsection (b)(2) shall not include making
 a contract, or engaging in a combination or conspiracy--
 `(1) to collect, compile, or disseminate historical loss data;
 `(2) to determine a loss development factor applicable to historical loss
 data; or
 `(3) to perform actuarial services if such contract, combination, or
 conspiracy does not involve a restraint of trade.
 `(d) For purposes of this section--
 `(1) the term `historical loss data' means information respecting claims
 paid, or reserves held for claims reported, by any person engaged in the
 business of insurance; and
 `(2) the term `loss development factor' means an adjustment to be made
 to reserves held for losses incurred for claims reported by any person
 engaged in the business of insurance, for the purpose of bringing such
 reserves to an ultimate paid basis.'
SEC. 3. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 This Act shall take effect 1 year after the date of the enactment of
 this Act.