101st CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2104
AMENDMENT
S2104 EAH1S
In the House of Representatives, U. S.,
August 3, 1990.
 Resolved, That the bill from the Senate (S. 2104) entitled `An Act to
 amend the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to restore and strengthen civil rights
 laws that ban discrimination in employment, and for other purposes',
 do pass with the following
AMENDMENT:
 Strike out all after the enacting clause and insert:
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Civil Rights Act of 1990'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
 (a) FINDINGS- Congress finds that--
 (1) in a series of recent decisions addressing employment discrimination
 claims under Federal law, the Supreme Court cut back dramatically on the
 scope and effectiveness of civil rights protections; and
 (2) existing protections and remedies under Federal law are not adequate
 to deter unlawful discrimination or to compensate victims of such
 discrimination.
 (b) PURPOSES- The purposes of this Act are to--
 (1) respond to the Supreme Court's recent decisions by restoring the civil
 rights protections that were dramatically limited by those decisions; and
 (2) strengthen existing protections and remedies available under Federal
 civil rights laws to provide more effective deterrence and adequate
 compensation for victims of discrimination.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 Section 701 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e) is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new subsections:
 `(l) The term `complaining party' means the Commission, the Attorney General,
 or a person who may bring an action or proceeding under this title.
 `(m) The term `demonstrates' means meets the burdens of production and
 persuasion.
 `(n) The term `group of employment practices' means a combination of
 employment practices that produces one or more decisions with respect to
 employment, employment referral, or admission to a labor organization,
 apprenticeship or other training or retraining program.
 `(o)(1) The term `required by business necessity' means--
 `(A) in the case of employment practices involving selection (such
 as hiring, assignment, transfer, promotion, training, apprenticeship,
 referral, retention, or membership in a labor organization), the practice
 or group of practices must bear a significant relationship to successful
 performance of the job; or
 `(B) in the case of employment practices that do not involve selection,
 the practice or group of practices must bear a significant relationship
 to a significant business objective of the employer.
 `(2) In deciding whether the standards in paragraph (1) for business
 necessity have been met, unsubstantiated opinion and hearsay are not
 sufficient; demonstrable evidence is required. The defendant may offer
 as evidence statistical reports, validation studies, expert testimony,
 prior successful experience and other evidence as permitted by the Federal
 Rules of Evidence, and the court shall give such weight, if any, to such
 evidence as is appropriate.
 `(3) This subsection is meant to codify the meaning of `business necessity'
 as used in Griggs v. Duke Power Co. (401 U.S. 424 (1971)) and to overrule
 the treatment of business necessity as a defense in Wards Cove Packing Co.,
 Inc. v. Atonio (109 S. Ct. 2115 (1989)).
 `(p) The term `respondent' means an employer, employment agency, labor
 organization, joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship
 or other training or retraining programs, including on-the-job training
 programs, or those Federal entities subject to the provisions of section
 717 (or the heads thereof).'.
SEC. 4. RESTORING THE BURDEN OF PROOF IN DISPARATE IMPACT CASES.
 Section 703 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-2) is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(k) PROOF OF UNLAWFUL EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES IN DISPARATE IMPACT CASES- (1)
 An unlawful employment practice based on disparate impact is established
 under this section when--
 `(A) a complaining party demonstrates that an employment practice results in
 a disparate impact on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or national
 origin, and the respondent fails to demonstrate that such practice is
 required by business necessity; or
 `(B) a complaining party demonstrates that a group of employment practices
 results in a disparate impact on the basis of race, color, religion, sex,
 or national origin, and the respondent fails to demonstrate that such group
 of employment practices is required by business necessity, except that--
 `(i) except as provided in clause (iii), if a complaining party demonstrates
 that a group of employment practices results in a disparate impact, such
 party shall not be required to demonstrate which specific practice or
 practices within the group results in such disparate impact;
 `(ii) if the respondent demonstrates that a specific employment practice
 within such group of employment practices does not contribute to the
 disparate impact, the respondent shall not be required to demonstrate that
 such practice is required by business necessity; and
 `(iii) if the court finds that the complaining party can identify, from
 records or other information of the respondent reasonably available
 (through discovery or otherwise), which specific practice or practices
 contributed to the disparate impact--
 `(I) the complaining party shall be required to demonstrate which specific
 practice or practices contributed to the disparate impact; and
 `(II) the respondent shall be required to demonstrate business necessity
 only as to the specific practice or practices demonstrated by the complaining
 party to have contributed to the disparate impact;
except that an employment practice or group of employment practices
demonstrated to be required by business necessity shall be unlawful where
a complaining party demonstrates that a different employment practice or
group of employment practices with less disparate impact would serve the
respondent as well.
 `(2) A demonstration that an employment practice is required by business
 necessity may be used as a defense only against a claim under this
 subsection.
 `(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, a rule barring the
 employment of an individual who currently and knowingly uses or possesses
 an illegal drug as defined in Schedules I and II of section 102(6) of
 the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802(6)), other than the use or
 possession of a drug taken under the supervision of a licensed health care
 professional, or any other use or possession authorized by the Controlled
 Substances Act or any other provision of Federal law, shall be considered
 an unlawful employment practice under this title only if such rule is
 adopted or applied with an intent to discriminate because of the race,
 color, religion, sex, or national origin.
 `(4) The mere existence of a statistical imbalance in an employer's workforce
 on account of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin is not alone
 sufficient to establish a prima facie case of disparate impact violation.'.
SEC. 5. CLARIFYING PROHIBITION AGAINST IMPERMISSIBLE CONSIDERATION OF RACE,
COLOR, RELIGION, SEX OR NATIONAL ORIGIN IN EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 703 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42
 U.S.C. 2000e-2) (as amended by section 4) is further amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(l) DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICE NEED NOT BE SOLE CONTRIBUTING FACTOR- Except
 as otherwise provided in this title, an unlawful employment practice is
 established when the complaining party demonstrates that race, color,
 religion, sex, or national origin was a contributing factor for any
 employment practice, even though other factors also contributed to such
 practice.'.
 (b) ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS- Section 706(g) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5(g))
 is amended by inserting before the period in the last sentence the following:
 `or, in a case where a violation is established under section 703(l),
 if the respondent establishes that it would have taken the same action
 in the absence of any discrimination. In any case in which a violation is
 established under section 703(l), damages may be awarded only for injury
 that is attributable to the unlawful employment practice'.
SEC. 6. FACILITATING PROMPT AND ORDERLY RESOLUTION OF CHALLENGES TO EMPLOYMENT
PRACTICES IMPLEMENTING LITIGATED OR CONSENT JUDGMENTS OR ORDERS.
 Section 703 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-2) (as amended
 by sections 4 and 5) is further amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new subsection:
 `(m) FINALITY OF LITIGATED OR CONSENT JUDGMENTS OR ORDERS- (1)
 Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and except as provided in
 paragraph (2), an employment practice that implements and is within the
 scope of a litigated or consent judgment or order resolving a claim of
 employment discrimination under the United States Constitution or Federal
 civil rights laws may not be challenged in a claim under the United States
 Constitution or Federal civil rights laws--
 `(A) by a person who, prior to the entry of such judgment or order, had--
 `(i) actual notice from any source of the proposed judgment or order
 sufficient to apprise such person that such judgment or order might affect
 the interests of such person and that an opportunity was available to
 present objections to such judgment or order; and
 `(ii) a reasonable opportunity to present objections to such judgment
 or order;
 `(B) by a person with respect to whom the requirements of subparagraph
 (A) are not satisfied, if the court determines that the interests of such
 person were adequately represented by another person who challenged such
 judgment or order prior to or after the entry of such judgment or order; or
 `(C) if the court that entered the judgment or order determines that
 reasonable efforts were made to provide notice to interested persons.
A determination under subparagraph (C) shall be made prior to the entry of
the judgment or order, except that if the judgment or order was entered
prior to the date of the enactment of this subsection, the determination
may be made at any reasonable time.
 `(2) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to--
 `(A) alter the standards for intervention under rule 24 of the Federal Rules
 of Civil Procedure or apply to the rights of parties who have successfully
 intervened pursuant to such rule in the proceeding in which they intervened;
 `(B) apply to the rights of parties to the action in which the litigated or
 consent judgment or order was entered, or of members of a class represented
 or sought to be represented in such action, or of members of a group on
 whose behalf relief was sought in such action by the Federal Government;
 `(C) prevent challenges to a litigated or consent judgment or order on
 the ground that such judgment or order was obtained through collusion
 or fraud, or is transparently invalid or was entered by a court lacking
 subject matter jurisdiction; or
 `(D) authorize or permit the denial to any person of the due process of
 law required by the United States Constitution.
 `(3) Any action, not precluded under this subsection, that challenges an
 employment practice that implements and is within the scope of a litigated or
 consent judgment or order of the type referred to in paragraph (1) shall be
 brought in the court, and if possible before the judge, that entered such
 judgment or order. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude a transfer
 of such action pursuant to section 1404 of title 28, United States Code.'.
SEC. 7. STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS; APPLICATION TO CHALLENGES TO SENIORITY SYSTEMS.
 (a) STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS- Section 706(e) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5(e)) is amended--
 (1) by striking out `one hundred and eighty days' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `2 years';
 (2) by inserting after `occurred' the first time it appears `or has been
 applied to affect adversely the person aggrieved, whichever is later,';
 (3) by striking out `, except that in' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `. In'; and
 (4) by striking out `such charge shall be filed' and all that follows
 through `whichever is earlier, and'.
 (b) APPLICATION TO CHALLENGES TO SENIORITY SYSTEMS- Section 703(h) of such
 Act (42 U.S.C. 2000e-2) is amended by inserting after the first sentence the
 following new sentence: `Where a seniority system or seniority practice is
 part of a collective bargaining agreement and such system or practice was
 included in such agreement with the intent to discriminate on the basis
 of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin, the application of
 such system or practice during the period that such collective bargaining
 agreement is in effect shall be an unlawful employment practice.'.
SEC. 8. PROVIDING FOR DAMAGES IN CASES OF INTENTIONAL DISCRIMINATION.
 (a) DAMAGES- Section 706(g) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42
 U.S.C. 2000e-5(g)) is amended by inserting before the last sentence the
 following new sentences: `With respect to an unlawful employment practice
 (other than an unlawful employment practice established in accordance with
 section 703(k)) or in the case of an unlawful employment practice under the
 Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 (other than an unlawful employment
 practice established in accordance with paragraph (3)(A) or paragraph (6)
 of section 102 of that Act as it relates to standards and criteria that
 tend to screen out individuals with disabilities)--
 `(A) compensatory damages may be awarded; and
 `(B) if the respondent (other than a government, government agency, or a
 political subdivision) engaged in the unlawful employment practice with
 malice, or with reckless or callous indifference to the federally protected
 rights of others, punitive damages may be awarded against such respondent;
in addition to the relief authorized by the preceding sentences of this
subsection, except that compensatory damages shall not include backpay or
any interest thereon. Compensatory and punitive damages and jury trials
shall be available only for claims of intentional discrimination. If
compensatory or punitive damages are sought with respect to a claim of
intentional discrimination arising under this title, any party may demand
a trial by jury.'.
 (b) LIMITATION ON PUNITIVE DAMAGES- Section 706(g) of the Civil Rights
 Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5(g)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(1)' after `(g)'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 `(2) If the respondent has fewer than 100 employees for each working day in
 each of twenty or more calendar weeks in the current or preceding calendar
 year, then the amount of punitive damages that may be awarded under paragraph
 (1)(B) to an individual against the respondent shall not exceed--
 `(A) $150,000; or
 `(B) an amount equal to the sum of compensatory damages awarded under
 paragraph (1)(A) and equitable monetary relief awarded under paragraph (1);
whichever is greater.'.
SEC. 9. CLARIFYING ATTORNEY'S FEES PROVISION.
 Section 706(k) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5(k))
 is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(1)' after `(k)';
 (2) by inserting `(including expert fees and other litigation expenses)
 and' after `attorney's fee,';
 (3) by striking out `as part of the'; and
 (4) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraphs:
 `(2) No consent order or judgment settling a claim under this title shall
 be entered, and no stipulation of dismissal of a claim under this title
 shall be effective, unless the parties or their counsel attest to the
 court that a waiver of all or substantially all attorney's fees was not
 compelled as a condition of the settlement.
 `(3) In any action or proceeding in which any judgment or order granting
 relief under this title is challenged, the court, in its discretion, may
 allow the prevailing party in the original action (other than the Commission
 or the United States) to recover from the party against whom relief was
 granted in the original action a reasonable attorney's fee (including
 expert fees and other litigation expenses) and costs reasonably incurred
 in defending (as a party, intervenor or otherwise) such judgment or order.'.
SEC. 10. PROVIDING FOR INTEREST, AND EXTENDING THE STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS,
IN ACTIONS AGAINST THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
 Section 717 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-16) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (c), by striking out `thirty days' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `ninety days'; and
 (2) in subsection (d), by inserting before the period `, and the same
 interest to compensate for delay in payment shall be available as in cases
 involving nonpublic parties, except that prejudgment interest may not be
 awarded on compensatory damages'.
SEC. 11. CONSTRUCTION.
 Title XI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000h et seq.) is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 1107. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION FOR CIVIL RIGHTS LAWS.
 `(a) EFFECTUATION OF PURPOSE- All Federal laws protecting the civil rights
 of persons shall be interpreted consistent with the intent of such laws,
 and shall be broadly construed to effectuate the purpose of such laws to
 provide equal opportunity and provide effective remedies.
 `(b) NONLIMITATION- Except as expressly provided, no Federal law protecting
 the civil rights of persons shall be construed to repeal or amend by
 implication any other Federal law protecting such civil rights.
 `(c) INTERPRETATION- In interpreting Federal civil rights laws, including
 laws protecting against discrimination on the basis of race, color, national
 origin, sex, religion, age, and disability, courts and administrative
 agencies shall not rely on the amendments made by the Civil Rights Act of
 1990 as a basis for limiting the theories of liability, rights, and remedies
 available under civil rights laws not expressly amended by such Act.'.
SEC. 12. RESTORING PROHIBITION AGAINST ALL RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN THE
MAKING AND ENFORCEMENT OF CONTRACTS.
 Section 1977 of the Revised Statutes of the United States (42 U.S.C. 1981)
 is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(a)' before `All persons within'; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsections:
 `(b) For purposes of this section, the right to `make and enforce contracts'
 shall include the making, performance, modification and termination
 of contracts, and the enjoyment of all benefits, privileges, terms and
 conditions of the contractual relationship.
 `(c) The rights protected by this section are protected against impairment
 by nongovernmental discrimination as well as against impairment under
 color of State law.'.
SEC. 13. LAWFUL COURT-ORDERED REMEDIES, AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND CONCILIATION
AGREEMENTS NOT AFFECTED.
 Nothing in the amendments made by this Act shall be construed to require an
 employer to adopt hiring or promotion quotas on the basis of race, color,
 religion, sex, or national origin: Provided, however, That nothing in the
 amendments made by this Act shall be construed to affect court-ordered
 remedies, affirmative action, or conciliation agreements that are otherwise
 in accordance with the law.
SEC. 14. SEVERABILITY.
 If any provision of this Act, or an amendment made by this Act, or the
 application of such provision to any person or circumstances is held to
 be invalid, the remainder of this Act and the amendments made by this Act,
 and the application of such provision to other persons and circumstances,
 shall not be affected thereby.
SEC. 15. APPLICATION OF AMENDMENTS AND TRANSITION RULES.
 (a) APPLICATION OF AMENDMENTS- The amendments made by--
 (1) section 4 shall apply to all proceedings pending on or commenced after
 June 5, 1989;
 (2) section 5 shall apply to all proceedings pending on or commenced after
 May 1, 1989;
 (3) section 6 shall apply to all proceedings pending on or commenced after
 June 12, 1989;
 (4) sections 7(a)(1), 7(a)(3) and 7(a)(4), 7(b), 8, 9, 10, and 11 shall
 apply to all proceedings pending on or commenced after the date of enactment
 of this Act;
 (5) section 7(a)(2) shall apply to all proceedings pending on or commenced
 after June 12, 1989; and
 (6) section 12 shall apply to all proceedings pending on or commenced
 after June 15, 1989.
 (b) TRANSITION RULES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Any orders entered by a court between the effective dates
 described in subsection (a) and the date of enactment of this Act that are
 inconsistent with the amendments made by sections 4, 5, 7(a)(2), or 12,
 shall be vacated if, not later than 1 year after such date of enactment,
 a request for such relief is made.
 (2) SECTION 6- Any orders entered between June 12, 1989 and the date of
 enactment of this Act, that permit a challenge to an employment practice that
 implements a litigated or consent judgment or order and that is inconsistent
 with the amendment made by section 6, shall be vacated if, not later than 6
 months after the date of enactment of this Act, a request for such relief is
 made. For the 1-year period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act,
 an individual whose challenge to an employment practice that implements a
 litigated or consent judgment or order is denied under the amendment made
 by section 6, or whose order or relief obtained under such challenge is
 vacated under such section, shall have the same right of intervention in
 the case in which the challenged litigated or consent judgment or order
 was entered as that individual had on June 12, 1989.
 (3) FINAL JUDGMENTS- Pursuant to paragraphs (1) and (2), any final judgment
 entered prior to the date of the enactment of this Act as to which the
 rights of any of the parties thereto have become fixed and vested, where
 the time for seeking further judicial review of such judgment has otherwise
 expired pursuant to title 28 of the United States Code, the Federal Rules
 of Civil Procedure, and the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure, shall be
 vacated in whole or in part if justice requires pursuant to rule 60(b)(6)
 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure or other appropriate authority,
 and consistent with the constitutional requirements of due process of law.
 (c) PERIOD OF LIMITATIONS- The period of limitations for the filing of
 a claim or charge shall be tolled from the applicable effective date
 described in subsection (a) until the date of enactment of this Act,
 on a showing that the claim or charge was not filed because of a rule or
 decision altered by the amendments made by sections 4, 5, 7(a)(2), or 12.
SEC. 16. COVERAGE OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding any provision of title VII of the Civil
 Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.) or of other law, the purposes
 of such title shall, subject to subsections (b) and (c), apply in their
 entirety to the House of Representatives.
 (b) EMPLOYMENT IN THE HOUSE-
 (1) APPLICATION- The rights and protections under title VII of the Civil
 Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.) shall, subject to paragraph (2),
 apply with respect to any employee in an employment position in the House of
 Representatives and any employing authority of the House of Representatives.
 (2) ADMINISTRATION-
 (A) IN GENERAL- In the administration of this subsection, the remedies
 and procedures made applicable pursuant to the resolution described in
 subparagraph (B) shall apply exclusively.
 (B) RESOLUTION- The resolution referred to in subparagraph (A) is House
 Resolution 15 of the One Hundred First Congress, as agreed to January 3,
 1989, or any other provision that continues in effect the provisions of,
 or is a successor to, the Fair Employment Practices Resolution (House
 Resolution 558 of the One Hundredth Congress, as agreed to October 4, 1988).
 (3) EXERCISE OF RULEMAKING POWER- The provisions of paragraph (2) are
 enacted by the House of Representatives as an exercise of the rulemaking
 power of the House of Representatives, with full recognition of the right
 of the House to change its rules, in the same manner, and to the same
 extent as in the case of any other rule of the House.
SEC. 17. OTHER STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS; NOTICE OF RIGHT TO SUE.
 (a) STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS- Section 7(d) of the Age Discrimination in
 Employment Act of 1967 (29 U.S.C. 626(d)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) by striking out `180 days' and inserting in lieu thereof `2 years'; and
 (B) by inserting `or has been applied to affect adversely the person
 aggrieved, whichever is later' after `occurred'; and
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking out `within 300 days' and all that
 follows through `whichever is earlier' and inserting in lieu thereof `a
 copy of such charge shall be filed by the Commission with the State agency'.
 (b) NOTICE OF RIGHT TO SUE- Section 7(e) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 626(e))
 is amended--
 (1) by striking out paragraph (2);
 (2) by striking out the paragraph designation in paragraph (1);
 (3) by striking out `Sections 6 and' and inserting `Section'; and
 (4) by adding at the end thereof the following: `If a charge filed with
 the Commission is dismissed by the Commission, the Commission shall so
 notify the person aggrieved and within 90 days after the giving of such
 notice a civil action may be brought against the respondent named in the
 charge by a person defined in section 11 (29 U.S.C 630).'.
SEC. 18. ALTERNATIVE MEANS OF DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
 Where appropriate and to the extent authorized by law, the use of alternative
 means of dispute resolution, including settlement negotiations, conciliation,
 facilitation, mediation, factfinding, minitrials, and arbitration, is
 encouraged to resolve disputes arising under the Acts amended by this Act.
Attest:
Clerk.
S 2104 EAH----2