[Congressional Bills 116th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 4626 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

<DOC>

116th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 S. 4626

 To establish data privacy and data security protections for consumers 
 in the United States.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 September 17, 2020

 Mr. Wicker (for himself, Mr. Thune, Mrs. Blackburn, and Mrs. Fischer) 
introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the 
 Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To establish data privacy and data security protections for consumers 
 in the United States.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Setting an 
American Framework to Ensure Data Access, Transparency, and 
Accountability Act'' or the ``SAFE DATA Act''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Definitions.
Sec. 3. Effective date.
 TITLE I--INDIVIDUAL CONSUMER DATA RIGHTS

Sec. 101. Consumer loyalty.
Sec. 102. Transparency.
Sec. 103. Individual control.
Sec. 104. Rights to consent.
Sec. 105. Minimizing data collection, processing, and retention.
Sec. 106. Service providers and third parties.
Sec. 107. Privacy impact assessments.
Sec. 108. Scope of coverage.
 TITLE II--DATA TRANSPARENCY, INTEGRITY, AND SECURITY

Sec. 201. Algorithm bias, detection, and mitigation.
Sec. 202. Digital content forgeries.
Sec. 203. Data brokers.
Sec. 204. Protection of covered data.
Sec. 205. Filter bubble transparency.
Sec. 206. Unfair and deceptive acts and practices relating to the 
 manipulation of user interfaces.
 TITLE III--CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY

Sec. 301. Designation of data privacy officer and data security 
 officer.
Sec. 302. Internal controls.
Sec. 303. Whistleblower protections.
 TITLE IV--ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY AND NEW PROGRAMS

Sec. 401. Enforcement by the Federal Trade Commission.
Sec. 402. Enforcement by State attorneys general.
Sec. 403. Authority of Commission to seek permanent injunction and 
 other equitable remedies.
Sec. 404. Approved certification programs.
Sec. 405. Relationship between Federal and State law.
Sec. 406. Constitutional avoidance.
Sec. 407. Severability.

SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act:
 (1) Affirmative express consent.--The term ``affirmative 
 express consent'' means, upon being presented with a clear and 
 conspicuous description of an act or practice for which consent 
 is sought, an affirmative act by the individual clearly 
 communicating the individual's authorization for the act or 
 practice.
 (2) Algorithm.--The term ``algorithm'' means a 
 computational process derived from machine learning, 
 statistics, or other data processing or artificial intelligence 
 techniques, that processes covered data for the purpose of 
 making a decision or facilitating human decision making.
 (3) Algorithmic ranking system.--The term ``algorithmic 
 ranking system'' means a computational process, including one 
 derived from algorithmic decision making, machine learning, 
 statistical analysis, or other data processing or artificial 
 intelligence techniques, used to determine the order or manner 
 that a set of information is provided to a user on a covered 
 internet platform, including the ranking of search results, the 
 provision of content recommendations, the display of social 
 media posts, or any other method of automated content 
 selection.
 (4) Behavioral or psychological experiments or research.--
 The term ``behavioral or psychological experiments or 
 research'' means the study, including through human 
 experimentation, of overt or observable actions and mental 
 phenomena inferred from behavior, including interactions 
 between and among individuals and the activities of social 
 groups.
 (5) Collection.--The term ``collection'' means buying, 
 renting, gathering, obtaining, receiving, or accessing any 
 covered data of an individual by any means.
 (6) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Federal 
 Trade Commission.
 (7) Common branding.--The term ``common branding'' means a 
 shared name, servicemark, or trademark.
 (8) Compulsive usage.--The term ``compulsive usage'' means 
 any response stimulated by external factors that causes an 
 individual to engage in repetitive, purposeful, and intentional 
 behavior causing psychological distress, loss of control, 
 anxiety, depression, or harmful stress responses.
 (9) Connected device.--For purposes of paragraphs (20) and 
 (37), the term ``connected device'' means a physical object 
 that--
 (A) is capable of connecting to the internet, 
 either directly or indirectly through a network, to 
 communicate information at the direction of an 
 individual; and
 (B) has computer processing capabilities for 
 collecting, sending, receiving, or analyzing data.
 (10) Covered data.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``covered data'' means 
 information that identifies or is linked or reasonably 
 linkable to an individual or a device that is linked or 
 reasonably linkable to an individual.
 (B) Linked or reasonably linkable.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), information held by a covered entity 
 is linked or reasonably linkable to an individual or a 
 device if, as a practical matter, it can be used on its 
 own or in combination with other information held by, 
 or readily accessible to, the covered entity to 
 identify such individual or such device.
 (C) Exclusions.--Such term does not include--
 (i) aggregated data;
 (ii) de-identified data;
 (iii) employee data; or
 (iv) publicly available information.
 (D) Aggregated data.--For purposes of subparagraph 
 (C), the term ``aggregated data'' means information 
 that relates to a group or category of individuals or 
 devices that does not identify and is not linked or 
 reasonably linkable to any individual.
 (E) De-identified data.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (C), the term ``de-identified data'' means 
 information held by a covered entity that--
 (i) does not identify, and is not linked or 
 reasonably linkable to, an individual or 
 device;
 (ii) does not contain any persistent 
 identifier or other information that could 
 readily be used to re-identify the individual 
 to whom, or the device to which, the identifier 
 or information pertains;
 (iii) is subject to a public commitment by 
 the covered entity--
 (I) to refrain from attempting to 
 use such information to identify any 
 individual or device; and
 (II) to adopt technical and 
 organizational measures to ensure that 
 such information is not linked to any 
 individual or device; and
 (iv) is not disclosed by the covered entity 
 to any other party unless the disclosure is 
 subject to a contractually or other legally 
 binding requirement that--
 (I) the recipient of the 
 information shall not use the 
 information to identify any individual 
 or device; and
 (II) all onward disclosures of the 
 information shall be subject to the 
 requirement described in subclause (I).
 (F) Employee data.--For purposes of subparagraph 
 (C), the term ``employee data'' means--
 (i) information relating to an individual 
 collected by a covered entity in the course of 
 the individual acting as a job applicant to, or 
 employee (regardless of whether such employee 
 is paid or unpaid, or employed on a temporary 
 basis), owner, director, officer, staff member, 
 trainee, vendor, visitor, volunteer, intern, or 
 contractor of, the entity, provided that such 
 information is collected, processed, or 
 transferred by the covered entity solely for 
 purposes related to the individual's status as 
 a current or former job applicant to, or an 
 employee, owner, director, officer, staff 
 member, trainee, vendor, visitor, volunteer, 
 intern, or contractor of, that covered entity;
 (ii) business contact information of an 
 individual, including the individual's name, 
 position or title, business telephone number, 
 business address, business email address, 
 qualifications, and other similar information, 
 that is provided to a covered entity by an 
 individual who is acting in a professional 
 capacity, provided that such information is 
 collected, processed, or transferred solely for 
 purposes related to such individual's 
 professional activities;
 (iii) emergency contact information 
 collected by a covered entity that relates to 
 an individual who is acting in a role described 
 in clause (i) with respect to the covered 
 entity, provided that such information is 
 collected, processed, or transferred solely for 
 the purpose of having an emergency contact on 
 file for the individual; or
 (iv) information relating to an individual 
 (or a relative or beneficiary of such 
 individual) that is necessary for the covered 
 entity to collect, process, or transfer for the 
 purpose of administering benefits to which such 
 individual (or relative or beneficiary of such 
 individual) is entitled on the basis of the 
 individual acting in a role described in clause 
 (i) with respect to the entity, provided that 
 such information is collected, processed, or 
 transferred solely for the purpose of 
 administering such benefits.
 (G) Publicly available information.--
 (i) In general.--For the purposes of 
 subparagraph (C), the term ``publicly available 
 information'' means any information that a 
 covered entity has a reasonable basis to 
 believe--
 (I) has been lawfully made 
 available to the general public from 
 Federal, State, or local government 
 records;
 (II) is widely available to the 
 general public, including information 
 from--
 (aa) a telephone book or 
 online directory;
 (bb) television, internet, 
 or radio content or 
 programming; or
 (cc) the news media or a 
 website that is lawfully 
 available to the general public 
 on an unrestricted basis (for 
 purposes of this subclause a 
 website is not restricted 
 solely because there is a fee 
 or log-in requirement 
 associated with accessing the 
 website); or
 (III) is a disclosure to the 
 general public that is required to be 
 made by Federal, State, or local law.
 (ii) Exclusions.--Such term does not 
 include an obscene visual depiction (as defined 
 for purposes of section 1460 of title 18, 
 United States Code).
 (11) Covered entity.--The term ``covered entity'' means any 
 person that--
 (A) is subject to the Federal Trade Commission Act 
 (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.) or is--
 (i) a common carrier described in section 
 5(a)(2) of such Act (15 U.S.C. 45(a)(2)); or
 (ii) an organization not organized to carry 
 on business for their own profit or that of 
 their members;
 (B) collects, processes, or transfers covered data; 
 and
 (C) determines the purposes and means of such 
 collection, processing, or transfer.
 (12) Covered internet platform.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``covered internet 
 platform'' means any public-facing website, internet 
 application, or mobile application, including a social 
 network site, video sharing service, search engine, or 
 content aggregation service.
 (B) Exclusions.--Such term shall not include a 
 platform that--
 (i) is wholly owned, controlled, and 
 operated by a person that--
 (I) for the most recent 6-month 
 period, did not employ more than 500 
 employees;
 (II) for the most recent 3-year 
 period, averaged less than $50,000,000 
 in annual gross receipts; and
 (III) collects or processes on an 
 annual basis the personal data of less 
 than 1,000,000 individuals; or
 (ii) is operated for the sole purpose of 
 conducting research that is not made for profit 
 either directly or indirectly.
 (13) Data broker.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``data broker'' means a 
 covered entity whose principal source of revenue is 
 derived from processing or transferring the covered 
 data of individuals with whom the entity does not have 
 a direct relationship on behalf of third parties for 
 such third parties' use.
 (B) Exclusion.--Such term does not include a 
 service provider.
 (14) Delete.--The term ``delete'' means to remove or 
 destroy information such that it is not maintained in human or 
 machine readable form and cannot be retrieved or utilized in 
 such form in the normal course of business.
 (15) Executive agency.--The term ``Executive agency'' has 
 the meaning set forth in section 105 of title 5, United States 
 Code.
 (16) Independent review board.--The term ``independent 
 review board'' means a board, committee, or other group 
 formally designated by a large online operator to review, to 
 approve the initiation of, and to conduct periodic review of, 
 any research by, or at the direction or discretion of a large 
 online operator, involving human subjects.
 (17) Individual.--The term ``individual'' means a natural 
 person residing in the United States.
 (18) Inferred data.--The term ``inferred data'' means 
 information that is created by a covered entity through the 
 derivation of information, data, assumptions, or conclusions 
 from facts, evidence, or another source of information or data.
 (19) Informed consent.--For purposes of section 206, the 
 term ``informed consent''--
 (A) means a process by which a research subject is 
 provided adequate information prior to being included 
 in any experiment or study to allow for an informed 
 decision about voluntary participation in a behavioral 
 or psychological research experiment or study, while 
 ensuring the understanding of the potential participant 
 of the furnished information and any associated 
 benefits, risks, or consequences of participation prior 
 to obtaining the voluntary agreement to participate by 
 the participant; and
 (B) does not include--
 (i) the consent of an individual under the 
 age of 13; or
 (ii) the consent to a provision contained 
 in a general contract or service agreement.
 (20) Input-transparent algorithm.--
 (A) In general.--For purposes of section 205, the 
 term ``input-transparent algorithm'' means an 
 algorithmic ranking system that does not use the user-
 specific data of a user to determine the order or 
 manner that information is furnished to such user on a 
 covered internet platform, unless the user-specific 
 data is expressly provided to the platform by the user 
 for such purpose.
 (B) Inclusion of age-appropriate content filters.--
 Such term shall include an algorithmic ranking system 
 that uses user-specific data to determine whether a 
 user is old enough to access age-restricted content on 
 a covered internet platform, provided that the system 
 otherwise meets the requirements of subparagraph (A).
 (C) Data provided for express purpose of 
 interaction with platform.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), user-specific data that is provided 
 by a user for the express purpose of determining the 
 order or manner that information is furnished to a user 
 on a covered internet platform--
 (i) shall include user-supplied search 
 terms, filters, speech patterns (if provided 
 for the purpose of enabling the platform to 
 accept spoken input or selecting the language 
 in which the user interacts with the platform), 
 saved preferences, and the user's current 
 geographical location;
 (ii) shall include data supplied to the 
 platform by the user that expresses the user's 
 desire that information be furnished to them, 
 such as the social media profiles the user 
 follows, the video channels the user subscribes 
 to, or other sources of content on the platform 
 the user follows;
 (iii) shall not include the history of the 
 user's connected device, including the user's 
 history of web searches and browsing, 
 geographical locations, physical activity, 
 device interaction, and financial transactions; 
 and
 (iv) shall not include inferences about the 
 user or the user's connected device, without 
 regard to whether such inferences are based on 
 data described in clause (i).
 (21) Large data holder.--The term ``large data holder'' 
 means a covered entity that in the most recent calendar year--
 (A) processed or transferred the covered data of 
 more than 8,000,000 individuals; or
 (B) processed or transferred the sensitive covered 
 data of more than 300,000 individuals or devices that 
 are linked or reasonably linkable to an individual 
 (excluding any instance where the covered entity 
 processes the log-in information of an individual or 
 device to allow the individual or device to log in to 
 an account administered by the covered entity).
 (22) Large online operator.--For purposes of section 206, 
 the term ``large online operator'' means any person that--
 (A) provides an online service;
 (B) has more than 100,000,000 authenticated users 
 of an online service in any 30-day period; and
 (C) is subject to the jurisdiction of the 
 Commission under the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 
 U.S.C. 41 et seq.).
 (23) Material.--The term ``material'' means, with respect 
 to an act, practice, or representation of a covered entity 
 (including a representation made by the covered entity in a 
 privacy policy or similar disclosure to individuals), that such 
 act, practice, or representation is likely to affect an 
 individual's decision or conduct regarding a product or 
 service.
 (24) Online service.--For purposes of section 206, the term 
 ``online service'' means a website or a service, other than an 
 internet access service, that is made available to the public 
 over the internet, including a social network, a search engine, 
 or email service.
 (25) Opaque algorithm.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``opaque algorithm'' 
 means an algorithmic ranking system that determines the 
 order or manner that information is furnished to a user 
 on a covered internet platform based, in whole or part, 
 on user-specific data that was not expressly provided 
 by the user to the platform for such purpose.
 (B) Exception for age-appropriate content 
 filters.--Such term shall not include an algorithmic 
 ranking system used by a covered internet platform if--
 (i) the only user-specific data (including 
 inferences about the user) that the system uses 
 is information relating to the age of the user; 
 and
 (ii) such information is only used to 
 restrict a user's access to content on the 
 basis that the individual is not old enough to 
 access such content.
 (26) Process.--The term ``process'' means any operation or 
 set of operations performed on covered data including analysis, 
 organization, structuring, retaining, using, or otherwise 
 handling covered data.
 (27) Processing purpose.--The term ``processing purpose'' 
 means a reason for which a covered entity processes covered 
 data.
 (28) Research.--The term ``research'' means the scientific 
 analysis of information, including covered data, by a covered 
 entity or those with whom the covered entity is cooperating or 
 others acting at the direction or on behalf of the covered 
 entity, that is conducted for the primary purpose of advancing 
 scientific knowledge and may be for the commercial benefit of 
 the covered entity.
 (29) Search syndication contract; upstream provider; 
 downstream provider.--
 (A) Search syndication contract.--The term ``search 
 syndication contract'' means a contract or subcontract 
 for the sale, license, or other right to access an 
 index of web pages on the internet for the purpose of 
 operating an internet search engine.
 (B) Upstream provider.--The term ``upstream 
 provider'' means, with respect to a search syndication 
 contract, the person that grants access to an index of 
 web pages on the internet to a downstream provider 
 under the contract.
 (C) Downstream provider.--The term ``downstream 
 provider'' means, with respect to a search syndication 
 contract, the person that receives access to an index 
 of web pages on the internet from an upstream provider 
 under such contract.
 (30) Sensitive covered data.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``sensitive covered 
 data'' means any of the following forms of covered data 
 of an individual:
 (i) A unique, government-issued identifier, 
 such as a Social Security number, passport 
 number, or driver's license number, that is not 
 required to be displayed to the public.
 (ii) Any covered data that describes or 
 reveals the diagnosis or treatment of the past, 
 present, or future physical health, mental 
 health, or disability of an individual.
 (iii) A financial account number, debit 
 card number, credit card number, or any 
 required security or access code, password, or 
 credentials allowing access to any such 
 account.
 (iv) Covered data that is biometric 
 information.
 (v) A persistent identifier.
 (vi) Precise geolocation information.
 (vii) The contents of an individual's 
 private communications, such as emails, texts, 
 direct messages, or mail, or the identity of 
 the parties subject to such communications, 
 unless the covered entity is the intended 
 recipient of the communication.
 (viii) Account log-in credentials such as a 
 user name or email address, in combination with 
 a password or security question and answer that 
 would permit access to an online account.
 (ix) Covered data revealing an individual's 
 racial or ethnic origin, or religion in a 
 manner inconsistent with the individual's 
 reasonable expectation regarding the processing 
 or transfer of such information.
 (x) Covered data revealing the sexual 
 orientation or sexual behavior of an individual 
 in a manner inconsistent with the individual's 
 reasonable expectation regarding the processing 
 or transfer of such information.
 (xi) Covered data about the online 
 activities of an individual that addresses or 
 reveals a category of covered data described in 
 another subparagraph of this paragraph.
 (xii) Covered data that is calendar 
 information, address book information, phone or 
 text logs, photos, or videos maintained for 
 private use on an individual's device.
 (xiii) Any covered data collected or 
 processed by a covered entity for the purpose 
 of identifying covered data described in 
 another clause of this paragraph.
 (xiv) Any other category of covered data 
 designated by the Commission pursuant to a 
 rulemaking under section 553 of title 5, United 
 States Code.
 (B) Biometric information.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), the term ``biometric information''--
 (i) means the physiological or biological 
 characteristics of an individual, including 
 deoxyribonucleic acid, that are used, singly or 
 in combination with each other or with other 
 identifying data, to establish the identity of 
 an individual; and
 (ii) includes--
 (I) imagery of the iris, retina, 
 fingerprint, face, hand, palm, vein 
 patterns, and voice recordings, from 
 which an identifier template, such as a 
 faceprint, a minutiae template, or a 
 voiceprint, can be extracted; and
 (II) keystroke patterns or rhythms, 
 gait patterns or rhythms, and sleep, 
 health, or exercise data that contain 
 identifying information.
 (C) Persistent identifier.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), the term ``persistent identifier'' 
 means a technologically derived identifier that 
 identifies an individual, or is linked or reasonably 
 linkable to an individual over time and across services 
 and platforms, which may include a customer number held 
 in a cookie, a static Internet Protocol address, a 
 processor or device serial number, or another unique 
 device identifier.
 (D) Precise geolocation information.--For purposes 
 of subparagraph (A), the term ``precise geolocation 
 information'' means technologically derived information 
 capable of determining the past or present actual 
 physical location of an individual or an individual's 
 device at a specific point in time to within 1,750 
 feet.
 (31) Service provider.--The term ``service provider'' 
 means, with respect to a set of covered data, a covered entity 
 that processes or transfers such covered data for the purpose 
 of performing one or more services or functions on behalf of, 
 and at the direction of, another covered entity that--
 (A) is not related to the covered entity providing 
 the service or function by common ownership or 
 corporate control; and
 (B) does not share common branding with the covered 
 entity providing the service or function.
 (32) Service provider data.--The term ``service provider 
 data'' means, with respect to a set of covered data and a 
 service provider, covered data that is collected by the service 
 provider on behalf of a covered entity or transferred to the 
 service provider by a covered entity for the purpose of 
 allowing the service provider to perform a service or function 
 on behalf of, and at the direction of, such covered entity.
 (33) Third party.--The term ``third party'' means, with 
 respect to a set of covered data, a covered entity--
 (A) that is not a service provider with respect to 
 such covered data; and
 (B) that received such covered data from another 
 covered entity--
 (i) that is not related to the covered 
 entity by common ownership or corporate 
 control; and
 (ii) that does not share common branding 
 with the covered entity.
 (34) Third party data.--The term ``third party data'' 
 means, with respect to a third party, covered data that has 
 been transferred to the third party by a covered entity.
 (35) Transfer.--The term ``transfer'' means to disclose, 
 release, share, disseminate, make available, or license in 
 writing, electronically, or by any other means for 
 consideration of any kind or for a commercial purpose.
 (36) User data.--For purposes of section 206, the term 
 ``user data'' means any information relating to an identified 
 or identifiable individual user, whether directly submitted to 
 the large online operator by the user, or derived from the 
 observed activity of the user by the large online operator.
 (37) User-specific data.--For purposes of section 205, the 
 term ``user-specific data'' means information relating to an 
 individual or a specific connected device that would not 
 necessarily be true of every individual or device.

SEC. 3. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 Except as otherwise provided in this Act, this Act shall take 
effect 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act.

 TITLE I--INDIVIDUAL CONSUMER DATA RIGHTS

SEC. 101. CONSUMER LOYALTY.

 (a) Prohibition on the Denial of Products or Services.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), a covered entity 
 shall not deny products or services to an individual because 
 the individual exercises a right established under subparagraph 
 (A), (B), or (D) of section 103(a)(1).
 (2) Rules of application.--A covered entity--
 (A) shall not be in violation of paragraph (1) with 
 respect to a product or service and an individual if 
 the exercise of a right described in such paragraph by 
 the individual precludes the covered entity from 
 providing such product or service to such individual; 
 and
 (B) may offer different types of pricing and 
 functionalities with respect to a product or service 
 based on an individual's exercise of a right described 
 in such paragraph.
 (b) No Waiver of Individual Controls.--The rights and obligations 
created under section 103 may not be waived in an agreement between a 
covered entity and an individual.

SEC. 102. TRANSPARENCY.

 (a) In General.--A covered entity that processes covered data 
shall, with respect to such data, publish a privacy policy that is--
 (1) disclosed, in a clear and conspicuous manner, to an 
 individual prior to or at the point of the collection of 
 covered data from the individual; and
 (2) made available, in a clear and conspicuous manner, to 
 the public.
 (b) Content of Privacy Policy.--The privacy policy required under 
subsection (a) shall include the following:
 (1) The identity and the contact information of the covered 
 entity (including the covered entity's points of contact for 
 privacy and data security inquiries) and the identity of any 
 affiliate to which covered data may be transferred by the 
 covered entity.
 (2) The categories of covered data the covered entity 
 collects.
 (3) The processing purposes for each category of covered 
 data the covered entity collects.
 (4) Whether the covered entity transfers covered data, the 
 categories of recipients to whom the covered entity transfers 
 covered data, and the purposes of the transfers.
 (5) A general description of the covered entity's data 
 retention practices for covered data and the purposes for such 
 retention.
 (6) How individuals can exercise their rights under section 
 103.
 (7) A general description of the covered entity's data 
 security practices.
 (8) The effective date of the privacy policy.
 (c) Languages.--A privacy policy required under subsection (a) 
shall be made available in all of the languages in which the covered 
entity provides a product or service that is subject to the policy, or 
carries out activities related to such product or service.
 (d) Material Changes.--If a covered entity makes a material change 
to its privacy policy, it shall notify the individuals affected before 
further processing or transferring of previously collected covered data 
and provide an opportunity to withdraw consent to further processing or 
transferring of the covered data under the changed policy. The covered 
entity shall provide direct notification, where possible, regarding a 
material change to the privacy policy to affected individuals, taking 
into account available technology and the nature of the relationship.
 (e) Application to Indirect Transfers.--Where the ownership of an 
individual's device is transferred directly from one individual to 
another individual, a covered entity may satisfy its obligation to 
disclose a privacy policy prior to or at the point of collection of 
covered data by making the privacy policy available under subsection 
(a)(2).

SEC. 103. INDIVIDUAL CONTROL.

 (a) Access to, and Correction, Deletion, and Portability of, 
Covered Data.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), a 
 covered entity shall provide an individual, immediately or as 
 quickly as possible and in no case later than 90 days after 
 receiving a verified request from the individual, with the 
 right to reasonably--
 (A) access--
 (i) the covered data of the individual, or 
 an accurate representation of the covered data 
 of the individual, that is or has been 
 processed by the covered entity or any service 
 provider of the covered entity;
 (ii) if applicable, a list of categories of 
 third parties and service providers to whom the 
 covered entity has transferred the covered data 
 of the individual; and
 (iii) if a covered entity transfers covered 
 data, a description of the purpose for which 
 the covered entity transferred the covered data 
 of the individual to a service provider or 
 third party;
 (B) request that the covered entity--
 (i) correct material inaccuracies or 
 materially incomplete information with respect 
 to the covered data of the individual that is 
 maintained by the covered entity; and
 (ii) notify any service provider or third 
 party to which the covered entity transferred 
 such covered data of the corrected information;
 (C) request that the covered entity--
 (i) either delete or de-identify covered 
 data of the individual that is or has been 
 maintained by the covered entity; and
 (ii) notify any service provider or third 
 party to which the covered entity transferred 
 such covered data of the individual's request, 
 unless the transfer of such data to the third 
 party was made at the direction of the 
 individual; and
 (D) to the extent that is technically feasible, 
 provide covered data of the individual that is or has 
 been generated and submitted to the covered entity by 
 the individual and maintained by the covered entity in 
 a portable, structured, and machine-readable format 
 that is not subject to licensing restrictions.
 (2) Frequency and cost of access.--A covered entity shall--
 (A) provide an individual with the opportunity to 
 exercise the rights described in paragraph (1) not less 
 than twice in any 12-month period; and
 (B) with respect to the first 2 times that an 
 individual exercises the rights described in paragraph 
 (1) in any 12-month period, allow the individual to 
 exercise such rights free of charge.
 (3) Exceptions.--A covered entity--
 (A) shall not comply with a request to exercise the 
 rights described in paragraph (1) if the covered entity 
 cannot verify that the individual making the request is 
 the individual to whom the covered data that is the 
 subject of the request relates;
 (B) may decline to comply with a request that 
 would--
 (i) require the covered entity to retain 
 any covered data for the sole purpose of 
 fulfilling the request;
 (ii) be impossible or demonstrably 
 impracticable to comply with; or
 (iii) require the covered entity to 
 combine, relink, or otherwise re-identify 
 covered data that has been de-identified;
 (iv) result in the release of trade 
 secrets, or other proprietary or confidential 
 data or business practices;
 (v) interfere with law enforcement, 
 judicial proceedings, investigations, or 
 reasonable efforts to guard against, detect, or 
 investigate malicious or unlawful activity, or 
 enforce contracts;
 (vi) require disproportionate effort, 
 taking into consideration available technology, 
 or would not be reasonably feasible on 
 technical grounds;
 (vii) compromise the privacy, security, or 
 other rights of the covered data of another 
 individual;
 (viii) be excessive or abusive to another 
 individual; or
 (ix) violate Federal or State law or the 
 rights and freedoms of another individual, 
 including under the Constitution of the United 
 States; and
 (C) may delete covered data instead of providing 
 access and correction rights under subparagraphs (A) 
 and (B) of paragraph (1) if such covered data--
 (i) is not sensitive covered data; and
 (ii) is used only for the purposes of 
 contacting individuals with respect to 
 marketing communications.
 (b) Regulations.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Commission shall promulgate regulations under section 
553 of title 5, United States Code, establishing requirements for 
covered entities with respect to the verification of requests to 
exercise rights described in subsection (a)(1).

SEC. 104. RIGHTS TO CONSENT.

 (a) Consent.--Except as provided in section 108, a covered entity 
shall not, without the prior, affirmative express consent of an 
individual--
 (1) transfer sensitive covered data of the individual to a 
 third party; or
 (2) process sensitive covered data of the individual.
 (b) Requirements for Affirmative Express Consent.--In obtaining the 
affirmative express consent of an individual to process the sensitive 
covered data of the individual as required under subsection (a)(2), a 
covered entity shall provide the individual with notice that shall--
 (1) include a clear description of the processing purpose 
 for which the sensitive covered data will be processed;
 (2) clearly identify any processing purpose that is 
 necessary to fulfill a request made by the individual;
 (3) include a prominent heading that would enable a 
 reasonable individual to easily identify the processing purpose 
 for which consent is sought; and
 (4) clearly explain the individual's right to provide or 
 withhold consent.
 (c) Requirements Related to Minors.--A covered entity shall not 
transfer the covered data of an individual to a third party without 
affirmative express consent from the individual or the individual's 
parent or guardian if the covered entity has actual knowledge that the 
individual is between 13 and 16 years of age.
 (d) Right To Opt Out.--Except as provided in section 108, a covered 
entity shall provide an individual with the ability to opt out of the 
collection, processing, or transfer of such individual's covered data 
before such collection, processing, or transfer occurs.
 (e) Prohibition on Inferred Consent.--A covered entity shall not 
infer that an individual has provided affirmative express consent to a 
processing purpose from the inaction of the individual or the 
individual's continued use of a service or product provided by the 
covered entity.
 (f) Withdrawal of Consent.--A covered entity shall provide an 
individual with a clear and conspicuous means to withdraw affirmative 
express consent.
 (g) Rulemaking.--The Commission may promulgate regulations under 
section 553 of title 5, United States Code, to establish requirements 
for covered entities regarding clear and conspicuous procedures for 
allowing individuals to provide or withdraw affirmative express consent 
for the collection of sensitive covered data.

SEC. 105. MINIMIZING DATA COLLECTION, PROCESSING, AND RETENTION.

 (a) In General.--A covered entity shall not collect, process, or 
transfer covered data beyond--
 (1) what is reasonably necessary, proportionate, and 
 limited to provide or improve a product, service, or a 
 communication about a product or service, including what is 
 reasonably necessary, proportionate, and limited to provide a 
 product or service specifically requested by an individual or 
 reasonably anticipated within the context of the covered 
 entity's ongoing relationship with an individual;
 (2) what is reasonably necessary, proportionate, or limited 
 to otherwise process or transfer covered data in a manner that 
 is described in the privacy policy that the covered entity is 
 required to publish under section 102(a); or
 (3) what is expressly permitted by this Act or any other 
 applicable Federal law.
 (b) Best Practices.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Commission shall issue guidelines 
recommending best practices for covered entities to minimize the 
collection, processing, and transfer of covered data in accordance with 
this section.
 (c) Rule of Construction.--Notwithstanding section 405 of this Act, 
nothing in this section supersedes any other provision of this Act or 
other applicable Federal law.

SEC. 106. SERVICE PROVIDERS AND THIRD PARTIES.

 (a) Service Providers.--A service provider--
 (1) shall not process service provider data for any 
 processing purpose that is not performed on behalf of, and at 
 the direction of, the covered entity that transferred the data 
 to the service provider;
 (2) shall not transfer service provider data to a third 
 party for any purpose other than a purpose performed on behalf 
 of, or at the direction of, the covered entity that transferred 
 the data to the service provider without the affirmative 
 express consent of the individual to whom the service provider 
 data relates;
 (3) at the direction of the covered entity that transferred 
 service provider data to the service provider, shall delete or 
 de-identify such data--
 (A) as soon as practicable after the service 
 provider has completed providing the service or 
 function for which the data was transferred to the 
 service provider; or
 (B) as soon as practicable after the end of the 
 period during which the service provider is to provide 
 services with respect to such data, as agreed to by the 
 service provider and the covered entity that 
 transferred the data;
 (4) is exempt from the requirements of section 103 with 
 respect to service provider data, but shall, to the extent 
 practicable--
 (A) assist the covered entity from which it 
 received the service provider data in fulfilling 
 requests to exercise rights under section 103(a); and
 (B) upon receiving notice from a covered entity of 
 a verified request made under section 103(a)(1) to 
 delete, de-identify, or correct service provider data 
 held by the service provider, delete, de-identify, or 
 correct such data; and
 (5) is exempt from the requirements of sections 104 and 
 105.
 (b) Third Parties.--A third party--
 (1) shall not process third party data for a processing 
 purpose inconsistent with the reasonable expectation of the 
 individual to whom such data relates;
 (2) for purposes of paragraph (1), may reasonably rely on 
 representations made by the covered entity that transferred 
 third party data regarding the reasonable expectations of 
 individuals to whom such data relates, provided that the third 
 party conducts reasonable due diligence on the representations 
 of the covered entity and finds those representations to be 
 credible; and
 (3) is exempt from the requirements of sections 104 and 
 105.
 (c) Bankruptcy.--In the event that a covered entity enters into a 
bankruptcy proceeding which would lead to the disclosure of covered 
data to a third party, the covered entity shall in a reasonable time 
prior to the disclosure--
 (1) provide notice of the proposed disclosure of covered 
 data, including the name of the third party and their policies 
 and practices with respect to the covered data, to all affected 
 individuals; and
 (2) provide each affected individual with the opportunity 
 to withdraw any previous affirmative express consent related to 
 the covered data of the individual or request the deletion or 
 de-identification of the covered data of the individual.
 (d) Additional Obligations on Covered Entities.--
 (1) In general.--A covered entity shall exercise reasonable 
 due diligence to ensure compliance with this section before--
 (A) selecting a service provider; or
 (B) deciding to transfer covered data to a third 
 party.
 (2) Guidance.--Not later than 2 years after the effective 
 date of this Act, the Commission shall publish guidance 
 regarding compliance with this subsection. Such guidance shall, 
 to the extent practicable, minimize unreasonable burdens on 
 small- and medium-sized covered entities.

SEC. 107. PRIVACY IMPACT ASSESSMENTS.

 (a) Privacy Impact Assessments of New or Material Changes to 
Processing of Covered Data.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act (or, if later, not later than 1 year 
 after a covered entity first meets the definition of a large 
 data holder (as defined in section 2)), each covered entity 
 that is a large data holder shall conduct a privacy impact 
 assessment of each of their processing activities involving 
 covered data that present a heightened risk of harm to 
 individuals, and each such assessment shall weigh the benefits 
 of the covered entity's covered data collection, processing, 
 and transfer practices against the potential adverse 
 consequences to individual privacy of such practices.
 (2) Assessment requirements.--A privacy impact assessment 
 required under paragraph (1)--
 (A) shall be reasonable and appropriate in scope 
 given--
 (i) the nature of the covered data 
 collected, processed, or transferred by the 
 covered entity;
 (ii) the volume of the covered data 
 collected, processed, or transferred by the 
 covered entity;
 (iii) the size of the covered entity; and
 (iv) the potential risks posed to the 
 privacy of individuals by the collection, 
 processing, or transfer of covered data by the 
 covered entity;
 (B) shall be documented in written form and 
 maintained by the covered entity unless rendered out of 
 date by a subsequent assessment conducted under 
 subsection (b); and
 (C) shall be approved by the data privacy officer 
 of the covered entity.
 (b) Ongoing Privacy Impact Assessments.--
 (1) In general.--A covered entity that is a large data 
 holder shall, not less frequently than once every 2 years after 
 the covered entity conducted the privacy impact assessment 
 required under subsection (a), conduct a privacy impact 
 assessment of the collection, processing, and transfer of 
 covered data by the covered entity to assess the extent to 
 which--
 (A) the ongoing practices of the covered entity are 
 consistent with the covered entity's published privacy 
 policies and other representations that the covered 
 entity makes to individuals;
 (B) any customizable privacy settings included in a 
 service or product offered by the covered entity are 
 adequately accessible to individuals who use the 
 service or product and are effective in meeting the 
 privacy preferences of such individuals;
 (C) the practices and privacy settings described in 
 subparagraphs (A) and (B), respectively--
 (i) meet the expectations of a reasonable 
 individual; and
 (ii) provide an individual with adequate 
 control over the individual's covered data;
 (D) the covered entity could enhance the privacy 
 and security of covered data through technical or 
 operational safeguards such as encryption, de-
 identification, and other privacy-enhancing 
 technologies; and
 (E) the processing of covered data is compatible 
 with the stated purposes for which it was collected.
 (2) Approval by data privacy officer.--The data privacy 
 officer of a covered entity shall approve the findings of an 
 assessment conducted by the covered entity under this 
 subsection.

SEC. 108. SCOPE OF COVERAGE.

 (a) General Exceptions.--Notwithstanding any provision of this 
title other than subsections (a) through (c) of section 102, a covered 
entity may collect, process or transfer covered data for any of the 
following purposes, provided that the collection, processing, or 
transfer is reasonably necessary, proportionate, and limited to such 
purpose:
 (1) To initiate or complete a transaction or to fulfill an 
 order or provide a service specifically requested by an 
 individual, including associated routine administrative 
 activities such as billing, shipping, financial reporting, and 
 accounting.
 (2) To perform internal system maintenance, diagnostics, 
 product or service management, inventory management, and 
 network management.
 (3) To prevent, detect, or respond to a security incident 
 or trespassing, provide a secure environment, or maintain the 
 safety and security of a product, service, or individual.
 (4) To protect against malicious, deceptive, fraudulent, or 
 illegal activity.
 (5) To comply with a legal obligation or the establishment, 
 exercise, analysis, or defense of legal claims or rights, or as 
 required or specifically authorized by law.
 (6) To comply with a civil, criminal, or regulatory 
 inquiry, investigation, subpoena, or summons by an Executive 
 agency.
 (7) To cooperate with an Executive agency or a law 
 enforcement official acting under the authority of an Executive 
 or State agency concerning conduct or activity that the 
 Executive agency or law enforcement official reasonably and in 
 good faith believes may violate Federal, State, or local law, 
 or pose a threat to public safety or national security.
 (8) To address risks to the safety of an individual or 
 group of individuals, or to ensure customer safety, including 
 by authenticating individuals in order to provide access to 
 large venues open to the public.
 (9) To effectuate a product recall pursuant to Federal or 
 State law.
 (10) To conduct public or peer-reviewed scientific, 
 historical, or statistical research that--
 (A) is in the public interest;
 (B) adheres to all applicable ethics and privacy 
 laws; and
 (C) is approved, monitored, and governed by an 
 institutional review board or other oversight entity 
 that meets standards promulgated by the Commission 
 pursuant to section 553 of title 5, United States Code.
 (11) To transfer covered data to a service provider.
 (12) For a purpose identified by the Commission pursuant to 
 a regulation promulgated under subsection (b).
 (b) Additional Purposes.--The Commission may promulgate regulations 
under section 553 of title 5, United States Code, identifying 
additional purposes for which a covered entity may collect, process or 
transfer covered data.
 (c) Small Business Exception.--Sections 103, 105, and 301 shall not 
apply in the case of a covered entity that can establish that, for the 
3 preceding calendar years (or for the period during which the covered 
entity has been in existence if such period is less than 3 years)--
 (1) the covered entity's average annual gross revenues did 
 not exceed $50,000,000;
 (2) on average, the covered entity annually processed the 
 covered data of less than 1,000,000 individuals;
 (3) the covered entity never employed more than 500 
 individuals at any one time; and
 (4) the covered entity derived less than 50 percent of its 
 revenues from transferring covered data.

 TITLE II--DATA TRANSPARENCY, INTEGRITY, AND SECURITY

SEC. 201. ALGORITHM BIAS, DETECTION, AND MITIGATION.

 (a) FTC Enforcement Assistance.--
 (1) In general.--Whenever the Commission obtains 
 information that a covered entity may have processed or 
 transferred covered data in violation of Federal anti-
 discrimination laws, the Commission shall transmit such 
 information (excluding any such information that is a trade 
 secret as defined by section 1839 of title 18, United States 
 Code) to the appropriate Executive agency or State agency with 
 authority to initiate proceedings relating to such violation.
 (2) Annual report.--Beginning in 2021, the Commission shall 
 submit an annual report to Congress that includes--
 (A) a summary of the types of information the 
 Commission transmitted to Executive agencies or State 
 agencies during the preceding year pursuant to this 
 subsection; and
 (B) a summary of how such information relates to 
 Federal anti-discrimination laws.
 (3) Cooperation with other agencies.--The Commission may 
 implement this subsection by executing agreements or memoranda 
 of understanding with the appropriate Executive agencies.
 (4) Relationship to other laws.--Notwithstanding section 
 405, nothing in this subsection shall supersede any other 
 provision of law.
 (b) Algorithm Transparency Reports.--
 (1) Study and report.--
 (A) Study.--The Commission shall conduct a study, 
 using the Commission's authority under section 6(b) of 
 the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 46(b)), 
 examining the use of algorithms to process covered data 
 in a manner that may violate Federal anti-
 discrimination laws.
 (B) Report.--Not later than 3 years after the date 
 of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall publish 
 a report containing the results of the study required 
 under subparagraph (A).
 (C) Guidance.--The Commission shall use the results 
 of the study described in paragraph (A) to develop 
 guidance to assist covered entities in avoiding the 
 discriminatory use of algorithms.
 (2) Updated report.--Not later than 5 years after the 
 publication of the report required under paragraph (1), the 
 Commission shall publish an updated report.

SEC. 202. DIGITAL CONTENT FORGERIES.

 (a) Definition.--Not later than 6 months after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology shall develop and publish a definition of ``digital content 
forgery'' and accompanying explanatory materials.
 (b) Elements of Definition.--In developing a definition of 
``digital content forgery'' under subsection (a), the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology shall consider the following 
factors:
 (1) Whether the content is created with the intent to 
 deceive an individual into believing the content was genuine.
 (2) Whether the content is genuine or manipulated.
 (3) The impression the content makes on a reasonable 
 individual that observes the content.
 (4) Whether the production of the content was substantially 
 dependent upon technical means, rather than the ability of 
 another individual to physically or verbally impersonate such 
 individual.
 (5) The scope of technologies that may be utilized during 
 the creation or publication of digital content forgeries, 
 including--
 (A) video recording or film;
 (B) sound recording;
 (C) electronic image or photograph; or
 (D) any digital representation of speech or 
 conduct.
 (c) Scope of Definition.--The definition published by the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology under subsection (a) shall not 
supersede any other provision of law or be construed to limit the 
authority of any Executive agency related to digital content forgeries.
 (d) Commission Reports.--
 (1) Initial report.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 National Institute of Standards and Technology publishes the 
 definition and materials required under subsection (a), the 
 Commission shall publish a report regarding the impact of 
 digital content forgeries on individuals and competition.
 (2) Subsequent reports.--Not later than 2 years after the 
 publication of the report required under paragraph (1), and as 
 often as the Commission shall deem necessary thereafter, the 
 Commission shall publish an updated version of such report.
 (3) Content of reports.--Each report required under this 
 subsection shall include--
 (A) a description of the types of digital content 
 forgeries, including those used to commit fraud, cause 
 adverse consequences, violate any provision of law 
 enforced by the Commission, or violate civil rights 
 recognized under Federal law;
 (B) a description of the common sources in the 
 United States of digital content forgeries and 
 commercial sources of digital content forgery 
 technologies;
 (C) an assessment of the uses, applications, and 
 adverse consequences of digital content forgeries, 
 including the impact of digital content forgeries on 
 individuals, digital identity, and competition;
 (D) an analysis of the methods available to 
 individuals to identify digital content forgeries as 
 well as a description of commercial technological 
 countermeasures that are, or could be, used to address 
 concerns with digital content forgeries, which may 
 include countermeasures that warn individuals of 
 suspect content;
 (E) a description of any remedies available to 
 protect an individual's identity and reputation from 
 adverse consequences caused by digital content 
 forgeries, such as protections or remedies available 
 under the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 41 et 
 seq.) or any other law; and
 (F) any additional information the Commission 
 determines appropriate.
 (e) Establishment of Digital Content Forgery Prize Competition.--
Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology, in 
coordination with the Commission, shall establish under section 24 of 
the Stevenson-Wydler Technology Innovation Act of 1980 (15 U.S.C. 3719) 
a prize competition to spur the development of technical solutions to 
assist individuals and the public in identifying digital content 
forgeries and related technologies.

SEC. 203. DATA BROKERS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than January 31 of each calendar year 
that follows a calendar year during which a covered entity acted as a 
data broker, such covered entity shall register with the Commission 
pursuant to the requirements of this section.
 (b) Registration Requirements.--In registering with the Commission 
as required under subsection (a), a data broker shall do the following:
 (1) Pay to the Commission a registration fee of $100.
 (2) Provide the Commission with the following information:
 (A) The name and primary physical, email, and 
 internet addresses of the data broker.
 (B) Any additional information or explanation the 
 data broker chooses to provide concerning its data 
 collection and processing practices.
 (c) Penalties.--A data broker that fails to register as required 
under subsection (a) shall be liable for--
 (1) a civil penalty of $50 for each day it fails to 
 register, not to exceed a total of $10,000 for each year; and
 (2) an amount equal to the fees due under this section for 
 each year that it failed to register as required under 
 subsection (a).
 (d) Publication of Registration Information.--The Commission shall 
publish on the internet website of the Commission the registration 
information provided by data brokers under this section.

SEC. 204. PROTECTION OF COVERED DATA.

 (a) In General.--A covered entity shall establish, implement, and 
maintain reasonable administrative, technical, and physical data 
security policies and practices to protect against risks to the 
confidentiality, security, and integrity of covered data.
 (b) Data Security Requirements.--The data security policies and 
practices required under subsection (a) shall be--
 (1) appropriate to the size and complexity of the covered 
 entity, the nature and scope of the covered entity's collection 
 or processing of covered data, the volume and nature of the 
 covered data at issue, and the cost of available tools to 
 improve security and reduce vulnerabilities; and
 (2) designed to--
 (A) identify and assess vulnerabilities to covered 
 data;
 (B) take reasonable preventative and corrective 
 action to address known vulnerabilities to covered 
 data; and
 (C) detect, respond to, and recover from 
 cybersecurity incidents related to covered data.
 (c) Rulemaking and Guidance.--
 (1) Rulemaking authority and scope.--
 (A) In general.--The Commission may, pursuant to a 
 proceeding in accordance with section 553 of title 5, 
 United States Code, issue regulations to identify 
 processes for receiving and assessing information 
 regarding vulnerabilities to covered data that are 
 reported to the covered entity.
 (B) Consultation with nist.--In promulgating 
 regulations under this paragraph, the Commission shall 
 consult with, and take into consideration guidance 
 from, the National Institute for Standards and 
 Technology
 (2) Guidance.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Commission shall issue guidance to 
 covered entities on how to--
 (A) identify and assess vulnerabilities to covered 
 data, including--
 (i) the potential for unauthorized access 
 to covered data;
 (ii) vulnerabilities in the covered 
 entity's collection or processing of covered 
 data;
 (iii) the management of access rights; and
 (iv) the use of service providers to 
 process covered data;
 (B) take reasonable preventative and corrective 
 action to address vulnerabilities to covered data; and
 (C) detect, respond to, and recover from 
 cybersecurity incidents and events.
 (d) Applicability of Other Information Security Laws.--A covered 
entity that is required to comply with title V of the Gramm-Leach-
Bliley Act (15 U.S.C. 6801 et seq.) or the Health Information 
Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (42 U.S.C. 17931 et 
seq.), and is in compliance with the information security requirements 
of such Act, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements 
of this section with respect to covered data that is subject to the 
requirements of such Act.

SEC. 205. FILTER BUBBLE TRANSPARENCY.

 (a) In General.--Beginning on the date that is 1 year after the 
date of enactment of this Act, it shall be unlawful--
 (1) for any person to operate a covered internet platform 
 that uses an opaque algorithm unless the person complies with 
 the requirements of subsection (b); or
 (2) for any upstream provider to grant access to an index 
 of web pages on the internet under a search syndication 
 contract that does not comply with the requirements of 
 subsection (c).
 (b) Opaque Algorithm Requirements.--
 (1) In general.--The requirements of this subsection with 
 respect to a person that operates a covered internet platform 
 that uses an opaque algorithm are the following:
 (A) The person provides notice to users of the 
 platform that the platform uses an opaque algorithm 
 that makes inferences based on user-specific data to 
 select the content the user sees. Such notice shall be 
 presented in a clear, conspicuous manner on the 
 platform whenever the user interacts with an opaque 
 algorithm for the first time, and may be a one-time 
 notice that can be dismissed by the user.
 (B) The person makes available a version of the 
 platform that uses an input-transparent algorithm and 
 enables users to easily switch between the version of 
 the platform that uses an opaque algorithm and the 
 version of the platform that uses the input-transparent 
 algorithm by selecting a prominently placed icon, which 
 shall be displayed wherever the user interacts with an 
 opaque algorithm.
 (2) Nonapplication to certain downstream providers.--
 Paragraph (1) shall not apply with respect to an internet 
 search engine if--
 (A) the search engine is operated by a downstream 
 provider with fewer than 1,000 employees; and
 (B) the search engine uses an index of web pages on 
 the internet to which such provider received access 
 under a search syndication contract.
 (c) Search Syndication Contract Requirement.--The requirements of 
this subsection with respect to a search syndication contract are 
that--
 (1) as part of the contract, the upstream provider makes 
 available to the downstream provider the same input-transparent 
 algorithm used by the upstream provider for purposes of 
 complying with subsection (b)(1)(B); and
 (2) the upstream provider does not impose any additional 
 costs, degraded quality, reduced speed, or other constraint on 
 the functioning of such algorithm when used by the downstream 
 provider to operate an internet search engine relative to the 
 performance of such algorithm when used by the upstream 
 provider to operate an internet search engine.

SEC. 206. UNFAIR AND DECEPTIVE ACTS AND PRACTICES RELATING TO THE 
 MANIPULATION OF USER INTERFACES.

 (a) Conduct Prohibited.--
 (1) In general.--It shall be unlawful for any large online 
 operator--
 (A) to design, modify, or manipulate a user 
 interface with the purpose or substantial effect of 
 obscuring, subverting, or impairing user autonomy, 
 decision making, or choice to obtain consent or user 
 data;
 (B) to subdivide or segment consumers of online 
 services into groups for the purposes of behavioral or 
 psychological experiments or studies, except with the 
 informed consent of each user involved; or
 (C) to design, modify, or manipulate a user 
 interface on a website or online service, or portion 
 thereof, that is directed to an individual under the 
 age of 13, with the purpose or substantial effect of 
 cultivating compulsive usage, including video auto-play 
 functions initiated without the consent of a user.
 (b) Duties of Large Online Operators.--Any large online operator 
that engages in any form of behavioral or psychological research based 
on the activity or data of its users shall--
 (1) disclose to its users on a routine basis, but not less 
 than once each 90 days, any experiments or studies that a user 
 was subjected to or enrolled in with the purpose of promoting 
 engagement or product conversion;
 (2) disclose to the public on a routine basis, but not less 
 than once each 90 days, any experiments or studies with the 
 purposes of promoting engagement or product conversion being 
 currently undertaken, or concluded since the prior disclosure;
 (3) shall present the disclosures in paragraphs (1) and (2) 
 in a manner that--
 (A) is clear, conspicuous, context appropriate, and 
 easily accessible; and
 (B) is not deceptively obscured;
 (4) establish an Independent Review Board for any 
 behavioral or psychological research, of any purpose, conducted 
 on users or on the basis of user activity or data, which shall 
 review and have authority to approve, require modification in, 
 or disapprove all behavioral or psychological experiments or 
 research; and
 (5) ensure that any Independent Review Board established 
 under paragraph (4) shall register with the Commission, 
 including providing to the Commission--
 (A) the names and resumes of every board member;
 (B) the composition and reporting structure of the 
 Board to the management of the operator;
 (C) the process by which the Board is to be 
 notified of proposed studies or modifications along 
 with the processes by which the Board is capable of 
 vetoing or amending such proposals;
 (D) any compensation provided to board members; and
 (E) any conflict of interest that might exist 
 concerning a board member's participation in the Board.
 (c) Registered Professional Standards Body.--
 (1) In general.--An association of large online operators 
 may register as a professional standards body by filing with 
 the Commission an application for registration in such form as 
 the Commission, by rule, may prescribe containing the rules of 
 the association and such other information and documents as the 
 Commission, by rule, may prescribe as necessary or appropriate 
 in the public interest or for protecting the welfare of users 
 of large online operators.
 (2) Professional standards body.--An association of large 
 online operators may not register as a professional standards 
 body unless the Commission determines that--
 (A) the association is so organized and has the 
 capacity to enforce compliance by its members and 
 persons associated with its members, with the 
 provisions of this Act;
 (B) the rules of the association provide that any 
 large online operator may become a member of such 
 association;
 (C) the rules of the association ensure a fair 
 representation of its members in the selection of its 
 directors and administration of its affairs and provide 
 that one or more directors shall be representative of 
 users and not be associated with, or receive any direct 
 or indirect funding from, a member of the association 
 or any large online operator;
 (D) the rules of the association are designed to 
 prevent exploitative and manipulative acts or 
 practices, to promote transparent and fair principles 
 of technology development and design, to promote 
 research in keeping with best practices of study design 
 and informed consent, and to continually evaluate 
 industry practices and issue binding guidance 
 consistent with the objectives of this Act;
 (E) the rules of the association provide that its 
 members and persons associated with its members shall 
 be appropriately disciplined for violation of any 
 provision of this Act, the rules or regulations 
 thereunder, or the rules of the association, by 
 expulsion, suspension, limitation of activities, 
 functions, fine, censure, being suspended or barred 
 from being associated with a member, or any other 
 appropriate sanction; and
 (F) the rules of the association are in accordance 
 with the provisions of this Act, and, in general, 
 provide a fair procedure for the disciplining of 
 members and persons associated with members, the denial 
 of membership to any person seeking membership therein, 
 the barring of any person from becoming associated with 
 a member thereof, and the prohibition or limitation by 
 the association of any person with respect to access to 
 services offered by the association or a member 
 thereof.
 (3) Responsibilities and activities.--
 (A) Bright-line rules.--An association shall 
 develop, on a continuing basis, guidance and bright-
 line rules for the development and design of technology 
 products of large online operators consistent with 
 subparagraph (B).
 (B) Safe harbors.--In formulating guidance under 
 subparagraph (A), the association shall define conduct 
 that does not have the purpose or substantial effect of 
 subverting or impairing user autonomy, decision making, 
 or choice, or of cultivating compulsive usage for 
 children such as--
 (i) de minimis user interface changes 
 derived from testing consumer preferences, 
 including different styles, layouts, or text, 
 where such changes are not done with the 
 purpose of obtaining user consent or user data;
 (ii) algorithms or data outputs outside the 
 control of a large online operator or its 
 affiliates; and
 (iii) establishing default settings that 
 provide enhanced privacy protection to users or 
 otherwise enhance their autonomy and decision-
 making ability.
 (d) Enforcement by the Commission.--
 (1) Unfair or deceptive acts or practice.--A violation of 
 subsection (a) or (b) shall be treated as a violation of a rule 
 defining an unfair or deceptive act or practice under section 
 18(a)(1)(B) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 
 57a(a)(1)(B)).
 (2) Determination.--For purposes of enforcement of this 
 Act, the Commission shall determine an act or practice is 
 unfair or deceptive if the act or practice--
 (A) has the purpose, or substantial effect, of 
 subverting or impairing user autonomy, decision making, 
 or choice to obtain consent or user data; or
 (B) has the purpose, or substantial effect, of 
 cultivating compulsive usage by a child under 13.
 (3) Regulations.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Commission shall promulgate 
 regulations under section 553 of title 5, United States Code, 
 that--
 (A) establish rules and procedures for obtaining 
 the informed consent of users;
 (B) establish rules for the registration, 
 formation, oversight, and management of the independent 
 review boards, including standards that ensure 
 effective independence of such entities from improper 
 or undue influence by a large online operator;
 (C) establish rules for the registration, 
 formation, oversight, and management of professional 
 standards bodies, including procedures for the regular 
 oversight of such bodies and revocation of their 
 designation; and
 (D) in consultation with a professional standards 
 body established under subsection (c), define conduct 
 that does not have the purpose or substantial effect of 
 subverting or impairing user autonomy, decision making, 
 or choice, or of cultivating compulsive usage for 
 children such as--
 (i) de minimis user interface changes 
 derived from testing consumer preferences, 
 including different styles, layouts, or text, 
 where such changes are not done with the 
 purpose of obtaining user consent or user data;
 (ii) algorithms or data outputs outside the 
 control of a large online operator or its 
 affiliates; and
 (iii) establishing default settings that 
 provide enhanced privacy protection to users or 
 otherwise enhance their autonomy and decision-
 making ability.
 (4) Safe harbor.--The Commission may not bring an 
 enforcement action under this section against any large online 
 operator that relied in good faith on the guidance of a 
 professional standards body.

 TITLE III--CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY

SEC. 301. DESIGNATION OF DATA PRIVACY OFFICER AND DATA SECURITY 
 OFFICER.

 (a) In General.--A covered entity shall designate--
 (1) one or more qualified employees or contractors as data 
 privacy officers; and
 (2) one or more qualified employees or contractors (in 
 addition to any employee or contractor designated under 
 paragraph (1)) as data security officers.
 (b) Responsibilities of Data Privacy Officers and Data Security 
Officers.--An employee or contractor who is designated by a covered 
entity as a data privacy officer or a data security officer shall be 
responsible for, at a minimum, coordinating the covered entity's 
policies and practices regarding--
 (1) in the case of a data privacy officer, compliance with 
 the privacy requirements with respect to covered data under 
 this Act; and
 (2) in the case of a data security officer, the security 
 requirements with respect to covered data under this Act.

SEC. 302. INTERNAL CONTROLS.

 A covered entity shall maintain internal controls and reporting 
structures to ensure that appropriate senior management officials of 
the covered entity are involved in assessing risks and making decisions 
that implicate compliance with this Act.

SEC. 303. WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTIONS.

 (a) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
 (1) Whistleblower.--The term ``whistleblower'' means any 
 employee or contractor of a covered entity who voluntarily 
 provides to the Commission original information relating to 
 non-compliance with, or any violation or alleged violation of, 
 this Act or any regulation promulgated under this Act.
 (2) Original information.--The term ``original 
 information'' means information that is provided to the 
 Commission by an individual and--
 (A) is derived from the independent knowledge or 
 analysis of an individual;
 (B) is not known to the Commission from any other 
 source at the time the individual provides the 
 information; and
 (C) is not exclusively derived from an allegation 
 made in a judicial or an administrative action, in a 
 governmental report, a hearing, an audit, or an 
 investigation, or from news media, unless the 
 individual is a source of the allegation.
 (b) Effect of Whistleblower Retaliations on Penalties.--In seeking 
penalties under section 401 for a violation of this Act or a regulation 
promulgated under this Act by a covered entity, the Commission shall 
consider whether the covered entity retaliated against an individual 
who was a whistleblower with respect to original information that led 
to the successful resolution of an administrative or judicial action 
brought by the Commission or the Attorney General of the United States 
under this Act against such covered entity.

 TITLE IV--ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY AND NEW PROGRAMS

SEC. 401. ENFORCEMENT BY THE FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION.

 (a) Enforcement by the Federal Trade Commission.--
 (1) Unfair or deceptive acts or practices.--A violation of 
 this Act or a regulation promulgated under this Act shall be 
 treated as a violation of a rule defining an unfair or 
 deceptive act or practice prescribed under section 18(a)(1)(B) 
 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 57a(a)(1)(B)).
 (2) Powers of commission.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in paragraphs 
 (3) and (4), the Commission shall enforce this Act and 
 the regulations promulgated under this Act in the same 
 manner, by the same means, and with the same 
 jurisdiction, powers, and duties as though all 
 applicable terms and provisions of the Federal Trade 
 Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.) were incorporated 
 into and made a part of this Act.
 (B) Privileges and immunities.--Any person who 
 violates this Act or a regulation promulgated under 
 this Act shall be subject to the penalties and entitled 
 to the privileges and immunities provided in the 
 Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.).
 (C) Limiting certain actions unrelated to this act; 
 authority preserved.--
 (i) In general.--The Commission shall not 
 bring any action to enforce the prohibition in 
 section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act 
 (15 U.S.C. 45) on unfair or deceptive acts or 
 practices with respect to the privacy or 
 security of covered data, unless such action is 
 consistent with this Act.
 (ii) Rule of construction.--Except as 
 provided in paragraph (1), nothing in this Act 
 shall be construed to limit the authority of 
 the Commission under any other provision of 
 law, or to limit the Commission's authority to 
 bring actions under section 5 of the Federal 
 Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45) relating to 
 unfair or deceptive acts or practices to 
 enforce the provisions of this Act and 
 regulations promulgated thereunder, including 
 to ensure that privacy policies required under 
 section 102 are truthful and non-misleading.
 (3) Common carriers and nonprofit organizations.--
 Notwithstanding section 4, 5(a)(2), or 6 of the Federal Trade 
 Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 44, 45(a)(2), 46) or any 
 jurisdictional limitation of the Commission, the Commission 
 shall also enforce this Act and the regulations promulgated 
 under this Act, in the same manner provided in paragraphs (1) 
 and (2) of this subsection, with respect to--
 (A) common carriers subject to the Communications 
 Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 151 et seq.) and all Acts 
 amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto; and
 (B) organizations not organized to carry on 
 business for their own profit or that of their members.
 (4) Data privacy and security fund.--
 (A) Establishment of victims relief fund.--There is 
 established in the Treasury of the United States a 
 separate fund to be known as the ``Data Privacy and 
 Security Victims Relief Fund'' (referred to in this 
 paragraph as the ``Victims Relief Fund'').
 (B) Deposits.--
 (i) Deposits from the commission.--The 
 Commission shall deposit into the Victims 
 Relief Fund the amount of any civil penalty 
 obtained against any covered entity in any 
 action the Commission commences to enforce this 
 Act or a regulation promulgated under this Act.
 (ii) Deposits from the attorney general.--
 The Attorney General of the United States shall 
 deposit into the Victims Relief Fund the amount 
 of any civil penalty obtained against any 
 covered entity in any action the Attorney 
 General commences on behalf of the Commission 
 to enforce this Act or a regulation promulgated 
 under this Act.
 (C) Use of fund amounts.--Amounts in the Victims 
 Relief Fund shall be available to the Commission, 
 without fiscal year limitation, to provide redress, 
 payments or compensation, or other monetary relief to 
 individuals affected by an act or practice for which 
 civil penalties have been imposed under this Act. To 
 the extent that individuals cannot be located or such 
 redress, payments or compensation, or other monetary 
 relief are otherwise not practicable, the Commission 
 may use such funds for the purpose of consumer or 
 business education relating to data privacy and 
 security or for the purpose of engaging in 
 technological research that the Commission considers 
 necessary to enforce this Act.
 (D) Amounts not subject to apportionment.--
 Notwithstanding any other provision of law, amounts in 
 the Victims Relief Fund shall not be subject to 
 apportionment for purposes of chapter 15 of title 31, 
 United States Code, or under any other authority.
 (5) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized 
 to be appropriated to the Commission $100,000,000 to carry out 
 this Act.
 (b) Enforcement of Section 206.--This section shall not apply to a 
violation of section 206 or a regulation promulgated under such 
section, and such section shall be enforced under subsection (d) of 
such section.

SEC. 402. ENFORCEMENT BY STATE ATTORNEYS GENERAL.

 (a) Civil Action.--Except as provided in subsection (h), in any 
case in which the attorney general of a State has reason to believe 
that an interest of the residents of that State has been or is 
adversely affected by the engagement of any covered entity in an act or 
practice that violates this Act or a regulation promulgated under this 
Act, the attorney general of the State, as parens patriae, may bring a 
civil action on behalf of the residents of the State in an appropriate 
district court of the United States to--
 (1) enjoin that act or practice;
 (2) enforce compliance with this Act or the regulation;
 (3) obtain damages, civil penalties, restitution, or other 
 compensation on behalf of the residents of the State; or
 (4) obtain such other relief as the court may consider to 
 be appropriate.
 (b) Rights of the Commission.--
 (1) In general.--Except where not feasible, the attorney 
 general of a State shall notify the Commission in writing prior 
 to initiating a civil action under subsection (a). Such notice 
 shall include a copy of the complaint to be filed to initiate 
 such action. Upon receiving such notice, the Commission may 
 intervene in such action and, upon intervening--
 (A) be heard on all matters arising in such action; 
 and
 (B) file petitions for appeal of a decision in such 
 action.
 (2) Notification timeline.--Where it is not feasible for 
 the attorney general of a State to provide the notification 
 required by paragraph (2) before initiating a civil action 
 under paragraph (1), the attorney general shall notify the 
 Commission immediately after initiating the civil action.
 (c) Consolidation of Actions Brought by Two or More State Attorneys 
General.--Whenever a civil action under subsection (a) is pending and 
another civil action or actions are commenced pursuant to such 
subsection in a different Federal district court or courts that involve 
one or more common questions of fact, such action or actions shall be 
transferred for the purposes of consolidated pretrial proceedings and 
trial to the United States District Court for the District of Columbia; 
provided however, that no such action shall be transferred if pretrial 
proceedings in that action have been concluded before a subsequent 
action is filed by the attorney general of the State.
 (d) Actions by Commission.--In any case in which a civil action is 
instituted by or on behalf of the Commission for violation of this Act 
or a regulation promulgated under this Act, no attorney general of a 
State may, during the pendency of such action, institute a civil action 
against any defendant named in the complaint in the action instituted 
by or on behalf of the Commission for violation of this Act or a 
regulation promulgated under this Act that is alleged in such 
complaint.
 (e) Investigatory Powers.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to prevent the attorney general of a State or another 
authorized official of a State from exercising the powers conferred on 
the attorney general or the State official by the laws of the State to 
conduct investigations, to administer oaths or affirmations, or to 
compel the attendance of witnesses or the production of documentary or 
other evidence.
 (f) Venue; Service of Process.--
 (1) Venue.--Any action brought under subsection (a) may be 
 brought in the district court of the United States that meets 
 applicable requirements relating to venue under section 1391 of 
 title 28, United States Code.
 (2) Service of process.--In an action brought under 
 subsection (a), process may be served in any district in which 
 the defendant--
 (A) is an inhabitant; or
 (B) may be found.
 (g) Actions by Other State Officials.--
 (1) In general.--Any State official who is authorized by 
 the State attorney general to be the exclusive authority in 
 that State to enforce this Act may bring a civil action under 
 subsection (a), subject to the same requirements and 
 limitations that apply under this section to civil actions 
 brought under such subsection by State attorneys general.
 (2) Authority preserved.--Nothing in this section shall be 
 construed to prohibit an authorized official of a State from 
 initiating or continuing any proceeding in a court of the State 
 for a violation of any civil or criminal law of the State.
 (h) Exclusion of Section 206.--This section shall not apply to a 
violation of section 206 or a regulation promulgated under such 
section.

SEC. 403. AUTHORITY OF COMMISSION TO SEEK PERMANENT INJUNCTION AND 
 OTHER EQUITABLE REMEDIES.

 (a) In General.--Section 13 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 
U.S.C. 53) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``is violating, 
 or is about to violate,'' and inserting ``has violated, 
 is violating, or is about to violate'';
 (B) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) by inserting ``either (A)'' before 
 ``the enjoining thereof''; and
 (ii) by inserting ``or (B) the permanent 
 enjoining thereof or the ordering of an 
 equitable remedy under subsection (e)'' after 
 ``final,''; and
 (C) in the flush text following paragraph (2)--
 (i) by striking ``to enjoin any such act or 
 practice'' and inserting ``to obtain such 
 injunction or remedy'';
 (ii) by striking ``Upon a proper showing 
 that'' and inserting ``In a case brought under 
 paragraph (2)(A), upon a proper showing that'';
 (iii) by striking ``such action'' and 
 inserting ``a temporary restraining order or 
 preliminary injunction'';
 (iv) by striking ``without bond'';
 (v) by striking ``That in proper cases the 
 Commission may seek, and after proper proof, 
 the court may issue, a permanent injunction.'' 
 and inserting the following: ``That in a case 
 brought under paragraph (2)(B), after proper 
 proof and upon a showing that a permanent 
 injunction or equitable remedy under subsection 
 (e) would be in the public interest, the court 
 may issue a permanent injunction, an equitable 
 remedy under subsection (e), or any other 
 relief as the court determines to be just and 
 proper, including temporary or preliminary 
 equitable relief.'';
 (vi) by inserting ``under paragraph (2)'' 
 after ``Any suit''; and
 (vii) by striking ``any suit under this 
 section'' and inserting ``any such suit''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(e) Equitable Remedies.--
 ``(1) Restitution; contract rescission and reformation.--
 ``(A) In general.--In a suit brought under 
 subsection (b)(2)(B) with respect to a violation of a 
 provision of law enforced by the Commission, the 
 Commission may seek, and the court may order--
 ``(i) restitution for consumer loss 
 resulting from such violation;
 ``(ii) rescission or reformation of 
 contracts; and
 ``(iii) the refund of money or return of 
 property.
 ``(B) Limitations period.--Relief under this 
 paragraph shall not be available for a claim arising 
 more than 10 years before the filing of the 
 Commission's suit under subsection (b)(2)(B) with 
 respect to the violation that gave rise to the claim.
 ``(2) Disgorgement.--
 ``(A) In general.--In a suit brought under 
 subsection (b)(2)(B) with respect to a violation of a 
 provision of law enforced by the Commission, the 
 Commission may seek, and the court may order, 
 disgorgement of any unjust enrichment that a person 
 obtained as a result of that violation.
 ``(B) Calculation.--Any disgorgement that is 
 ordered with respect to a person under subparagraph (A) 
 shall be offset by any amount of restitution that the 
 person is ordered to pay under paragraph (1).
 ``(C) Limitations period.--Disgorgement under this 
 paragraph shall be limited to any unjust enrichment a 
 person, partnership, or corporation obtained in the 10 
 years preceding the filing of the Commission's suit 
 under subsection (b)(2)(B) with respect to the 
 violation that resulted in such unjust enrichment.
 ``(3) Calculation of limitations periods.--For purposes of 
 calculating any limitations period with respect to a claim for 
 relief under paragraph (1) or a disgorgement order under 
 paragraph (2), any time in which a person, partnership, or 
 corporation against which such relief or order is sought is 
 outside the United States shall not be counted for purposes of 
 calculating such period.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--Section 16(a)(2) of the Federal Trade 
Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 56(a)(2)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``(relating to 
 injunctive relief)''; and
 (2) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``(relating to 
 consumer redress)''.
 (c) Applicability.--The amendments made by this section shall apply 
with respect to any action or proceeding that is commenced on or after 
the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 404. APPROVED CERTIFICATION PROGRAMS.

 (a) In General.--The Commission shall establish a program in which 
the Commission shall approve voluntary consensus standards or 
certification programs that covered entities may use to comply with one 
or more provisions in this Act.
 (b) Effect of Approval.--A covered entity in compliance with a 
voluntary consensus standard approved by the Commission shall be deemed 
to be in compliance with the provisions of this Act.
 (c) Time for Approval.--The Commission shall issue a decision 
regarding the approval of a proposed voluntary consensus standard not 
later than 180 days after a request for approval is submitted.
 (d) Effect of Non-Compliance.--A covered entity that claims 
compliance with an approved voluntary consensus standard and is found 
not to be in compliance with such program by the Commission or in any 
judicial proceeding shall be considered to be in violation of the 
section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45) 
prohibition on unfair or deceptive acts or practices.
 (e) Rulemaking.--Not later than 120 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Commission shall promulgate regulations 
under section 553 of title 5, United States Code, establishing a 
process for review of requests for approval of proposed voluntary 
consensus standards under this section.
 (f) Requirements.--To be eligible for approval by the Commission, a 
voluntary consensus standard shall meet the requirements for voluntary 
consensus standards set forth in Office of Management and Budget 
Circular A-119, or other equivalent guidance document, ensuring that 
they are the result of due process procedures and appropriately balance 
the interests of all the stakeholders, including individuals, 
businesses, organizations, and other entities making lawful uses of the 
covered data covered by the standard, and--
 (1) specify clear and enforceable requirements for covered 
 entities participating in the program that provide an overall 
 level of data privacy or data security protection that is 
 equivalent to or greater than that provided in the relevant 
 provisions in this Act;
 (2) require each participating covered entity to post in a 
 prominent place a clear and conspicuous public attestation of 
 compliance and a link to the website described in paragraph 
 (4);
 (3) include a process for an independent assessment of a 
 participating covered entity's compliance with the voluntary 
 consensus standard or certification program prior to 
 certification and at reasonable intervals thereafter;
 (4) create a website describing the voluntary consensus 
 standard or certification program's goals and requirements, 
 listing participating covered entities, and providing a method 
 for individuals to ask questions and file complaints about the 
 program or any participating covered entity;
 (5) take meaningful action for non-compliance with the 
 relevant provisions of this Act by any participating covered 
 entity, which shall depend on the severity of the non-
 compliance and may include--
 (A) removing the covered entity from the program;
 (B) referring the covered entity to the Commission 
 or other appropriate Federal or State agencies for 
 enforcement;
 (C) publicly reporting the disciplinary action 
 taken with respect to the covered entity;
 (D) providing redress to individuals harmed by the 
 non-compliance;
 (E) making voluntary payments to the United States 
 Treasury; and
 (F) taking any other action or actions to ensure 
 the compliance of the covered entity with respect to 
 the relevant provisions of this Act; and
 (6) issue annual reports to the Commission and to the 
 public detailing the activities of the program and its 
 effectiveness during the preceding year in ensuring compliance 
 with the relevant provisions of this Act by participating 
 covered entities and taking meaningful disciplinary action for 
 non-compliance with such provisions by such entities.

SEC. 405. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FEDERAL AND STATE LAW.

 (a) Relationship to State Law.--No State or political subdivision 
of a State may adopt, maintain, enforce, or continue in effect any law, 
regulation, rule, requirement, or standard related to the data privacy 
or data security and associated activities of covered entities.
 (b) Savings Provision.--Subsection (a) may not be construed to 
preempt State laws that directly establish requirements for the 
notification of consumers in the event of a data breach.
 (c) Relationship to Other Federal Laws.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and 
 (3), the requirements of this Act shall supersede any other 
 Federal law or regulation relating to the privacy or security 
 of covered data or associated activities of covered entities.
 (2) Savings provision.--This Act may not be construed to 
 modify, limit, or supersede the operation of the following:
 (A) The Children's Online Privacy Protection Act 
 (15 U.S.C. 6501 et seq.).
 (B) The Communications Assistance for Law 
 Enforcement Act (47 U.S.C. 1001 et seq.).
 (C) Section 227 of the Communications Act of 1934 
 (47 U.S.C. 227).
 (D) Title V of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (15 
 U.S.C. 6801 et seq.).
 (E) The Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681 
 et seq.).
 (F) The Health Insurance Portability and 
 Accountability Act (Public Law 104-191).
 (G) The Electronic Communications Privacy Act (18 
 U.S.C. 2510 et seq.).
 (H) Section 444 of the General Education Provisions 
 Act (20 U.S.C. 1232g) (commonly referred to as the 
 ``Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974'').
 (I) The Driver's Privacy Protection Act of 1994 (18 
 U.S.C. 2721 et seq.).
 (J) The Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 U.S.C. 
 App. 1301 et seq.).
 (K) The Health Information Technology for Economic 
 and Clinical Health Act (42 U.S.C. 17931 et seq.).
 (3) Compliance with saved federal laws.--To the extent that 
 the data collection, processing, or transfer activities of a 
 covered entity are subject to a law listed in paragraph (2), 
 such activities of such entity shall not be subject to the 
 requirements of this Act.
 (4) Nonapplication of fcc laws and regulations to covered 
 entities.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, neither 
 any provision of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 151 
 et seq.) and all Acts amendatory thereof and supplementary 
 thereto nor any regulation promulgated by the Federal 
 Communications Commission under such Acts shall apply to any 
 covered entity with respect to the collection, use, processing, 
 transferring, or security of individual information, except to 
 the extent that such provision or regulation pertains solely to 
 ``911'' lines or other emergency line of a hospital, medical 
 provider or service office, health care facility, poison 
 control center, fire protection agency, or law enforcement 
 agency.

SEC. 406. CONSTITUTIONAL AVOIDANCE.

 The provisions of this Act shall be construed, to the greatest 
extent possible, to avoid conflicting with the Constitution of the 
United States, including the protections of free speech and freedom of 
the press established under the First Amendment to the Constitution of 
the United States.

SEC. 407. SEVERABILITY.

 If any provision of this Act, or an amendment made by this Act, is 
determined to be unenforceable or invalid, the remaining provisions of 
this Act and the amendments made by this Act shall not be affected.
 <all>