Calendar No. 34
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 684
[Report No. 101-10]
A BILL
To authorize competitive oil and gas leasing and development on the Coastal
Plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in a manner consistent with
protection of the environment, and for other purposes.
March 29, 1989
Reported, under authority of the order of the Senate of March 17 (legislative
day, January 3), 1989, the following original bill; which was read twice
and placed on the calendar
S 684 PCS
Calendar No. 34
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 684
[Report No. 101-10]
To authorize competitive oil and gas leasing and development on the Coastal
Plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in a manner consistent with
protection of the environment, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
March 29, 1989
Mr. JOHNSTON, from the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources, reported,
under authority of the order of the Senate of March 17 (legislative day,
January 3), 1989, the following original bill; which was read twice and
placed on the calendar
A BILL
To authorize competitive oil and gas leasing and development on the Coastal
Plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in a manner consistent with
protection of the environment, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act may be cited as the
 `Arctic Coastal Plain Competitive Oil and Gas Leasing Act'.
TITLE I--STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
 SEC. 101. PURPOSE AND POLICY- The Congress hereby declares that it is the
 purpose and policy of this Act--
 (a) to authorize competitive oil and gas leasing and development to
 proceed on the Coastal Plain in a manner consistent with protection of
 the environment, maintenance of fish and wildlife and their habitat,
 and the interests of the area's subsistence users; and
 (b) to provide a new source of funding for: (1) the Land and Water
 Conservation Fund; (2) the preservation, protection, creation, enhancement,
 or restoration of wetlands; (3) research, development and commercialization
 of energy conservation and alternative sources; and (4) for other purposes.
 SEC. 102. DEFINITIONS- When used in this Act--
 (a) the term `Coastal Plain' means that area identified as such in the map
 entitled `Arctic National Wildlife Refuge', dated August 1980, as referenced
 in section 1002(b) of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act
 of 1980 (16 U.S.C. 3142(b)(1) comprising approximately one million five
 hundred and forty-nine thousand acres; and
 (b) the term `Secretary' means the Secretary of the Interior or the
 Secretary's designee.
TITLE II--CONGRESSIONAL DETERMINATION OF COMPATIBILITY
 SEC. 201. CONGRESSIONAL DETERMINATION- Congress hereby determines that
 oil and gas activities authorized and conducted on the Coastal Plain
 pursuant to this Act so as to result in no significant adverse effect on
 fish and wildlife, their habitat, and the environment, shall be deemed
 to be compatible with the major purposes for which the Arctic National
 Wildlife Refuge was established and no further findings or determinations
 of compatibility by the Secretary under the National Wildlife Refuge
 System Administration Act are required to implement this Congressional
 determination.
TITLE III--COASTAL PLAIN COMPETITIVE LEASING PROGRAM
 SEC. 301. LEASING PROGRAM FOR LANDS WITHIN THE COASTAL PLAIN- (a) The
 Congress hereby authorizes and directs the Secretary of the Interior and
 other appropriate Federal officers and agencies to take such actions as
 are necessary to establish and implement a competitive oil and gas leasing
 program that will result in an environmentally sound program for the
 exploration, development, and production of the oil and gas resources of
 the Coastal Plain. Activities pursuant to such program shall be undertaken--
 (1) in accordance with the standards for protection of the environment as
 required by title IV of this Act; and
 (2) in a manner to ensure the receipt of fair market value by the public
 for the mineral resources to be leased.
 (b) This Act shall be the sole authority for leasing on the Coastal Plain.
 SEC. 302. RULES AND REGULATIONS- (a) The Secretary shall prescribe such
 rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes
 and provisions of this Act, including rules and regulations relating to
 protection of the environment of the Coastal Plain, as required by title
 IV of this Act. Such rules and regulations shall be promulgated within
 nine months after the date of enactment of this Act and shall, as of their
 effective date, apply to all operations conducted under a lease issued
 under the provisions of this Act and all operations on the Coastal Plain
 related to the exploration, development and production of oil and gas.
 (b) In the formulation and promulgation of rules and regulations under
 this Act, the Secretary shall request and give due consideration to the
 views of appropriate officials of the State of Alaska and the Government of
 Canada. The Secretary shall also consult with the Environmental Protection
 Agency and the Army Corps of Engineers in developing rules and regulations
 relating to the environment.
 (c) The Secretary shall periodically review and, if appropriate, revise
 the rules and regulations issued under subsection (a) of this section to
 reflect any significant biological, environmental, or engineering data
 which come to the Secretary's attention.
 SEC. 303. ADEQUACY OF DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR'S LEGISLATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL
 IMPACT STATEMENT- (a) The `Final Legislative Environmental Impact Statement'
 (April 1987) on the Coastal Plain prepared pursuant to section 1002 of the
 Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act of 1980 (16 U.S.C. 3142),
 and section 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969
 (42 U.S.C. 4332(2)(C)), is hereby found by the Congress to be adequate to
 satisfy the legal requirements under the National Environmental Policy Act
 of 1969 with respect to actions authorized to be taken by the Secretary to
 develop and promulgate the regulations for the establishment of a leasing
 program authorized by this Act prior to conducting the first lease sale.
 (b) Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, nothing in this Act
 shall be considered or construed as otherwise limiting or affecting in any
 way the applicability of section 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental
 Policy Act of 1969 to all phases of oil and gas leasing, exploration,
 development and production and related activities conducted under or
 associated with the leasing program authorized by this Act, nor shall
 anything in this Act be considered or construed as in any way limiting or
 affecting the applicability of any other Federal or State law relating to
 the protection of the environment.
 SEC. 304. LEASE SALES- (a) Lands may be leased pursuant to the provisions
 of this Act to any person qualified to obtain a lease for deposits of oil
 and gas under the Mineral Leasing Act, as amended (30 U.S.C. 181).
 (b) The Secretary shall, by regulation, establish procedures for--
 (1) receipt and consideration of sealed nominations for any area in the
 Coastal Plain for inclusion in, or exclusion from, a lease sale;
 (2) public notice of and comment on designation of areas to be included in,
 or excluded from, a lease sale;
 (3) review by the State of Alaska and local governments in Alaska which
 may be impacted by the proposed leasing; and
 (4) periodic consultation with the State of Alaska and local governments
 in Alaska, oil and gas lessees, and representatives of other individuals
 or organizations engaged in activity in or on the Coastal Plain including
 those involved in subsistence uses and recreational activities.
 (c) The Secretary shall, by regulation, provide for lease sales of lands on
 the Coastal Plain. When lease sales are to be held, they shall occur after
 the nomination process provided for in subsection (b) of this section. For
 the first lease sale, the Secretary shall, consistent with the requirements
 set forth in title IV of this Act, offer for lease those acres receiving
 the greatest number of nominations, but not to exceed a total of three
 hundred thousand acres. If the total acreage nominated is less than three
 hundred thousand acres, he shall include in such sale any other acreage
 which he believes has the highest resource potential, but in no event shall
 more than three hundred thousand acres of the Coastal Plain be offered in
 such sale. Thereafter, no more than three hundred thousand acres of the
 Coastal Plain may be leased in any one lease sale. The initial lease sale
 shall be held within eighteen months of the issuance of final regulations
 by the Secretary. The second lease sale shall be held thirty-six months
 after the initial sale, with additional sales conducted every twenty-four
 months thereafter so long as sufficient interest in development exists to
 warrant, in the Secretary's judgment, the conduct of such sales.
 (d) Areas of the Coastal Plain deemed by the Secretary to be of particular
 environmental sensitivity may be excluded from leasing by the Secretary. The
 Secretary shall notify the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of
 the United States Senate and the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs
 of the United States House of Representatives ninety days in advance of
 excluding any such areas from leasing. If the Secretary later determines
 that exploration, development, or production will result in no significant
 adverse effect on fish and wildlife, their habitat, and the environment,
 the Secretary shall, consistent with the provisions of subsection (c)
 of this section, offer such lands for leasing.
 SEC. 305. GRANT OF LEASES BY THE SECRETARY- (a) The Secretary is authorized
 to grant to the highest responsible qualified bidder by sealed competitive
 bid any lands to be leased on the Coastal Plain upon payment by the lessee
 of such bonus as may be accepted by the Secretary. The royalty shall be
 fixed in the lease and shall be not less than 12 1/2 per centum in amount
 or value of the production removed or sold from the lease.
 (b) The Secretary shall not accept a bid for a lease if the Secretary
 finds, after notice and hearing, that the bidder is not meeting diligent
 development requirements on any other Federal mineral lease.
 (c) ANTITRUST REVIEW- (1) Following each notice of a proposed lease sale
 and before the acceptance of bids and the issuance of leases based on such
 bids, the Secretary shall allow the Attorney General, in consultation with
 the Federal Trade Commission, thirty days to review the results of such
 lease sale, except that the Attorney General, after consultation with the
 Federal Trade Commission, may agree to a shorter review period.
 (2) The Attorney General may, in consultation with the Federal Trade
 Commission, conduct such antitrust review on the likely effects the
 issuance of such leases would have on competition as the Attorney General,
 after consultation with the Federal Trade Commission, deems appropriate
 and shall advise the Secretary with respect to such review. The Secretary
 shall provide such information as the Attorney General, after consultation
 with the Federal Trade Commission, may require in order to conduct any
 antitrust review pursuant to this paragraph and to make recommendations
 pursuant to paragraph (3) of this subsection.
 (3) The Attorney General, after consultation with the Federal Trade
 Commission, may make such recommendations to the Secretary, including
 the nonacceptance of any bid or the imposition of terms or conditions on
 any lease, as may be appropriate to prevent any situation inconsistent
 with the antitrust laws. If the Secretary determines, or if the Attorney
 General advises the Secretary, after consultation with the Federal Trade
 Commission and prior to the issuance of any lease, that such lease would
 create or maintain a situation inconsistent with the antitrust laws,
 the Secretary may--
 (A) refuse to accept an otherwise qualified bid for such lease, or refuse
 to issue such lease, notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section; or
 (B) modify or impose terms or conditions on the lease, consistent with
 advice provided by the Attorney General.
 (4) The Secretary may issue a lease notwithstanding adverse advice from
 the Attorney General, or refuse to impose recommended terms or conditions,
 if he makes specific findings that approval of the lease is necessary to
 carry out the purposes of the Act, that approval is consistent with the
 public interest, and that there are no reasonably available alternatives
 that would have significantly less anticompetitive effects. In such event,
 he must notify the lessee and the Attorney General of his findings.
 (5) Nothing in this subsection shall restrict the authority of the Attorney
 General, the Federal Trade Commission, or any other Federal department
 or agency to secure information, conduct reviews, make recommendations,
 or seek appropriate relief.
 (d) SECRETARY'S APPROVAL FOR SALE, EXCHANGE, ASSIGNMENT, OR OTHER TRANSFER
 OF LEASES- No lease issued under this Act may be sold, exchanged, assigned,
 or otherwise transferred except with the approval of the Secretary. Prior
 to any such approval, the Secretary shall consult with, and give due
 consideration to the views of, the Attorney General.
 (e) NO ANTITRUST IMMUNITY OR DEFENSES- Nothing in this Act shall be deemed
 to convey to any person, association, corporation, or other business
 organization immunity from civil or criminal liability, or to create
 defenses to actions, under any antitrust law.
 (f) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section--
 (1) `antitrust review' shall be deemed an `antitrust investigation' for
 the purpose of the Antitrust Civil Process Act (15 U.S.C. 1311).
 (2) `antitrust laws' means those Acts set forth in section 1 of the Clayton
 Act (15 U.S.C. 12), as amended.
 SEC. 306. LEASE TERMS AND CONDITIONS- An oil and gas lease issued pursuant
 to this section shall--
 (a) be for a tract consisting of a compact area not to exceed two thousand
 five hundred and sixty acres;
 (b) be for an initial period of ten years and shall be extended for so long
 thereafter as oil or gas is produced in paying quantities from the lease
 or unit area to which the lease is committed or for so long as drilling
 or reworking operations, as approved by the Secretary, are conducted on
 the lease or unit area;
 (c) require the payment of royalty as provided for in section 305 of
 this Act;
 (d) require approval of an exploration plan, as provided for in section
 307 of this Act;
 (e) require approval of a development and production plan, as required in
 section 307 of this Act;
 (f) require posting of bond required by section 308 of this Act;
 (g) provide for the suspension of the lease during the initial lease term
 or thereafter pursuant to section 309 of this Act;
 (h) provide for the cancellation of the lease during the initial lease
 term or thereafter pursuant to section 310 of this Act;
 (i) contain the terms and conditions relating to protection of fish and
 wildlife, their habitat, and the environment, as required by title IV of
 this Act;
 (j) contain such rental and other provisions as the Secretary may prescribe
 at the time of offering the area for lease; and
 (k) contain such other provisions as the Secretary determines necessary
 to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Act and the regulations
 issued thereunder.
 SEC. 307. EXPLORATION AND DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION PLANS- (a) EXPLORATION
 PLANS- All exploration activities pursuant to any lease issued or maintained
 under this Act shall be conducted in accordance with an approved exploration
 plan or an approved revision of such plan. Prior to commencing exploration
 pursuant to any oil and gas lease issued or maintained under this Act,
 the holder thereof shall submit an exploration plan to the Secretary for
 approval. Such plan may apply to more than one lease held by a lessee in
 any region of the Coastal Plain, or by a group of lessees acting under a
 unitization, pooling, or drilling agreement, and shall be approved by the
 Secretary if he finds that such plan is consistent with the provisions of
 this Act and other applicable law.
 (b) OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION PLANS- All development and
 production pursuant to a lease issued or maintained pursuant to this
 Act shall be conducted in accordance with an approved development and
 production plan. Prior to commencing development or production pursuant
 to any oil and gas lease issued or maintained under this Act, the holder
 thereof shall submit a development and production plan to the Secretary for
 approval. Such plan may apply to more than one lease held by a lessee in
 any region of the Coastal Plain, or by a group of lessees acting under a
 unitization, pooling, or drilling agreement, and shall be approved by the
 Secretary if he finds that such plan is consistent with the provisions of
 this Act and other applicable law.
 (c) REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO EXPLORATION PLANS AND DEVELOPMENT AND
 PRODUCTION PLANS- Exploration plans and development and production plans
 shall include where applicable--
 (1) the names and legal addresses of the following persons: the operator,
 contractors, subcontractors and the owners or lessees other than the
 operator;
 (2) a map or maps showing--
 (A) the location of a point of reference selected by the operator within
 the area covered by the plan of operations showing, in relation to that
 point, existing and proposed access routes or roads within the area, the
 boundaries of proposed surface disturbance and location of all survey lines;
 (B) the location of proposed drilling sites, wellsite layout, and all
 surface facilities;
 (C) sources of construction materials within the area including but not
 limited to gravel; and
 (D) the location of ancillary facilities including but not limited to
 camps, sanitary facilities, water supply, disposal facilities, pipelines,
 fuel storage facilities, storage facilities, base of operations, and
 airstrips. A point of reference selected by the operator within the area
 of operations shall be marked with a ground monument;
 (3) a description of--
 (A) all surface and ancillary facilities, including but not limited to
 camps, sanitary facilities, water supply, disposal facilities, pipelines,
 fuel storage facilities, storage facilities, base of operations, and
 airstrips; and
 (B) the major equipment to be used in the operations, including but not
 limited to equipment and methods for the transport of all waters used in
 or produced by operations, and of the proposed method of transporting such
 equipment within the area covered by the plan of operations including to
 and from the site;
 (4) an estimated schedule for any phase of operations of which review by
 the Secretary is sought and the anticipated date of operation completion;
 (5) the nature and extent of proposed operations;
 (6) plans for reclamation, including:
 (A) the anticipated reclamation work to be performed;
 (B) a proposed schedule of reclamation activities to be performed; and
 (C) a detailed estimate of reclamation costs;
 (7) methods for disposal of all wastes and hazardous and toxic substances;
 (8) an affidavit stating that the operations planned will be in compliance
 with all applicable Federal, State, and local laws and regulations;
 (9) contingency plans in case of spills, leaks, or other accidents; and
 (10) such additional information as may be required by the Secretary to
 ensure that the proposed activities are consistent with this Act, as well
 as other applicable Federal and State environmental laws.
 (d) PROCEDURES FOR PLAN APPROVAL- (1) After an exploration or development
 and production plan is submitted for approval, the Secretary shall promptly
 publish notice of the submission and availability of the text of the proposed
 plan in the Federal Register and a newspaper of general circulation in
 the State of Alaska and provide an opportunity for written public comment.
 (2) Within one hundred and twenty days after receiving an exploration or
 development and production plan, the Secretary shall determine, after taking
 into account any comment received under paragraph (1) of this subsection,
 whether the activities proposed in the plan are consistent with this Act and
 other applicable provisions of Federal and State law. If that determination
 is in the affirmative, the Secretary shall return the plan along with a
 statement of any modifications necessary for its approval. The Secretary,
 as a condition of approving any plan under this section--
 (A) may require modifications to the plan that he considers necessary or
 appropriate to make it consistent with this Act and other applicable law. The
 Secretary shall assess reasonable fees or charges for the reimbursement
 of all necessary and reasonable research, administrative, monitoring,
 enforcement, and reporting costs associated with reviewing the plan and
 monitoring its implementation; and
 (B) shall require such periodic reports regarding the carrying out of the
 drilling and related activities as may be necessary or appropriate for
 purposes of determining the extent to which the plan is being complied with
 and the effectiveness of the plan in ensuring that the drilling and related
 activities are consistent with this Act and other applicable provisions
 of Federal and State law.
 (e) MODIFICATION OF PLANS- If at any time while activities are being
 carried out under a plan approved under this section, the Secretary, on the
 basis of available information, determines that the continuation of any
 particular activity under the plan is likely to result in a significant
 adverse effect on fish on wildlife, their habitat, or the environment,
 the Secretary, after consultation with the lessee shall--
 (1) make modifications to part or all of the plan as necessary or appropriate
 to avoid the significant adverse effect;
 (2) temporarily suspend part or all of the drilling or related activity
 under the plan for such time as the Secretary considers necessary or
 appropriate to avoid such significant adverse effect; or
 (3) terminate and cancel the plan where actions under paragraphs (1) or
 (2) will not avoid the significant adverse effect.
 SEC. 308. BONDING REQUIREMENTS- (a) REQUIREMENT FOR PERFORMANCE BOND-
 After approval of an exploration or development and production plan, the
 lessee shall be required to file with the Secretary a suitable performance
 bond. The bond shall be conditioned upon compliance with all the terms and
 conditions of the lease and all applicable laws. Such performance bond is
 in addition to and not in lieu of any bond or security deposit required by
 other regulatory authorities or required by any other provision of law. The
 lessee may file either a surety bond, or a personal bond consisting of cash
 or negotiable Treasury bonds of the United States. When negotiable Treasury
 bonds serve as the personal bond, they shall be accompanied by a proper
 conveyance to the Secretary of full authority to sell such securities in case
 of a default in the performance of the terms and conditions of the lease.
 (b) AMOUNT OF PERFORMANCE BOND- The performance bond shall be in an amount--
 (1) to be determined by the Secretary to provide for reclamation of
 the lease site in accordance with an approved or revised exploration or
 development and production plan; plus
 (2) an amount set by the Secretary, consistent with the type of operations
 proposed, to provide the means for rapid and effective cleanup, and to
 minimize damages resulting from an oil spill, the escape of gas, refuse,
 domestic wastewater, hazardous or toxic substances, or fire caused by oil
 and gas activities.
 (c) ADJUSTMENT OF BOND TO CONFORM TO REVISED PLAN- In the event that an
 approved exploration or development and production plan is revised, the
 Secretary may adjust the amount of the bond to conform to such modified plan.
 (d) DURATION OF BOND- The responsibility and liability of the lessee and
 its surety under the bond or security deposit shall continue until such
 time as the Secretary, after consultation with affected Federal and State
 agencies, determines that there has been compliance with the terms and
 conditions of the lease and all applicable law.
 (e) TERMINATION OF LIABILITY- Within sixty days after determining that
 there has been compliance with the terms and conditions of the lease and
 all applicable laws, the Secretary shall notify the lessee that the period
 of liability under the bond or security deposit has been terminated.
 SEC. 309. LEASE SUSPENSION- The Secretary may direct or assent to the
 suspension of operations and production under any lease granted under the
 terms of this Act: (1) in the interest of conservation of the resource;
 (2) where there is no available system to transport the resource; or (3)
 where there is a threat of significant adverse effect upon fish or wildlife,
 their habitat or the environment. If such a suspension is directed or
 assented to by the Secretary, any payment of rental prescribed by such
 lease shall be suspended during such period of suspension of operations
 and production, and the term of the lease shall be extended by adding any
 such suspension period thereto.
 SEC. 310. LEASE CANCELLATION- (a) CANCELLATION OF NONPRODUCING LEASE-
 Whenever the owner of a nonproducing lease fails to comply with any of the
 provisions of this Act, or of any applicable provision of Federal or State
 environmental law, or of the lease, or of any regulation issued under this
 Act, such lease may be canceled by the Secretary if such default continues
 for the period of thirty days after mailing of notice by registered letter
 to the lease owner at the lease owner's record post office address.
 (b) CANCELLATION OF PRODUCING LEASE- Whenever the owner of any producing
 lease fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Act, or of any
 applicable provision of Federal or State environmental law, or of the lease,
 or of any regulation issued under this Act, such lease may be forfeited and
 canceled by any appropriate proceeding brought by the Secretary in any United
 States district court having jurisdiction under the provisions of this Act.
 (c) ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS- (1) In addition to the authority for lease
 cancellation provided for by subsections (a) and (b) of this section,
 any lease may be canceled at any time, if the Secretary determines, after
 a hearing, that--
 (A) continued activity pursuant to such lease is likely to result in
 a significant adverse effect to fish or wildlife, their habitat, or the
 environment, or is likely to result in serious harm or damage to human life,
 to property, or to the national security or defense; and
 (B) the likelihood of a significant adverse effect will not disappear
 within a reasonable period of time or the threat of harm or damage will
 not disappear or decrease to any acceptable extent within a reasonable
 period of time.
 (2) Such cancellation shall not occur unless and until operations under such
 lease or permit shall have been under suspension, or temporary prohibition,
 by the Secretary, with due extension of any lease term continuously for
 a period of five years, or for a lesser period upon request of the lessee.
 (3) Cancellation under this subsection shall entitle the lessee to receive
 such compensation as the lessee demonstrates to the Secretary to be equal
 to the lesser of (A) the fair market value of the canceled rights as of
 the date of cancellation, taking account of both anticipated revenues from
 the lease and anticipated costs, including the costs of compliance with all
 applicable regulations and operating orders, liability for cleanup costs or
 damages, or both, in the case of an oil spill or spill of other hazardous
 or toxic materials, fines, damages, penalties, or removal costs assessed
 pursuant to section 315 of this Act or other State or Federal environmental
 law, any fees paid pursuant to section 503 of this Act, and all other
 costs reasonably anticipated on the lease; or (B) the excess, if any,
 over the lessee's revenues from the lease (plus interest thereon from the
 date of receipt to the date of reimbursement) of all consideration paid
 for the lease and all direct expenditures made by the lessee (exclusive
 of any fines, damages, penalties, or removal costs assessed pursuant
 to section 315 of this Act or other State or Federal environmental law,
 and any fees paid pursuant to section 503 of this Act) after the date of
 issuance of such lease and in connection with exploration or development,
 or both, pursuant to the lease (plus interest on such consideration and
 such expenditures from date of payment to date of reimbursement).
 SEC. 311. ASSIGNMENT OR SUBLETTING OF LEASES- No lease issued under the
 authority of this Act shall be assigned or sublet, except with the consent
 of the Secretary.
 SEC. 312. RELINQUISHMENT- The lessee may, at the discretion of the Secretary,
 be permitted at any time to make written relinquishment of all rights
 under any lease issued pursuant to this Act. The Secretary shall accept
 the relinquishment by the lessee of any lease issued under this Act where
 there has not been surface disturbance on the lands covered by the lease.
 SEC. 313. UNITIZATION- For the purpose of conserving the natural resources
 of any oil or gas pool, field, or like area, or any part thereof and in
 order to avoid the unnecessary duplication of facilities, to protect the
 environment of the Coastal Plain, and to protect correlative rights, the
 Secretary shall require to the greatest extent practicable, that lessees
 unite with each other in collectively adopting and operating under a
 cooperative or unit plan of development for operation of such pool, field,
 or like area, or any part thereof. The Secretary is also authorized and
 directed to enter into such agreements as are necessary or appropriate
 for the protection of the United States against drainage.
 SEC. 314. OIL AND GAS INFORMATION- (a)(1) Any lessee or permittee conducting
 any exploration for, or development or production of, oil or gas pursuant
 to this Act shall provide the Secretary access to all data and information
 (including processed, analyzed, and interpreted information) obtained
 from such activity and shall provide copies of such data and information
 as the Secretary may request. Such data and information shall be provided
 in accordance with regulations which the Secretary shall prescribe.
 (2) If interpreted information provided pursuant to paragraph (1) of
 this subsection is provided in good faith by the lessee or permittee,
 such lessee or permittee shall not be responsible for any consequence of
 the use or of reliance upon such interpreted information.
 (3) Whenever any data or information is provided to the Secretary, pursuant
 to paragraph (1) of this subsection--
 (A) by a lessee or permittee, in the form and manner of processing which is
 utilized by such lessee or permittee in the normal conduct of business,
 the Secretary shall pay the reasonable cost of reproducing such data
 and information;
 (B) by a lessee or permittee, in such other form and manner of processing
 as the Secretary may request, the Secretary shall pay the reasonable cost
 of processing and reproducing such data and information.
 (b) The Secretary shall prescribe regulations to: (1) assure that the
 confidentiality of privileged or proprietary information received by the
 Secretary under this section will be maintained; and (2) set forth the
 time periods and conditions which shall be applicable to the release of
 such information.
 SEC. 315. REMEDIES AND PENALTIES- (a) GENERAL- Except as provided in
 section 316 of this Act, the district courts of the United States shall have
 jurisdiction of cases and controversies arising out of, or in connection
 with, any lease issued under this Act. Proceedings may be instituted in
 the judicial district in which any defendant resides or may be found,
 or in the judicial district in which the Coastal Plain is located.
 (b) ACTIONS FOR RELIEF- At the request of the Secretary, the Attorney General
 or a United States Attorney shall institute a civil action in the district
 court of the United States for the district in which any defendant resides
 or may be found, or in the judicial district in which the Coastal Plain is
 located, for a temporary restraining order, injunction, or other appropriate
 remedy to enforce any provision of this Act, any regulation or order issued
 under this Act, or any term of a lease issued pursuant to this Act.
 (c) CIVIL PENALTIES- If any person fails to comply with any provision
 of this Act, or any term of a lease issued pursuant to this Act, or any
 regulation or order issued under this Act, after notice of such failure
 and expiration of any reasonable period allowed for corrective action, such
 person shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than $10,000 for each
 day of the continuance of such failure. The Secretary may assess, collect
 and compromise any such penalty. No penalty shall be assessed until the
 person charged with a violation has been given an opportunity for a hearing.
 (d) CRIMINAL PENALTIES- Any person who knowingly and willfully--
 (1) violates any provision of this Act, any term of a lease issued pursuant
 to this Act, or any regulation or order issued under the authority of this
 Act designed to protect health, safety, or the environment or conserve
 natural resources;
 (2) makes any false statement, representation, or certification in any
 application, record, report or other document filed or required to be
 maintained under this Act;
 (3) falsifies, tampers with, or renders inaccurate any monitoring device
 or method of record required to be maintained under this Act; or
 (4) reveals any data or information required to be kept confidential by
 this Act,
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $100,000,
or by imprisonment for not more than ten years, or both. Each day that a
violation under clause (1) of this subsection continues, or each day that
any monitoring device or data recorder remains inoperative or inaccurate
because of any activity described in clause (3) of this subsection, shall
constitute a separate violation.
 (e) LIABILITY OF CORPORATE OFFICERS AND AGENTS FOR VIOLATIONS BY CORPORATION-
 Whenever a corporation or other entity is subject to prosecution under
 subsection (d) of this section, any officer or agent of such corporation
 or entity who knowingly and willfully authorized, ordered, or carried out
 the proscribed activity shall be subject to the same fines or imprisonment,
 or both, as provided for under subsection (d) of this section.
 (f) CONCURRENT AND CUMULATIVE NATURE OF PENALTIES- The remedies and
 penalties prescribed in this Act shall be concurrent and cumulative and
 the exercise of one shall not preclude the exercise of the others. Further,
 the remedies and penalties prescribed in this Act shall be in addition to
 any other remedies and penalties afforded by any other law or regulation.
 (g) REMOVAL COSTS AND LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES- Notwithstanding any other
 provision of law, if any area of the Coastal Plain or adjacent State waters
 has been or is being polluted by discharges of oil or hazardous or toxic
 substances from exploration, development, or production of oil or gas or
 related activities, conducted by, or on behalf of, a responsible party,
 and if the pollution has damaged or is damaging fish or wildlife, their
 habitat, or the environment of the Coastal Plain or adjacent State waters,
 or if such pollution is causing a substantial threat of damaging those fish
 or wildlife, their habitat, or the environment of the Coastal Plain or
 adjacent State waters, the responsible party shall be jointly, severally
 and strictly liable for the removal costs and damages specified in this
 subsection that arise directly out of or directly result from pollution
 that has damaged, or is damaging or is causing a substantial threat of
 damaging fish or wildlife, their habitat, or the environment of the Coastal
 Plain or adjacent State waters. The Secretary shall make a determination
 with respect to such liability after notice to the responsible party and an
 opportunity for hearing. Upon failure of the responsible party adequately to
 control and remove the pollutant or threat, the Secretary, in cooperation
 with other Federal, State, or local agencies or in cooperation with the
 responsible party, or both, shall have the right to accomplish the control
 and removal at the expense of the responsible party. Funds contained in the
 Coastal Plain Liability and Reclamation Fund, provided for by section 503
 of this Act, may be used to accomplish such control and removal until such
 time as sufficient funds can be recovered from the responsible party. The
 removal costs and damages referred to in this subsection are the following--
 (1) all necessary removal costs as determined by the Secretary;
 (2) damages for injury to, destruction of, loss of, and reclamation of
 natural resources, including the reasonable costs of assessing such injury,
 destruction, loss or reclamation; and
 (3) damages for economic loss resulting from injury to, or destruction of,
 real or personal property or natural resources, and loss of subsistence
 use of natural resources by local residents.
 SEC. 316. JUDICIAL REVIEW- Any complaint filed seeking judicial review of
 an action of the Secretary in promulgating any regulation under this Act
 may be filed only in the United States Court of Appeals for the District of
 Columbia, and such complaint shall be filed within ninety days from the date
 of such promulgation, or after such date if such complaint is based solely
 on grounds arising after such ninetieth day, in which case the complaint
 must be filed within ninety days after the complainant knew or reasonably
 should have known of the grounds for the complaint. Any complaint seeking
 judicial review of any other actions of the Secretary under this Act may
 be filed in any appropriate district court of the United States, and such
 complaint must be filed within ninety days from the date of the action
 being challenged, or after such date if such complaint is based solely
 on grounds arising after such ninetieth day, in which case the complaint
 must be filed within ninety days after the complainant knew or reasonably
 should have known of the grounds for the complaint.
 SEC. 317. ANNUAL REPORT TO CONGRESS- On March 1st of each year following
 the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to
 the Congress an annual report on the leasing program authorized by this Act.
 SEC. 318. INTERESTS OF THE INUPIAT ESKIMO PEOPLE- (a) The prohibitions and
 limitations contained in section 1003 of the Alaska National Interest Lands
 Conservation Act of 1980 (16 U.S.C. 3143) insofar as they have application
 to lands or interests therein owned by the Inupiat Eskimo people within
 the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, but outside the Coastal Plain, are
 hereby repealed.
 (b) The prohibitions and limitations contained in section 1003 of the
 Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act of 1980 (16 U.S.C. 3143)
 insofar as they have application to lands or interests therein owned by
 the Inupiat Eskimo people within the Coastal Plain are hereby repealed as
 of the day after the first lease sale is held pursuant to this Act. With
 respect to the lands and interests therein described in this subsection,
 no exploratory drilling activities shall be authorized until the day after
 such lease sale.
 (c) The substantive provisions of the final regulations issued pursuant to
 this Act which establish environmental stipulations, terms and conditions for
 oil and gas leasing on the Coastal Plain shall apply to the exploration and
 development of all subsurface property interests owned by the Inupiat Eskimo
 people within the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge: Provided, That prior
 to issuance of such regulations, oil and gas exploration and development
 activities on the land and interests therein described in subsection (a),
 shall be governed by the stipulations set forth in appendix 2 of the August
 9, 1983, agreement between the Arctic Slope Regional Corporation and the
 United States.
 (d) Any claims for money damages or other available relief brought by Arctic
 Slope Regional Corporation or Kaktovik Inupiat Corporation alleging that
 the provisions of this Act constitute a taking of contract or property
 rights under the fifth amendment to the Constitution of the United States
 may be brought within one hundred and twenty days of its enactment. A claim
 shall be barred unless a complaint is filed within the time specified. Any
 such complaint shall be filed in a United States district court, and such
 court shall have exclusive jurisdiction to determine such proceedings in
 accordance with the procedures hereinafter provided, and no other court of
 the United States, of any State, territory, or possession of the United
 States, or of the District of Columbia, shall have jurisdiction of any
 claim whether in a proceeding instituted prior to or on or after the date of
 enactment of this Act. Any such proceeding shall be assigned for hearing at
 the earliest possible date, shall take precedence over all other matters
 pending on the docket of the district court at that time, and shall be
 expedited in every way by such court. Any review of an interlocutory or
 final judgment, decree, or order of such district court may be had only
 upon direct appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States.
TITLE IV--COASTAL PLAIN ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
 SEC. 401. (a) NO SIGNIFICANT ADVERSE EFFECT STANDARD TO GOVERN AUTHORIZED
 COASTAL PLAIN ACTIVITIES- The Secretary shall administer the provisions
 of this Act through regulations, lease terms, conditions, restrictions,
 prohibitions, stipulations, and other provisions that ensure the oil and
 gas exploration, development, and production activities on the Coastal
 Plain will result in no significant adverse effect on fish and wildlife,
 their habitat, and the environment, and that shall require the application
 of the best commercially available technology for oil and gas exploration,
 development, and production, on all new exploration, development, and
 production operations, and whenever practicable, on existing operations.
 (b) SITE-SPECIFIC ASSESSMENT AND MITIGATION- The Secretary shall also
 require, with respect to any proposed drilling and related activities, that--
 (1) a site-specific assessment be made of the probable effects, if any,
 that the drilling or related activities will have on fish and wildlife,
 their habitat, and the environment;
 (2) a mitigation plan be implemented to avoid, minimize and compensate
 (in that order and to the extent practicable) any significant adverse
 effect assessed under paragraph (1) of this subsection; and
 (3) the development of the mitigation plan shall occur after consultation
 with the agency or agencies having jurisdiction over matters mitigated by
 the plan.
 SEC. 402. REGULATIONS TO PROTECT THE COASTAL PLAIN'S FISH AND WILDLIFE
 RESOURCES, SUBSISTENCE USERS AND THE ENVIRONMENT- (a) Prior to implementing
 the leasing program authorized by title III of this Act, the Secretary shall
 prepare and promulgate regulations, lease terms, conditions, restrictions,
 prohibitions, stipulations, and other measures designed to ensure that
 the activities undertaken in the Coastal Plain authorized by this Act
 are conducted in a manner consistent with the purposes and environmental
 requirements of this Act.
 (b) The proposed regulations, lease terms, conditions, restrictions,
 prohibitions, and stipulations for the leasing program authorized by title
 III of this Act shall require compliance with all applicable provisions
 of Federal and State environmental law and shall also require--
 (1) as a minimum, the safety and environmental mitigation measures set
 forth in items one through twenty-nine (1 through 29) at pages 167 through
 169 of the `Final Legislative Environmental Impact Statement' (April 1987)
 on the Coastal Plain;
 (2) seasonal limitations on exploration, development and related activities,
 where necessary, to avoid significant adverse effects during periods of
 concentrated fish and wildlife breeding, denning, nesting, spawning and
 migration;
 (3) that exploration activities, except for surface geological studies, be
 limited to the period between approximately November 1 and May 1 and that
 exploration activities will be supported by ice roads, winter trails with
 adequate snow cover, ice pads, ice airstrips, and air transport methods:
 Provided, That such exploration activities may be permitted at other times
 if the Secretary determines, after affording an opportunity for public
 comment and review, that special circumstances exist necessitating that
 exploration activities be conducted at other times of the year and he finds
 that such exploration will have no significant adverse effect on the fish
 and wildlife, their habitat, and the environment of the Coastal Plain;
 (4) design safety and construction standards for all pipelines and any
 access and service roads that--
 (A) minimize adverse effects upon the passage of migratory species such
 as caribou to the maximum extent possible; and
 (B) minimize adverse effects upon the flow of surface water by requiring
 the use of culverts, bridges and other structural devices;
 (5) prohibitions on public access and use on all pipeline access and
 service roads;
 (6) stringent reclamation and rehabilitation requirements, consistent with
 the standards set forth in this Act, requiring the removal from the Coastal
 Plain of all oil and gas development and production facilities, structures
 and equipment upon completion of oil and gas production operations:
 Provided, That the Secretary may exempt from the requirements of this
 paragraph those facilities, structures or equipment which the Secretary
 determines would assist in the management of the Arctic National Wildlife
 Refuge and which are donated to the United States for that purpose;
 (7) appropriate prohibitions or restrictions on access by all modes of
 transportation;
 (8) appropriate prohibitions or restrictions on sand and gravel extraction;
 (9) consolidation of facility siting;
 (10) appropriate prohibitions or restrictions on use of explosives;
 (11) avoidance, to the extent practicable, of springs, streams and river
 systems; the protection of natural surface drainage patterns, wetlands, and
 riparian habitats; and the regulation of methods or techniques for developing
 or transporting adequate supplies of water for exploratory drilling;
 (12) avoidance or reduction of air traffic-related disturbance to fish
 and wildlife;
 (13) treatment and disposal of hazardous and toxic wastes, solid wastes,
 reserve pit fluids, drilling muds and cuttings, and domestic wastewater,
 in accordance with applicable Federal and State environmental law;
 (14) fuel storage and oil spill contingency planning;
 (15) research, monitoring and reporting requirements;
 (16) field crew environmental briefings;
 (17) avoidance of significant adverse effects upon subsistence hunting,
 fishing, and trapping by subsistence users;
 (18) compliance with applicable air and water quality standards;
 (19) appropriate seasonal and safety zone designations around well sites
 within which subsistence hunting and trapping would be limited;
 (20) reasonable stipulations for protection of cultural and archeological
 resources; and
 (21) all other protective environmental stipulations, restrictions, terms,
 and conditions deemed necessary by the Secretary.
 (c) In preparing and promulgating regulations, lease terms, conditions,
 restrictions, prohibitions, and stipulations under this section, the
 Secretary shall consider:
 (1) the environmental protection standards which governed the initial
 Coastal Plain exploration program (50 Code of Federal Regulations 37.31-33);
 (2) the land use stipulations for exploratory drilling on the KIC-ASRC
 private lands which are set forth in appendix 2 of the August 9, 1983,
 agreement between Arctic Slope Regional Corporation and the United States;
 and
 (3) the operational stipulations for Koniag ANWR Interest lands contained
 in the draft agreement between Koniag, Incorporated and the United States
 of America on file with the Secretary on December 1, 1987.
 SEC. 403. (a) SADLEROCHIT SPRING SPECIAL AREA- (1) The Sadlerochit Spring
 Special Area, comprising approximately four thousand acres as depicted
 on the map referenced in section 102 of this Act, is hereby designated
 to be a special area. Such special area shall be managed so as to protect
 and preserve the area's unique and diverse character including its fish,
 wildlife, and subsistence resource values.
 (2) Pursuant to subsection (d) of section 304 of this Act, the Secretary
 may exclude the Sadlerochit Spring Special Area from leasing.
 (3) In the event that the Secretary leases the Sadlerochit Spring Special
 Area, or any part thereof, for purposes of oil and gas exploration,
 development, production, and related activities, there shall be no surface
 occupancy of the lands comprising the Special Area.
 (b) DESIGNATION OF OTHER SPECIAL AREAS- The Secretary is authorized to
 designate other areas of the Coastal Plain as Special Areas if the Secretary
 determines that they are of unique character and interest so as to require
 such special protection. The Secretary shall notify the Committee on Energy
 and Natural Resources of the United States Senate and the Committee on
 Interior and Insular Affairs of the United States House of Representatives
 of the Secretary's intent to designate such areas ninety days in advance
 of making such designations. Any such areas designated as special areas
 shall be managed in accordance with the standards set forth in subsection
 (a) of this section.
 SEC. 404. FACILITY CONSOLIDATION PLANNING- (a) The Secretary shall, after
 providing for public notice and comment, prepare and update periodically a
 plan to govern, guide, and direct the siting and construction of facilities
 for the exploration, development, production, and transportation of Coastal
 Plain oil and gas resources. This plan shall have the following objectives--
 (1) avoiding unnecessary duplication of facilities and activities;
 (2) encouraging consolidation of common facilities and activities;
 (3) locating or confining facilities and activities to areas which will
 minimize impact on fish and wildlife, their habitat, and the environment;
 (4) utilizing existing facilities wherever practicable; and
 (5) enhancing compatibility between wildlife values and development
 activities.
 (b) The plan prepared under this section shall supplement any comprehensive
 conservation plan prepared pursuant to the requirements of section 304(g) of
 the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act of 1980 (94 Stat. 2394).
 SEC. 405. RIGHTS-OF-WAY ACROSS THE COASTAL PLAIN- Notwithstanding
 title XI of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act of 1980
 (16 U.S.C. 3161 et seq.), the Secretary is authorized to grant under
 section 28 of the Mineral Leasing Act (30 U.S.C. 185) rights-of-way and
 easements across the Coastal Plain for the transportation of oil and gas
 under such terms and conditions as may be necessary so as not to result
 in a significant adverse effect on the fish and wildlife, their habitat,
 and the environment of the Coastal Plain. Such terms and conditions shall
 include requirements that facilities be sited or modified so as to avoid
 unnecessary duplication of roads and pipelines. The regulations issued
 pursuant to this Act shall include provisions regarding the granting of
 rights-of-way across the Coastal Plain.
 SEC. 406. ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES- In addition to any other environmental
 studies required by law, subsequent to exploring or developing any area or
 region of the Coastal Plain, the Secretary shall conduct such additional
 studies to establish environmental information as he deems necessary,
 and shall monitor the human, marine, and coastal environments of such
 area or region in a manner designed to provide information which can be
 used for comparison with any previously-collected data for the purpose of
 identifying any effects on the fish or wildlife and their habitat and any
 significant changes in the quality and productivity of such environments,
 for establishing trends in the areas studied and monitored, and for
 designing experiments to identify the causes of such effects or changes.
 SEC. 407. ENFORCEMENT OF SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS- (a)
 RESPONSIBILITY OF THE SECRETARY- The Secretary shall diligently enforce
 all regulations, lease terms, conditions, restrictions, prohibitions,
 and stipulations promulgated pursuant to this Act.
 (b) RESPONSIBILITIES OF HOLDERS OF LEASE- It shall be the responsibility
 of any holder of a lease under this Act to--
 (1) maintain all operations within such lease area in compliance with
 regulations intended to protect persons and property on, and fish and
 wildlife, their habitat, and the environment of, the Coastal Plain; and
 (2) allow prompt access at the site of any operations subject to regulation
 under this Act to any appropriate Federal or State inspector, and to provide
 such documents and records which are pertinent to occupational or public
 health, safety, or environmental protection, as may be requested.
 (c) ONSITE INSPECTION OF FACILITIES- The Secretary shall promulgate
 regulations to provide for--
 (1) scheduled onsite inspection by the Secretary, at least twice a year,
 of each facility on the Coastal Plain which is subject to any environmental
 or safety regulation promulgated pursuant to this Act or such provisions
 contained in any lease issued pursuant to this Act to assure compliance
 with such environmental or safety regulations; and
 (2) periodic onsite inspection by the Secretary at least once a year without
 advance notice to the operator of such facility to assure compliance with
 all environmental or safety regulations.
 SEC. 408. FUNDING FOR ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING AND ENFORCEMENT- The
 Congress authorizes and directs the Secretary of the Treasury to make
 available to the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency
 (Administrator) an amount of $5,000,000, not later than sixty days after
 the first lease sale pursuant to section 304 and annually thereafter,
 until ten years after oil and gas exploration, production and development
 activities on the Coastal Plain have ceased. The Administrator shall
 distribute annually to the State of Alaska not less than 25 per centum
 of such amount. These money shall be used for activities, or in support
 of activities, within the State of Alaska by the Environmental Protection
 Agency and the State of Alaska for monitoring compliance with, and enforcing,
 all Federal environmental laws within their jurisdiction applicable to
 oil and gas exploration, development and production under this Act, and
 monitoring compliance with, and enforcing, all such laws, with respect
 to owners, operators, and other persons having business in connection
 with leases granted pursuant to this Act. For purposes of this section,
 all such Federal environmental laws shall include, but are not limited
 to, the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401-7642), the Solid Waste Disposal
 Act (42 U.S.C. 6901-6987); the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1251-1376); the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation,
 and Liability Act (26 U.S.C. 4611 et. seq. and 42 U.S.C. 9601-9675); and
 the Safe Drinking Water Act (42 U.S.C. 300f-300j-9). The Administrator and
 the State of Alaska shall enter into a cooperative agreement to coordinate
 their responsibilities under this section. The Administrator shall consult
 with the United States Department of Transportation and the State of Alaska
 on the appropriate role of the State of Alaska in monitoring and enforcing
 the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (49 U.S.C. app. 1801-1814). The
 Administrator shall submit annually a report to the Congress on the amount
 of funds expended and activities carried out pursuant to this section.
TITLE V--LAND RECLAMATION AND RECLAMATION LIABILITY FUND
 SEC. 501. LAND RECLAMATION- The holder of a lease or leases on lands within
 the Coastal Plain shall be fully responsible and liable for the reclamation
 of lands within the Coastal Plain and any other Federal lands adversely
 affected in connection with exploration, development, or transportation
 activities on a lease within the Coastal Plain. The holder of a lease
 shall also be responsible for conducting any land reclamation required as
 a result of activities conducted on the lease by any of the lease holder's
 subcontractors or agents. The holder of a lease may not delegate or convey,
 by contract or otherwise, this responsibility and liability to another
 party without the express written approval of the Secretary.
 SEC. 502. STANDARD TO GOVERN LAND RECLAMATION- The standard to govern the
 reclamation of lands required to be reclaimed under this Act, following
 their temporary disturbance or upon the conclusion of their use or prolonged
 commercial production of oil and gas and related activities, shall be
 reclamation and restoration to a condition capable of supporting the
 uses which the lands were capable of supporting prior to any exploration,
 development, or production activities, or upon application by the lessee,
 to a higher or better use as approved by the Secretary; except that in the
 case of roads, drill pads and other gravel-foundation structures, reclamation
 and restoration shall be to a condition as closely approximating the original
 condition of such lands as is feasible using the best commercially available
 technology. Reclamation of lands shall be conducted in a manner that will
 not itself impair or cause significant adverse effects on fish or wildlife,
 their habitat, or the environment.
 SEC. 503. COASTAL PLAIN LIABILITY AND RECLAMATION FUND- (a) Within six
 months of a commercial discovery within the Coastal Plain, the Coastal
 Plain Liability and Reclamation Fund (the `Reclamation Fund') is hereby
 directed to be established by the Secretary.
 (b) The Secretary shall collect from the owner of any commercially produced
 crude oil or natural gas liquids from the Coastal Plain at the time and
 point where such crude oil first enters the trans-Alaska pipeline a fee of
 5 cents per barrel. The collection of the fee shall cease when $50,000,000
 has been accumulated in the Reclamation Fund, and it shall be resumed at
 any time that the accumulation of revenue in the Reclamation Fund falls
 below $45,000,000.
 (c) All revenues collected under subsection (b) shall be paid into the
 Reclamation Fund. The reasonable costs of administration of the Reclamation
 Fund shall be paid from the revenues in the Reclamation Fund. All sums
 not needed for administration of the Reclamation Fund or making authorized
 payments out of the Fund shall be invested prudently by the Secretary in
 income-producing securities. Income from such securities shall be added
 to the principal of the Reclamation Fund.
 (d) The revenues in the Reclamation Fund shall be available, with the
 approval of the Secretary, for the following purposes:
 (1) to compensate promptly any person or entity, public or private, for
 any damages caused by oil and gas exploration, development and production
 activities on or in the vicinity of the Coastal Plain;
 (2) to reclaim any area of the Coastal Plain not reclaimed in accordance
 with the standard set forth in section 502 of this Act, by the operator
 or the holder of a lease or leases;
 (3) up to $15,000,000 annually to reclaim and restore--
 (A) any area of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge or other North
 Slope Federal lands affected by past or future oil and gas exploration,
 development, or production; and
 (B) North Slope non-Federal lands affected by future exploration,
 development, or production on the Coastal Plain,
which are not reclaimed and restored in accordance with applicable Federal
and State law;
 (4) up to $2,000,000 annually to the Director of the Fish and Wildlife
 Service to monitor and conduct research on fish and wildlife species which
 utilize the land and water resources of the Coastal Plain; and
 (5) to reclaim at the conclusion of the period of exploration, development
 and production, any area of the Coastal Plain and related lands which have
 not been properly reclaimed by the operator or lease holder.
 (e) The United States shall have legal recourse against any party or
 entity who is responsible for the reclamation of any area within the
 Coastal Plain, to recover any funds expended under paragraphs (1), (2),
 (3) and (5) of this subsection due to a failure by the responsible party
 to reclaim such area as required by this Act: Provided, That such right
 of recovery shall not be available against any Alaska Natives conducting
 traditional subsistence use activities. Any funds so recovered shall be
 deposited in the Reclamation Fund.
 (f) Any moneys remaining in the Reclamation Fund fifty years after the
 period of active oil and gas exploration, development, production and
 reclamation has been concluded in the Coastal Plain shall be paid into
 the Migratory Bird Conservation Fund.
TITLE VI--DISPOSITION OF OIL AND GAS REVENUES
 SEC. 601. DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES- Notwithstanding any other provision of
 law, all revenues received from competitive bids, sales, bonuses, royalties,
 rents, fees, interest charges or other income derived from the leasing of
 oil and gas resources within the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, Alaska
 shall be distributed as follows:
 (a) 50 per centum to the State of Alaska;
 (b) 20 per centum deposited into the Land and Water Conservation Fund;
 (c) 15 per centum deposited into a special account in the Treasury to be
 used in accordance with the provisions of section 603 for the preservation,
 protection, creation, enhancement, or restoration of wetlands in the
 United States;
 (d) 10 per centum to miscellaneous receipts in the Treasury; and
 (e) 5 per centum to be used by the Secretary of Energy for funding research,
 development, and commercialization of energy conservation and alternative
 sources authorized in section 704.
 SEC. 602. LAND AND WATER CONSERVATION FUND- (a)(1) Moneys deposited into the
 Land and Water Conservation Fund (`the Fund') pursuant to section 601 shall
 be credited to a special account within the Fund. In addition, beginning
 the first full fiscal year after funds are credited to the special account,
 there shall also be credited to the special account an amount equal to the
 average annual appropriation from the Fund for the five years preceding the
 date of the initial crediting of funds pursuant to section 601(b). These
 funds shall be derived from those moneys comprising the authorized but
 unappropriated balance of the Fund.
 (2) Not more than 25 per centum of the funds deposited into the special
 account shall be available for State purposes pursuant to section 6 of
 the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act (16 U.S.C. 460l-8). The balance
 of the funds in the special account shall be available, without further
 appropriation, for Federal purposes as provided in section 7 of that Act
 (16 U.S.C. 460l-9) and shall be allocated in accordance with this section.
 (b)(1) At the time of the submission of the President's budget, each
 Federal land managing agency eligible to receive moneys from the Fund
 shall provide the Congress with a list, in descending order or priority,
 of land acquisition projects which have been authorized by law (hereinafter
 in this section referred to as the `priority list').
 (2) The priority lists shall be prepared by the Directors of the Bureau
 of Land Management, National Park Service, Fish and Wildlife Service,
 Department of the Interior, and the Chief of the Forest Service, United
 States Department of Agriculture, and shall reflect their best professional
 judgment regarding the land acquisition priorities of such bureau or agency.
 (3) In preparing such lists the following factors shall be considered:
 the amount of money anticipated to be made available in any one year; the
 availability of land appraisal and other information necessary to complete
 the acquisition in a timely manner; the potential adverse impacts on the
 park, wilderness, wildlife refuge or other such unit which might result
 if the acquisition is not undertaken; and such other factors as the land
 managers deem appropriate.
 (c)(1) Except as provided in subsection (d) funds shall be allocated from
 the special account in accordance with the priority lists submitted pursuant
 to this section unless such lists are modified by law.
 (2) The Secretary of the Treasury shall notify the Congress on an annual
 basis as to the amounts available for allocation within the special account.
 (3) If the priority lists are modified by law, such law shall ensure that
 each Federal land managing agency shall receive a fair and equitable share
 in accordance with land acquisition needs, congressional directives,
 and historical patterns of distribution of the fund: Provided, That no
 agency shall receive more than 50 per centum of the funds available from
 the special account in any one year.
 (d) Unless priority lists are modified by law, the Secretary of the
 Treasury is authorized and directed, beginning one year after the lists
 are submitted pursuant to paragraph (b)(1), to make funds from the special
 account directly available to the land managing agencies to be used solely
 for land acquisition projects on the respective priority lists in accordance
 with the following formula:
 (1) 45 per centum to the Fish and Wildlife Service;
 (2) 40 per centum to the National Park Service;
 (3) 10 per centum to the Forest Service; and
 (4) 5 per centum to the Bureau of Land Management.
 SEC. 603. SPECIAL WETLANDS PROTECTION ACCOUNT- (a) Those funds allocated
 for wetland protection purposes pursuant to subsection 601(c) shall be
 credited to a special wetlands protection account (`Wetlands Account')
 in the Treasury of the United States. Such funds shall be available,
 without further appropriation, for expenditure solely in accordance with
 the provisions of this section. Any funds deposited into the Wetlands
 Account shall remain available until expended.
 (b)(1) Within thirty days after the date funds are first credited to the
 Wetlands Account pursuant to subsection (a), the Secretary, in conjunction
 and consultation with the Secretary of the Army acting through the Chief
 of the Corps of Engineers, the Secretary of Commerce, the Secretary of
 Agriculture, and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency
 shall initiate a process to identify and prepare a list of high priority
 projects to preserve, protect, enhance, restore, or create wetlands in
 the United States.
 (2) To assist in the preparation of the list, the Secretary of the Treasury
 shall make funds available from the Wetlands Account to the Secretary to
 prepare preliminary assessments; general and site specific inventories;
 reconnaissance, engineering, or other studies; preliminary design work;
 and such other studies as may be necessary to identify such projects.
 (3) Such funds as are necessary for these purposes, but not to exceed
 $10,000,000 annually, shall be allocated by the Secretary to the Federal
 agencies identified in paragraph (b)(1) (including the Department of the
 Interior) based on the need for such funds and such other factors as the
 Secretary, in consultation with the other agencies, deems appropriate to
 carry out the purposes of this subsection.
 (c)(1) As soon as practicable after funds are made available pursuant
 to subsection (b), the Secretary shall compile and transmit the list of
 priority projects to the Congress. Thereafter, the list shall be transmitted
 to the Congress annually as part of the President's budget submission. Such
 transmittal shall also include a statement from the Secretary of the Treasury
 indicating the amount available for expenditure from the Wetlands Account.
 (2) The list shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
 (A) identification, by map or other means, of the wetland area to be
 covered by the project; and
 (B) a detailed description of the proposed project including a justification
 for including such project on the list, the proposed activities to be carried
 out pursuant to the project, the benefits to be realized by such project,
 the identification of a lead agency to undertake the proposed project,
 an estimated timetable for the completion of project, and the estimated
 cost of the project.
 (3) Where such a determination is required under applicable law, benefits
 of projects on the list are deemed to be at least equal to the costs
 associated with such projects.
 (4) In preparing the list, special consideration shall be given to the
 inclusion of projects affecting wetland areas, including but not limited to
 coastal wetland areas, having particularly high value as fish and wildlife
 habitat, for purposes of flood or pollution control and which are, or are
 likely to be, subject to erosion, conversion or other degradation.
 (d) Except as provided in subsection (b), funds from the Wetlands Account
 shall be allocated in accordance with the list submitted pursuant to this
 section unless such list is modified by law.
 (e) Unless the list is modified by law, the Secretary of the Treasury is
 authorized and directed, beginning one year after the list is transmitted
 pursuant to paragraph (c)(1), to make funds from the Wetlands Account
 directly available to the head of the appropriate agency for the purpose
 of carrying out projects as identified on the list.
 (f) As used in this section, the term `project' means a complete project
 or, where applicable, individual phases, portions, or components thereof.
 SEC. 604. JUDICIAL REVIEW AND NON-SEVERABILITY- (a) Notwithstanding the
 provisions of section 316 of this Act, any legal action, including an
 action for declaratory judgment, to challenge the determination made
 in section 601(a) of this Act of the State of Alaska's share of oil and
 gas revenues shall be assigned for hearing and completed at the earliest
 possible date, shall, to the greatest extent practicable, take precedence
 over all other matters pending on the docket of the court at that time,
 and shall be expedited in every way by such court. Any such action shall
 be brought within ninety days of enactment of this Act in an appropriate
 United States district court. Such action shall be barred unless a complaint
 is filed within the time specified. Any review of an interlocutory or final
 judgment, decree, or order of the United States district court in such action
 may be had only upon direct appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States.
 (b) Nothing in this section shall be construed to grant causes of action
 to any person or to waive any defenses which may be available to the
 United States.
 (c) If any action is brought in accordance with subsection (a), no lease
 sale shall occur under section 304 of this Act until a final nonappealable
 decision has been issued in any such action.
 (d) If the revenue sharing provision of section 601(a) of this Act is held
 invalid, the remainder of this Act shall be void.
TITLE VII--ENERGY PLAN
 SEC. 701. ENERGY PLAN- (a)(1) Not later than fifteen months after the
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Energy, with the advice
 and assistance of the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality,
 the Secretary and the National Academy of Sciences, shall prepare and
 transmit to the Congress an energy plan which shall include, among other
 things, a proposed statement of national energy policy objectives.
 (2) The plan shall focus on the total projected demand in the United
 States for energy and for crude oil and petroleum products, in particular,
 over the estimated period of potential production from the Coastal Plain
 (approximately through the year 2030). The plan also shall include a
 range of likely scenarios for crude oil and petroleum products demand and
 a description of alternative sources of supply, including imported crude
 oil and petroleum products, likely to be available to meet such demand.
 (3) The information contained in the energy plan shall include, but not
 be limited to--
 (A) a projection of the Nation's demand for energy and for crude oil
 and petroleum products, in particular, in each sector of the domestic
 economy--transportation, industrial (including chemicals, feedstocks,
 and byproducts), residential/commercial, and electric utility;
 (B) an estimate of the potentially available supply of crude oil and
 petroleum products--
 (i) produced from domestic sources; and
 (ii) imported from foreign sources;
 (C) an estimate of--
 (i) the potentially available supply of crude oil and natural gas from
 the Arctic region of Alaska (including Prudhoe Bay and adjacent fields)
 to be derived in part from the study required under section 702, and
 (ii) the costs of exploration, development, mitigation and reclamation;
 (D) an estimate of the potential in-place and economically recoverable
 reserves of crude oil and natural gas in the Coastal Plain, utilizing the
 geologic information gathered for the report required by section 1002(h)
 of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (16 U.S.C. 3142(h))
 and other available information;
 (E) an estimate of projected world crude oil prices and economic conditions
 with specified operative assumptions;
 (F) an identification of alternative energy sources of supply that are
 or may be commercially available to substitute for part of the estimated
 requirements for crude oil and petroleum products under subsection (a)(2);
 (G) an identification, a projection and an estimate of the status and
 role of each of the following energy sources in meeting projected national
 energy requirements generally and in providing substitutes for crude oil
 and petroleum products under the demand projection associated with the
 scenarios provided for in subsection (a)(2)--
 (i) coal, including clean coal technologies and underground coal
 gasification;
 (ii) energy conservation, including research and development;
 (iii) improvements and technological gains in electrical energy generation
 and transmission;
 (iv) other alternative energy sources such as renewable resources, solar,
 geothermal, and hydroelectric power; and
 (v) improvements in the extraction of energy resources such as oil and
 natural gas.
 (H) an identification of technologies and programs available and their
 cost of implementation for increasing the efficiency in energy extraction
 and use, including transportation uses.
 (b) POTENTIAL ALTERNATIVES TO MEET DEMAND PROJECTIONS- The range of demand
 scenarios under subsection (a) shall identify and evaluate all potential
 and realistic alternative energy resources available to meet the range of
 demand scenarios on a consistent basis. The alternative energy resources
 shall include, but shall not be limited to--
 (1) increased efficiency in the use of crude oil and petroleum products
 through higher fuel efficiency standards, including the identification of
 any social, environmental and technology conversion costs associated with
 the implementation of such standards;
 (2) use of substitutes for petroleum products in the transportation
 sector such as methanol, ethanol, natural gas, and hydrogen, including the
 identification of research, development, demonstration, production and any
 environmental technology conversion costs for the use of such substitutes;
 (3) producing crude oil and natural gas from the Coastal Plain, including
 the identification of exploration, development, mitigation, and reclamation
 costs; and
 (4) importing crude oil from foreign sources, including the identification of
 risks and potential costs of disruption in supply and a range of assumptions
 concerning the national security risks and potential social and economic
 costs of cartel imposed supply levels and prices.
 (c) RECOMMENDATIONS- (1) The energy plan shall include a ranking of
 all potential and realistic alternatives identified under subsection
 (b). The plan shall identify the most reliable mix of alternatives from the
 standpoint of national security, consumer costs, impact on the environment,
 and least regulatory interference with the marketplace. The plan also shall
 provide recommendations to the Congress concerning the implementation of
 such alternative or alternatives. Such recommendations shall include any
 changes in existing laws or regulations or new statutory authority necessary
 to implement the recommendations contained in the plan, as well as proposed
 changes in energy research and development priorities and funding.
 (2) In developing such recommendations, the Secretary of Energy shall give
 special consideration to measures which--
 (A) reduce energy costs to consumers;
 (B) enhance reliability of energy supplies and national security;
 (C) utilize proven or demonstrated technologies;
 (D) increase the efficient use of nonrenewable resources such as coal,
 crude oil and petroleum products;
 (E) have the least potential social costs and adverse impacts on the
 environment;
 (F) minimize the long-term subsidization of alternatives through tax or
 other Federal aid programs;
 (G) enhance the diversification of the Nation's domestic energy supply; and
 (H) minimize or reduce reliance on imported oil over the supply-demand
 period under study.
 SEC. 702. OIL AND GAS POTENTIAL DEVELOPMENT IN THE ARCTIC REGIONS OF ALASKA-
 (a) The Secretary of the Interior, to accompany the energy plan required
 under section 701, shall prepare a study of present and projected oil and
 gas developments in the Arctic region of Alaska, both onshore and offshore,
 excluding all portions of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge which are--
 (1) not held in private ownership; or
 (2) contained in the Coastal Plain study area.
 (b) The study shall include an identification of--
 (1) those areas which qualified geologists rate as prospective for
 hydrocarbon accumulation;
 (2) those areas where seismic work and exploration has taken place and
 the available results;
 (3) those areas where seismic work and exploration are projected to occur
 in the future; and
 (4) those areas where exploratory and production drilling has demonstrated
 the presence of oil or natural gas, regardless whether commercially
 recoverable quantities of oil or gas were demonstrated.
 (c) The study shall include the projected quantities of oil or natural
 gas that are or may be recoverable from the Arctic region under a range
 of world oil prices and economic conditions.
 (d) The study shall include an examination of the infrastructure needed,
 beyond what is already in place at Prudhoe Bay, in the trans-Alaska pipeline
 and the port and marine facilities at Valdez, to develop the oil and gas
 resources of the Arctic region under a range of development scenarios.
 SEC. 703. TRANSMITTAL OF THE ENERGY PLAN AND OTHER STUDIES TO THE CONGRESS-
 (a) The energy plan and other studies developed by the Secretary and the
 Secretary of Energy pursuant to this title shall be transmitted to the
 Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the respective
 jurisdictional committees of the House of Representatives no later than
 fifteen months after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (b) The Secretary shall not conduct the first lease sales authorized under
 title III and section 304 of this Act until twenty-one months after the
 date of enactment of this Act to permit adequate time for review and for
 action, if any, by the Congress on implementing the energy plan and studies
 authorized and directed under this title.
 (c) The Secretary is authorized and directed to proceed with the development
 and implementation of final regulations to carry out the purposes of this
 Act, in accordance with the provisions of this Act, during the twenty-one
 month period required to develop and review the energy plan and studies
 required by this title.
 SEC. 704. ENERGY CONSERVATION AND ALTERNATIVE ENERGY RESEARCH AND
 DEMONSTRATION PROGRAMS- (a) Pursuant to the Federal Nonnuclear Energy
 Research and Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5901 et seq.), the Secretary
 of Energy is authorized and directed to establish an energy research and
 demonstration grant program to promote and advance research, development,
 and commercialization in the areas of energy conservation and alternative
 energy sources. The energy research and demonstration grant program shall
 be funded out of revenues received under section 601(e).
 (b) The energy research and demonstration grant program authorized by
 this section shall have as its major purpose the development of energy
 conservation and alternative energy technologies which have the capacity
 to significantly reduce the Nation's growing reliance on imported oil by
 the end of the century.
TITLE VIII--EXPORT RESTRICTIONS
 SEC. 801. CRUDE OIL EXPORT RESTRICTIONS- (a) Notwithstanding any other
 provision of law, no crude oil produced from lands in the Coastal Plain
 (except any such crude oil which (1) is exported to an adjacent foreign
 country to be refined and consumed therein in exchange for the same quantity
 of crude oil being exported from that country to the United States;
 such exchange must result through convenience or increased efficiency
 of transportation in lower prices for consumers of petroleum products in
 the United States as described in subsection (b)(1)(B) of this section,
 (2) is temporarily exported for convenience or increased efficiency of
 transportation across parts of an adjacent foreign country and reenters the
 United States, or (3) is transported to Canada, to be consumed therein, in
 amounts not to exceed an annual average of fifty thousand barrels per day,
 in addition to exports under paragraphs (1) and (2), except that any ocean
 transportation of such oil shall be by vessesl documented under section
 12106 of title 46, United States Code) may be exported from the United
 States, or any of its territories and possessions, subject to subsection
 (b) of this section.
 (b) Crude oil subject to the prohibition contained in subsection (a)
 may be exported only if--
 (1) the President so recommends to the Congress after making and publishing
 express findings that exports of such crude oil, including exchanges--
 (A) will not diminish the total quantity or quality of petroleum refined
 within, stored within, or legally committed to be transported to and sold
 within the United States;
 (B) will, within three months following the initiation of such exports or
 exchanges, result in (i) acquisition costs to the refiners which purchase
 the imported crude oil being lower than the acquisition costs such refiners
 would have to pay for the domestically produced oil in the absence of such
 an export or exchange, and (ii) not less than 75 per centum of such savings
 in costs being reflected in wholesale and retail prices of products refined
 from such imported crude oil;
 (C) will be made only pursuant to contracts which may be terminated if
 the crude oil supplies of the United States are interrupted, threatened,
 or diminished;
 (D) are clearly necessary to protect the national interest; and
 (E) are in accordance with the provisions of the Export Administration
 Act of 1979 (50 U.S.C. app. 2401 and following); and
 (2) the President includes such findings in his recommendation to
 the Congress and the Congress, within sixty days after receiving that
 recommendation, agrees to a joint resolution which approves such exports
 on the basis of those findings, and which is thereafter enacted into law.
 (c) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section or any other
 provision of law, the President may export oil to any country pursuant to
 a bilateral international oil supply agreement entered into by the United
 States with such nation before June 25, 1979, or to any country pursuant
 to the International Emergency Oil Sharing Plan of the International
 Energy Agency.
S 684 PCS----2
S 684 PCS----3
S 684 PCS----4
S 684 PCS----5
S 684 PCS----6
S 684 PCS----7
S 684 PCS----8 prohibition contained in subsection (a) may be exported
only if--
 (1) the President so recommends to the Congress after making and publish