S 391 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 391
To amend the Toxic Substances Control Act to reduce the levels of lead in
the environment, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
February 7 (legislative day, FEBRUARY 6), 1991
Mr. REID (for himself, Mr. LIEBERMAN, Mr. BRADLEY, Mr. MOYNIHAN, Mr. JEFFORDS,
Mr. BRYAN, Mr. LAUTENBERG, Mr. SARBANES, Ms. MIKULSKI, Mr. WIRTH, Mr. GORE,
Mr. KENNEDY, Mr. KERRY, and Mr. DODD) introduced the following bill; which
was read twice and referred to the Committee on Environment and Public Works
A BILL
To amend the Toxic Substances Control Act to reduce the levels of lead in
the environment, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION. 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. AMENDMENT OF THE TOXIC SUBSTANCES CONTROL ACT.
 (a) AMENDMENT OF THE TOXIC SUBSTANCES CONTROL ACT- The Toxic Substances
 Control Act (15 U.S.C. 2601 et seq.) is amended by adding after title III
 the following new title:
`TITLE IV--LEAD EXPOSURE REDUCTION
`SEC. 401. FINDINGS AND POLICY.
 `(a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 `(1) lead poisoning is the most prevalent disease of environmental origin
 among American children today, and children under seven years of age are
 at special risk because of their susceptibility to the potency of lead as
 a neurologic toxin;
 `(2) the effects of lead on children may include permanent, significant
 neurologic and physiologic impairment, and additional health effects occur
 in adults exposed to similar exposure levels;
 `(3) because of the practical difficulties of removing lead already
 dispersed into the environment, children and adults will continue to be
 exposed to such lead for years;
 `(4) as a result of decades of highly dispersive uses of lead in a variety
 of products, contamination of the environment with unacceptable levels of
 lead is widespread;
 `(5) the continued manufacture, import, processing, use, and disposal
 of lead-containing products may cause further releases of lead to the
 environment, and such releases contribute to further environmental
 contamination and resultant exposure to lead; and
 `(6) methods to reduce existing lead exposure levels must be improved,
 especially through the development of more effective and affordable
 methods for abating lead-based paint, which continues to be a major cause
 of childhood lead poisoning.
 `(b) POLICY- It is the policy of the United States that further releases of
 lead to the environment should be minimized, and means should be developed
 and implemented to reduce exposures to sources of environmentally dispersed
 lead.
`SEC. 402. RESTRICTIONS ON CONTINUING USES OF CERTAIN LEAD-CONTAINING PRODUCTS.
 `(a) GENERAL RESTRICTIONS- Except as provided under subsection (b) of
 this section, beginning on the date that is one year after the date of
 the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, no person may
 import, manufacture or process any of the following product categories,
 and beginning on the date that is two years after the date of the enactment
 of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, no person may distribute in
 commerce, any of the following product categories:
 `(1) Paint containing more than 0.06 percent lead by dry weight.
 `(2) Plumbing fittings and fixtures containing more than 2 percent lead
 by dry weight.
 `(3) Pesticides (as defined in section 2(u) of the Federal Insecticide,
 Rodenticide, and Fungicide Act (7 U.S.C. 136(u)) containing more than 0.1
 percent lead by dry weight.
 `(4) Toys and recreational game pieces containing more than 0.1 percent
 lead by dry weight.
 `(5) Curtain weights containing more than 0.1 percent lead by dry weight.
 `(b) MODIFICATION OF RESTRICTIONS- (1) The Administrator may, after public
 notice and opportunity for comment, promulgate regulations to modify,
 pursuant to paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection, the percentage of
 the allowable lead content for a product category described in paragraphs
 (1) through (5) of subsection (a).
 `(2) The Administrator may, pursuant to paragraph (1), establish by
 regulation a percentage of the allowable lead content that is less than
 the percentage specified under subsection (a) (including nondetectable
 levels) for any product category described in paragraphs (1) through (5)
 of such subsection if the Administrator determines that a reduction in the
 percentage of allowable lead content is necessary to protect human health
 or the environment.
 `(3)(A) The Administrator may, pursuant to paragraph (1), establish by
 regulation a percentage by dry weight of the allowable lead content for
 a product category described in paragraphs (1) through (5) of subsection
 (a) that is greater than the percentage specified for the product category
 under such subsection if the Administrator determines that increasing the
 percentage of the allowable lead content for the product category will
 promote the protection of human health or the environment.
 `(B) If the Administrator establishes by regulation an increased percentage
 of the allowable lead content for a product category pursuant to this
 paragraph, the regulation establishing such percentage shall terminate on
 the date that is six years after the date such regulation becomes final.
 `(C) Not later than one hundred and eighty days prior to the termination of
 a regulation promulgated under this paragraph, the Administrator shall
 review the regulation. If, on or after the termination date of such
 regulation, the Administrator determines pursuant to subparagraph (A),
 that the promulgation of a regulation is appropriate, the Administrator
 may promulgate a regulation which shall terminate on the date that is six
 years after the date such regulation becomes final.
 `(4) The Administrator may by regulation extend the dates for compliance
 with the requirements of subsection (a)(2) by one year and establish a
 performance standard for lead leaching from plumbing fittings and fixtures
 in lieu of the restriction under such subsection if the Administrator
 determines that such performance standard is at least as protective of
 human health and the environment as such restriction.
 `(5) The Administrator shall promulgate regulations within twelve months
 of enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990 to waive the
 requirements of subsection (a)(4) with respect to certain toys and
 recreational game pieces that are collectible items and scale models
 intended for adult acquisition.
 `(c) STATEMENTS BY ADMINISTRATOR RELATING TO MODIFICATIONS OF RESTRICTIONS-
 In promulgating any regulation under subsection (b) of this section
 with respect to the allowable lead content under a product category,
 the Administrator shall, prior to the promulgation of a final regulation,
 consider and publish a statement that describes the effects of the proposed
 allowable lead content level for the product category on human health and
 the environment.
 `(d) Not later than twenty-four months after the date of the enactment of
 the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, the Administrator shall promulgate
 regulations banning the sale of lead solder to plumbers and plumbing supply
 wholesalers and retailers.
 `(e) PACKAGING-
 `(1) As used in this subsection, the term--
 `(A) `package' means a container providing a means of marketing, protecting,
 or handling a product, and includes a unit package, an intermediate package,
 crates, pails, rigid foil, unsealed receptacles such as carrying cases,
 cups, and such other trays, wrappers and wrapping films, bags, tubs,
 and shipping or other containers, as the Administrator by regulation, may
 define (except that such term shall not include ceramic ware or a casing
 of a lead-acid battery, as defined in section 405(o)(1));
 `(B) `distributor' means any individual, firm, corporation, or other entity
 which takes title to goods purchased for resale; and
 `(C) `packaging component' means any individual assembled part of a
 package such as any interior or exterior blocking, bracing, cushioning,
 weatherproofing, exterior strapping, coatings, closures, inks, and labels.
 `(2) For the purposes of this section, tin-plated steel that meets the
 American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Specification A-623
 shall be deemed an individual packaging component.
 `(3) Beginning on the date that is twenty-four months after the date of
 the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990--
 `(A) no package or packaging component which may be used for food for
 human consumption (or intended for such use) shall be offered for sale
 or for promotional purposes by a manufacturer or distributor, which
 includes, in the package, or in any packaging component, inks, dyes,
 pigments, adhesives, stabilizers, or other additive to which lead has been
 intentionally introduced as an element during manufacturing or distribution
 as opposed to the incidental presence of lead;
 `(B) no food for human consumption (or intended for such use) shall
 be offered for sale or for promotional purposes by its manufacturer or
 distributor in a package which includes, in the package itself or in any
 of its packaging components, inks, dyes, pigments, adhesives, stabilizers,
 or other additive to which any lead has been intentionally introduced as an
 element during manufacturing or distribution as opposed to the incidental
 presence of lead; and
 `(C) notwithstanding subparagraphs (A) and (B) of this paragraph, the
 aggregate of the concentration levels, from any incidental presence of
 lead present in any package or packaging component which may be used for
 food for human consumption (or intended for such use) shall not exceed--
 `(i) for the third twelve-month period following the date of the enactment
 of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, 600 parts per million by weight
 (0.06 percent);
 `(ii) for the fourth twelve-month period following the date of the enactment
 of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, 250 parts per million by weight
 (0.025 percent); and
 `(iii) for the fifth twelve-month period following the date of the enactment
 of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, and for each twelve-month
 period thereafter, 100 parts per million by weight (0.01 percent); and
 `(D) no package or packaging component which may be used for food for
 human consumption (or intended for such use) shall be offered for sale or
 for promotional purposes by a manufacturer or distributor, and no food for
 human consumption (or intended for such use) shall be offered for sale or
 for promotional purposes by a manufacturer or distributor in a package,
 if such package or packaging component exceeds the level provided under
 subparagraph (C) of this paragraph.
 `(4) Beginning on the date that is forty-eight months after the date of
 the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990--
 `(A) no package or packaging component shall be offered for sale or for
 promotional purposes by a manufacturer or distributor, which includes, in the
 package, or in any packaging component, inks, dyes, pigments, adhesives,
 stabilizers, or other additive to which lead has been intentionally
 introduced as an element during manufacturing or distribution as opposed
 to the incidental presence of lead;
 `(B) no product shall be offered for sale or for promotional purposes
 by its manufacturer or distributor in a package which includes, in
 the package itself or in any of its packaging components, inks, dyes,
 pigments, adhesives, stabilizers, or other additive to which any lead
 has been intentionally introduced as an element during manufacturing or
 distribution as opposed to the incidental presence of lead; and
 `(C) notwithstanding subparagraphs (A) and (B) of this paragraph, the
 aggregate of the concentration levels, from any incidental presence of
 lead present in any package or packaging component shall not exceed--
 `(i) for the fifth twelve-month period following the date of the enactment
 of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, 600 parts per million by weight
 (0.06 percent);
 `(ii) for the sixth twelve-month period following the date of the enactment
 of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, 250 parts per million by weight
 (0.025 percent); and
 `(iii) for the seventh twelve-month period following the date of the
 enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, and for each
 twelve-month period thereafter, 100 parts per million by weight (0.01
 percent); and
 `(D) no package or packaging component shall be offered for sale or for
 promotional purposes by a manufacturer or distributor, and no product
 shall be offered for sale for promotional purposes by a manufacturer or
 distributor in a package, if such package or packaging component exceeds
 the level provided under subparagraph (C) of this paragraph.
 `(5) Prior to the expiration of the sixty-month period following the date
 of the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, upon receipt
 of an application (in such form and containing such information as the
 Administrator may prescribe by regulation) the Administrator may exempt
 from the requirements of paragraphs (3) or (4)--
 `(A) a package or packaging component manufactured prior to the date of
 the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990 that displays a
 code prescribed by the Administrator that indicates that such package or
 component was manufactured prior to such date; and
 `(B) a package or packaging component to which lead has been added in
 the manufacturing, forming, printing, or distribution process in order
 to comply with health or safety requirements of Federal law or the law of
 any State or political subdivision of a State.
 `(6)(A) A certificate of compliance stating that a package or packaging
 component is in compliance with the requirements of the Lead Exposure
 Reduction Act of 1990 shall be retained by its manufacturer or distributor
 and made available to the purchaser or intended purchaser of the package
 or packaging component.
 `(B) In any case in which compliance is achieved because of an exemption
 under paragraph (3) or (4), such certificate shall state the specific
 basis upon which the exemption is claimed.
 `(C) A certificate of compliance shall be signed by an authorized official
 of the manufacturer or distributor, as the case may be.
 `(f) CANS FOR FOOD, FOILS- (1) Beginning on the date that is eighteen months
 after the date of the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990,
 no person may manufacture or import any can which may be used for food
 for human consumption (or intended for such use) containing solder that
 has a lead content greater than 0.2 percent by dry weight.
 `(2) Beginning on the date that is twenty-four months after the date of
 the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, no person may
 distribute in commerce any can containing food for human consumption (or
 intended for such use) containing solder that has a lead content greater
 than 0.2 percent by dry weight.
 `(3) Beginning on the date that is eighteen months after the date of the
 enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, no person may import,
 manufacture, process, or distribute in commerce foils for wine bottles
 containing more than 0.1 percent lead by dry weight.
 `(4) If the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services
 (hereinafter in this subsection referred to as the `Secretary') finds that--
 `(A) a person who imports, manufactures, processes, or distributes
 in commerce foils for wine bottles has, upon the expiration of the
 eighteen-month period following the date of the enactment of the Lead
 Exposure Reduction Act, a large volume of foils for wine bottles which do
 not comply with the requirements of paragraph (3);
 `(B) such volume was purchased prior to the expiration of such eighteen-month
 period in the normal course of the manufacturer's business; and
 `(C) compliance with the requirements of paragraph (3) would cause undue
 economic hardship on such person,
the Secretary may delay the application of paragraph (3) with respect to
such person for a reasonable period of time.
 `(5) The Secretary under the authority granted to the Secretary under
 the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.) shall
 promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes
 of this subsection.
 `(g) SALE OF GASOLINE- (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
 beginning on the date that is six months after the date of the enactment
 of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, no person may sell or offer
 for sale gasoline that contains any lead additives for a price that is
 less than the lowest price at which unleaded gasoline is offered for sale
 at the same establishment.
 `(2) Beginning on the date that is six months after the date of the
 enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, the Administrator
 shall, by regulation, prohibit the selling or offering for sale, in a
 metropolitan statistical area or consolidated metropolitan statistical
 area (as defined by the United States Office of Management and Budget)
 with a 1980 population of two hundred fifty thousand persons or more,
 for use as a fuel in any motor vehicle, other than farm vehicles, any
 gasoline which contains lead or a lead additive.
 `(3)(A) Effective January 1, 1996, any person who manufactures or imports
 any fuel that contains lead or a lead additive (including fuel for use in
 a farm vehicle or engine, nonroad vehicle or engine, competition vehicle
 or engine, marine vehicle or engine, or aviation vehicle or engine) shall
 submit quarterly reports to the Administrator on the lead content and
 volume of such fuel that is manufactured or imported (by type of fuel,
 where such information is reasonably available).
 `(B) No later than January 1, 1995, the Administrator shall promulgate
 such regulations as he determines are necessary to implement and enforce
 this requirement.
 `(h) EXEMPTIONS- (1) The Administrator shall, by regulation, exempt from
 the restrictions on the lead content of paint described in paragraph (1)
 of subsection (a) any paint used by an artist in a work of art.
 `(2) The Administrator shall, by regulation, exempt from the restrictions on
 lead content under subsection (a) or (b) any product or product category
 used--
 `(A) for medical purposes (as defined by the Administrator, in consultation
 with the Secretary of Health and Human Services);
 `(B) in connection with the national security activities of the Department
 of Defense;
 `(C) in the nuclear industry (as defined by the Administrator), including
 any product or product category used in connection with the national
 security programs of the Department of Energy; and
 `(D) in the mining industry to determine the presence of noble metals in
 geological materials.
 `(3) For the purposes of subsection (a) or (b), the term `processed' shall
 not include the recycling (for use as a raw material or for processing),
 the recovery, or the reuse of--
 `(A) Metal.
 `(B) Glass.
 `(C) Plastic.
 `(D) Paper.
 `(E) Textile.
`SEC. 403. INVENTORY OF LEAD-CONTAINING PRODUCTS.
 `(a) INVENTORY OF LEAD-CONTAINING PRODUCTS- (1) Not later than eighteen
 months after the date of the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act
 of 1990, each person who manufactures, processes, or imports any product
 that contains more than 0.1 percent lead by dry weight shall notify
 the Administrator of such manufacture, processing, or importing. Such
 notification shall be in writing and shall specify the following inventory
 information:
 `(A) the type of product manufactured, processed, or imported;
 `(B) the quantity of such product manufactured, processed, or imported;
 `(C) the amount and percentage of lead used in the manufacturing or
 processing of the product, or the amount and percentage of lead contained
 in the imported product; and
 `(D) such other information as the Administrator determines, by order,
 is necessary to meet the purposes of this section.
 `(2) The owner or operator of a recycling facility regulated by a State or
 by the Administrator shall not be subject to the notification requirements
 described in paragraph (1) with respect to such recycling facility.
 `(3) Not later than twelve months after the date of the enactment of
 the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, the Administrator shall publish
 in the Federal Register notice of the requirements under paragraph (1)
 of this subsection and other related information that the Administrator
 determines to be appropriate.
 `(4) The Administrator shall develop procedures to assure that the inventory
 is updated periodically and that each person who manufactures, processes,
 or imports a product that contains more than 0.1 percent lead by dry
 weight that is not subject to notification in the initial inventory is
 required to provide the notification required under paragraph (1) within
 six months of beginning the manufacture, processing, or importing of such
 lead containing product.
 `(5) To the extent feasible, the Administrator shall utilize existing
 product classification codes such as the harmonized export-import codes
 compiled by the Department of Commerce.
 `(6) The Administrator may be administrative order define the terms
 `product' and `product category'.
 `(b) COMPILATION OF INVENTORY INFORMATION- (1) Not later than twenty-four
 months after the date of enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of
 1990, and every five years thereafter, the Administrator shall publish
 a compilation of the inventory information reported under paragraph (1)
 of subsection (a). In compiling such information the Administrator may,
 to the extent consistent with the purpose of this section, in lieu of
 listing a product individually, list a category of products in which such
 product is included.
 `(2) Not later than thirty months after the date of enactment of the Lead
 Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, the Administrator shall report to Congress
 a summary of inventory information and recommendations for minimizing the
 release of lead into the environment and preventing human exposure to lead.
 `(c) CONFIDENTIALITY OF INVENTORY INFORMATION- (1) A person who is
 required to submit written notification under subsection (a) may submit
 an application to the Administrator to claim information included in such
 written notification as confidential information, for the purposes of
 this section.
 `(2) A person may claim the information described in paragraph (1) as
 confidential if such person--
 `(A) meets the requirements of paragraph (3);
 `(B) includes in the application submitted under paragraph (1)--
 `(i) a detailed explanation of the reasons why such information meets the
 criteria for confidentiality described in subparagraphs (A) through (D)
 of paragraph (3);
 `(ii) written designation of the information claimed as confidential, in such
 manner and in such form as the Administrator may prescribe by regulation;
 `(iii) a copy of the written notification required under subsection (a)
 that contains all information claimed as confidential; and
 `(iv) a copy of the written notification that excludes such information
 claimed as confidential.
 `(3) The Administrator may approve an application for claiming information as
 confidential, as described in paragraph (1), if the Administrator determines
 that the application meets the requirements of this subsection and that--
 `(A) the applicant has not disclosed the information to any person other
 than--
 `(i) an officer or employee of the Federal Government or of a State
 government or the government of a political subdivision of a State;
 `(ii) an employee of the applicant; or
 `(iii) a person who has entered into an agreement with the applicant to
 ensure the confidentiality of the information; and
 `(B) the applicant has taken reasonable measures to protect the
 confidentiality of the information, and demonstrates, to the satisfaction
 of the Administrator, the intent to continue to protect the confidentiality
 of the information;
 `(C) public disclosure of the information is not required under any other
 Federal or State law;
 `(D) no Federal or State law requires that the information shall be
 otherwise made available to the public;
 `(E) disclosure of the information would likely cause substantial economic
 harm to the competitive position of such applicant or the information has
 been determined to constitute national security information under Federal
 law; and
 `(F) the information is not readily discoverable through reverse engineering
 or the examination of data sources available to the public.
 `(4) Unless the Administrator makes a determination that the requirements of
 paragraph (3) have been met, any information submitted to the Administrator
 in the application described in paragraph (1), and in response to any inquiry
 by the Administrator for the submittal of additional information, shall be
 made available to the public. If the Administrator makes a determination
 that the requirements of paragraph (3) have been met, the information shall
 be considered as confidential for purposes of this section, and section 14,
 except that the Administrator may disclose such information as provided
 in section 14(a).
 `(5) Notwithstanding paragraph (4), upon a request by the Governor of
 a State, the Administrator shall provide to the State the application
 information described in paragraphs (1) and (2).
 `(6) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, upon receipt of a request
 by a committee of Congress authorized by the Congress to receive such
 information, or the General Accounting Office, the Administrator shall
 make available to such committee, or the General Accounting Office, any
 information obtained under this subsection.
 `(7) If the Administrator determines that--
 `(A) an applicant has not made a sufficient showing that the information
 it sought to protect meets the criteria described in paragraph (3)(B); and
 `(B) the claim of confidentiality in the application was frivolous,
the applicant may be deemed liable for a civil penalty described in section
16(a).
 `(8)(A) Any officer or employee of the United States or former officer or
 employee of the United States, who by virtue of such employment or official
 position has obtained possession of, or has access to, information that
 the Administrator has determined to be entitled to protection under this
 subsection who knowlingly and willfully discloses the information in
 any manner to any person not entitled to receive it, shall be guilty of
 a misdemeanor and fined not more than $5,000 or imprisoned for not more
 than one year, or both. Section 1905 of title 18, United States Code,
 does not apply with respect to the publishing, divulging, disclosure,
 making know of, or making available, information reported or otherwise
 obtained under this subsection.
 `(B) For the purposes of subparagraph (A), any contractor with the United
 States who is furnished information as authorized by section 14(a)(2),
 and any employee of any such contractor, shall be considered to be an
 employee of the United States.
 `(d) EXEMPTION FROM INVENTORY REQUIREMENTS FOR LEAD-ACID BATTERIES- A person
 who manufactures, processes, or imports lead-acid batteries, as defined in
 section 405(o)(1), shall, with respect to providing notification regarding
 lead-acid batteries under subsection (a), be exempt from the notification
 requirements under such subsection.
 `(e) DEFINITIONS- For the purposes of this section, the terms `manufacture'
 and `process' mean manufacture or process for commercial purposes.
`SEC. 404. PRODUCT LABELING.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- (1) Not later than twelve months after the date of the
 enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, the Administrator
 shall promulgate regulations that provide for the labeling of products
 (other than lead-acid batteries as defined in section 405(o)(1) and products
 regulated under the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act) that may pose a
 risk of human exposure to lead.
 `(2) Not later than twelve months after the date of enactment of the Lead
 Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, the Commissioner of the Food and Drug
 Administration shall promulgate regulations that provide for the labeling
 of products regulated under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act that
 may pose a risk of human exposure to lead.
 `(3) The regulations promulated pursuant to paragraphs (1) and (2) shall
 take effect not later than twenty-four months after the date of enactment
 of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990.
 `(b) CONTENT OF REGULATIONS- The regulations described in subsection (a)
 shall specify the wording, type size, and placement of the labels described
 in such subsection.
 `(c) LABELING OF CERTAIN TOYS AND RECREATIONAL GAME PIECES- (1) The
 Administrator shall promulgate regulations requiring that the following
 labeling be included in the labeling of the packaging of all toys and
 recreational game pieces that are collectible items and scale models which
 are subject to the regulations promulgated under section 402(b)(5) and are
 manufactured on or after the effective date of the regulations promulgated
 under this subsection:
`COLLECTIBLE ITEM, CONTAINS LEAD, NOT SUITABLE FOR CHILDREN
 `(2) Regulations promulgated pursuant to (1) shall specify the type size,
 and placement of the labels described.
 `(3) Any regulation promulgated under paragraph (1) shall take effect
 on the date that is twelve months after the date of the promulgation of
 such regulation.
`SEC. 405. RECYCLING OF LEAD-ACID BATTERIES.
 `(a) PROHIBITIONS- (1) Beginning on the date that is twelve months after
 the date of the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990,
 no person shall place a lead-acid battery in any landfill and no person
 shall incinerate any such battery.
 `(2) No person shall discard or otherwise dispose of a lead-acid battery
 in mixed municipal solid waste or discard or otherwise dispose of any such
 battery in a manner other than by recycling in accordance with this section.
 `(b) GENERAL DISCARD OR DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS- Beginning on the date that is
 twelve months after the date of the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction
 Act of 1990, no person (except a person described in subsection (c), (d),
 or (e)) shall discard or otherwise dispose of used lead-acid batteries
 except by delivery to one of the following persons (or the authorized
 representative of such person):
 `(1) A person who sells lead-acid batteries at retail or wholesale.
 `(2) A lead smelter regulated by a State or the Administrator under the
 Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.) or the Clean Air Act
 (42 U.S.C. 7401 et seq.).
 `(3) A collection or recycling facility regulated by a State or subject
 to regulation by the Administrator under the Solid Waste Disposal Act
 (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.).
 `(4) An automotive dismantler (as defined by the Administrator).
 `(c) DISCARD OR DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS FOR RETAILERS- Beginning on the date
 that is twelve months after the date of the enactment of the Lead Exposure
 Reduction Act of 1990, no person who sells lead-acid batteries at retail
 shall discard or otherwise dispose of used lead-acid batteries except by
 delivery to one of the following persons (or the authorized representative
 of such person):
 `(1) A person who sells lead-acid batteries at wholesale.
 `(2) A lead smelter regulated by a State or the Administrator under the
 Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.) or the Clean Air Act
 (42 U.S.C. 7401 et seq.).
 `(3) A battery manufacturer.
 `(4) A collection or recycling facility regulated by a State or subject
 to regulation by the Administrator under the Solid Waste Disposal Act
 (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.).
 `(5) An automotive dismantler (as defined by the Administrator).
 `(d) DISCARD OR DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS FOR WHOLESALERS- Beginning on the
 date that is twelve months after the date of the enactment of the Lead
 Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, no person who sells lead-acid batteries at
 wholesale shall discard or otherwise dispose of used lead-acid batteries
 except by delivery to one of the following persons (or the authorized
 representative of such person):
 `(1) A lead smelter regulated by a State or the Administrator under the
 Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.) or the Clean Air Act
 (42 U.S.C. 7401 et seq.).
 `(2) A battery manufacturer.
 `(3) A collection or recycling facility regulated by a State or subject
 to regulation by the Administrator under the Solid Waste Disposal Act
 (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.).
 `(e) DISCARD OR DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURERS- Beginning on
 the date that is twelve months after the date of the enactment of the
 Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, no person who manufactures lead-acid
 batteries shall discard or otherwise dispose of used lead-acid batteries
 except by delivery to one of the following persons (or the authorized
 representative of such person):
 `(1) A lead smelter regulated by a State or the Administrator under the
 Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.) or the Clean Air Act
 (42 U.S.C. 7401 et seq.).
 `(2) A collection or recycling facility regulated by a State or subject
 to regulation by the Administrator.
 `(f) COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS FOR RETAILERS- Beginning on the date that
 is twelve months after the date of the enactment of the Lead Exposure
 Reduction Act of 1990, a person who sells, or offers for sale, lead-acid
 batteries at retail shall accept from customers, used lead-acid batteries
 of the same type as the batteries sold and in a quantity approximately
 equal to the number of batteries sold. The used lead-acid batteries shall
 be accepted at the place where lead-acid batteries are offered for sale.
 `(g) COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS FOR WHOLESALERS- (1) Beginning on the date
 that is twelve months after the date of the enactment of the Lead Exposure
 Reduction Act of 1990, a person who sells, or offers for sale, lead-acid
 batteries at wholesale (hereinafter referred to as a `wholesaler') shall
 accept from customers, used lead-acid batteries of the same type as the
 batteries sold and in a quantity approximately equal to the number of
 batteries sold.
 `(2) In the case of a wholesaler who sells, or offers for sale, lead-acid
 batteries to a retailer, such wholesaler shall also provide for removing
 used lead-acid batteries at the place of business of the retailer. Such
 removal shall occur not later than ninety days after the retailer notifies
 the wholesaler of the existence of such used lead-acid batteries for such
 removal unless there are less than five such batteries, in which case the
 wholesaler shall remove such batteries within one-hundred and eighty days.
 `(h) COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURERS- Beginning on the date that is
 twelve months after the date of the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction
 Act of 1990, a person who manufactures lead-acid batteries shall accept
 from customers, used lead-acid batteries of the same type as the batteries
 sold and in a quantity approximately equal to the number of batteries sold.
 `(i) WRITTEN NOTICE REQUIREMENTS FOR RETAILERS- (1) Beginning on the
 date that is twelve months after the date of the enactment of the Lead
 Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, a person who sells, or offers for sale,
 lead-acid batteries at retail shall post written notice that--
 `(A) is clearly visible in a public area of the establishment in which
 such lead-acid batteries are sold or offered for sale;
 `(B) is at least 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches in size; and
 `(C) contains the following language:
 `(i) `It is illegal to throw away a motor vehicle battery or other lead-acid
 battery.'.
 `(ii) `Recycle your used batteries.'.
 `(iii) `Federal law requires battery retailers to accept used lead-acid
 batteries for recycling when a battery is purchased.'.
 `(iv) `Federal law allows you to sell or give used batteries to an authorized
 battery collector, recycler, or processer, or to an automotive dismantler'.
 `(2) Any person who, after receiving a written warning by the Administrator,
 fails to post a notice required under paragraph (1) shall, notwithstanding
 section 16, be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $1,000 per day.
 `(j) LEAD-ACID BATTERY LABELING REQUIREMENTS- (1) Beginning on the date that
 is eighteen months after the date of the enactment of the Lead Exposure
 Reduction Act of 1990, it shall be unlawful for any lead-acid battery
 manufacturer to sell, or offer for sale, any lead-acid battery that does
 not bear a permanent label that contains the statements required under
 paragraph (3).
 `(2) Beginning on the date that is twenty-four months after the date of
 the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, it shall be
 unlawful to sell a lead-acid battery that does not bear a permanent label
 that contains the statements required under paragraph (3).
 `(3) A label described in paragraph (1) or (2) shall be deemed consistent
 with the requirements of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990 if
 such label--
 `(A) identifies that the lead-acid battery contains lead; and
 `(B) contains the following statements:
 `(i) `Federal law requires recycling'.
 `(ii) `Seller must accept return'.
 `(4) Nothing in this Act shall be interpreted as prohibiting the display
 on the label of a lead-acid battery a recycling symbol (as defined by the
 Administrator) or other information intended to encourage recycling.
 `(k) PUBLICATION OF NOTICE- Not later than six months after the date of the
 enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, the Administrator
 shall publish in the Federal Register notice of the requirements of this
 section and other related information that the Administrator determines
 to be appropriate.
 `(l) STATE AND LOCAL LABELING LAWS- (1) Beginning on the date that is
 eighteen months after the date of the enactment of the Lead Exposure
 Reduction Act of 1990, no State or political subdivision of a State shall
 enact or enforce requirements that do not include the following requirements
 under this section with respect to lead-acid battery recycling:
 `(A) labeling requirements;
 `(B) written notice requirements for retailers; and
 `(C) collection requirements.
 `(2) Nothing in paragraph (1) or in any other provision of the Lead Exposure
 Reduction Act of 1990 shall be construed so as to prohibit a government of
 a State or a political subdivision of a State from requiring the payment
 of a deposit upon the sale of a lead-acid battery.
 `(m) WARNINGS AND CITATIONS- The Administrator may issue warnings and
 citations to any person who fails to comply with any provision of this
 section.
 `(n) EXPORT FOR PURPOSES OF RECYCLING- Notwithstanding any other provision
 of this section, any person may export used lead-acid batteries for the
 purpose of recycling.
 `(o) DEFINITIONS- For the purposes of this section:
 `(1) The term `lead-acid battery' means a battery that--
 `(A) consists of lead and sulfuric acid; and
 `(B) is used as a power source.
 `(2) The term `secondary lead smelter' means a facility which produces
 metallic lead from various forms of lead scrap, including used lead-acid
 batteries. Such a facility also may produce plastic chips that are sent
 for reprocessing.
`SEC. 406. PROHIBITED ACTS.
 `It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with a
 provision of sections 402 through 405 or with any rule or order issued
 under such sections.
`SEC. 407. LEAD ABATEMENT AND MEASUREMENT.
 `(a) PROGRAM TO PROMOTE LEAD EXPOSURE ABATEMENT- The Administrator,
 in cooperation with the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, the
 Secretary of Commerce, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and the
 Secretary of Labor shall conduct a comprehensive program to promote safe,
 effective, and affordable monitoring, detection and abatement of lead-based
 paint and other lead exposure hazards.
 `(b) STANDARDS FOR ENVIRONMENTAL SAMPLING LABORATORIES- The Secretary of
 Commerce (acting through the Director of the National Institute of Standards
 and Technology), in consultation with the Secretary of Housing and Urban
 Development and the Administrator, shall establish protocols, criteria, and
 minimum performance standards for laboratory analysis of lead in paint films,
 soil and dust. Not more than eighteen months after the date of the enactment
 of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, the Secretary of Commerce shall
 establish certification programs to assure the quality and consistency of
 laboratory analyses, unless the Secretary determines, by the date specified
 in this subsection, that effective voluntary accreditation programs are in
 place and operating on a nationwide basis at the time of such determination.
 `(c) STANDARDS FOR BLOOD ANALYSIS LABORATORIES- (1) The Secretary of
 Health and Human Services (hereafter in this subsection referred to as the
 `Secretary'), acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control,
 shall establish protocols, criteria and minimum performance standards for
 laboratory analysis of lead in blood. Not later than eighteen months after
 the date of the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, the
 Secretary shall establish certification programs to assure the quality and
 consistency of laboratory analyses, unless the Secretary determines, by the
 date specified in this subsection, that effective voluntary accreditation
 programs are in place and operating on a nationwide basis at the time of
 such determination.
 `(2) A quality control program under this subsection shall include an
 accreditation or certification program which shall include provisions for
 reporting results of blood-lead analyses to the Director of the Centers
 for Disease Control on an ongoing basis. Such reports shall be in such
 form as the Secretary shall require by regulation.
 `(d) CONTRACTOR TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION- (1) Not later than twelve
 months after the date of the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act
 of 1990, the Secretary of Labor in conjunction with the Administrator of
 the Environmental Protection Agency, the Secretary of Housing and Urban
 Development and the Secretary of Health and Human Services (acting through
 the Director of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health),
 shall develop minimum core curricula for technical training courses for
 lead-based paint abatement workers, supervisors, designers, inspectors
 and building owners.
 `(2) The courses described in paragraph (1) shall address generic factors
 associated with lead testing and abatement in various types of housing
 units, including public and private single- and multi-family, housing
 units (as determined by the Secretary of Labor, in consultation with the
 individuals described in paragraph (1)).
 `(3) The Secretary of Labor may assure the quality, comprehensiveness,
 and effectiveness of the training courses described in paragraph (2)
 by evaluating training programs, and shall encourage State certification
 programs, or the development of national proficiency tests.
 `(4) Not later than April 1, 1992, the Secretary of Labor in consultation
 with the individuals described in paragraph (1) shall jointly report
 to the Congress their assessment of abatement training capacity and the
 quality of ongoing abatement work.
 `(e) DETECTION TECHNOLOGIES- (1) The Secretary of Commerce (acting through
 the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology), in
 consultation with the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and the
 Administrator, shall evaluate emerging products and emerging techniques
 for detecting lead in paint films and dust, including x-ray fluorescence
 devices, on-site chemical spot testers, and laboratory methods.
 `(2) The Secretary of Commerce (acting through the Director of the National
 Institute of Standards and Technology), in consultation with the Secretary
 of Housing and Urban Development and the Administrator, shall develop
 criteria, standards, and testing protocols to assure reliable, accurate,
 and effective detection technologies.
 `(f) EVALUATION OF ABATEMENT AND IN-PLACE MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES TO REDUCE
 LEAD DUST LEVELS- (1) Not later than thirty-six months after the date of
 the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, the Administrator,
 in consultation with the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, shall
 submit a report to the Congress concerning the short-term and long-term
 efficacy and effectiveness of various abatement and in-place management
 techniques in reducing lead dust levels. The assessment of such in-place
 management techniques shall be based on resultant and subsequent levels
 of lead dust.
 `(2) The report described in paragraph (1) shall review the feasibility of
 State standards for post-abatement lead dust levels in effect immediately
 preceding the date of the issuance of such report.
 `(g) EVALUATION OF EMERGING ABATEMENT TECHNOLOGIES- (1) The Secretary of
 Commerce (hereafter in this subsection referred to as the `Secretary'),
 acting through the Director of the National Institute of Standards and
 Technology, in consultation with the Secretary of Labor and the Secretary of
 Housing and Urban Development, shall establish a program for the evaluation
 of existing and new products and procedures for encapsulating or removing
 lead-based paint.
 `(2) The products and procedures described in paragraph (1) shall be
 evaluated for safety, effectiveness, durability, and other relevant
 performance characteristics (as determined by the Secretary, in consultation
 with the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology)
 and based on written performance criteria and standards that the Secretary
 shall develop (in consultation with the Director of the National Institute
 of Standards and Technology).
 `(3) Not later than eighteen months after the date of the enactment of the
 Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, the Secretary shall publish in the
 Federal Register a list of the products and procedures that the Secretary
 has determined to meet the performance standards and criteria developed
 by the Secretary.
 `(4) The Secretary shall update and publish the list described in paragraph
 (3)--
 `(A) on the date that is thirty months after the date of the enactment of
 the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990;
 `(B) on the date that is forty-two months after the date of the enactment
 of such Act; and
 `(C) at any time subsequent to the date under subparagraph (B), as the
 Secretary determines to be appropriate.
 `(h) CLASSIFICATION OF ABATEMENT WASTES- (1) Not later than six months
 after the date of the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990,
 the Administrator shall issue guidelines for the management of lead-based
 paint abatement debris. Such guidelines shall describe steps for segregating
 wastes from lead-based paint abatement projects in order to minimize the
 volume of material qualifying as hazardous solid waste.
 `(2) Beginning on the date that is seven months after the date of the
 enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, if the requirements of
 paragraph (1) have not been met, no appropriated moneys may be expended by
 the Environmental Protection Agency for the purpose of funding travel for
 employees to engage in official business of the Environmental Protection
 Agency outside of the United States and the territories of the United
 States. The prohibition under this paragraph shall terminate on the date
 that the requirements of paragraph (1) are met.
 `(i) EXPOSURE STUDIES- (1) The Administrator, in consultation with the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services (hereafter in this subsection
 referred to as the `Secretary'), acting through the Director of the Centers
 for Disease Control, shall conduct a long-term research project to study
 the sources of lead exposure in children who have elevated blood lead
 levels (or other indicators of elevated lead body burden), as defined by
 the Administrator, in consultation with the Director of the Centers for
 Disease Control.
 `(2) The Secretary of Labor and the Administrator, in consultation with
 the Director of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health,
 shall conduct a long-term research project to study the sources of lead
 exposure in construction workers.
 `(3) The research projects described in paragraphs (1) and (2) shall
 examine the relative contributions to lead body burden from the following:
 `(A) Drinking water.
 `(B) Food.
 `(C) Lead-based paint and dust from lead-based paint.
 `(D) Exterior sources such as ambient air and lead in soil.
 `(E) Occupational exposures, and other exposures that the Administrator
 determines to be appropriate.
 `(4) The Administrator shall consult with the Secretary of Health and Human
 Services in conducting the research activities related to the contribution
 of lead from food to lead body burden.
 `(5) Not later than eighteen months after the date of the enactment of the
 Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, and every twelve months thereafter,
 the Administrator shall submit a report to the Congress concerning the
 research projects described in paragraphs (1) and (2).
 `(j) PUBLIC EDUCATION- (1) The Administrator of the Environmental Protection
 Agency in conjunction with the Secretary of Health and Human Services,
 acting through the Administrator of the Agency for Toxic Substances and
 Disease Registry, shall sponsor public education and outreach activities
 to increase public awareness of--
 `(A) the scope and severity of lead poisoning from household sources;
 `(B) potential exposure to sources of lead in schools and childhood day
 care centers (as determined pursuant to section 4 of the Lead Exposure
 Reduction Act of 1990); and
 `(C) the need for careful, quality, abatement and management actions.
 `(2) The activities described in paragraph (1) shall be designed to provide
 educational services and information to--
 `(A) health professionals;
 `(B) other groups that the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
 Agency and the Secretary of Health and Human Services determine to be
 appropriate; and
 `(C) the general public.
 `(k) SOIL LEAD GUIDELINES- Not later than twenty-four months after the
 date of the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, the
 Administrator shall issue guidelines concerning the action levels for lead
 in soil.
 `(l) COORDINATOR FOR LEAD ACTIVITIES- Not later than thirty days after
 the date of the enactment of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, the
 Administrator shall appoint, from among the employees of the Environmental
 Protection Agency, a Coordinator for Lead Activities to coordinate the
 activities conducted by the Agency (or in conjunction with the Agency)
 relating to the prevention of lead poisoning, the reduction of lead exposure,
 and lead abatement.
`SEC. 408. ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL CENTERS FOR THE PREVENTION OF LEAD
POISONING.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT AND RESPONSIBILITIES- (1) There is established a
 grant program to establish one or more Centers for the Prevention of Lead
 Poisoning. (Each such Center is hereinafter referred to as a `Center'.)
 `(2) The Administrator shall award grants to one or more institutions
 of higher education in the United States for the purpose of establishing
 and funding a Center. Each such Center shall assist the Administrator in
 carrying out the functions of this title. Such functions shall include
 providing for the transfer of technology and serving as a source of
 information to the general public.
 `(b) APPLICATIONS- The Administrator shall solicit applications from any
 institution of higher education in the United States for the designation as
 a Center. The application shall be in such form and contain such information
 as the Administrator may require by regulation.
 `(c) SELECTION CRITERIA- The Administrator shall select grant recipients
 from the applicants in accordance with the following criteria:
 `(1) The capability of the applicant institution to provide leadership in
 making national contributions to the prevention of lead poisoning.
 `(2) The demonstrated capacity of applicant institution to conduct relevant
 research.
 `(3) The appropriateness of the projects proposed to be carried out by
 the applicant institution.
 `(4) The assurance of the applicant institution of a commitment of at
 least $100,000 in budgeted institutional funds to relevant research upon
 receipt of such grant.
 `(5) The presence at the applicant institution of an interdisciplinary
 staff with demonstrated expertise in lead poisoning prevention.
 `(6) The demonstrated ability of the applicant institution to disseminate
 results of relevant research and educational programs through an
 interdisciplinary continuing education program.
 `(7) Any other criteria that the Administrator determines to be appropriate.
 `(d) FEDERAL SHARE AND DURATION OF GRANT- (1) The Federal share of a grant
 under this section shall not exceed 95 percent of the costs of establishing
 and operating a Center and related research activities carried out by
 the Center.
 `(2) A grant under this section shall be for a period of time not to exceed
 two years.'.
 SEC. 3. TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- (1) Section 11 of the Toxic
 Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. 2610) is amended--
 (A) in the first sentence of subsection (a)--
 (i) by striking `or mixtures' before `are manufactured' and inserting `,
 mixtures, or products subject to title IV'; and
 (ii) by inserting `such products,' before `or such articles'; and
 (B) in paragraph (1) of subsection (b) by striking `or mixtures' and
 inserting `, mixtures, or products subject to title IV'.
 (2) Section 16 of the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. 2615) is
 amended by inserting `or 406' after `section 15' each place it appears.
 (3)(a) Section 17(a)(1) of the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. 2616)
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(a) SPECIFIC ENFORCEMENT- (1) The district courts of the United States
 shall have jurisdiction over civil actions to--
 `(A) restrain any violation of section 15 or 406,
 `(B) restrain any person from taking any action prohibited by section 5,
 6, or 402, or by a rule or order under section 5, 6, or 402,
 `(C) compel the taking of any action required by or under this Act, or
 `(D) direct any manufacturer or processor of a chemical substance,
 mixture, or product subject to title IV manufactured or processed in
 violation of section 5, 6, or 402, or a rule or order under section 5,
 6, or 402, and distributed in commerce, (i) to give notice of such fact
 to distributors in commerce of such substance, mixture, or product and,
 to the extent reasonably ascertainable, to other persons in possession of
 such substance, mixture, or product or exposed to such substance, mixture,
 or product, (ii) to give public notice of such risk of injury, and (iii)
 to either replace or repurchase such substance, mixture, or product,
 whichever the person to which the requirement is directed elects.'.
 (b) in the first sentence of subsection (b)--
 (i) by striking `or mixture' after `Any chemical substance' and inserting
 `, mixture, or product subject to title IV'; and
 (ii) by inserting `product,' before `or article' in each place that
 it appears.
 (4) Section 18(a)(1) of the Toxic Substances Control Act (15
 U.S.C. 2617(a)(1)) is amended by striking the comma after `Except as
 provided in paragraph (2)' and inserting `and in section 405(1)'.
 (5) The Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. 2601 et seq.) is amended
 by adding at the end of the table of contents in section 1 the following:
`TITLE IV--LEAD EXPOSURE REDUCTION
`Sec. 401. Findings and policy.
`Sec. 402. Restrictions on continuing uses of certain lead-containing products.
`Sec. 403. Inventory of lead-containing products.
`Sec. 404. Product labeling.
`Sec. 405. Recycling of lead-acid batteries.
`Sec. 406. Prohibited acts.
`Sec. 407. Lead abatement and measurement.
`Sec. 408. Establishment of national centers for the prevention of lead
poisoning.'.
SEC. 4. REPORTING OF BLOOD-LEAD LEVELS; BLOOD-LEAD LABORATORY REFERENCE
PROJECT.
 (a) REPORTING OF BLOOD-LEAD LEVELS- (1) The Secretary of Health and Human
 Services (hereafter in this section referred to as the `Secretary'), acting
 through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control (hereafter in this
 section referred to as the `Director'), shall encourage State public health
 officials to report blood-lead measurements to the Director.
 (2) Not later than eighteen months after the date of the enactment of this
 Act, the Secretary shall submit a report to the Congress that--
 (A) describes the status of blood-lead reporting; and
 (B) evaluates the feasibility and desirability of instituting a national
 requirement for mandatory preschool blood-lead screening.
 (3) Not later than twenty-four months after the date of the enactment of
 this Act, the Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of Labor and
 the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, shall submit a
 report to the Congress that assesses the effectiveness of the blood-lead
 reporting provisions under regulations establishing the accreditation
 and certification programs for blood analysis laboratories described in
 section 407(c) of the Toxic Substances Control Act, as added by this Act.
 (b) ESTABLISHMENT OF BLOOD-LEAD LABORATORY REFERENCE PROJECT- Subpart 2
 of part C of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 258b et
 seq.), is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 424. BLOOD-LEAD LABORATORY REFERENCE PROJECT.
 `The Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the Director of
 the Centers for Disease Control, shall establish a blood-lead laboratory
 reference project to assist States and local governments to establish,
 maintain, improve, and assure the quality of laboratory measurements
 performed for childhood lead poisoning prevention programs. Such project
 shall include--
 `(1) collaboration with manufacturers of analytical instruments to develop
 blood-lead measurement devices that are accurate, portable, precise,
 rugged, reliable, safe, and of reasonable cost;
 `(2) the development of improved techniques for safe, contamination-free
 blood sample collection; and
 `(3) assistance to State and local laboratories in the form of reference
 materials, equipment, supplies, training, consultation, and technology
 development for quality assurance, capacity expansion, and technology
 transfer.'.
SEC. 5. UPDATE OF 1988 REPORT TO CONGRESS ON CHILDHOOD LEAD POISONING.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Not later than twenty-four months after the date of the
 enactment of this Act, and every at four twenty-four month intervals and as
 necessary thereafter, the Administrator of the Agency for Toxic Substances
 and Disease Registry shall submit to Congress a report updating the report
 submitted pursuant to subsection (f)(1) of section 118 of the Superfund
 Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986. Such updated report shall
 include, at a minimum, revised estimates of the prevalence of elevated lead
 levels among children and adults in the population of the United States,
 and estimates of the prevalence of adverse health outcomes associated
 with lead exposure. The initial report under this section shall include
 an assessment of the potential contribution to elevated blood lead levels
 in children from exposure to sources of lead in schools and day care centers.
 (b) FUNDING- The costs of preparing and submitting such updates shall be
 borne by the Hazardous Substance Superfund established under subchapter
 A of chapter 98 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
SEC. 6. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
 (a) AMENDMENT TO THE FAIR PACKAGING AND LABELING ACT- Section 11 of the
 Fair Packaging and Labeling Act (15 U.S.C. 1460) is amended--
 (1) by striking `or' at the end of subsection (b);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of subsection (c) and inserting `;
 or'; and
 (3) by adding at the end of the section the following new subsection:
 `(d) the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990.'.
 (b) AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT- (1) Section
 402 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 342) is amended
 by adding at the end the following new subsections:
 `(f) If it is packaged in a can or other container that contains solder or
 other component or ingredient with a lead content greater than 0.2 percent
 by dry weight.
 `(g) If it is ceramic ware and the ability of such ceramic ware to leach
 lead does not conform with the standards for ceramic ware established by
 the Secretary'.
 (2) Chapter IV of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 341
 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new section:
`CERAMIC WARE
 `SEC. 413. (1) Not later than twelve months after the date of the enactment
 of the Lead Exposure Reduction Act of 1990, the Secretary of Health and
 Human Services shall promulgate regulations to establish such standards and
 testing procedures with respect to lead in ceramic ware as the Secretary
 determines to be necessary to protect public health.
 `(2) For the purposes of this section and section 402(e), ceramic ware
 shall be deemed to be food.'.
SEC. 7. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out the purposes of
 this Act--
 (1) $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1991;
 (2) $24,000,000 for fiscal year 1992;
 (3) $24,000,000 for fiscal year 1993; and
 (4) $22,000,000 for fiscal year 1994.