S 734 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 734
To permanently prohibit the Secretary of the Interior from preparing for or
conducting any activity under the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act on certain
portions of the outer continental shelf off the State of Florida, to prohibit
activities other than certain required environmental or oceanographic studies
under the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act within the part of the Eastern Gulf
of Mexico Planning Area lying off the State of Florida, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
March 21 (legislative day, FEBRUARY 6), 1991
Mr. GRAHAM (for himself and Mr. MACK) introduced the following bill; which
was read twice and referred to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
A BILL
To permanently prohibit the Secretary of the Interior from preparing for or
conducting any activity under the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act on certain
portions of the outer continental shelf off the State of Florida, to prohibit
activities other than certain required environmental or oceanographic studies
under the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act within the part of the Eastern Gulf
of Mexico Planning Area lying off the State of Florida, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. PROHIBITION OF PRELEASING AND LEASING ACTIVITY.
 The Secretary of the Interior (referred to as the `Secretary') shall not
 prepare for or conduct any activity under the Outer Continental Shelf Lands
 Act (43 U.S.C. 1331 et seq.), with respect to submerged lands lying within--
 (1) the area south of 26 degrees north latitude and east of 86 degrees
 west longitude; or
 (2) the area within 100 nautical miles seaward from the baseline from
 which the territorial sea is measured at any point on the coast line of
 the State of Florida.
SEC. 2. CANCELLATION OF LEASES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Not later than 10 days after the date of enactment of this
 Act, the Secretary shall commence the process of canceling, and thereafter
 shall proceed with dispatch to cancel, all leases in the areas described
 in section 1 that were issued under the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act
 on or prior to the date of enactment of this Act.
 (b) ANNUAL REPORT- The Secretary shall submit a report to Congress annually,
 on the anniversary of the date of enactment of this Act, on the status
 of the cancellation proceedings, until all of the leases described in
 subsection (a) have been canceled.
SEC. 3. COMPENSATION.
 (a) AMOUNT OF COMPENSATION- For any lease that is canceled pursuant
 to section 2, to the extent that it is determined that the lessee is
 entitled to compensation, the lessee shall receive compensation as
 provided in section 5(a)(2)(C) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act
 (43 U.S.C. 1334(a)(2)(C)).
 (b) PAYMENT BY THE UNITED STATES- All of the compensation to which a lessee
 may be entitled under subsection (a) shall be paid out of the Treasury of
 the United States, and the State of Florida shall incur no cost or other
 liability of any kind as a consequence of cancellation of any lease under
 this Act.
SEC. 4. PROHIBITION OF ACTIVITIES OTHER THAN ENVIRONMENTAL OR OCEANOGRAPHIC
STUDIES.
 (a) PROHIBITION- The Secretary shall not--
 (1) conduct a lease sale;
 (2) issue any new leases;
 (3) approve any exploration plan;
 (4) approve any development and production plan;
 (5) approve any application for a permit to drill; or
 (6) permit any drilling,
in the part of the Eastern Gulf of Mexico Planning Area that lies east of
the western boundary of the State of Florida.
 (b) EFFECTIVE PERIOD- (1) The prohibition in paragraph (a) shall remain
 in effect until the later of--
 (A) January 1, 2002; or
 (B) 180 days after the date on which the Secretary submits to the Congress
 and to the Governor of the State of Florida a report documenting the
 completion of the studies described in subsection (c).
 (2) Each study that is documented in a report described in paragraph
 (1)(B) shall be reviewed, prior to submission of the report, by at least
 3 scientists who--
 (A) shall be nominated by the Florida Academy of Sciences, and approved
 by the Secretary and the Governor of the State of Florida;
 (B) are not employees of the Department of the Interior; and
 (C) are well qualified in the scientific disciplines required for performance
 of the particular study or studies that they review.
 (3) A report described in paragraph (1) shall include each reviewer's
 written evaluations of each study's methodology and results.
 (c) STUDIES- The Secretary shall undertake, directly or by contract,
 ecological and socioeconomic studies, physical oceanographic studies,
 endangered and threatened species and marine mammal surveys, and other
 environmental studies, including fieldwork and correlation of existing data
 and information, sufficient to obtain information about all significant
 conditions, processes, resources, and environments that may influence or
 be influenced by any of the activities described in subsection (a).
SEC. 5. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There are authorized to be appropriated $1,000,000 for each of fiscal
 years 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, and 2001, for
 the purpose of conducting or contracting for performance of the studies
 required by section 2, to remain available until expended.