S 1441 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1441
To enhance the Federal Trade Commission's ability to prevent consumer fraud.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
July 31 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. MCCAIN introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
A BILL
To enhance the Federal Trade Commission's ability to prevent consumer fraud.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act may be cited as the
 `Consumer Fraud Prevention Act'.
FINDINGS
 SEC. 2. The Congress finds that:
 (1) Consumer fraud is a pervasive and persistent problem for American
 businesses and consumers;
 (2) Consumer fraud costs Americans billions of dollars each year, and it
 undermines legitimate commercial activities by businesses of all sizes
 and in all fields.
 (3) Consumer fraud schemes commonly exceed the jurisdictional boundaries
 of any single court or State.
 (4) The perpetrators of consumer fraud use various means to escape
 prosecution, including rapid flight, jurisdictional diversity, and fictitious
 legal entities.
 (5) One of the most pervasive types of consumer fraud is health fraud,
 which has been estimated to cost Americans more than $10,000,000,000
 annually. In addition to being costly, such fraud can be life threatening.
 (6) Consumer fraud involving telemarketing is estimated to cost consumers
 billions of dollars annually. Telemarketing involving investment fraud
 alone is estimated to cost $1,000,000,000 each year.
 (7) The Federal Trade Commission and the attorneys general of the States
 have initiated a cooperative attack on telemarketing fraud. The success of
 this program has been hampered by jurisdictional limitations and inadequate
 resources.
 (8) Consumer fraud is a particular burden for senior citizens, who are
 more frequently defrauded than other consumers.
 (9) The ability of the Federal Trade Commission to attack consumer fraud
 has been limited due to inadequate authority, and legislation is needed
 to enhance the Commission's ability to protect consumers from such abuses.
FALSE ADVERTISEMENTS CONCERNING SERVICES
 SEC. 3. Section 12(a) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 52(a))
 is amended by inserting `services,' immediately after `devices,' each
 place it appears.
EXPANDED ENFORCEMENT TOOLS
 SEC. 4. (a) VENUE- (1) Subsections (a) and (b) of section 13 of the
 Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 53) are each amended by adding
 at the end thereof the following: `Whenever it appears to the court that
 the interests of justice require that any other person, partnership,
 or corporation should be a party in such suit, the court may cause such
 person, partnership, or corporation to be summoned whether or not they
 reside or transact business in the district in which the suit is brought,
 and to that end process may be served in any district.'.
 (2) Section 13 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 53) is
 amended by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d) and inserting
 immediately after subsection (b) the following:
 `(c) Any process of the Commission under this section may be served by
 anyone duly authorized by the Commission--
 `(1) by delivering a copy of such process to the person to be served, to
 a member of the partnership to be served, or to the president, secretary,
 or other executive officer or a director of the corporation to be served;
 `(2) by leaving a copy of such process at the residence or the principal
 office or place of business of such person, partnership, or corporation; or
 `(3) by mailing a copy of such process by registered mail or certified
 mail addressed to such person, partnership, or corporation at his or her
 or its residence or principal office or place of business.
The verified return by the person so serving such process setting forth
the manner of such service shall be proof of the same, and the return post
office receipt for such process mailed by registered mail or certified mail
as provided in this subsection shall be proof of the service of the same.'.
 (b) SUBPOENA- (1) Section 20(a) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15
 U.S.C. 57b-1(a)) is amended by redesignating paragraph (7) as paragraph
 (8) and inserting after paragraph (6) the following:
 `(7) The term `physical evidence' means any object or device including any
 medical device, food product, drug, nutritional product, cosmetic product,
 or audio or video recording.'.
 (2) Section 20(c)(1) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15
 U.S.C. 57b-1(c)(1)) is amended--
 (A) by inserting `physical evidence or' immediately after `any' the second
 time it appears;
 (B) by inserting `to produce such physical evidence for inspection,'
 immediately before `to produce';
 (C) by inserting `physical evidence,' immediately after `concerning'; and
 (D) by inserting `evidence,' immediately before `material, answers,'.
 (3) Section 20(c)(3) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15
 U.S.C. 57b-1(c)(3)) is amended--
 (A) by inserting `physical evidence or' immediately before `documentary
 material';
 (B) in subparagraph (A)--
 (i) by inserting `physical evidence or' immediately before `documentary'; and
 (ii) by inserting `evidence or' immediately after `permit such';
 (C) in subparagraph (B), by inserting `evidence or' immediately before
 `material'; and
 (D) in subparagraph (C), by inserting `evidence or' immediately before
 `material'.
 (4) Section 20(c)(10) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15
 U.S.C. 57b-1(c)(10)) is amended by inserting `physical evidence or'
 immediately before `documentary material' each place it appears.
 (c) POSTAL DATA- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the United
 States Postal Service shall, within 180 days after the date of enactment of
 this Act, amend its regulations in part 233 of title 39, Code of Federal
 Regulations, concerning mail covers to provide that the Federal Trade
 Commission may, in the course of investigating unfair or deceptive acts
 or practices in violation of section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act
 (15 U.S.C. 45), obtain access to mail cover reports to the same extent and
 in the same manner as law enforcement agencies investigating the commission
 or attempted commission of a crime.
 (d) FINANCIAL DATA- Section 1109(a)(3) of Public Law 95-360, approved
 November 10, 1978, is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraph (E) as subparagraph (F);
 (2) in subparagraph (D), by striking `or'; and
 (3) by inserting immediately after subparagraph (D) the following new
 subparagraph;
 `(E) dissipation, removal, or destruction of assets that are subject to
 forfeiture, seizure, redress, or restitution under any law of the United
 States by reason of having been obtained in violation of law; or'.
 (e) ASSISTANCE OF STATE ATTORNEYS GENERAL- (1) The Commission may appoint
 State attorneys general to assist Commission attorneys to enforce Commission
 rules when the public interest so requires. The Commission shall, within
 fifteen days after receiving any request from a State attorney general for
 such an appointment, determine whether to grant the request and communicate
 such determination to that State attorney general.
 (2) Each person appointed under this subsection is subject to removal by
 the Commission at its discretion.
RULEMAKING ON TELEMARKETING
 SEC. 5. (a) RULEMAKING- Within two hundred and seventy days after the date
 of enactment of this Act, the Federal Trade Commission shall amend its
 rule in part 435 of title 16, Code of Federal Regulations, concerning mail
 order merchandise, to apply also to telemarketing. Except as specified
 in the remainder of this subsection, the amended rule shall apply to
 telemarketing to the same extent and in the same manner as it now applies
 to mail order sales.
 (b) TELEMARKETING REQUIREMENTS- As part of the rulemaking required by
 subsection (a) of this section the Commission shall consider including in
 the final rule a requirement that--
 (1) each telemarketer shall inform the person, partnership, or corporation
 to whom the telemarketing is directed that such person, partnership,
 or corporation is entitled to a refund of any money paid for the product
 or service which is the subject of the telemarketing if delivery of the
 product or service is not made--
 (A) within the time period included in the offer of the product or
 service, or
 (B) if no time period is included in such offer, within thirty days after
 the date the offer is made; and
 (2) if such telemarketer--
 (A) makes an unsolicited telephone call to a person, partnership, or
 corporation or otherwise communicates with such person, partnership,
 or corporation offering a free gift or prize and invites such person,
 partnership, or corporation to respond,
 (B) a specific product or service is offered or sold in connection with
 such telephone call or other communication, and
 (C) there is no Federal statute governing such telephone call or other
 communication involving such product or service,
such person, partnership, or corporation may cancel an order for such product
or service not later than the expiration of three days after the date on
which there is a sales agreement.
 (c) REBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION- Such amended rule shall include a rebuttable
 presumption that if a telemarketer does not keep adequate records to show
 compliance with the requirements described in subsection (b) of this section,
 such telemarketer shall be considered to be in violation of such requirement.
 (d) LIMITATION- For purposes of this section, a financial institution or
 other participant in a payment system used to pay for products or services
 offered or sold through telemarketing, including the credit or payment
 authorization aspect of such payment system, is not, by virtue of such
 participation, a telemarketer nor a person, partnership, or corporation
 which acts in concert with, or on behalf of, a telemarketer.
 (e) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section--
 (1) the term `telemarketer' means a person, partnership, or corporation
 which engages in telemarketing; and
 (2) the term `telemarketing' means the use of a telephone in the ordinary
 course of business to communicate with a person, partnership, or corporation
 an offer for sale or to complete a sale of a product or service.
LIFE CARE HOME STUDY
 SEC. 6. (a) STUDY- The Federal Trade Commission shall conduct a study
 of unfair or deceptive acts or practices in the life care home industry,
 including acts or practices engaged in by life care homes. Within twenty-four
 months of the date of enactment of this section, the Commission shall report
 the findings and conclusions of the study to Congress. The Commission shall
 indicate in its report whether it intends to initiate a trade regulation
 rulemaking under section 18 of the Federal Trade Commission Act respecting
 unfair or deceptive acts or practices in the life care home industry and
 the reasons for such determination.
 (b) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of subsection (a):
 (1) The term `life care home' includes the facility or facilities occupied,
 or planned to be occupied, by residents or prospective residents where a
 provider undertakes to provide living accommodations and services pursuant
 to a life care contract, regardless of whether such facilities are operated
 on a profit or nonprofit basis.
 (2) The term `life care contract' includes a contract between a resident and
 a provider to provide the resident, for the duration of such resident's life,
 living accommodations and related services in a life care home, including
 nursing care services, medical services, and other health-related services,
 which is conditioned upon the transfer of an entrance fee to the provider and
 which may be further conditioned upon the payment of periodic service fees.
LONG-TERM HEALTH CARE INSURANCE STUDY
 SEC. 7. (a) STUDY- The Federal Trade Commission shall conduct a study
 concerning--
 (1) the use of unfair or deceptive acts or practices in the marketing and
 sale of long-term health care policies to the elderly;
 (2) the relationship of premiums for long-term health care policies to
 unexpected (expected) claims paid under such policies;
 (3) the effectiveness of various alternatives supported by the States to
 prevent unfair or deceptive acts or practices in the marketing and sale
 of long-term health care policies for the elderly; and
 (4) the ability of consumers to compare different long-term health care
 policies.
 (b) REPORT- The Commission shall, not later than one year after the date
 of enactment of this Act, report the results of the study conducted under
 subsection (a) to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
 of the Senate and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of
 Representatives.
 (c) COMPTROLLER GENERAL- In conducting the study under subsection (a), the
 Commission shall consult with the Comptroller General of the United States.
 (d) DEFINITION- For purposes of subsection (a), the term `long-term
 health care policy' includes any insurance policy which provides, among
 other benefits, a predetermined or fixed benefit payment for each day the
 policyholder stays in a nursing or care facility.