HR 2501 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2501
To provide for the full recovery of the Federal Government's costs of selling
timber on national forest lands, to require site-specific identification
of national forest lands that are not economically suitable for timber
harvesting, to remove that land from the suitable timber base and make
associated adjustments in the allowable sale quantity, to assist in the
economic transition of timber dependent communities, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
May 30, 1991
Mr. JONTZ (for himself and Mr. RAVENEL) introduced the following bill;
which was referred to the Committee on Agriculture
A BILL
To provide for the full recovery of the Federal Government's costs of selling
timber on national forest lands, to require site-specific identification
of national forest lands that are not economically suitable for timber
harvesting, to remove that land from the suitable timber base and make
associated adjustments in the allowable sale quantity, to assist in the
economic transition of timber dependent communities, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `National Forest Timber
 Sales Cost Recovery Act of 1991'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents of this Act is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--FOREST MANAGEMENT
Sec. 101. Elimination of below-cost sales of timber.
Sec. 102. Findings.
Sec. 103. Timberland suitability.
Sec. 104. Reforestation funds.
Sec. 105. Annual report.
TITLE II--ECONOMIC TRANSITION ASSISTANCE FOR TIMBER DEPENDENT COMMUNITIES
Sec. 201. Purposes.
Sec. 202. Definitions.
Subtitle A--Community Development Programs
Sec. 211. Financial assistance.
Sec. 212. Limitations on assistance.
Sec. 213. Federal share.
Subtitle B--Special Rural Programs
Sec. 221. Financial assistance.
Sec. 222. Limitations on assistance.
Subtitle C--Development Loans to Community Economic Development Programs
Sec. 231. Financial assistance.
Sec. 232. Development Loan Fund for Timber Dependent Communities.
Subtitle D--Supportive Programs and Activities
Sec. 241. Training and technical assistance.
Sec. 242. Coordination and eligibility.
Sec. 243. Evaluation and research.
Sec. 244. Planning grants.
Subtitle E--General Provisions
Sec. 251. Nondiscrimination.
Sec. 252. Advisory community investment boards.
Sec. 253. Regulations.
Sec. 254. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 255. Termination.
TITLE I--FOREST MANAGEMENT
SEC. 1O1. ELIMINATION OF BELOW-COST SALES OF TIMBER.
 Section 14 of the National Forest Management Act of 1976 (16 U.S.C. 472a)
 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(j)(1) As used in this subsection:
 `(A) The term `below-cost sale' means a sale of timber from which the
 expected total costs of making timber in the national forests available
 for sale are greater than the anticipated revenues from the sale.
 `(B) The term `costs' include the actual appropriated expenses for sale
 preparation, harvest administration, timber resource planning, silvicultural
 examination, other resource support, road design and construction, road
 maintenance, transportation planning, appropriated reforestation, timber
 stand improvement, forest genetics, timber program general administration,
 facilities construction, payments to counties, and a portion of timber
 program expenses for the national and regional offices of the Forest
 Service allocated to each national forest on the basis of harvest volume.
 `(C) The term `revenues' means actual cash returns to the United States
 Treasury.
 `(2) Effective beginning October 1, 1997, the Secretary of Agriculture shall
 not make a below-cost sale of timber produced on National Forest System land.
 `(3)(A) Effective for fiscal year 1992, the Secretary shall not make a
 below-cost sale of a quantity of timber produced on National Forest System
 land in excess of 75 percent of the quantity of the timber sold in fiscal
 year 1991.
 `(B) Effective for fiscal year 1993, the Secretary shall not make a
 below-cost sale of a quantity of timber produced on National Forest System
 land in excess of 75 percent of the quantity of the timber sold in fiscal
 year 1992.
 `(C) Effective for fiscal year 1994, the Secretary shall not make a
 below-cost sale of a quantity of timber produced on National Forest System
 land in excess of 75 percent of the quantity of the timber sold in fiscal
 year 1993.
 `(D) Effective for fiscal year 1995, the Secretary shall not make a
 below-cost sale of a quantity of timber produced on National Forest System
 land in excess of 65 percent of the quantity of the timber sold in fiscal
 year 1994.
 `(E) Effective for fiscal year 1996, the Secretary shall not make a
 below-cost sale of a quantity of timber produced on National Forest System
 land in excess of 50 percent of the quantity of the timber sold in fiscal
 year 1995.'.
SEC. 102. FINDINGS.
 Section 2 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of
 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1600) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (6);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (7) and inserting `;
 and'; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(8) the practice of selling national forest timber for less than the cost
 to the Federal Government of growing and selling the timber is not in the
 Nation's best interest and such below-cost sales should be eliminated in
 an orderly manner to achieve a more economically and environmentally sound
 national forest timber program.'.
SEC. 103. TIMBERLAND SUITABILITY.
 Subsection (k) of section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources
 Planning Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1604(k)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(k)(1) As used in this subsection:
 `(A) The term `appropriated expenditures' includes sale preparation, harvest
 administration, timber sale planning, silvicultural examination, support
 from other resource programs, road design and construction, road maintenance,
 transportation planning, reforestation and timber stand improvement, forest
 genetics, facilities construction, timber program general administration,
 payments to counties, and national and regional office timber costs
 allocated to individual forests on the basis of harvest volume.
 `(B) The term `net revenues' means the difference between actual cash
 returns to the United States Treasury and actual appropriated expenditures.
 `(C) The term `standing timber' means an existing stand of timber that
 has not been harvested.
 `(D) The term `subsequent timber stand' means a regenerated stand of timber
 produced on land from which standing timber has been harvested.
 `(2) In revising land management plans developed pursuant to this section,
 the Secretary shall identify lands within the management area that are
 not suited for timber production based on physical, economic, and other
 relevant factors.
 `(3) No timber harvesting shall occur on lands described in paragraph (2)
 for a period of 10 years or the life of the plan, whichever is greater.
 `(4) The Secretary shall review the determination of the Secretary on
 timberland suitability during each revision of the forest plan.
 `(5) The Secretary shall identify as economically unsuitable--
 `(A) lands where the expected net revenues from the sale of standing timber
 are negative; and
 `(B) lands where the expected net revenues from the sale of a subsequent
 timber stand are negative.'.
SEC. 104. REFORESTATION FUNDS.
 The first sentence of section 3 of the Act of June 9, 1930 (46 Stat. 527,
 chapter 416; 16 U.S.C. 576b) (popularly known as the Knutson-Vandenberg
 Act of 1930) is amended by striking `may' and all that follows through
 `payments for the timber,' and inserting `shall make deposits of money
 only from the net revenues (as defined in section 6(k)(1) of the Forest and
 Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1604(k)(1))
 of each national forest'.
SEC. 105. ANNUAL REPORT.
 Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, and each
 year thereafter until this title and the amendments made by this title
 are fully implemented, the Secretary of Agriculture shall report to the
 appropriate committees of Congress on the implementation of this title
 and the amendments made by this title.
TITLE II--ECONOMIC TRANSITION ASSISTANCE FOR TIMBER DEPENDENT COMMUNITIES
SEC. 201. PURPOSES.
 It is the purpose of this title to--
 (1) encourage the development of programs by which the residents of
 timber dependent communities may (through self-help and mobilization of
 the communities at large, with appropriate Federal assistance) develop a
 sustainable economic future for themselves and their communities consistent
 with sound ecological principles; and
 (2) establish programs of assistance to nonprofit, private, locally
 initiated, community development corporations that are directed to the
 solution of the critical problems existing in timber dependent communities.
SEC. 202. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this title:
 (1) TIMBER DEPENDENT COMMUNITY- The term `timber dependent community'
 means a community in which--
 (A) employment from manufacturing involving primary forest products (such
 as logging, sawmills, and other millwork) accounts for 10 percent or more
 of total employment; and
 (B) the mills of the community obtain 50 percent or more of their timber
 from national forests sales that are below-cost sales (as defined in
 section 14(j)(1) of the National Forest Management Act of 1976 (16
 U.S.C. 472a(j)(1)).
 (2) COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION- The term `community development
 corporation' means--
 (A) a nonprofit organization responsible to residents of a timber dependent
 community that is receiving financial assistance under this title; and
 (B) any organization more than 50 percent of that is--
 (i) owned by an organization described in subparagraph (A);
 (ii) otherwise controlled by such an organization; or
 (iii) designated by such an organization for the purposes of this title.
 (3) SECRETARY- The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Agriculture,
 unless otherwise specified.
Subtitle A--Community Development Programs
SEC. 211. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary is authorized to provide financial assistance,
 in the form of grants, to nonprofit and for-profit community development
 corporations to carry out this subtitle.
 (b) AMOUNT- Financial assistance shall be provided so that each community
 economic development program is of sufficient size, scope, and duration
 to have an appreciable impact on the area served.
 (c) PROGRAMS- The programs may include--
 (1) community business and commercial development programs, including--
 (A) programs that provide financial and other assistance (including equity
 capital) to start, expand, or locate businesses in or near the area served
 so as to provide employment and ownership opportunities for residents of
 the area; and
 (B) programs for small businesses located in or owned by residents of
 the area;
 (2) community physical development programs that contribute to an improved
 business or economic environment and that create new training, employment,
 and ownership opportunities for residents of the area;
 (3) training and related services for unemployed timber workers and their
 families that support and compliment community development programs financed
 under this title; and
 (4) social service programs that support and complement community business
 and commercial development programs financed under this title, including
 child care, educational services, health services, credit counseling,
 energy conservation, recreation services, and programs for the maintenance
 of housing facilities.
 (d) SUSTAINABLE BENEFITS- The Secretary shall conduct programs assisted
 under this subtitle in a manner that will contribute to the establishment
 of sustainable economic and social benefits in the area served.
SEC. 212. LIMITATIONS ON ASSISTANCE.
 (a) PREREQUISITES- The Secretary shall not provide financial assistance
 for any community economic development corporation or program under this
 subtitle unless the Secretary determines that--
 (1) the community development corporation is responsible to residents of
 the area served--
 (A) through a governing body, not less than 50 percent of the members of
 which are area residents; and
 (B) in accordance with such other regulations and guidelines as may be
 established by the Secretary,
except that the composition of the governing bodies of joint ventures owned
or controlled by the community development corporation shall not be subject
to the residency requirement of subparagraph (A);
 (2) the program is appropriately coordinated with local planning programs,
 with housing and community development programs, with employment and
 training programs, and with other relevant planning agencies for physical
 and human resources in the areas served;
 (3) adequate technical assistance is made available and committed to the
 program being supported;
 (4) the financial assistance will materially further the purposes of
 this subtitle;
 (5) the applicant is fulfilling or will fulfill a need for services,
 supplies, or facilities that is otherwise not being met;
 (6) all projects and related facilities assisted under the program will,
 to the maximum feasible extent, be located in the area served;
 (7) the projects will promote the development of entrepreneurial and
 management skills and the ownership or participation in ownership of
 assisted businesses and housing, cooperatively or otherwise, by residents
 of the area served;
 (8) the projects will be planned and carried out with the fullest
 possible participation of resident or local business representatives and
 representatives of financial institutions, including participation through
 contract, joint venture, partnership, stock ownership, or membership on
 the governing boards or advisory councils of the projects consistent with
 the self-help purposes of this subtitle;
 (9) the program will not result in the displacement of employed workers
 or impair existing contracts for services, or result in the substitution
 of Federal or other funds in connection with work that would otherwise
 be performed;
 (10) the rates of pay for time spent in work training and education,
 and other conditions of employment, will be appropriate and reasonable
 in the light of such factors as the type of work, geographical region,
 and proficiency of the participant;
 (11) the program will, to the maximum extent feasible, contribute to the
 occupational development or upward mobility of individual participants;
 (12) preference will be given to displaced or unemployed timber workers,
 their families, and residents of the areas served in filling jobs and
 training opportunities; and
 (13) training programs carried out in connection with projects financed
 under this subtitle shall be designed, whenever feasible, to provide skills
 that are in demand in communities, neighborhoods, or urban or rural areas,
 other than those for which programs are established under this subtitle.
 (b) RELOCATION OF BUSINESSES- Financial assistance under this section shall
 not be extended to assist in the relocation of business establishments if
 the relocation would result in a substantial increase in unemployment in
 the area of original location.
 (c) NONDISPLACEMENT OF ASSISTANCE- The level of financial assistance
 for related purposes under this title, or any other program for Federal
 financial assistance to the area served, shall not be diminished as the
 result of funds provided under this subtitle.
 (d) Development Plans, Goals, and Timetables-
 (1) PLANS- Financial assistance for commercial development under this
 subtitle shall not be extended until the community economic development
 program that has applied for assistance under this subtitle submits a
 plan to the Secretary, in accordance with the regulations prescribed by
 the Secretary, and the Secretary approves the plan.
 (2) GOALS AND TIMETABLES- The plan shall specify in detail the development
 goals and timetable and the community economic development program.
 (3) CONTINUED ASSISTANCE- The Secretary, in determining whether to provide
 continued financial assistance to a community economic development program,
 shall consider the experience that the program has had in meeting development
 goals or in adhering to development timetables.
SEC. 213. FEDERAL SHARE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Assistance provided under this subtitle to any program
 described in section 212(a) shall not exceed 90 percent of the cost of the
 program, including costs of administration, unless the Secretary determines
 that assistance in excess of 90 percent is required to further the purposes
 of this subtitle.
 (b) FORM OF NON-FEDERAL CONTRIBUTIONS- Non-Federal contributions may be
 in cash or in-kind (including plant, equipment, and services), or both.
 (c) PROVISION OF ASSISTANCE- The assistance referred to in subsection (a)
 shall be made available--
 (1) for deposit to the order of grantees that have demonstrated program
 performance, under conditions that the Secretary considers appropriate,
 within 30 days following approval of the grant agreement by the Secretary
 and the grantees; or
 (2) whenever the Secretary considers appropriate, in accordance with
 applicable rules and regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury
 and any other conditions that the Secretary considers appropriate, within
 30 days following approval of the grant agreement by the Secretary and
 the grantee.
 (d) Ownership of Acquired Property-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Property acquired as a result of capital investments made
 by any community development corporation with funds granted as its Federal
 share of the cost of programs carried out under this subtitle, and the
 proceeds from the property, shall become the property of the community
 development corporation and shall not be considered to be Federal property.
 (2) CONTINUED USE FOR GRANT PURPOSES- The Federal Government shall retain
 the right to require that on severance of the grant relationship the assets
 purchased with grant funds shall continue to be used for the original
 purpose for which the funds were granted.
Subtitle B--Special Rural Programs
SEC. 221. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE.
 (a) Family Assistance-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary is authorized to provide financial assistance
 to any displaced or unemployed timber worker's family, or any low-income
 rural family residing in a timber dependent community, if (in the judgment
 of the Secretary) the financial assistance has a reasonable chance of
 bringing about a permanent increase in the income of the family, or will
 contribute to the improvement of their living or housing conditions,
 by assisting or permitting the family to--
 (A) acquire or improve real estate or reduce encumbrances or erect
 improvements thereon; and
 (B) participate in cooperative associations, or to finance nonagricultural
 enterprises that will enable the families to supplement their income.
 (2) LOANS- Financial assistance under paragraph (1) may take the form of
 loans having a maximum maturity of 15 years and in amounts not resulting
 in an aggregate principal indebtedness of more than $7,500 at any one time.
 (b) Cooperative Programs-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary is authorized to provide financial assistance
 to local cooperative associations or local public and private nonprofit
 organizations or agencies in rural areas to--
 (A) defray all or part of the costs of establishing and operating cooperative
 programs for farming, manufacturing, purchasing, marketing, and processing;
 (B) improve their income as producers and their purchasing power as
 consumers; and
 (C) provide such essentials as credit and health services.
 (2) COSTS- Costs that may be defrayed shall include--
 (A) administrative costs of staff and overhead;
 (B) costs of planning and developing new enterprises;
 (C) costs of acquiring technical assistance; and
 (D) initial capital, if it is determined by the Secretary that the economic
 and the social conditions of the area require initial capital.
SEC. 222. LIMITATIONS ON ASSISTANCE.
 (a) PREREQUISITES- No financial assistance shall be provided under this
 subtitle unless the Secretary determines that--
 (1) any cooperative association receiving assistance has a minimum of 15
 active members, a majority of which are displaced or unemployed timber
 workers;
 (2) adequate technical assistance is made available and committed to the
 programs being supported;
 (3) the financial assistance will materially further the purposes of this
 title; and
 (4) the applicant is fulfilling or will fulfill a need for services,
 supplies, or facilities that is otherwise not being met.
 (b) NONDISPLACEMENT OF ASSISTANCE- The level of financial assistance
 for related purposes under this title, or any other program for Federal
 financial assistance to the area served, shall not be diminished as the
 result of funds provided under this subtitle.
Subtitle C--Development Loans to Community Economic Development Programs
SEC. 231. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary is authorized to make or guarantee loans
 (either directly or in cooperation with banks or other organizations
 through agreements to participate on an immediate or deferred basis)
 to community development corporations, families, local cooperatives,
 business facilities, and community development projects (including community
 development credit unions) that the Secretary determines will carry out
 the purposes of this title.
 (b) PREREQUISITES- No loans, guarantees, or other financial assistance
 shall be provided under this section unless the Secretary determines that--
 (1) there is reasonable assurance of repayment of the loan;
 (2) the loan is not otherwise available on reasonable terms from private
 sources or other Federal, State, or local programs; and
 (3) the amount of the loan, together with other funds available, is adequate
 to ensure completion of the project or achievement of the purposes for
 which the loan is made.
 (c) Interest Rate-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), loans made by the
 Secretary pursuant to this section shall bear interest at a rate that is
 not less than a rate determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, taking
 into consideration--
 (A) the average market yield on outstanding Treasury obligations of
 comparable maturity; plus
 (B) such additional charge (if any), toward covering other costs of the
 program as the Secretary may determine to be consistent with its purposes.
 (2) INITIAL RATE- During the 5-year period beginning on the date on which
 funds are initially available to the borrower, the rate of interest shall be
 at a rate considered appropriate by the Secretary in light of the particular
 needs of the borrower, which rate shall not be lower than 1 percent.
 (d) TERM- All loans made under this subtitle shall be repayable within a
 period of not more than 30 years.
 (e) ADJUSTMENTS- The Secretary is authorized to adjust interest rates,
 grant moratoriums on repayment of principal and interest, collect or
 compromise any obligations held by the Secretary, and to take such other
 actions in respect to the loans as the Secretary shall determine to be
 necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this section.
SEC. 232. DEVELOPMENT LOAN FUND FOR TIMBER DEPENDENT COMMUNITIES.
 (a) DEVELOPMENT LOAN FUND- To carry out the lending and guaranty functions
 authorized under this subtitle, there shall be established a Development Loan
 Fund for Timber Dependent Communities consisting of two separate accounts--
 (1) one of which shall be a revolving fund called the Transition Community
 Rural Development Loan Fund; and
 (2) the other of which shall be a revolving fund called the Timber Dependent
 Community Development Loan Fund.
 (b) Transition Community Rural Development Loan Fund-
 (1) FUNDS- The Transition Community Rural Development Loan Fund shall
 consist of such amounts as may be deposited in the Fund by the Secretary
 out of funds made available from appropriations for the purposes of carrying
 out this title.
 (2) USE- The Transition Community Rural Development Loan Fund shall be used
 to make or guarantee loans under section 231 to assist persons residing
 in rural areas, other than timber dependent communities, to carry out the
 purposes of this title.
 (3) ADMINISTRATION- The Secretary shall utilize the services of the
 Farmers Home Administration in administering the Transition Community
 Rural Development Loan Fund.
 (c) Timber Dependent Community Development Loan Fund-
 (1) Funds-
 (A) APPROPRIATED FUNDS- The Timber Dependent Community Development Loan
 Fund shall consist of such amounts as may be deposited in the Fund by the
 Secretary out of funds made available from appropriations for the purposes
 of carrying out this title.
 (B) DEPOSITS- The Secretary may make deposits in the Timber Dependent
 Community Development Loan Fund in any fiscal year in which the Secretary has
 made available for grants to community development corporations under this
 title not less than 50 percent of funds made available from appropriations
 for the purpose of carrying out this title.
 (2) USE- The Timber Dependent Community Development Loan Fund shall be used
 to make or guarantee loans under section 231 to assist persons residing
 in timber dependent communities to carry out the purposes of this title.
 (d) AVAILABILITY OF CAPITAL- The capital of each revolving loan fund
 established under this section shall remain available until expended.
Subtitle D--Supportive Programs and Activities
SEC. 241. TRAINING AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.
 The Secretary shall provide (directly or through grants, contracts, or
 other arrangements) such technical assistance and training of personnel
 as may be required to carry out this title.
SEC. 242. COORDINATION AND ELIGIBILITY.
 (a) COORDINATION- The Secretary shall encourage Federal departments and
 agencies and State and local governments to make grants, provide technical
 assistance, enter into contracts, and generally support and cooperate with
 community development corporations and local cooperative associations to
 carry out this title.
 (b) ELIGIBILITY FOR FEDERAL ASSISTANCE- Eligibility for assistance under
 other Federal programs shall not be denied to any applicant on the ground
 that it is a community development corporation or any other entity assisted
 under this title.
SEC. 243. EVALUATION AND RESEARCH.
 (a) Evaluation-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Each program for which grants are made under this title
 shall be consistent with sound ecological principles and with sustainable
 economic activities and shall provide for a thorough evaluation of the
 effectiveness of the program in achieving its purposes.
 (2) EVALUATOR- The evaluation shall be conducted by such public or private
 organizations as the Secretary, in consultation with existing grantees
 familiar with programs carried out under this title, may designate.
 (3) COSTS- All or part of the costs of evaluation may be paid from funds
 appropriated to carry out this title.
 (4) CRITERIA- In evaluating the performance of any community development
 corporation funded under subtitle A, the criteria for evaluation shall be
 based on such program objectives, goals, and priorities as are--
 (A) consistent with the purposes of this title; and
 (B) set forth by the community development corporation in its proposal
 for funding, as--
 (i) approved and agreed on by the Secretary; or
 (ii) subsequently modified from time to time by mutual agreement between
 the Secretary and the community development corporation.
 (b) RESEARCH- The Secretary shall conduct (either directly or through
 grants or other arrangements) research and demonstration projects designed
 to promote new programs and policies to achieve the purposes of this title
 in such ways as to provide opportunities for employment, ownership, and
 a better quality of life for residents of timber dependent communities.
SEC. 244. PLANNING GRANTS.
 To facilitate the purposes of this title, the Secretary is authorized to
 provide financial assistance to any public or private nonprofit agency or
 organization for planning of community economic development programs and
 cooperative programs under this title.
Subtitle E--General Provisions
SEC. 251. NONDISCRIMINATION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall not provide financial assistance for
 any program, project, or activity under this title unless the grant or
 contract with respect thereto specifically provides that no person with
 responsibilities in the operation thereof shall discriminate with respect to
 the program, project, or activity because of race, creed, color, national
 origin, sex, political affiliation, or beliefs.
 (b) ENFORCEMENT- With respect to each form of discrimination described in
 subsection (a)--
 (1) the Secretary shall enforce subsection (a) in accordance with section
 602 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-1); and
 (2) section 603 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 2000d-2) shall apply with respect
 to any action taken by the Secretary to enforce subsection (a).
 (c) NO EFFECT ON OTHER LEGAL REMEDIES- This section shall not be construed
 as affecting any other legal remedy that a person may have if the person
 is excluded from participation in, denied the benefits of, subjected to
 discrimination under, or denied employment in connection with, any program,
 project, or activity receiving assistance under this title.
SEC. 252. ADVISORY COMMUNITY INVESTMENT BOARDS.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The governing body of each community development
 corporation may establish an advisory community investment board composed
 of not to exceed 15 members who shall be appointed by the governing body
 after consultation with appropriate local officials.
 (b) DUTIES- Each such board shall promote cooperation between private
 investors and businesses and the governing body of the community development
 corporation through--
 (1) advising the governing body on means to facilitate private investments;
 (2) advising businesses and other investors of opportunities in community
 development corporation projects; and
 (3) advising the governing body, private investors, and businesses of
 means by which they might engage in mutually beneficial efforts.
SEC. 253. REGULATIONS.
 Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary
 shall issue such regulations as are necessary to carry out this title,
 including regulations that ensure that community development corporations
 and programs established under this title further the purposes of this title.
SEC. 254. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to
 carry out this title. Funds appropriated under this section shall remain
 available until expended.
SEC. 255. TERMINATION.
 The authority provided by this title shall terminate 10 years after the
 date of enactment of this Act or December 31, 2001, whichever is later.