HR 728 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 728
To require certain flammable liquid storage facilities to have overflow
alarm systems, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
January 31, 1989
Mr. GUARINI introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Education and Labor
A BILL
To require certain flammable liquid storage facilities to have overflow
alarm systems, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That as used in this Act, the term--
 (1) `attended terminal' means a terminal where an individual knowledgeable
 in liquid storage tank filling operation is physically in attendance and
 control during the entire delivery of a flammable liquid and has as his
 responsibility supervision of the storage tank filling operation;
 (2) `flammable liquid' means a liquid having a flash point below 100 degrees
 Fahrenheit and having a vapor pressure not exceeding 40 pounds per square
 inch absolute at 100 degrees Fahrenheit;
 (3) `terminal' means a facility at which one or more storage tanks for
 the containment of flammable liquid are located; and
 (4) `unattended terminal' means any terminal other than an attended terminal.
 SEC. 2. (a) Not later than one year after the date of enactment of this Act,
 any terminal in operation in the United States shall be equipped with a
 high level alarm system set to activate when any tank becomes filled to a
 level at which steps must be initiated to prevent an overflow of flammable
 liquid, taking into account the maximum filling rate of such tank and any
 human or mechanical reaction time necessary to shut down or safely divert
 the flow of such liquid.
 (b)(1) Plans and specifications for any new high level alarm system required
 to be installed under this Act shall be submitted to the Assistant Secretary
 of Labor for Occupational Safety and Health for approval before installation
 of such system.
 (2) Components used in any system required to be installed under this Act
 shall be of a type approved by the National Fire Protection Association.
 (c) Upon the completion of the installation of any new high level alarm
 system required under this Act, the Assistant Secretary of Labor for
 Occupational Safety and Health shall be notified, and such Assistant
 Secretary shall inspect such system to ensure compliance with this Act.
 (d) Any high level alarm system required under this Act shall be maintained
 according to its manufacturer's recommendations, and shall be tested every
 three months by the owner of the terminal. Records of the results of such
 tests shall be available for inspection by the Assistant Secretary of
 Labor for Occupational Safety and Health.
 SEC. 3. (a) In addition to the requirements of section 2 of this Act, any
 high level alarm system at an attended terminal shall be equipped with a
 signaling device which provides a distinctive sound not used for any other
 purpose and of sufficient decibels to be audible to all terminal personnel
 required to respond to its sounding in the event of--
 (1) a danger of tank overfilling;
 (2) a loss of main electrical operating power at the terminal;
 (3) an electrical break or ground fault in the alarm triggering circuit
 or the signaling device circuit;
 (4) any malfunction of the high level alarm system control equipment;
 (5) the removal of triggering devices from the system; or
 (6) an electrical malfunction of the signaling devices of the system.
 (b)(1) Operating personnel at attended terminals shall be trained in
 the usage of the high level alarm system and informed of their specific
 responsibilities, including tank gauging, according to formal written
 procedures established by the terminal owners under this subsection.
 (2) The procedures referred to in paragraph (1) shall be available
 in sufficient quantities and readily accessible to terminal operating
 personnel and shall include procedures for--
 (A) verification of proper line up and receipt of initial delivery to the
 tank designated to receive shipment at the expected rate;
 (B) provision of adequate supervision and monitoring of the performance
 of operating personnel;
 (C) scheduling for checkout and maintenance of high level instrumentation
 and related systems; and
 (D) training and qualification requirements of terminal personnel on duty
 who are responsible for overfill prevention.
 SEC. 4. In addition to the requirements of section 2 of this Act, any high
 level alarm system at an unattended terminal shall be capable of shutting
 off or diverting the flow of flammable liquid upon danger of overfilling,
 in the event of power failure or otherwise.
 SEC. 5. Existing high level alarm systems installed prior to the date of
 enactment of this Act shall be deemed to meet the requirements of this Act
 if they can be shown to operate, and if they are maintained and tested,
 as required in section 2 of this Act. The Assistant Secretary of Labor for
 Occupational Safety and Health shall be notified of the existence of such
 a system by its owner, and an inspection shall be made by such Assistant
 Secretary to determine if the system is in compliance with this section.
 SEC. 6. The owner of any terminal shall develop a fire and emergency
 plan for such terminal and file a copy of such plan with the local fire
 department having jurisdiction over the terminal.
 SEC. 7. At the request of a terminal owner and after the Assistant Secretary
 of Labor for Occupational Safety and Health has received from the terminal
 owner and has approved plans and specifications outlining the manner in which
 and the date by which the terminal owner will comply with the requirements
 of this Act, the Assistant Secretary of Labor for Occupational Safety and
 Health may grant variations from the requirements of this Act to the extent
 that such variations are consistent with the public safety.
 SEC. 8. The Assistant Secretary of Labor for Occupational Safety and
 Health shall assess a civil penalty against any owner or operator of a
 terminal in violation of this Act in the amount of $5,000 per violation
 per day. Such civil penalty shall be recovered in a suit or suits brought
 by the Attorney General in the district court of the United States for
 the judicial district in which such violation occurred or in which the
 defendant has its principal executive offices.