[Congressional Bills 106th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 1396 Introduced in House (IH)]

106th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 1396

To save taxpayers money, reduce the deficit, cut corporate welfare, and 
 protect and restore America's natural heritage by eliminating the 
 fiscally wasteful and ecologically destructive commercial logging 
program on Federal public lands and to facilitate the economic recovery 
 and diversification of communities dependent on the Federal logging 
 program.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 April 13, 1999

 Ms. McKinney (for herself, Mr. Leach, Mr. Ackerman, Mr. Andrews, Mr. 
 Forbes, Mr. Gutierrez, Mr. Hastings of Florida, Mr. Lewis of Georgia, 
Mr. McDermott, Mr. Payne, Mr. Lantos, Mr. Wexler, Mrs. Meek of Florida, 
 Mrs. Jones of Ohio, Mr. Rush, Mr. Clay, Mr. Filner, Mr. Waxman, Mr. 
 Stark, Mr. Luther, Mr. McGovern, Mr. Kleczka, Mr. Dixon, Mr. Markey, 
Mr. Frank of Massachusetts, Mr. Martinez, Mr. Pascrell, Mr. Barrett of 
Wisconsin, Ms. Woolsey, Mr. Owens, Ms. Lofgren, Ms. Rivers, Mr. Bonior, 
Mr. Meeks of New York, Ms. Lee, Mr. Conyers, Mr. Larson, Mr. Kucinich, 
 Mr. Jackson of Illinois, Ms. DeLauro, Mr. Franks of New Jersey, Ms. 
 Waters, Mr. Ford, Mr. Brown of California, Mr. Capuano, Mr. Holt, Mr. 
 Towns, and Ms. Baldwin) introduced the following bill; which was 
 referred to the Committee on Agriculture, and in addition to the 
Committees on Resources, and Education and the Workforce, for a period 
 to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for 
consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the 
 committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

To save taxpayers money, reduce the deficit, cut corporate welfare, and 
 protect and restore America's natural heritage by eliminating the 
 fiscally wasteful and ecologically destructive commercial logging 
program on Federal public lands and to facilitate the economic recovery 
 and diversification of communities dependent on the Federal logging 
 program.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``National Forest 
Protection and Restoration Act of 1999''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Definitions.
Sec. 3. Findings.
Sec. 4. Prohibition on timber sales to protect Federal public lands.
Sec. 5. Effect of prohibition on existing timber sale contracts.
Sec. 6. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 7. Natural heritage restoration.
Sec. 8. Worker retraining.
Sec. 9. Allocation of funds.

 SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.

 For purposes of this Act:
 (1) Agencies.--The term ``agencies'' means the Forest 
 Service, the National Park Service, the Bureau of Land 
 Management, and the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
 (2) Commercial logging.--(A) The term ``commercial 
 logging'' means--
 (i) the sale of timber;
 (ii) the execution of a timber sale; or
 (iii) any other transfer of timber to an 
 individual, company, corporation, or other entity, 
 which then uses the timber so transferred for sale.
 (B) The term includes a sale, execution, or other transfer 
 specified in paragraph (1) regardless of--
 (i) the stated reason for the sale, execution, or 
 transfer; or
 (ii) whether the timber is standing, fallen, 
 living, or dead.
 (3) Federal public lands.--The term ``Federal public 
 lands'' means--
 (A) all lands in the United States included in the 
 National Forest System;
 (B) all lands in the United States included in the 
 National Wildlife Refuge System;
 (C) all lands in the United States included in the 
 National Park System; and
 (D) all lands under the jurisdiction of the Bureau 
 of Land Management.
 (4) Roadless area.--The term ``roadless area'' means each 
 of the following:
 (A) Any inventoried roadless area.
 (B) Any area of at least 1,000 contiguous acres 
 meeting Forest Service road density guidelines.
 (C) Any area of less than 1,000 contiguous acres 
 meeting Forest Service road density guidelines, if the 
 area is adjacent to a unit of the National Wilderness 
 Preservation System, a unit of the National Park 
 System, or a designated Wilderness Study Area.
 (5) Timber sale.--The term ``timber sale'' means--
 (i) the sale of timber;
 (ii) the offering of timber for sale or 
 consideration; or
 (iii) any other transfer of timber to an 
 individual, company, corporation, or other entity, 
 which then uses the timber so transferred for sale.
 (B) The term includes a sale, offer, or other transfer 
 specified in paragraph (1) regardless of--
 (i) the stated reason for the sale, offer, or 
 transfer; or
 (ii) whether the timber is standing, fallen, 
 living, or dead.

 SEC. 3. FINDINGS.

 Congress finds the following:
 (1) Polls conducted by the Forest Service show that a 
 strong majority of the American people think that natural 
 resources on Federal public lands should not be made available 
to produce consumer goods.
 (2) The 1995 Forest Service draft report entitled ``Forest 
 Service Program for Forest and Rangeland Resources: A Long-Term 
 Strategic Plan'' shows that recreation and tourism in the 
 National Forest System creates over 30 times more jobs, and 
 generates over 30 times more income, than commercial logging on 
 national forests.
 (3) According to Forest Service figures, timber cut from 
 Federal public lands comprises less than five percent of the 
 annual timber consumption of the United States.
 (4) The vast majority of America's original pristine 
 forests have been logged, and what little primary forest that 
 remains exists almost entirely on public lands.
 (5) The ecological crisis resulting from this severe 
 habitat loss and fragmentation of American forests requires 
 bold action to protect this Nation's natural heritage so that 
 pristine forests may remain pristine, and damaged forests may 
 have an opportunity to recover.
 (6) The 1995 report of the Comptroller General regarding 
 distribution of Forest Service timber sales receipts (GAO/RCED-
 95-237FS) and the 1998 follow-up report (GAO/RCED-99-24) reveal 
 that, of the hundreds of millions of dollars of taxpayer money 
 that is annually expended on the Forest Service timber sales 
 program, only a small fraction finds its way back to the 
 Federal Treasury, resulting in an enormous net loss to 
 taxpayers.
 (7) The timber-oriented counties in Oregon, Washington, and 
 California that currently receive a percentage of timber sales 
 receipts from commercial logging are guaranteed, by sections 
 13982 and 13983 of Public Law 103-66 (16 U.S.C. 500 note; 43 
 U.S.C. 1181f note), to continue to receive these payments at 
 near historic levels through fiscal year 2003, regardless of 
 logging levels on public lands.
 (8) Forests absorb rainfall, retard stream runoff, reduce 
 floods, increase slope stability, and retain topsoil, and 
 retard soil erosion and siltation in streams, irrigation 
 ditches, and reservoirs.
 (9) Commercial logging has many indirect costs which are 
 very significant, but not easily measured, such as flooding 
 damage and relief of flooding damage through Federal funds, 
 damage to the salmon fishing industry; and harm to the 
 recreation and tourism industries.
 (10) A congressionally commissioned scientific study of the 
 Sierra Nevada forests found that more than any other human 
 activity, commercial logging has increased the risk and 
 severity of fires by removing the cooling shade of trees and 
 leaving flammable debris (see Sierra Nevada Ecosystem Project 
 Final Report to Congress, Vol. 1, Assessment Summaries and 
 Management Strategies, 1996).
 (11) It is in the interests of the American people to 
 protect watersheds on Federal public lands in order to prevent 
 potentially damaging and deadly floods.

 SEC. 4. PROHIBITION ON TIMBER SALES TO PROTECT FEDERAL PUBLIC LANDS.

 (a) Prohibition on New Timber Sales.--Notwithstanding any other 
provision of law, effective as of the date of the enactment of this 
Act, no timber sales shall be prepared, advertised, offered, or awarded 
on Federal public lands and, except as provided in section 5, no 
commercial logging shall occur on Federal public lands.
 (b) Exceptions.--The gathering of firewood or other wood by 
individuals for personal, noncommercial use, through free-use permits 
under the personal use component of the forest management program of 
the Forest Service or an equivalent program of the Bureau of Land 
Management, the National Park Service, or the United States Fish and 
Wildlife Service, to the extent allowed under existing law, is not 
prohibited by subsection (a) but must be consistent with section 7 of 
this Act.
 (c) Native American Tribes.--Nothing contained in this Act shall be 
construed to modify, amend, or breach any treaty in existence on the 
date of enactment of this Act with any Native American tribe.

SEC. 5. EFFECT OF PROHIBITION ON EXISTING TIMBER SALE CONTRACTS.

 (a) Remaining Salvage Rider Sales.--Notwithstanding any outstanding 
judicial order or administrative proceeding interpreting section 2001 
of Public Law 104-19 (109 Stat. 240; 16 U.S.C. 1611 note), the 
Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior shall 
immediately suspend each timber sale or activity that was being 
undertaken in whole or in part under the authority provided in such 
section.
 (b) Roadless Areas.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 
the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior shall 
immediately suspend each timber sale in any roadless area on Federal 
public lands.
 (c) Phase-Out Period Authorized.--There shall be a 2-year period to 
phase out those timber sale contracts in existence as of the date of 
the enactment of this Act. The phase-out period shall begin on the date 
of the enactment of this Act. Any remaining timber sales on Federal 
public lands shall be automatically suspended upon the expiration of 
the phase-out period. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no 
commercial logging shall occur anywhere on Federal public lands after 
the end of the phase-out period.
 (d) Early Termination.--For all timber sales suspended under 
subsection (a), subsection (b), and subsection (c) of this subsection, 
the Secretary concerned shall--
 (1) exercise any provision of the original contract that 
 authorizes termination and payment of specified damages; or
 (2) terminate the contract to avoid adverse effects on the 
 environment or natural resources.
 (e) Payment for Timber Sale Contracts Relinquished.--Any claim, 
whether as a result of a judgment or an agreement against the Federal 
Government, arising from termination of any timber sale contract under 
subsection (d) of this subsection, may be--
 (1) paid from funds made available under section 1304 of 
 title 31, United States Code, and shall not require 
 reimbursement under section 13(c) of the Contract Disputes Act 
 of 1978 (41 U.S.C. 612(c));
 (2) offset by forgiveness of a Federal Government loan or 
 loan guarantee;
 (3) paid through funds appropriated for the purpose; or
 (4) paid through the transfer of funds from any of the 
 following Forest Service or Bureau of Land Management timber 
 accounts:
 (A) Timber sales management.
 (B) Forest land vegetation management.
 (C) Forest roads program.
 (D) General administration related to commercial 
 logging.
 (f) Disputes.--Any claim by a purchaser against the Federal 
Government relating to a contract terminated under this section shall 
be subject to the Contract Disputes Act of 1978 (41 U.S.C. 601 et 
seq.).

SEC. 6. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 (a) Calculation of Logging Subsidy.--The Secretary of Agriculture, 
in consultation with the Secretary of the Interior, shall determine the 
average amount of Federal funds appropriated annually from the General 
Fund of the Treasury over the five fiscal years immediately preceding 
the date of the enactment of this Act for commercial logging and 
commercial logging-related activities on Federal public lands. In 
making this determination, the Secretary shall include amounts expended 
for the following, using estimates, where necessary:
 (1) Timber sales management.
 (2) Forest-land vegetation management.
 (3) Land management planning, inventory, and monitoring 
 related to commercial logging.
 (4) Research related to commercial logging.
 (5) The portion of the forest roads and road maintenance 
 program related to commercial logging.
 (6) General administration expenses related to commercial 
 logging.
 (7) Landline location related to commercial logging.
 (8) Law enforcement related to commercial logging.
 (9) The portion of the forest fire fighting and prevention 
 program related to commercial logging.
 (10) The portion of any other activities related to 
 commercial logging.
 (b) Authorization.--There are authorized to be appropriated such 
sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act in the fiscal years 
beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act, but not to 
exceed for any fiscal year one-half of the logging subsidy amount 
calculated in subsection (a).
 (c) Administrative Expenses.--Not more than ten percent of the 
funds appropriated or allocated to carry out sections 7 and 8 may be 
reserved for the administration of activities authorized under those 
sections.

SEC. 7. NATURAL HERITAGE RESTORATION.

 (a) Natural Heritage Restoration Corps.--The Secretary of the 
Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture shall each establish a 
special unit (to be known as the Natural Heritage Restoration Corps) 
for the purposes of conducting, in areas of Federal public lands where 
commercial logging has occurred, the following activities:
 (1) Restore native vegetative cover.
 (2) Conduct prescribed burning where necessary to reduce 
 fire risk caused by commercial logging.
 (3) Stabilize slopes and soils so as to prevent or reduce 
 further erosion.
 (4) Recontour slopes to their original contours, where 
 deemed appropriate and beneficial.
 (5) Decommission and obliterate logging roads in order to 
 recover roadless characteristics.
 (6) Remove man-made barriers to natural fish spawning runs.
 (7) Generally restore, as much as possible, such areas to 
 their natural condition as existed prior to the occurrence of 
 commercial logging.
 (b) Personnel and Equipment.--The Natural Heritage Restoration 
Corps shall hire the necessary personnel, which may include private 
contractors, and purchase or lease the necessary equipment to implement 
the Natural Heritage Restoration Plans and achieve the goals and 
objectives as set forth by the Secretaries of Agriculture and Interior 
under this section. There shall be a hiring preference for dislocated 
timber workers who have been terminated or laid off, or have received a 
notice of termination or lay off, as a consequence of the enactment of 
this Act.
 (c) Natural Heritage Restoration Plans.--
 (1) National forest system lands.--For lands in the 
 National Forest System, the Secretary of Agriculture shall 
 develop Natural Heritage Restoration Plans at the regional 
 level to carry out the activities specified in subsection (a) 
 in accordance with the standards, guidelines, and procedures 
 developed in subsection (d). Such Plans shall be completed no 
 later than eighteen months after the date of enactment of this 
 Act.
 (2) BLM and national wildlife refuge lands.--For lands 
 under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land Management, and, 
 as necessary for National Wildlife Refuges, the Secretary of 
 the Interior shall develop Natural Heritage Restoration Plans 
 at the regional level to carry out the objectives of subsection 
 (a) in accordance with the standards, guidelines, and 
 procedures developed in subsection (d). Such plans shall be 
 completed no later than eighteen months after the date of 
 enactment of this Act.
 (d) Developing Standards, Guidelines, and Procedures for 
Restoration.--
 (1) Responsibilities of the secretaries.--The Secretary of 
 Agriculture and Secretary of the Interior shall develop 
 regional standards, guidelines, and procedures for restoration 
 as soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, 
 and shall begin to incorporate these regional standards, 
 guidelines, and procedures into land management plans for 
 Federal public lands as soon as practicable. The Secretaries 
 shall complete such incorporation for all Federal public lands 
 by no later than two years after the date of enactment of this 
 Act. The Secretaries shall report to the Congress on the 
 progress of such incorporation in the annual report required by 
 section 8(c) of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources 
 Planning Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1606(c)) and section 311 of the 
 Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 
 1741).
 (2) Committee of scientists.--In carrying out the purposes 
 of this subsection, the Secretary of the Interior shall appoint 
 a committee of scientists for each of the Forest Service 
 regions in the United States who are not officers or employees 
 of the Forest Service or the Bureau of Land Management. The 
 committee shall provide scientific and technical advice and 
 counsel on proposed standards, guidelines, and procedures to 
 assure that an effective interdisciplinary approach is proposed 
 and adopted for the development of Natural Heritage Restoration 
 Plans for each region. The committee shall terminate upon 
 promulgation of the standards, guidelines, and procedures, but 
 the Secretary shall, from time to time, appoint similar 
 committees when considering revisions of regional standards, 
 guidelines, and procedures. Standards, guidelines, and 
 procedures for developing Natural Heritage Restoration Plans 
 for each region shall be completed no later than one year after 
 the date of enactment of this Act. The views of the committees 
 shall be included in the public information supplied when the 
 standards and guidelines are proposed for adoption.
 (3) Clerical and technical assistance.--Clerical and 
 technical assistance, as may be necessary to discharge the 
 duties of the committee of scientists established under 
 paragraph (2) of this subsection, shall be provided from the 
 personnel of the Department of Agriculture or the Department of 
 Interior, as appropriate.
 (4) Compensation.--While attending meetings of the 
 committee, the members shall be entitled to receive 
 compensation at a rate of $200 per diem, including travel time, 
 and while away from their homes or regular places of business 
 they may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu 
 of subsistence, as authorized by section 5703 of title 5, 
 United States Code, for persons in the Government service 
 employed intermittently.
 (e) Interim Needs for Restoration.--During the interim period while 
regional standards, guidelines, and procedures are being developed, the 
Secretary of Agriculture and Secretary of the Interior shall identify 
interim needs for restoration and take prompt action to begin 
restoration work with available personnel, until the Natural Heritage 
Restoration Corps is established. Interim needs for restoration shall 
be limited to the following:
 (1) Prescribed burning and slash disposal where necessary 
 to reduce fire risk.
 (2) Stabilization of slopes and soils so as to prevent or 
 reduce further erosion and land sliding in areas that have been 
 logged.
 (3) Decommissioning and obliteration of logging roads.
 (f) Restoration Goals and Objectives.--Within one year of the date 
of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture and the 
Secretary of the Interior shall develop specific restoration goals and 
objectives for each Unit of the Federal public lands, and shall, within 
the same time period, develop a specific schedule to accomplish those 
goals and objectives with the funds made available to carry out this 
section, as authorized in section 6 of this Act.
 (g) Plan Transition.--Except as otherwise provided in section 4 and 
5, and elsewhere in this Act, any plan, policy, or guidance of the 
Agencies, with respect to Federal public lands, in effect on the date 
of enactment of this Act shall continue to apply to such lands until 
such plan, policy or guidance is revised, amended, or changed as 
provided in this section.
 (h) Public Participation.--This subsection shall be carried out in 
compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 and its 
implementing regulations.

SEC. 8. WORKER RETRAINING.

 (a) Eligible Individual Defined.--For the purposes of this section, 
the term ``eligible individual'' means an individual who--
 (1) is a dislocated worker, as that term is defined in 
 section 101 of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (Public Law 
 105-220; 112 Stat. 939; 29 U.S.C. 2801); and
 (2) has been terminated or laid off, or has received a 
 notice of termination or lay off, as a consequence of the 
 enactment of this Act, or as a consequence of management 
 decisions on Federal public lands prior to the enactment of 
 this Act.
 (b) Determinations of Eligibility.--The determination of whether an 
individual is an eligible individual shall be made by the Secretary of 
Labor, pursuant to criteria established by the Secretary of Labor, in 
consultation with the Secretaries of Agriculture and the Interior.
 (c) Grants Authorized.--The Secretary of Labor may make grants to 
States, employers, employer associations, and representatives of 
employees--
 (1) to provide training, adjustment assistance, and 
 employment services to eligible individuals; and
 (2) to make needs-related payments to eligible individuals 
 in accordance with subsection (h).
 (d) Priority and Approval.--
 (1) Priority.--In reviewing applications for grants under 
 subsection (c), the Secretary of Labor shall give priority to 
 applications proposing to provide training, adjustment 
 assistance, and services in areas which have the greatest 
 number or percentage of eligible individuals.
 (2) Needs-related payments required.--The Secretary of 
 Labor shall not approve an application for a grant under 
 subsection (c) unless the application contains assurances that 
 the applicant will use grant funds to provide needs-related 
 payments in accordance with subsection (h).
 (e) Use of Funds.--Subject to the requirements of subsections (f), 
(g), and (h), grants under subsection (c) may be used for any purpose 
for which funds may be used under section 134 of the Workforce 
Investment Act of 1998 (Public Law 105-220; 112 Stat. 990; 29 U.S.C. 
2864).
 (f) Job Search Allowance.--
 (1) Allowance authorized.--Grants under subsection (c) for 
 adjustment assistance may be used to provide job search 
 allowances to eligible individuals. Such allowance, if granted, 
 shall provide reimbursement to the individual of not more than 
 90 percent of the cost of necessary job search expenses, as 
 prescribed by regulations of the Secretary of Labor, but may 
 not exceed $1,200 unless the need for a greater amount is 
 justified in the application and approved by the Secretary of 
 Labor.
 (2) Criteria for granting job search allowances.--A job 
 search allowance may be granted only--
 (A) to assist an eligible individual who has been 
 totally separated in securing a job within the United 
 States; and
 (B) where the Secretary of Labor determines that 
 such employee cannot reasonably be expected to secure 
 suitable employment in the commuting area in which the 
 worker resides.
 (g) Relocation Allowance.--
 (1) Allowance authorized.--Grants under subsection (c) for 
 adjustment assistance may be used to provide relocation 
 allowances to eligible individuals. Such an allowance may only 
 be granted to assist an eligible individual in relocating 
 within the United States and only if the Secretary of Labor 
 determines that such employee;
 (A) cannot reasonably be expected to secure 
 suitable employment in the commuting area in which the 
 employee resides;
 (B) has obtained suitable employment affording a 
 reasonable expectation of long-term duration in the 
 area in which the employee wishes to relocate, or has 
 obtained a bona fide offer of such employment, and
 (C) is totally separated from employment at the 
 time relocation commences.
 (2) Amount of relocation allowance.--The amount of any 
 relocation allowance for any eligible individual may not exceed 
 the amount which is equal to the sum of--
 (A) 90 percent of the reasonable and necessary 
 expenses, specified in regulations prescribed by the 
 Secretary, incurred in transporting an individual and 
 the individual's family, if any, and household effects; 
 and
 (B) a lump sum equivalent to 3 times the employee's 
 average weekly wage, up to a maximum payment of $1,200, 
 unless the need for a greater amount is justified in 
 the application and approved by the Secretary of Labor.
 (h) Needs-Related Payments.--The Secretary of Labor shall prescribe 
regulations with respect to the use of funds from grants under 
subsection (c) for needs-related payments in order to enable eligible 
individuals to complete training or education programs under this 
section. Such regulations shall--
 (1) require that such payments shall be provided to an 
 eligible individual only if such individual--
 (A) does not qualify or has ceased to qualify for 
 unemployment compensation;
 (B) has been enrolled in training by the end of the 
 13th week of the individual's initial unemployment 
 compensation benefit period, or, if later, the end of 
 the 8th week after an individual is informed that a 
 short-term layoff will in fact exceed six months; and
 (C) is participating in training or education 
 programs under this section, except that such 
 regulations shall protect an individual from being 
 disqualified pursuant to this clause for a failure to 
 participate that is not the fault of the individual;
 (2) provide that to qualify for such payments the 
 individual currently receives, or is a member of a family which 
 currently receives, a total family income (exclusive of 
 unemployment compensation, child support payments, and welfare 
 payments) which, in relation to family size, is not in excess 
 of the lower living standard income level;
 (3) provide that the levels of such payments shall be equal 
 to the higher of--
 (A) the applicable level of unemployment 
 compensation; or
 (B) the poverty level determined in accordance with 
 criteria established by the Director of the Office of 
 Management and Budget;
 (4) provide for the adjustment of payments to reflect 
 changes in total family income; and
 (5) provide that the grantee shall obtain information with 
 respect to such income, and changes therein, from the eligible 
 individual.
 (i) Regulations.--The Secretary of Labor shall prescribe 
regulations to carry out this section not later than 180 days after the 
date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 9. ALLOCATION OF FUNDS.

 (a) Availability of Certain Accounts.--Notwithstanding any other 
provision of law, from the date of the enactment of this Act through 
the duration of the two-year phase-out period provided in section 5 
plus one year thereafter, all funds in each of the following Forest 
Service and Bureau of Land Management accounts, including any funds 
deposited into these accounts during the two-year phase-out period, 
shall be used only to carry out this Act:
 (1) Timber salvage funds (including the Salvage Sale Fund 
 established under section 14(h) of the National Forest 
 Management Act of 1976 (16 U.S.C. 472a(h))).
 (2) The fund established under section 3 of the Act of June 
 9, 1930 (commonly known as the Knutson-Vandenberg Act; 16 U.S.C 
 576b).
 (3) The fund containing moneys associated with the 
 Purchaser-Elect Roads Program under section 6 of the Act of 
 October 13, 1964 (commonly known as the Forest Roads And Trails 
 Act; 16 U.S.C. 537).
 (b) Allocation of Timber Sales Revenues During Phase-Out Period.--
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, from the date of the 
enactment of this Act through the duration of the two-year phase-out 
period, all timber sale revenues from Federal public lands shall be 
deposited in the fund established under section 3 of the Act of June 9, 
1930 (commonly known as the Knutson-Vandenberg Act; 16 U.S.C 576b).
 (c) Abolishment of Accounts.--Notwithstanding any other provision 
of law, the funds referred to in subsection (a) shall be used to carry 
out this section until no funds remain in such accounts, after which 
these accounts shall be abolished.
 (d) Payments to States.--For the fiscal year in which this Act is 
enacted and each fiscal year thereafter through fiscal year 2003, 
revenue sharing payments to States from timber sale receipts, which 
have annually been made pursuant to the Act of May 23, 1908 (16 U.S.C. 
500) shall be paid from the funds referred to in subsection (a) of this 
section, except that no such payments shall be made for counties 
already receiving ``Spotted Owl Payments'' pursuant to section 13982 or 
13983 of Public Law 103-66 (16 U.S.C. 500 note; 43 U.S.C. 1181f note). 
Payments under this subsection shall be made in an amount equivalent to 
the revenue-sharing payments to States from timber sale receipts in 
fiscal year 1996 ($125,000,000). Should the monies in the funds 
referred to in subsection (a) fall below $380,000,000 cumulatively, the 
Secretary of the Treasury shall make these payments out of money in the 
Treasury not otherwise appropriated.
 (e) Worker Retraining.--Monies shall be distributed from the funds 
referred to in subsection (a) to carry out section 8. Such 
distributions shall be made in amounts up to $100,000,000 in the first 
year of the phase-out period, and $100,000,000 and $150,000,000, 
respectively, in the subsequent two years.
 (f) Alternatives to Wood.--From the funds referred to in subsection 
(a), at least $1,000,000 and up to $3,000,000 shall be distributed to 
the Environmental Protection Agency to fund an investigation into wood-
free alternative products for paper and construction. Within one year 
after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the 
Environmental Protection Agency shall make recommendations for grants 
to entities involved in the development and production of the most 
environmentally sound non-wood alternatives for paper and construction 
products. Up to $30,000,000 from the funds referred to in subsection 
(a) shall be made available to the Environmental Protection Agency for 
such grants, which shall be made within three years after the date of 
the enactment of this Act.
 (g) Allocation of Remaining Funds.--Any funds remaining in the 
accounts referred to in subsection (a) in the fourth year after the 
date of the enactment of this Act shall be deposited into the general 
fund of the United States Treasury.
 <all>