HR 1662 SC2
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 1662
To amend the Federal Trade Commission Act to require food advertising to
meet the requirements applicable to nutritional labeling of food.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
April 9, 1991
Mr. MOAKLEY introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Energy and Commerce
FEBRUARY 14, 1992
Additional sponsors: Mr. DYMALLY, Mr. FRANK of Massachusetts, Mr. SERRANO,
Mr. TORRES, Mr. WAXMAN, Mr. MFUME, Mr. ACKERMAN, Mr. ROYBAL, Mr. GORDON,
Mr. LAFALCE, Mr. WHEAT, Mr. BRYANT, Mr. WEISS, Mr. LEHMAN of Florida,
Mr. MCDERMOTT, Mr. LIPINSKI, Mr. PRICE, Mr. DERRICK, Mr. ORTON, and Mr. Kleczka
May 6, 1992
Deleted sponsor: Mr. ORTON (added September 12, 1991; deleted February
27, 1992)
A BILL
To amend the Federal Trade Commission Act to require food advertising to
meet the requirements applicable to nutritional labeling of food.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Nutrition Advertising Coordination Act
 of 1991'.
SEC. 2. MISLEADING FOOD ADVERTISEMENTS.
 Section 15(a) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 55(a)) is
 amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(3)(A) In the case of food, an advertisement shall be deemed misleading in
 a material respect if such advertisement contains a claim which expressly
 or by implication--
 `(i) characterizes the level of any nutrient which is of the type required
 by section 403(q)(1) or 403(q)(2) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
 Act to be in the label or labeling of the food unless the claim is made
 in accordance with section 403(r)(2)(A) of such Act and the regulations
 promulgated by the Secretary of Health and Human Services to implement
 such section,
 `(ii) characterizes the relationship of any nutrient which is of the type
 required by section 403(q)(1) or 403(q)(2) of the Federal Food, Drug, and
 Cosmetic Act to be in the label or labeling of the food to a disease or
 a health-related condition unless the claim is made in accordance with
 section 403(r)(3) of such Act and the regulations promulgated by the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services to implement such section, or
 `(iii) characterizes the amount of any nutrient in a serving or portion of
 the food unless the amount of such nutrient is expressed in the same units
 of weight that are specified in regulations promulgated by the Secretary
 of Health and Human Services to implement section 403(q)(1) and 403(q)(2)
 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
 `(B) An advertisement for a food shall be deemed to be misleading in a
 material respect--
 `(i) if it contains a claim that complies with subparagraph (A)(i) but--
 `(I) fails to disclose the level of fat or saturated fat in the food when
 a claim is made that characterizes the level of cholesterol in the food,
 `(II) fails to disclose the level of cholesterol in the food when a claim
 is made that characterizes the level of saturated fat in the food,
 `(II) fails to disclose the level of total fat in the food when a claim
 is made that the food is high in dietary fiber, or
 `(ii) if it contains a claim that complies with subparagraph (A) but fails
 to include clearly and conspicuously the statement `See product label for
 complete nutrition information'.'
SEC. 3. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 The amendment made by section 2 shall take effect--
 (1) with respect to a claim described in clauses (i) and (ii) of section
 15(a)(3)(A) of the Federal Trade Commission Act, on the date that regulations
 to implement section 403(r) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
 take effect,
 (2) with respect to a claim described in clause (iii) of section 15(a)(3)(A)
 of the Federal Trade Commission Act, on the date that regulations to
 implement section 403(q) (1) and (2) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
 Act take effect, and
 (3) with respect to the requirement described in subparagraph (B) of
 section 15(a)(3) of the Federal Trade Commission Act, on the date that
 regulations to implement section 403(r) of the Federal Food, Drug, and
 Cosmetic Act take effect.