[Congressional Bills 106th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 578 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

106th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 S. 578

 To ensure confidentiality with respect to medical records and health 
 care-related information, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 March 10, 1999

Mr. Jeffords (for himself and Mr. Dodd) introduced the following bill; 
 which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Health, 
 Education, Labor, and Pensions

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To ensure confidentiality with respect to medical records and health 
 care-related information, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Health Care 
Personal Information Nondisclosure Act of 1999'' or the ``Health Care 
PIN Act''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings.
Sec. 3. Purposes.
Sec. 4. Definitions.
 TITLE I--INDIVIDUAL'S RIGHTS

 Subtitle A--Review of Protected Health Information by Subjects of the 
 Information

Sec. 101. Inspection and copying of protected health information.
Sec. 102. Amendment of protected health information.
Sec. 103. Notice of confidentiality practices.
 Subtitle B--Establishment of Safeguards

Sec. 111. Establishment of safeguards.
Sec. 112. Accounting for disclosures.
 TITLE II--RESTRICTIONS ON USE AND DISCLOSURE

Sec. 201. General rules regarding use and disclosure.
Sec. 202. Procurement of authorizations for disclosure of protected 
 health information for treatment, payment, 
 and health care operations.
Sec. 203. Authorizations for disclosure of protected health information 
 other than for treatment, payment, or 
 health care operations.
Sec. 204. Next of kin and directory information.
Sec. 205. Emergency circumstances.
Sec. 206. Oversight.
Sec. 207. Public health.
Sec. 208. Health research.
Sec. 209. Disclosure in civil, judicial, and administrative procedures.
Sec. 210. Disclosure for law enforcement purposes.
Sec. 211. Disclosures for postmarketing adverse experience reporting 
 for human drug and licensed biological 
 products.
Sec. 212. Payment card and electronic payment transaction.
Sec. 213. Standards for electronic disclosures.
Sec. 214. Individual representatives.
Sec. 215. Limited liability for law enforcement officers.
Sec. 216. No liability for permissible disclosures.
 TITLE III--SANCTIONS

 Subtitle A--Criminal Provisions

Sec. 301. Wrongful disclosure of protected health information.
Sec. 302. Debarment for crimes.
 Subtitle B--Civil Sanctions

Sec. 311. Civil penalty.
Sec. 312. Procedures for imposition of penalties.
Sec. 313. Report on use of existing enforcement mechanisms.
Sec. 314. Civil action by individuals.
 TITLE IV--MISCELLANEOUS

Sec. 401. Relationship to other laws.
Sec. 402. Effective date.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS.

 The Congress finds that--
 (1) individuals have a right of confidentiality with 
 respect to their personal health information and records;
 (2) with respect to information about medical care and 
 health status, the traditional right of confidentiality is at 
 risk;
 (3) an erosion of the right of confidentiality may reduce 
 the willingness of patients to confide in physicians and other 
 practitioners, thus jeopardizing quality health care;
 (4) an individual's confidentiality right means that an 
 individual's consent is needed to disclose his or her protected 
 health information, except in rare and limited circumstances 
 required by the public interest;
 (5) any disclosure of protected health information should 
 be limited to that information or portion of the medical record 
 necessary to fulfill the purpose of the disclosure;
 (6) incentives need to be created to use nonidentifiable 
 health information where appropriate;
 (7) the availability of timely and accurate personal health 
 data for the delivery of health care services throughout the 
 Nation is needed;
 (8) personal health care data may be essential for selected 
 types of medical research;
 (9) public health uses of personal health data are critical 
 to both personal health as well as public health; and
 (10) confidentiality of an individual's health information 
 must be assured without jeopardizing the pursuit of clinical 
 and epidemiological research undertaken to improve health care 
 and health outcomes and to assure the quality and efficiency of 
 health care.

SEC. 3. PURPOSES.

 The purpose of this Act is to--
 (1) establish strong and effective mechanisms to protect 
 against the unauthorized and inappropriate use of protected 
 health information that is created or maintained as part of 
 health care treatment, diagnosis, enrollment, payment, plan 
 administration, testing, or research processes;
 (2) promote the efficiency and security of the health 
 information infrastructure so that members of the health care 
 community may more effectively exchange and transfer health 
 information in a manner that will ensure the confidentiality of 
 protected health information without impeding the delivery of 
high quality health care;
 (3) create incentives to turn personal health information 
 into nonidentifiable health information for oversight, health 
 research, public health, law enforcement, judicial, and 
 administrative purposes, where appropriate; and
 (4) establish strong and effective remedies for violations 
 of this Act.

SEC. 4. DEFINITIONS.

 As used in this Act:
 (1) Accrediting body.--The term ``accrediting body'' means 
 a national body, committee, organization, or institution (such 
 as the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Health Care 
 Organizations or the National Committee for Quality Assurance) 
 that has been authorized by law or is recognized by a health 
 care regulating authority as an accrediting entity or any other 
 entity that has been similarly authorized or recognized by law 
 to perform specific accreditation, licensing or credentialing 
 activities.
 (2) Agent.--The term ``agent'' means a person who 
 represents and acts for another under the contract or relation 
 of agency, or whose function is to bring about, modify, affect, 
 accept performance of, or terminate contractual obligations 
 between the principal and a third person, including a 
 contractor.
 (3) Anonymous link.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``anonymous link'' means 
 a number assigned to nonidentifiable health information 
 which, by itself, contains no information about an 
 individual, but which, under specific, controlled 
 conditions, can be used to link to additional health 
 information about the same individual which may be used 
 to identify that individual.
 (B) Disclosure.--Any subsequent disclosure of an 
 anonymous link with any information which, together 
 with information previously disclosed with the same 
 link might reasonably be used to identify an 
 individual, shall be considered to be a disclosure of 
 protected health information. Such a disclosure shall 
 convert any previously disclosed, nonidentifiable 
 information with the same link into protected health 
 information.
 (4) Common rule.--The term ``common rule'' means the 
 Federal policy for the protection of human subjects from 
 research risks originally published as 56 Federal Register 
 28.012 (et seq.) (June 18, 1991) as adopted and implemented by 
 a Federal department or agency.
 (5) Disclose.--The term ``disclose'' means to release, 
 transfer, provide access to, or otherwise divulge protected 
 health information to any person other than the individual who 
 is the subject of such information. Such term includes the 
 initial disclosure and any subsequent disclosures of protected 
 health information.
 (6) Employer.--The term ``employer'' has the meaning given 
 such term under section 3(5) of the Employee Retirement Income 
 Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(5)), except that such term 
 shall include only employers of two or more employees.
 (7) Health care.--The term ``health care'' means--
 (A) preventive, diagnostic, therapeutic, 
 rehabilitative, maintenance, or palliative care, 
 including appropriate assistance with disease or 
 symptom management and maintenance, counseling, 
 service, or procedure--
 (i) with respect to the physical or mental 
 condition of an individual; or
 (ii) affecting the structure or function of 
 the human body or any part of the human body, 
 including the banking of blood, sperm, organs, 
 or any other tissue; or
 (B) pursuant to a prescription or medical order any 
 sale or dispensing of a drug, device, equipment, or 
 other health care related item to an individual, or for 
 the use of an individual.
 (8) Health care operations.--The term ``health care 
 operations'' means services provided by or on behalf of a 
 health plan or health care provider for the purpose of carrying 
 out the management functions of a health care provider or 
 health plan, or implementing the terms of a contract for health 
 plan benefits. Such term means--
 (A) conducting quality assurance activities or 
 outcomes assessments;
 (B) reviewing the competence or qualifications of 
 health care professionals;
 (C) performing accreditation, licensing, or 
 credentialing activities;
 (D) analysis of health plan claims or health care 
 records data;
 (E) evaluating health plan and provider 
 performance;
 (F) carrying out utilization review, 
 precertification or preauthorization of services;
 (G) underwriting or experience rating of health 
 plans;
 (H) conducting or arranging for auditing services; 
 or
 (I) such other services as the Secretary determines 
 appropriate.
 (9) Health care provider.--The term ``health care 
 provider'' means a person, who with respect to a specific item 
 of protected health information, receives, creates, uses, 
 maintains, or discloses the information while acting in whole 
 or in part in the capacity of--
 (A) a person who is licensed, certified, 
 registered, or otherwise authorized by Federal or State 
 law to provide an item or service that constitutes 
 health care in the ordinary course of business, or 
 practice of a profession;
 (B) a Federal, State, or employer sponsored program 
 that directly provides items or services that 
 constitute health care to beneficiaries; or
 (C) an officer, employee, or agent of a person 
 described in subparagraph (A) or (B) that is engaged in 
 the provision of health care.
 (10) Health or life insurer.--The term ``health or life 
 insurer'' means a health insurance issuer as defined in section 
 9805(b)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 or a life 
 insurance company as defined in section 816 of such Code.
 (11) Health oversight agency.--The term ``health oversight 
 agency'' means a person who, with respect to a specific item of 
 protected health information, receives, creates, uses, 
 maintains, or discloses the information while acting in whole 
 or in part in the capacity of--
 (A) a person who performs or oversees the 
 performance of an assessment, evaluation, 
 determination, or investigation, relating to the 
 licensing, accreditation, or credentialing of health 
 care providers; or
 (B) a person who--
 (i) performs or oversees the performance of 
 an audit, assessment, evaluation, 
 determination, or investigation relating to the 
 effectiveness of, compliance with, or 
 applicability of, legal, fiscal, medical, or 
 scientific standards or aspects of performance 
 related to the delivery of, or payment for, 
 health care; and
 (ii) is a public agency, acting on behalf 
 of a public agency, acting pursuant to a 
 requirement of a public agency, or carrying out 
 activities under a Federal or State law 
 governing the assessment, evaluation, 
 determination, investigation, or prosecution 
 described in subparagraph (A).
 (12) Health plan.--The term ``health plan'' means any 
 health insurance plan, including any hospital or medical 
 service plan, dental or other health service plan or health 
 maintenance organization plan, provider sponsored organization, 
 or other program providing or arranging for the provision of 
 health benefits. Such term includes employee welfare benefits 
 plans and group health plans as defined in sections 3 and 607 
 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 
 U.S.C. 1002 and 1167).
 (13) Health researcher.--The term ``health researcher'' 
 means a person, or an officer, employee or independent 
 contractor of a person, who receives protected health 
 information as part of a systematic investigation, testing or 
 evaluation designed to develop or contribute to generalized 
 scientific and clinical knowledge.
 (14) Individual representative.--The term ``individual 
 representative'' means a person who is authorized by law (based 
 on grounds other than the individual being a minor), or by an 
 instrument recognized under law, to act as an agent, attorney, 
 proxy, or other legal representative of a protected individual. 
 Such term includes a health care power of attorney.
 (15) Institutional review board.--The term ``institutional 
 review board'' means a review panel, that is generally 
 associated with a particular university or other research 
 institution, that is responsible for implementing Federal human 
 subject protection requirements for research conducted at or 
 supported by the university or institution involved.
 (16) Law enforcement inquiry.--The term ``law enforcement 
 inquiry'' means a lawful investigation conducted by an 
 appropriate government agency or official inquiring into a 
 violation of, or failure to comply with, any criminal or civil 
 statute or any regulation, rule, or order issued pursuant to 
 such a statute.
 (17) Network plan.--The term ``network plan'' means health 
 care coverage provided under a health plan under which the 
 financing and delivery of health care are provided, in whole or 
 in part, through a defined set of health care providers under 
 contract with the health plan.
 (18) Nonidentifiable health information.--The term 
 ``nonidentifiable health information'' means any information 
 that would otherwise be protected health information except 
 that such information does not directly reveal the identity of 
 the individual whose health or health care is the subject of 
 the information and there is no reasonable basis to believe 
 that such information could be used, either alone or with other 
 information that is, or should reasonably be known to be, 
 available to predictable recipients of such information, to 
 reveal the identity of that individual.
 (19) Originating provider.--The term ``originating 
 provider'' means a health care provider who creates or 
 originates medical information that is or that becomes 
 protected health information.
 (20) Payment.--The term ``payment'' means--
 (A) the activities undertaken by--
 (i) or on behalf of a health plan to 
 determine its responsibility for coverage under 
 the plan and the actual payment under such 
 plan; and
 (ii) a health care provider to obtain 
 payment for items or services provided under a 
 health plan or provided based on a 
 determination by the health plan of 
 responsibility for coverage under the plan; and
 (B) activities undertaken as described in 
 subparagraph (A) including--
 (i) billing, claims management, medical 
 data processing or other administrative 
 services;
 (ii) determinations of coverage or 
 adjudication of health benefit claims; and
 (iii) review of health care services with 
 respect to medical necessity, coverage under a 
 health plan, appropriateness of care, or 
 justification of charges.
 (21) Person.--The term ``person'' means a government, 
 governmental subdivision, agency or authority; corporation; 
 company; association; firm; partnership; society; estate; 
 trust; joint venture; individual; individual representative; 
 tribal government; and any other legal entity.
 (22) Protected health information.--The term ``protected 
 health information'' means any information (including 
 demographic information) whether or not recorded in any form or 
 medium--
 (A) that relates to the past, present or future--
 (i) physical or mental health or condition 
 of an individual (including the condition or 
 other attributes of individual cells or their 
 components);
 (ii) provision of health care to an 
 individual; or
 (iii) payment for the provision of health 
 care to an individual;
 (B) that is created or received by a health care 
 provider, health plan, health researcher, health 
 oversight agency, public health authority, employer, 
 law enforcement official, health or life insurer, 
 school or university; and
 (C) that is not nonidentifiable health information.
 (23) Public health authority.--The term ``public health 
 authority'' means an authority or instrumentality of the United 
 States, a tribal government, a State, or a political 
 subdivision of a State that is--
 (A) primarily responsible for public health 
 matters; and
 (B) primarily engaged in activities such as injury 
 reporting, public health surveillance, and public 
 health investigation or intervention.
 (24) School or university.--The term ``school or 
 university'' means an institution or place for instruction or 
 education, including an elementary school, secondary school, or 
 institution of higher learning, a college, or an assemblage of 
 colleges united under one corporate organization or government.
 (25) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (26) State.--The term ``State'' includes the District of 
 Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American 
 Samoa, and the Northern Mariana Islands.
 (27) Treatment.--The term ``treatment'' means the provision 
 of health care by, or the coordination of health care among, 
 health care providers, or the referral of a patient from one 
 provider to another, or coordination of health care or other 
 services among health care providers and third parties 
 authorized by the health plan or the plan member.
 (28) Writing.--The term ``writing'' means writing in either 
 a paper-based or computer-based form, including electronic 
 signatures.

 TITLE I--INDIVIDUAL'S RIGHTS

 Subtitle A--Review of Protected Health Information by Subjects of the 
 Information

SEC. 101. INSPECTION AND COPYING OF PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION.

 (a) In General.--At the request of an individual and except as 
provided in subsection (b), a health care provider, health plan, 
employer, health or life insurer, school, or university shall permit an 
individual who is the subject of protected health information or the 
individual's designee, to inspect and copy protected health information 
concerning the individual, including records created under sections 102 
and 112, that such entity maintains. The entity may set forth 
appropriate procedures to be followed for such inspection or copying 
and may require an individual to pay reasonable costs associated with 
such inspection or copying.
 (b) Exceptions.--Unless ordered by a court of competent 
jurisdiction, an entity described in subsection (a) is not required to 
permit the inspection or copying of protected health information if any 
of the following conditions are met:
 (1) Endangerment to life or safety.--The entity determines 
 that the disclosure of the information could reasonably be 
 expected to endanger the life or physical safety of, or cause 
 substantial mental harm to, the individual who is the subject 
 of the record.
 (2) Confidential source.--The information identifies, or 
 could reasonably lead to the identification of, a person who 
 provided information under a promise of confidentiality 
 concerning the individual who is the subject of the 
 information.
 (3) Information compiled in anticipation of litigation.--
 The information is compiled principally--
 (A) in the reasonable anticipation of a civil, 
 criminal, or administrative action or proceeding; or
 (B) for use in such action or proceeding.
 (4) Research purposes.--The information was collected for a 
 research project monitored by an institutional review board, 
 such project is not complete, and the researcher reasonably 
 believes that access would harm the conduct of the research or 
 invalidate or undermine the validity of the research.
 (c) Denial of a Request for Inspection or Copying.--If an entity 
described in subsection (a) denies a request for inspection or copying 
pursuant to subsection (b), the entity shall inform the individual in 
writing of--
 (1) the reasons for the denial of the request for 
 inspection or copying;
 (2) any procedures for further review of the denial; and
 (3) the individual's right to file with the entity a 
 concise statement setting forth the request for inspection or 
 copying.
 (d) Statement Regarding Request.--If an individual has filed a 
statement under subsection (c)(3), the entity in any subsequent 
disclosure of the portion of the information requested under subsection 
(a) shall include--
 (1) a copy of the individual's statement; and
 (2) a concise statement of the reasons for denying the 
 request for inspection or copying.
 (e) Inspection and Copying of Segregable Portion.--An entity 
described in subsection (a) shall permit the inspection and copying 
under subsection (a) of any reasonably segregable portion of a record 
after deletion of any portion that is exempt under subsection (b).
 (f) Deadline.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), an 
 entity described in subsection (a) shall comply with or deny, 
 in accordance with subsection (c), a request for inspection or 
 copying of protected health information under this section not 
 later than 30 days after the date on which the entity receives 
 the request.
 (2) Off premises.--In the case of a request described in 
 paragraph (1), if the information involved is in paper form, 
 located off the premises of the entity involved, and not 
 readily available, the entity shall have 60 days to comply with 
 or deny such request.
 (g) Rules Governing Agents.--An agent of an entity described in 
subsection (a) shall not be required to provide for the inspection and 
copying of protected health information, except where--
 (1) the protected health information is retained by the 
 agent; and
 (2) the agent has received in writing a request from the 
 entity involved to fulfill the requirements of this section;
at which time such information shall be provided to the requesting 
entity. Such requesting entity shall comply with subsection (f) with 
respect to any such information.
 (h) Rule of Construction.--This section shall not be construed to 
require an entity described in subsection (a) to conduct a formal, 
informal, or other hearing or proceeding concerning a request for 
inspection or copying of protected health information.

SEC. 102. AMENDMENT OF PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION.

 (a) Requirements.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in subsections (b) and 
 (e), not later than 45 days after the date on which a health 
 care provider, health plan, employer, health or life insurer, 
 school, or university receives from an individual a request in 
 writing to amend information that meets the requirements of 
 paragraph (2), such entity shall--
 (A) make the amendment requested;
 (B) inform the individual of the amendment that has 
 been made; and
 (C) make reasonable efforts to inform any person to 
 whom the unamended portion of the information was 
 previously disclosed, of any nontechnical amendment 
 that has been made.
 (2) Information.--The requirements of this paragraph are 
 that--
 (A) the information that is the subject of the 
 request is in fact inaccurate; and
 (B) the entity receiving the request created the 
 information that is at issue.
 (b) Refusal to Amend.--If an entity described in subsection (a) 
refuses to make the amendment requested under such subsection, the 
entity shall inform the individual in writing of--
 (1) the reasons for the refusal to make the amendment;
 (2) any procedures for further review of the refusal; and
 (3) the individual's right to file with the entity a 
 concise statement setting forth the requested amendment and the 
 individual's reasons for disagreeing with the refusal.
 (c) Statement of Disagreement.--If an individual has filed a 
statement of disagreement under subsection (b)(3), the entity involved, 
in any subsequent disclosure of the disputed portion of the 
information--
 (1) shall include a copy of the individual's statement; and
 (2) may include a concise statement of the reasons for not 
 making the requested amendment.
 (d) Rules Governing Agents.--The agent of an entity described in 
subsection (a) shall not be required to make amendments to protected 
health information, except where--
 (1) the protected health information is retained by the 
 agent; and
 (2) the agent has been asked by such entity to fulfill the 
 requirements of this section.
If the agent is required to comply with this section as provided for in 
paragraph (2), such agent shall be subject to the 45-day deadline 
described in subsection (a).
 (e) Extension for Paper Records Off Premises.--In the case of a 
request described in subsection (a), if the information involved is in 
paper form, located off the premises of the entity involved, and not 
readily available, the entity shall have 60 days to comply with or deny 
such request.
 (f) Repeated Requests for Amendments.--If an entity described in 
subsection (a) receives a request for an amendment of information as 
provided for in such subsection and a statement of disagreement has 
been filed pursuant to subsection (c), the entity shall inform the 
individual of such filing and shall not be required to carry out the 
procedures required under this section.
 (g) Rules of Construction.--This section shall not be construed 
to--
 (1) require that an entity described in subsection (a) 
 conduct a formal, informal, or other hearing or proceeding 
 concerning a request for an amendment to protected health 
 information;
 (2) require a provider to amend an individual's record as 
 to the type, duration, or quality of treatment the individual 
 believes he or she should have been provided; or
 (3) require any deletion or alteration of the original 
 information.

SEC. 103. NOTICE OF CONFIDENTIALITY PRACTICES.

 (a) Preparation of Written Notice.--A health care provider, health 
plan, health oversight agency, public health authority, employer, 
health or life insurer, health researcher, school, or university shall 
post or provide, in writing and in a clear and conspicuous manner, 
notice of the entity's confidentiality practices, that shall include--
 (1) a description of an individual's rights with respect to 
 protected health information;
 (2) the uses and disclosures of protected health 
 information authorized under this Act;
 (3) the procedures for authorizing disclosures of protected 
 health information and for revoking such authorizations;
 (4) the procedures established by the entity for the 
 exercise of the individual's rights; and
 (5) the right to obtain a copy of the notice of the 
 confidentiality practices required under this Act.
 (b) Model Notice.--The Secretary, after notice and opportunity for 
public comment, shall develop and disseminate model notices of 
confidentiality practices. Use of the model notice shall serve as an 
absolute defense against claims of receiving inappropriate notice.

 Subtitle B--Establishment of Safeguards

SEC. 111. ESTABLISHMENT OF SAFEGUARDS.

 (a) In General.--A health care provider, health plan, health 
oversight agency, public health authority, employer, health or life 
insurer, health researcher, law enforcement official, school, or 
university shall establish and maintain appropriate administrative, 
technical, and physical safeguards to protect the confidentiality, 
security, accuracy, and integrity of protected health information 
created, received, obtained, maintained, used, transmitted, or disposed 
of by such entity.
 (b) Regulations.--The Secretary shall have the authority to 
promulgate regulations for the implementation of subsection (a).
 (c) Rule of Construction.--Safeguards to protect the security of 
protected health information under subsection (a) shall include the 
implementation of policies or procedures to consider whether protected 
health information is essential for a use or disclosure undertaken by 
an entity described in such subsection.

SEC. 112. ACCOUNTING FOR DISCLOSURES.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Health related entities.--Except as provided in 
 paragraph (3), a health care provider, health plan, health 
 oversight agency, public health authority, employer, health or 
 life insurer, health researcher, law enforcement official, 
 school, or university shall establish and maintain, with 
 respect to any protected health information disclosure, a 
 record of such disclosure in accordance with regulations issued 
 by the Secretary.
 (2) Agent.--Except as provided in paragraph (3), an agent 
 shall maintain a record of its disclosures made pursuant to 
 sections 205 through 212.
 (3) Exception.--A record of disclosures under this 
 subsection is not required with respect to disclosures made to 
 officers or employees of the entity that maintains the record 
 involved who, in the performance of their duties, have a need 
 for the protected health information.
 (b) Record of Disclosure.--A record established under subsection 
(a) shall be maintained for not less than 7 years.

 TITLE II--RESTRICTIONS ON USE AND DISCLOSURE

SEC. 201. GENERAL RULES REGARDING USE AND DISCLOSURE.

 (a) Prohibition.--
 (1) General rule.--A health care provider, health plan, 
 health oversight agency, public health authority, employer, 
 health or life insurer, health researcher, law enforcement 
 official, school, or university may not disclose protected 
 health information except as authorized under this title.
 (2) Rule of construction.--Disclosure of health information 
 in the form of nonidentifiable health information shall not be 
 construed as a disclosure of protected health information.
 (b) Use or Disclosure of Protected Health Information Within an 
Entity.--
 (1) In general.--An entity described in subsection (a) may 
 use protected health information or disclose such information 
 within the entity if such use or disclosure is made pursuant to 
 an authorization under section 202 or 203 and consistent with 
 the limitations under subsection (d) on the scope of 
 disclosure.
 (2) Agents.--Disclosure to agents of an entity described in 
 subsection (a) shall be considered as a disclosure within an 
 entity.
 (c) Disclosure by Agents.--An agent who receives protected health 
information from an entity described in subsection (a) shall be subject 
to all rules of disclosure and safeguard requirements under this title.
 (d) Scope of Disclosure.--Every disclosure of protected health 
information by an entity under this title shall be limited to the 
information necessary to accomplish the purpose for which the 
information is disclosed.
 (e) No General Requirement to Disclose.--Nothing in this title 
permitting the disclosure of protected health information shall be 
construed to require such disclosure.
 (f) Identification of Disclosed Information as Protected 
Information.--Except as otherwise provided in this title, protected 
health information may not be disclosed unless such information is 
clearly identified as protected health information that is subject to 
this Act.
 (g) Creation of Nonidentifiable Information.--An entity described 
in subsection (a) may disclose protected health information to an 
employee or agent of the entity for purposes of creating 
nonidentifiable information, if the entity prohibits the employee or 
agent of the entity from using or disclosing the protected health 
information for purposes other than the sole purpose of creating 
nonidentifiable information as specified by the entity.
 (h) Deemed Disclosures of Protected Health Information.--
 (1) In general.--Any individual or entity who manipulates a 
 nonidentifiable database in order to identify an individual 
 shall be deemed to have disclosed protected health information.
 (2) Disclosure or transmission of an anonymous link.--The 
 disclosure or transmission of an anonymous link with any 
 information which, together with information previously 
 disclosed with the same link, might reasonably be used to 
 identify an individual, shall be deemed to be a disclosure of 
 protected health information. Such a disclosure shall have the 
 effect of converting any previously disclosed, nonidentifiable 
 information with the same link into the protected health 
 information.

SEC. 202. PROCUREMENT OF AUTHORIZATIONS FOR DISCLOSURE OF PROTECTED 
 HEALTH INFORMATION FOR TREATMENT, PAYMENT, AND HEALTH 
 CARE OPERATIONS.

 (a) Requirements Relating to Employers, Health Plans, Uninsured 
Individuals, and Providers.--
 (1) In general.--To meet the requirements relating to the 
 authorized disclosure of protected health information under 
 section 201, an authorization form must be secured for each 
 individual in connection with treatment, payment and health 
 care operations.
 (2) Consolidated authorization.--A single authorization may 
 be secured for each individual in connection with treatment, 
 payment, and health care operations.
 (3) Employers.--Every employer offering a health plan to 
 its employees shall, at the time of, and as a condition of 
 enrollment in the health plan, obtain a signed, written 
 authorization that is a legal, informed authorization 
 concerning the use and disclosure of protected health 
 information for treatment, payment, and health care operations 
 with respect to each individual who is eligible to receive care 
 under the health plan.
 (4) Health plans.--Every health plan offering enrollment to 
 individual or non-employer groups shall, at the time of, and as 
 a condition of enrollment in the health plan, obtain a signed, 
 written authorization that is a legal, informed authorization 
 concerning the use and disclosure of protected health 
 information for treatment, payment, and health care operations 
 with respect to each individual who is eligible to receive care 
 under the plan.
 (5) Uninsured.--An originating provider providing health 
 care to an uninsured individual, shall obtain a signed, written 
 authorization that is a legal, informed authorization 
 concerning the use and disclosure of protected health 
 information, in providing health care or arranging for health 
 care from other providers or seeking payment for the provision 
 of health care services.
 (6) Providers.--Every health care provider providing health 
 care to an individual who has not given an authorization under 
 paragraph (3), (4), or (5), shall, at the time of providing 
 such care, obtain a signed, written authorization concerning 
 the use and disclosure of protected health information for 
 treatment, payment, and health care operations with respect to 
 such individual. Nothing in this section shall be construed to 
 require that a health care provider secure an authorization in 
 addition to an authorization secured under paragraph (3), (4), 
 or (5).
 (b) Requirements for Individual Authorization.--To be valid, an 
authorization to disclose protected health information shall--
 (1) identify the individual involved;
 (2) describe the nature of the health care information to 
 be disclosed;
 (3) identify the type of person to whom the information is 
 to be disclosed;
 (4) describe the purpose of the disclosure, including 
 whether the information may be used for disease management or 
 medication compliance;
 (5) be subject to revocation by the individual and indicate 
 that the authorization is valid until revocation by the 
 individual; and
 (6)(A) be either--
 (i) in writing, dated, and signed by the 
 individual; or
 (ii) in electronic form, dated and authenticated by 
 the individual using a unique identifier; and
 (B) not have been revoked under paragraph (c).
 (c) Revocation of Authorization.--
 (1) In general.--An individual may revoke in writing an 
 authorization under this section at any time, unless the 
 disclosure that is the subject of the authorization is required 
 to effectuate payment for health care that has been provided to 
 the individual for which the individual has not agreed to 
 assume personal financial responsibility.
 (2) Exception for self-payment.--An individual may revoke a 
 prior authorization for payment or health care operations 
 described in paragraphs (1) through (6) of subsection (a) prior 
 to a single or series of encounters with a health care provider 
 if such individual has agreed to assume personal financial 
 responsibility for the treatment.
 (3) Health plans.--With respect to a health plan, the 
 authorization of an individual is deemed to be revoked at the 
 time of the cancellation or non-renewal of enrollment in the 
 health plan, except as may be necessary to complete health care 
 operations and payment requirements related to the individual's 
 period of enrollment.
 (4) Actions.--An individual may not maintain an action 
 against a person for disclosure of protected health information 
 made in good faith reliance on the individual's authorization 
 at the time disclosure was made.
 (d) Record of Individual's Authorizations and Revocations.--
 (1) In general.--Each person collecting or storing 
 protected health information shall maintain a record for a 
 period of 7 years of each authorization of an individual and 
 revocation thereof.
 (2) Rule of construction.--Records of authorizations and 
 revocations maintained under paragraph (1) shall not be 
 construed to be protected health information under this Act.
 (e) No Waiver.-- Except as provided for in this Act, an 
authorization to disclose protected health information by an individual 
shall not be construed as a waiver of any rights that the individual 
has under other Federal or State laws, the rules of evidence, or common 
law.
 (f) Rule of Construction.--Authorizations for the disclosure of 
protected health information for treatment, payment, and health care 
operations shall not authorize the disclosure of such information by an 
individual with the intent to sell, transfer, or use protected health 
information for the purpose of marketing a product or service. For such 
disclosures a separate authorization is required under section 203.

SEC. 203. AUTHORIZATIONS FOR DISCLOSURE OF PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION 
 OTHER THAN FOR TREATMENT, PAYMENT, OR HEALTH CARE 
 OPERATIONS.

 (a) Written Authorizations.--A health care provider, health plan, 
health oversight agency, health researcher, public health authority, 
law enforcement official, employer, health or life insurer, school, or 
university may disclose protected health information, for purposes 
other than those authorized under section 202, pursuant to an 
authorization executed by the individual who is the subject of the 
information that meets the requirements of section 202(b). Such an 
authorization shall be separate from an authorization provided under 
section 202.
 (b) Limitation on Authorizations.--An entity described in section 
202 may not condition the delivery of treatment or payment for services 
on the receipt of an authorization described in this section.
 (c) Revocation or Amendment of Authorization.--
 (1) In general.--An individual may in writing revoke or 
 amend an authorization described in subsection (a).
 (2) Notice of revocation.--An entity described in 
 subsection (a) that discloses protected health information 
 pursuant to an authorization that has been revoked under 
 paragraph (1) shall not be subject to any liability or penalty 
 under this title if that entity had no actual or constructive 
 notice of the revocation.
 (d) Requirement To Release Protected Health Information to Coroners 
and Medical Examiners.--
 (1) In general.--When a Coroner or Medical Examiner or 
 their duly appointed deputies seek protected health information 
 for the purpose of inquiry into and determination of, the 
 cause, manner, and circumstances of a death, the health care 
 provider, health plan, health oversight agency, public health 
 authority, employer, health or life insurer, health researcher, 
 law enforcement official, school, or university involved shall 
 provide the protected health information to the Coroner or 
 Medical Examiner or to the duly appointed deputies without 
 undue delay.
 (2) Production of additional information.--If a Coroner or 
 Medical Examiner or their duly appointed deputies receives 
 health information from an entity referred to in paragraph (1), 
 such health information shall remain as protected health 
 information unless the health information is attached to or 
 otherwise made a part of a Coroner's or Medical Examiner's 
 official report, in which case it shall no longer be protected.
 (3) Exemption.--Health information attached to or otherwise 
 made a part of a Coroner's or Medical Examiner's official 
 report, shall be exempt from the provisions of this Act except 
 as provided for in this subsection.
 (4) Reimbursement.--A Coroner or Medical Examiner may 
 require a person to reimburse their Office for the reasonable 
 costs associated with such inspection or copying.
 (e) Disclosure for Purpose Only.--A recipient of information 
pursuant to an authorization under this section may use or disclose 
such information solely to carry out the purpose for which the 
information was authorized for release.
 (f) Model Authorizations.--The Secretary, after notice and 
opportunity for public comment, shall develop and disseminate model 
written authorizations of the type described in subsection (a). Any 
authorization obtained on a model authorization form developed by the 
Secretary shall be deemed to meet the authorization requirements of 
this section.

SEC. 204. NEXT OF KIN AND DIRECTORY INFORMATION.

 (a) Next of Kin.--A health care provider, or a person who receives 
protected health information under section 205, may disclose protected 
health information regarding an individual to the individual's next of 
kin, an individual's representative, or to another person whom the 
individual has identified, if--
 (1) the individual who is the subject of the information--
 (A) has been notified of the individual's right to 
 object to such disclosure and the individual has not 
 objected to the disclosure; or
 (B) is in a physical or mental condition such that 
 the individual is not capable of objecting, and there 
 are no prior indications that the individual would 
 object;
 (2) the information disclosed relates to health care 
 currently being provided to that individual; or
 (3) the disclosure of the protected health information is 
 consistent with good medical or professional practice.
 (b) Directory Information.--
 (1) Disclosure.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph 
 (2), an entity described in subsection (a) may disclose 
 the information described in subparagraph (B) to any 
 person if the individual who is the subject of the 
 information--
 (i) has been notified of the individual's 
 right to object and the individual has not 
 objected to the disclosure; or
 (ii) is in a physical or mental condition 
 such that the individual is not capable of 
 objecting, the individual's next of kin has not 
 objected, and there are no prior indications 
 that the individual would object.
 (B) Information.--Information described in this 
 subparagraph is information that consists only of 1 or 
 more of the following items:
 (i) The name of the individual who is the 
 subject of the information.
 (ii) The general health status of the 
 individual, described as critical, poor, fair, 
 stable, or satisfactory or in terms denoting 
 similar conditions.
 (iii) The location of the individual on 
 premises controlled by a provider.
 (2) Exception.--
 (A) Location.--Paragraph (1)(B)(iii) shall not 
 apply if disclosure of the location of the individual 
 would reveal specific information about the physical or 
 mental condition of the individual, unless the 
 individual expressly authorizes such disclosure.
 (B) Directory or next of kin information.--A 
 disclosure may not be made under this section if the 
 health care provider involved has reason to believe 
 that the disclosure of directory or next of kin 
 information could lead to the physical or mental harm 
 of the individual, unless the individual expressly 
 authorizes such disclosure.
 (c) Identification of Deceased Individual.--An entity described in 
subsection (a) may disclose protected health information if such 
disclosure is necessary to assist in the identification or safe 
handling of a deceased individual.
 (d) Rights of Minors.--
 (1) Individuals who are 18 or legally capable.--In the case 
 of an individual--
 (A) who is 18 years of age or older, all rights of 
 the individual under this title shall be exercised by 
 the individual; or
 (B) who, acting alone, can obtain a type of health 
 care without violating any applicable Federal or State 
 law, and who has sought such care, the individual shall 
 exercise all rights of the individual under this title 
 with respect to protected health information relating 
 to such health care.
 (2) Individuals under 18.--Except as provided in paragraph 
 (1)(B), in the case of an individual who is--
 (A) under 14 years of age, all of the individual's 
 rights under this title shall be exercised through the 
 parent or legal guardian; or
 (B) at least 14 but under 18 years of age, the 
 rights of inspection and amendment, and the right to 
 authorize use and disclosure of protected health 
 information of the individual shall be exercised by the 
 individual, or by the parent or legal guardian of the 
 individual.

SEC. 205. EMERGENCY CIRCUMSTANCES.

 Any person who creates or receives protected health information 
under this title may disclose protected health information in emergency 
circumstances when necessary to protect the health or safety of the 
individual who is the subject of such information from serious, 
imminent harm. No disclosure made in the good faith belief that the 
disclosure was necessary to protect the health or safety or an 
individual from serious, imminent harm shall be in violation of, or 
punishable under, this Act.

SEC. 206. OVERSIGHT.

 (a) In General.--A health care provider, health plan, employer, 
health or life insurer, law enforcement official, school, or university 
may disclose protected health information to a health oversight agency 
for purposes of an oversight function authorized by law.
 (b) Public Health and Health Research.--A public health authority 
or health researcher may disclose protected health information to a 
health oversight agency for purposes of an oversight function of the 
public health authority or health researcher authorized by law.
 (c) Authorization by a Supervisor.--For purposes of this section, 
the individual with authority to authorize the oversight function 
involved shall provide to the entity described in subsection (a) or (b) 
a statement that the protected health information is being sought for a 
legally authorized oversight function.
 (d) Use in Action Against Individuals.--Protected health 
information about an individual that is disclosed under this section 
may not be used in, or disclosed to any person for use in, an 
administrative, civil, or criminal action or investigation directed 
against the individual unless the action or investigation arises out of 
and is directly related to--
 (1) the receipt of health care or payment for health care;
 (2) an action involving a fraudulent claim related to 
 health; or
 (3) an action involving oversight of a public health 
 authority or a health researcher.

SEC. 207. PUBLIC HEALTH.

 A health care provider, health plan, public health authority, 
employer, health or life insurer, law enforcement official, school, or 
university may disclose protected health information to a public health 
authority or other person authorized by law for use in a legally 
authorized--
 (1) disease or injury report;
 (2) public health surveillance; or
 (3) public health investigation or intervention.

SEC. 208. HEALTH RESEARCH.

 (a) In General.--A health care provider, health plan, public health 
authority, employer, health or life insurer, school, or university may 
disclose protected health information to a health researcher if--
 (1) the research involves human subjects conducted or 
 supported by any Federal department or agency and the 
 researcher complies with the common rule;
 (2) the research is a clinical investigation involving 
 human subjects and the researcher follows the regulations of 
 the Food and Drug Administration governing confidentiality 
 procedures; or
 (3) the research is not subject to the Federal Policy for 
 the Protection of Human Subjects.
 (b) Periodic Review and Technical Assistance of Institutional 
Review Boards Involved With the Federal Policy for Protection of Human 
Subjects.--
 (1) Institutional review board.--Any institutional review 
 board that authorizes research under this section pursuant to 
 the common rule shall keep records of the names and addresses 
 of all members who participate in such authorizations for 
 possible review or audit.
 (2) Technical assistance.--The Secretary may provide 
 technical assistance to institutional review boards described 
 in this section.
 (3) Monitoring.--The Secretary shall periodically monitor 
 institutional review boards described in this section.
 (4) Reports.--Not later than 3 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall report to Congress 
 regarding the activities of institutional review boards 
 described in this section.
 (c) Review of the Common Rule by the Secretary.--The Secretary 
shall review the requirements of the common rule pertaining to the 
privacy of protected health information and shall promulgate any 
amendments to the common rule that may be necessary to ensure the 
confidentiality of such information.
 (d) Recommendations With Respect to Privacy.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than the date that is 12 months 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary 
 shall submit to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources of 
 the Senate detailed recommendations on standards with respect 
 to the privacy of individually identifiable health information 
 in research described in subsection (a)(3).
 (2) Rule of construction.--In formulating the 
 recommendations under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall 
 consider the findings of the National Bioethics Advisory 
 Commission and the results of the General Accounting Office 
 report authorized by section 402.
 (3) Regulations.--If legislation governing standards with 
 respect to the privacy of individually identifiable health 
 information transmitted in connection with research described 
 in subsection (a)(3) is not enacted by the date that is 24 
 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
 Secretary shall promulgate final regulations containing such 
 standards not later than the date that is 30 months after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 209. DISCLOSURE IN CIVIL, JUDICIAL, AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.

 (a) In General.--A health care provider, health plan, public health 
authority, employer, health or life insurer, law enforcement official, 
school, or university may disclose protected health information 
pursuant to a discovery request or subpoena in a civil action brought 
in a Federal or State court or a request or subpoena related to a 
Federal or State administrative proceeding, but only if the disclosure 
is made pursuant to a court order as provided for in subsection (b).
 (b) Court Orders.--
 (1) Standard for issuance.--In considering a request for a 
 court order regarding the disclosure of protected health 
 information under subsection (a), the court shall issue such 
 order if the court determines that without the disclosure of 
 such information, the person requesting the order would be 
 impaired from establishing a claim or defense.
 (2) Requirements.--An order issued under paragraph (1) 
 shall--
 (A) provide that the protected health information 
 involved is subject to court protection;
 (B) specify to whom the information may be 
 disclosed;
 (C) specify that such information may not otherwise 
 be disclosed or used; and
 (D) meet any other requirements that the court 
 determines are needed to protect the confidentiality of 
 the information.
 (c) Applicability.--This section shall not apply in a case in which 
the protected health information sought under such discovery request or 
subpoena--
 (1) is nonidentifiable health information;
 (2) is related to a party to the litigation whose medical 
 condition is at issue; or
 (3) could be disclosed under any of sections 202 through 
 208, 210, and 212.
 (d) Effect of Section.--This section shall not be construed to 
supersede any grounds that may apply under Federal or State law for 
objecting to turning over the protected health information.

SEC. 210. DISCLOSURE FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES.

 (a) In General.--A health care provider, health plan, health 
oversight agency, employer, health or life insurer, school, university, 
or person who receives protected health information pursuant to 
sections 203 through 208, may disclose protected health information 
under this section, except to a health oversight agency governed by 
section 206, if the disclosure is pursuant to--
 (1) a subpoena issued under the authority of a grand jury;
 (2) an administrative subpoena or summons or judicial 
 subpoena or warrant; or
 (3) a Federal or State law requiring the reporting of 
 specific medical information to law enforcement authorities.
 (b) Probable Cause.--A subpoena or summons for a disclosure under 
paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (a) shall only be issued if the law 
enforcement agency involved shows that there is probable cause to 
believe that the information is relevant to a legitimate law 
enforcement inquiry.
 (c) Destruction or Return of Information.--When the matter or need 
for which protected health information was disclosed to a law 
enforcement agency or grand jury under subsection (a) has concluded, 
including any derivative matters arising from such matter or need, the 
law enforcement agency or grand jury shall either destroy the protected 
health information, or return it to the person from whom it was 
obtained.
 (d) Redactions.--To the extent practicable, and consistent with the 
requirements of due process, a law enforcement agency shall redact 
personally identifying information from protected health information 
prior to the public disclosure of such protected information in a 
judicial or administrative proceeding.
 (e) Use of Information.--Protected health information obtained by a 
law enforcement agency pursuant to this section may only be used for 
purposes of a legitimate law enforcement activity.
 (f) Exclusion of Evidence.--If protected health information is 
obtained without meeting the requirements of paragraphs (1), (2), and 
(3) of subsection (a), any such information that is unlawfully obtained 
shall be excluded from court proceedings unless the defendant requests 
otherwise.

SEC. 211. DISCLOSURES FOR POSTMARKETING ADVERSE EXPERIENCE REPORTING 
 FOR HUMAN DRUG AND LICENSED BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS.

 (a) Adverse Experience Reports.--
 (1) In general.--Pursuant to the regulations of the Food 
 and Drug Administration at sections 310.305, 314.80, and 600.80 
 of title 21, Code of Federal Regulations, manufacturers, 
 packers, and distributors of approved new drug applications, 
 abbreviated new drug applications, antibiotic applications, 
 marketed prescription of drugs for human use, and approved 
 biologic product license applications shall report adverse 
 experiences in accordance with such section.
 (2) No identification of patients.--In accordance with the 
 August 1997 Guidance for Industry of the Food and Drug 
 Administration, patients shall not be identified by name, 
 address, or social security number in any report described in 
 paragraph (1). The manufacturer, packer, or distributor 
 involved shall assign a code for a patient in each such report.
 (3) Non liability under act.--A manufacturer, packer, or 
 distributor who submits an adverse report in accordance with 
 this subsection and the regulations described in paragraph (1) 
 shall not be liable under this Act.
 (b) Rule of Construction.--An adverse experience report written in 
accordance with the regulations described in subsection (a) shall be 
deemed to be a disclosure of non-identifiable information under this 
Act.

SEC. 212. PAYMENT CARD AND ELECTRONIC PAYMENT TRANSACTION.

 (a) Payment for Health Care Through Card or Electronic Means.--If 
an individual pays for health care by presenting a debit, credit, or 
other payment card or account number, or by any other electronic 
payment means, the entity receiving payment may disclose to a person 
described in subsection (b) only such protected health information 
about the individual as is necessary for the processing of the payment 
transaction or the billing or collection of amounts charged to, debited 
from, or otherwise paid by, the individual using the card, number, or 
other electronic means.
 (b) Transaction Processing.--A person who is a debit, credit, or 
other payment card issuer, or is otherwise directly involved in the 
processing of payment transactions involving such cards or other 
electronic payment transactions, or is otherwise directly involved in 
the billing or collection of amounts paid through such means, may use 
or disclose protected health information about an individual that has 
been disclosed in accordance with subsection (a) only when necessary 
for--
 (1) the authorization, settlement, billing or collection of 
 amounts charged to, debited from, or otherwise paid the 
 individual using a debit, credit, or other payment card or 
 account number, or by other electronic payment means;
 (2) the transfer of receivables, accounts, or interest 
 therein;
 (3) the audit of the debit, credit, or other payment card 
 account information;
 (4) compliance with Federal, State, or local law, or
 (5) compliance with a properly authorized civil, criminal, 
 or regulatory investigation by Federal, State, or local 
 authorities as governed by the requirements of this section.

SEC. 213. STANDARDS FOR ELECTRONIC DISCLOSURES.

 The Secretary shall promulgate standards for disclosing, 
authorizing, and authenticating, protected health information in 
electronic form consistent with this title.

SEC. 214. INDIVIDUAL REPRESENTATIVES.

 (a) In General.--Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), a 
person who is authorized by law (based on grounds other than the 
individual being a minor), or by an instrument recognized under law, to 
act as an agent, attorney, proxy, or other legal representative of a 
protected individual, may, to the extent so authorized, exercise and 
discharge the rights of the individual under this Act.
 (b) Health Care Power of Attorney.--A person who is authorized by 
law (based on grounds other than being a minor), or by an instrument 
recognized under law, to make decisions about the provision of health 
care to an individual who is incapacitated, may exercise and discharge 
the rights of the individual under this Act to the extent necessary to 
effectuate the terms or purposes of the grant of authority.
 (c) No Court Declaration.--If a health care provider determines 
that an individual, who has not been declared to be legally 
incompetent, suffers from a medical condition that prevents the 
individual from acting knowingly or effectively on the individual's own 
behalf, the right of the individual to authorize disclosure under this 
Act may be exercised and discharged in the best interest of the 
individual by--
 (1) a person described in subsection (b) with respect to 
 the individual;
 (2) a person described in subsection (a) with respect to 
 the individual, but only if a person described in paragraph (1) 
 cannot be contacted after a reasonable effort;
 (3) the next of kin of the individual, but only if a person 
 described in paragraph (1) or (2) cannot be contacted after a 
 reasonable effort; or
 (4) the health care provider, but only if a person 
 described in paragraph (1), (2), or (3) cannot be contacted 
 after a reasonable effort.
 (d) Application to Deceased Individuals.--The provisions of this 
Act shall continue to apply to protected health information concerning 
a deceased individual for a period of 2-years following the death of 
that individual.
 (e) Exercise of Rights on Behalf of a Deceased Individual.--A 
person who is authorized by law or by an instrument recognized under 
law, to act as an executor of the estate of a deceased individual, or 
otherwise to exercise the rights of the deceased individual, may, to 
the extent so authorized, exercise and discharge the rights of such 
deceased individual under this Act for a period of 2-years following 
the death of that individual. If no such designee has been authorized, 
the rights of the deceased individual may be exercised as provided for 
in subsection (c).

SEC. 215. LIMITED LIABILITY FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.

 Federal and State law enforcement officers shall not be personally 
liable for violations of this Act unless it is shown that the violation 
was a result of intentional conduct committed with the intent to sell, 
transfer, or use protected health information for commercial advantage, 
personal gain, or malicious harm.

SEC. 216. NO LIABILITY FOR PERMISSIBLE DISCLOSURES.

 A health care provider, health plan, health oversight agency, 
health researcher, public health authority, law enforcement official, 
employer, health or life insurer, school, or university who makes a 
disclosure of protected health information about an individual that is 
permitted by this Act shall not be liable to the individual for such 
disclosure under common law.

 TITLE III--SANCTIONS

 Subtitle A--Criminal Provisions

SEC. 301. WRONGFUL DISCLOSURE OF PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION.

 (a) In General.--Part I of title 18, United States Code, is amended 
by adding at the end the following:

 ``CHAPTER 124--WRONGFUL DISCLOSURE OF PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION

 ``Sec.
 ``2801. Wrongful disclosure of protected health information.
``Sec. 2801. Wrongful disclosure of protected health information
 ``(a) Offense.--The penalties described in subsection (b) shall 
apply to a person that knowingly and intentionally--
 ``(1) obtains protected health information relating to an 
 individual in violation of title II of the Health Care PIN Act;
 ``(2) discloses protected health information to another 
 person in violation of title II of the Health Care PIN Act; or
 ``(3) uses protected health information in violation of 
 title II of the Health Care PIN Act.
 ``(b) Penalties.--A person described in subsection (a) shall--
 ``(1) be fined not more than $50,000, imprisoned not more 
 than 1 year, or both;
 ``(2) if the offense is committed under false pretenses, be 
 fined not more than $250,000, imprisoned not more than 5 years, 
 or any combination of such penalties;
 ``(3) if the offense is committed with the intent to sell, 
 transfer, or use protected health information for commercial 
 advantage, personal gain, or malicious harm, be fined not more 
 than $500,000, imprisoned not more than 10 years, excluded from 
 participation in any federally funded health care programs, or 
 any combination of such penalties.
 ``(c) Subsequent Offenses.--In the case of a person described in 
subsection (a), the maximum penalties described in subsection (b) shall 
be doubled for every subsequent conviction for an offense arising out 
of a violation or violations related to a set of circumstances that are 
different from those involved in the previous violation or set of 
related violations described in such subsection (a).''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of chapters for part I of title 
18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating 
to chapter 123 the following new item:

``124. Wrongful disclosure of protected health information.. 2801''.

SEC. 302. DEBARMENT FOR CRIMES.

 (a) Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to promote the 
prevention and deterrence of instances of intentional criminal actions 
which violate criminal laws which are designed to safeguard the 
protected health information in a manner consistent with this Act.
 (b) Debarment.--Not later than 270 days after the effective date of 
this Act, the Attorney General, in consultation with the Secretary, 
shall promulgate regulations and establish procedures to permit the 
debarment of health care providers, health researchers, health or life 
insurers, or schools or universities from receiving benefits under any 
Federal health programs if the managers or officers of such entities 
are found guilty of violating section 2801 of title 18, United States 
Code, have civil penalties imposed against such officers or managers 
under section 311 in connection with the illegal disclosure of 
protected health information, or are found guilty of making a false 
statement or obstructing justice related to attempting to conceal or 
concealing such illegal disclosure. Such regulations shall take into 
account the need for continuity of medical care and may provide for a 
delay of any debarment imposed under this section to take into account 
the medical needs of patients.
 (c) Consultation.--Before publishing a proposed rule to implement 
subsection (b), the Attorney General shall consult with State law 
enforcement officials, health care providers, patient privacy rights' 
advocates, and other appropriate individuals and entities, to gain 
additional information regarding the debarment of entities under 
subsection (b) and the best methods to ensure the continuity of medical 
care.
 (d) Report.--The Attorney General shall annually prepare and submit 
to the Committee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives and 
the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate a report concerning the 
activities and debarment actions taken by the Attorney General under 
this section.
 (e) Assistance To Prevent Criminal Violations.--The Attorney 
General, in cooperation with any other appropriate individual, 
organization, or agency, may provide advice, training, technical 
assistance, and guidance regarding ways to reduce the incidence of 
improper disclosure of protected health information.
 (f) Relationship to Other Authorities.--A debarment imposed under 
this section shall not reduce or diminish the authority of a Federal, 
State, or local governmental agency or court to penalize, imprison, 
fine, suspend, debar, or take other adverse action against a person, in 
a civil, criminal, or administrative proceeding.

 Subtitle B--Civil Sanctions

SEC. 311. CIVIL PENALTY.

 (a) Violation.--A health care provider, health researcher, health 
plan, health oversight agency, public health agency, law enforcement 
agency, employer, health or life insurer, school, or university, or the 
agent of any such individual or entity, who the Secretary, in 
consultation with the Attorney General, determines has substantially 
and materially failed to comply with this Act shall be subject, in 
addition to any other penalties that may be prescribed by law--
 (1) in a case in which the violation relates to title I, to 
 a civil penalty of not more than $500 for each such violation, 
 but not to exceed $5,000 in the aggregate for multiple 
 violations;
 (2) in a case in which the violation relates to title II, 
 to a civil penalty of not more than $10,000 for each such 
 violation, but not to exceed $50,000 in the aggregate for 
 multiple violations; or
 (3) in a case in which the Secretary finds that such 
 violations have occurred with such frequency as to constitute a 
 general business practice, to a civil penalty of not more than 
 $100,000.
 (b) Procedures for Imposition of Penalties.--Section 1128A of the 
Social Security Act, other than subsections (a) and (b) and the second 
sentence of subsection (f) of that section, shall apply to the 
imposition of a civil, monetary, or exclusionary penalty under this 
section in the same manner as such provisions apply with respect to the 
imposition of a penalty under section 1128A of such Act.

SEC. 312. PROCEDURES FOR IMPOSITION OF PENALTIES.

 (a) Initiation of Proceedings.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation with the 
 Attorney General, may initiate a proceeding to determine 
 whether to impose a civil money penalty under section 311. The 
 Secretary may not initiate an action under this section with 
 respect to any violation described in section 311 after the 
 expiration of the 6-year period beginning on the date on which 
 such violation was alleged to have occurred. The Secretary may 
 initiate an action under this section by serving notice of the 
 action in any manner authorized by Rule 4 of the Federal Rules 
 of Civil Procedure.
 (2) Notice and opportunity for hearing.--The Secretary 
 shall not make a determination adverse to any person under 
 paragraph (1) until the person has been given written notice 
 and an opportunity for the determination to be made on the 
 record after a hearing at which the person is entitled to be 
represented by counsel, to present witnesses, and to cross-examine 
witnesses against the person.
 (3) Estoppel.--In a proceeding under paragraph (1) that--
 (A) is against a person who has been convicted 
 (whether upon a verdict after trial or upon a plea of 
 guilty or nolo contendere) of a crime under section 
 2801 of title 18, United States Code; and
 (B) involves the same conduct as in the criminal 
 action;
 the person is estopped from denying the essential elements of 
 the criminal offense.
 (4) Sanctions for failure to comply.--The official 
 conducting a hearing under this section may sanction a person, 
 including any party or attorney, for failing to comply with an 
 order or procedure, failing to defend an action, or other 
 misconduct as would interfere with the speedy, orderly, or fair 
 conduct of the hearing. Such sanction shall reasonably relate 
 to the severity and nature of the failure or misconduct. Such 
 sanction may include--
 (A) in the case of refusal to provide or permit 
 discovery, drawing negative factual inferences or 
 treating such refusal as an admission by deeming the 
 matter, or certain facts, to be established;
 (B) prohibiting a party from introducing certain 
 evidence or otherwise supporting a particular claim or 
 defense;
 (C) striking pleadings, in whole or in part;
 (D) staying the proceedings;
 (E) dismissal of the action;
 (F) entering a default judgment;
 (G) ordering the party or attorney to pay 
 attorneys' fees and other costs caused by the failure 
 or misconduct; and
 (H) refusing to consider any motion or other action 
 which is not filed in a timely manner.
 (b) Scope of Penalty.--In determining the amount or scope of any 
penalty imposed pursuant to section 311, the Secretary shall take into 
account--
 (1) the nature of claims and the circumstances under which 
 they were presented;
 (2) the degree of culpability, history of prior offenses, 
 and financial condition of the person presenting the claims; 
 and
 (3) such other matters as justice may require.
 (c) Review of Determination.--
 (1) In general.--Any person adversely affected by a 
 determination of the Secretary under this section may obtain a 
 review of such determination in the United States Court of 
 Appeals for the circuit in which the person resides, or in 
 which the claim was presented, by filing in such court (within 
 60 days following the date the person is notified of the 
 determination of the Secretary) a written petition requesting 
 that the determination be modified or set aside.
 (2) Filing of record.--A copy of the petition filed under 
 paragraph (1) shall be forthwith transmitted by the clerk of 
 the court to the Secretary, and thereupon the Secretary shall 
 file in the Court the record in the proceeding as provided in 
 section 2112 of title 28, United States Code. Upon such filing, 
 the court shall have jurisdiction of the proceeding and of the 
 question determined therein, and shall have the power to make 
 and enter upon the pleadings, testimony, and proceedings set 
 forth in such record a decree affirming, modifying, remanding 
 for further consideration, or setting aside, in whole or in 
 part, the determination of the Secretary and enforcing the same 
 to the extent that such order is affirmed or modified.
 (3) Consideration of objections.--No objection that has not 
 been raised before the Secretary with respect to a 
 determination described in paragraph (1) shall be considered by 
 the court, unless the failure or neglect to raise such 
 objection shall be excused because of extraordinary 
 circumstances.
 (4) Findings.--The findings of the Secretary with respect 
 to questions of fact in an action under this subsection, if 
 supported by substantial evidence on the record considered as a 
 whole, shall be conclusive. If any party shall apply to the 
 court for leave to adduce additional evidence and shall show to 
 the satisfaction of the court that such additional evidence is 
 material and that there were reasonable grounds for the failure 
 to adduce such evidence in the hearing before the Secretary, 
 the court may order such additional evidence to be taken before 
 the Secretary and to be made a part of the record. The 
 Secretary may modify findings as to the facts, or make new 
 findings, by reason of additional evidence so taken and filed, 
 and shall file with the court such modified or new findings, 
 and such findings with respect to questions of fact, if 
 supported by substantial evidence on the record considered as a 
 whole, and the recommendations of the Secretary, if any, for 
the modification or setting aside of the original order, shall be 
conclusive.
 (5) Exclusive jurisdiction.--Upon the filing of the record 
 with the court under paragraph (2), the jurisdiction of the 
 court shall be exclusive and its judgment and decree shall be 
 final, except that the same shall be subject to review by the 
 Supreme Court of the United States, as provided for in section 
 1254 of title 28, United States Code.
 (d) Recovery of Penalties.--
 (1) In general.--Civil money penalties imposed under this 
 subtitle may be compromised by the Secretary and may be 
 recovered in a civil action in the name of the United States 
 brought in United States district court for the district where 
 the claim was presented, or where the claimant resides, as 
 determined by the Secretary. Amounts recovered under this 
 section shall be paid to the Secretary and deposited as 
 miscellaneous receipts of the Treasury of the United States.
 (2) Deduction from amounts owing.--The amount of any 
 penalty, when finally determined under this section, or the 
 amount agreed upon in compromise under paragraph (1), may be 
 deducted from any sum then or later owing by the United States 
 or a State to the person against whom the penalty has been 
 assessed.
 (e) Determination Final.--A determination by the Secretary to 
impose a penalty under section 321 shall be final upon the expiration 
of the 60-day period referred to in subsection (c)(1). Matters that 
were raised or that could have been raised in a hearing before the 
Secretary or in an appeal pursuant to subsection (c) may not be raised 
as a defense to a civil action by the United States to collect a 
penalty under section 311.
 (f) Subpoena Authority.--
 (1) In general.--For the purpose of any hearing, 
 investigation, or other proceeding authorized or directed under 
 this section, or relative to any other matter within the 
 jurisdiction of the Attorney General hereunder, the Attorney 
 General, acting through the Secretary shall have the power to 
 issue subpoenas requiring the attendance and testimony of 
 witnesses and the production of any evidence that relates to 
 any matter under investigation or in question before the 
 Secretary. Such attendance of witnesses and production of 
 evidence at the designated place of such hearing, 
 investigation, or other proceeding may be required from any 
 place in the United States or in any Territory or possession 
 thereof.
 (2) Service.--Subpoenas of the Secretary under paragraph 
 (1) shall be served by anyone authorized by the Secretary by 
 delivering a copy thereof to the individual named therein.
 (3) Proof of service.--A verified return by the individual 
 serving the subpoena under this subsection setting forth the 
 manner of service shall be proof of service.
 (4) Fees.--Witnesses subpoenaed under this subsection shall 
 be paid the same fees and mileage as are paid witnesses in the 
 district court of the United States.
 (5) Refusal to obey.--In case of contumacy by, or refusal 
 to obey a duly served upon, any person, any district court of 
 the United States for the judicial district in which such 
 person charged with contumacy or refusal to obey is found or 
 resides or transacts business, upon application by the 
 Secretary, shall have jurisdiction to issue an order requiring 
 such person to appear and give testimony, or to appear and 
 produce evidence, or both. Any failure to obey such order of 
 the court may be punished by the court as contempt thereof.
 (g) Injunctive Relief.--Whenever the Secretary has reason to 
believe that any person has engaged, is engaging, or is about to engage 
in any activity which makes the person subject to a civil monetary 
penalty under section 311, the Secretary may bring an action in an 
appropriate district court of the United States (or, if applicable, a 
United States court of any territory) to enjoin such activity, or to 
enjoin the person from concealing, removing, encumbering, or disposing 
of assets which may be required in order to pay a civil monetary 
penalty if any such penalty were to be imposed or to seek other 
appropriate relief.
 (h) Agency.--A principal is liable for penalties under section 311 
for the actions of the principal's agent acting within the scope of the 
agency.

SEC. 313. REPORT ON USE OF EXISTING ENFORCEMENT MECHANISMS.

 In addition to the criminal and civil penalties that may be applied 
under this title, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to Congress a 
report regarding the use of existing Federal, State and other 
licensure, certification and regulatory mechanisms, including State 
insurance regulations, for the imposition of sanctions or penalties for 
the wrongful disclosure of protected health information.

SEC. 314. CIVIL ACTION BY INDIVIDUALS.

 (a) In General.--Any individual whose rights under this Act have 
been knowingly or negligently violated may bring a civil action to 
recover--
 (1) such preliminary and equitable relief as the court 
 determines to be appropriate; and
 (2) the greater of compensatory damages or liquidated 
 damages of $5,000.
 (b) Punitive Damages.--In any action brought under this section in 
which the individual has prevailed because of a knowing violation of a 
provision of this Act, the court may, in addition to any relief awarded 
under subsection (a), award such punitive damages as may be 
appropriate.
 (c) Attorney's Fees.--In the case of a civil action brought under 
subsection (a) in which the individual has substantially prevailed, the 
court may assess against the respondent a reasonable attorney's fee and 
other litigation costs and expenses (including expert fees) reasonably 
incurred.
 (d) Limitation.--No action may be commenced under this section more 
than 3 years after the date on which the violation was or should 
reasonably have been discovered.

 TITLE IV--MISCELLANEOUS

SEC. 401. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS.

 (a) State and Federal Law.--
 (1) State law enacted prior to effective date.--Nothing in 
 this Act shall be construed to supersede any provision of State 
 law that establishes, implements, or continues in effect any 
 standard or requirement relating to the privacy of protected 
 health information if such provision is enacted prior to the 
 effective date of this Act. Such laws shall not be superseded 
 after such effective date to the extent that such laws are at 
 least as protective of the privacy of protected health 
 information as the protections provided under this Act.
 (2) State law enacted after effective date.--Except as 
 provided in subsections (b) and (c), the provisions of this Act 
 shall preempt any State law relating to the privacy of 
 protected health information if such law is enacted after the 
 effective date of this Act.
 (3) Federal law.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed as 
 repealing, explicitly or implicitly, other Federal laws or 
 regulations relating to protected health information or 
 relating to an individual's access to protected health 
 information or health care services.
 (b) Privileges.--Nothing in this title shall be construed to 
preempt or modify any provisions of State statutory or common law to 
the extent that such law concerns a privilege of a witness or person in 
a court of that State. This title shall not be construed to supersede 
or modify any provision of Federal statutory or common law to the 
extent such law concerns a privilege of a witness or person in a court 
of the United States. Authorizations pursuant to sections 202 and 203 
shall not be construed as a waiver of any such privilege.
 (c) Certain Duties Under Law.--Nothing in this title shall be 
construed to preempt, supersede, or modify the operation of any State 
law that--
 (1) provides for the reporting of vital statistics such as 
 birth or death information;
 (2) requires the reporting of abuse or neglect information 
 about any individual;
 (3) relates to public or mental health and that prevents or 
 otherwise restricts disclosure of information otherwise 
 permissible under this Act;
 (4) governs a minor's right to access protected health 
 information or health care services; or
 (5) authorizes the collecting, analysis, or dissemination 
 of information from an entity described in section 201(a) for 
 the purpose of developing use, cost effectiveness, performance, 
 or quality data.
 (d) Federal Privacy Act.--
 (1) Medical exemptions.--Sections 552a of title 5, United 
 States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the 
 following: ``The head of an agency that is an entity described 
 in section 311(a) of the Health Care PIN Act shall promulgate 
 rules, in accordance with the requirements (including general 
 notice) of subsections (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), (c), and (e) of 
 section 553 of this title, to exempt a system of records within 
 an agency, to the extent that the system of records contains 
 protected health information (as defined in section 4(20) of 
 such Act), from all provisions of this section except 
 subsections (b)(6), (d), (e)(1), (e)(2), subparagraphs (A) and 
 (C) and (E) through (I) of subsection (e)(4), and subsections 
 (e)(5), (e)(6), (e)(9), (e)(12), (l), (n), (o), (p), (r), and 
 (u).''.
 (2) Technical amendment.--Section 552a(f)(3) of title 5, 
 United States Code, is amended by striking ``pertaining to 
 him,'' and all that follows through the semicolon and inserting 
 ``pertaining to the individual.''
 (e) Application to Certain Federal Agencies.--
 (1) Department of defense.--
 (A) Exceptions.--The Secretary of Defense may, by 
 regulation, establish exceptions to the disclosure 
 requirements of this Act to the extent such Secretary 
 determines that disclosure of protected health 
 information relating to members of the armed forces 
 from systems of records operated by the Department of 
 Defense is necessary under circumstances different from 
 those permitted under this Act for the proper conduct 
 of national defense functions by members of the armed 
 forces.
 (B) Application to civilian employees.--The 
 Secretary of Defense may, by regulation, establish for 
 civilian employees of the Department of Defense and 
 employees of Department of Defense contractors, 
 limitations on the right of such persons to revoke or 
 amend authorizations for disclosures under section 203 
 when such authorizations were provided by such 
 employees as a condition of employment and the 
 disclosure is determined necessary by the Secretary of 
 Defense to the proper conduct of national defense 
 functions by such employees.
 (2) Department of transportation.--
 (A) Exceptions.--The Secretary of Transportation 
 may, with respect to members of the Coast Guard, 
 exercise the same powers as the Secretary of Defense 
 may exercise under paragraph (1)(A).
 (B) Application to civilian employees.--The 
 Secretary of Transportation may, with respect to 
 civilian employees of the Coast Guard and Coast Guard 
 contractors, exercise the same powers as the Secretary 
 of Defense may exercise under paragraph (1)(B).
 (3) Department of veterans affairs.--The limitations on use 
 and disclosure of protected health information under this Act 
 shall not be construed to prevent any exchange of such 
 information within and among components of the Department of 
 Veterans Affairs that determine eligibility for or entitlement 
 to, or that provide, benefits under laws administered by the 
 Secretary of Veteran Affairs.

SEC. 402. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 (a) Effective Date.--Except as provided in subsection (b), this Act 
shall take effect on the date that is 18 months after the date of 
enactment of this Act.
 (b) Regulations.--The Secretary shall promulgate regulations 
implementing this Act not later than 12 months after the date of 
enactment of this Act.
 <all>