S 356 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 356
To authorize negotiation of a North American Free Trade Area, to promote
free trade, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
February 7 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. GRAMM introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Finance
A BILL
To authorize negotiation of a North American Free Trade Area, to promote
free trade, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `American Trade, Growth, and Employment
 Promotion Act'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress makes the following findings:
 (1) The income of the United States and its trading partners is increased
 by the mutual reduction of trade barriers.
 (2) The free trade agreements into which the United States has entered
 with Israel and Canada symbolize the path of prosperity for the United
 States in its trade relations into the next century.
 (3) The establishment of a North American Free Trade Area will promote
 the mutual reduction of trade barriers with countries outside of the North
 American continent as well, initiating a series of trade barrier reductions,
 instead of the series of trade barrier increases likely to result from a
 resort to protectionism and trade retaliation.
 (4) Trade protectionism endangers economic prosperity in the United States
 and globally and undermines civil liberty and constitutionally limited
 government abroad.
 (5) The reduction of government interference in the foreign and domestic
 sectors of a nation's economy and the concomitant promotion of economic
 opportunity and freedoms promote civil liberty and constitutionally
 limited government.
 (6) Developing countries that observe a consistent policy of free trade,
 the promotion of free enterprise and other economic freedoms (including
 protection of private property), the removal of barriers to foreign direct
 investment, in the context of constitutionally limited government and
 minimal government interference in the economy, will follow the surest and
 most effective prescription to alleviate poverty and provide for economic,
 social, and political development.
TITLE I--EXPANDED TRADE NEGOTIATING AUTHORITY
SEC. 101. NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AREA.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The President shall take action to initiate negotiations
 to obtain trade agreements with Mexico, and the Caribbean Basin countries,
 the terms of which provide for the reduction and ultimate elimination of
 tariffs and other nontariff barriers to trade for the purpose of promoting
 the establishment of a North American free trade area.
 (b) RECIPROCAL BASIS- An agreement entered into under subsection (a)
 shall be reciprocal and provide mutual reductions in trade barriers to
 promote trade, economic growth, and employment.
 (c) BILATERAL OR MULTILATERAL BASIS- Agreements may be entered into under
 subsection (a) on a bilateral basis with any foreign country described in
 that subsection or on a multilateral basis with all of such countries or
 any group of such countries.
 (d) CARIBBEAN BASIN COUNTRIES- For purposes of this section, the term
 `Caribbean Basin countries' means the countries designated as beneficiary
 countries under section 212 of the Caribbean Basin Economic Recovery Act
 (19 U.S.C. 2702).
SEC. 102. ESTABLISHMENT OF EXPANDED TRADE AREAS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The President is authorized to enter into bilateral
 and multilateral trade agreements with foreign countries, the terms of
 which provide for reciprocal reductions or eliminations of tariffs and
 nontariff barriers and subsidies (including, but not limited to, those acts,
 policies, and practices identified in any report submitted to the Congress
 under section 181(b) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C. 2241(b))) for the
 purpose of promoting freer and fairer trade through the establishment of
 expanded trade areas.
 (b) RECIPROCAL BASIS- An agreement entered into under subsection (a) shall
 be structured in a manner that ensures a mutual reduction of tariff and
 nontariff barriers to trade on a reciprocal basis.
SEC. 103. EXPANSION OF TRADE WITH DEVELOPING COUNTRIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The President is authorized to enter into trade agreements
 with any developing country, the terms of which provide, on a nonsymmetrical
 basis, for the reduction or elimination of tariff and nontariff barriers to
 trade for the purpose of establishing expanded trade areas and ultimately
 promoting a reciprocal reduction in barriers to trade.
 (b) Gradual Reduction of Barriers-
 (1) Any agreement entered into under subsection (a) shall provide for a
 reduction or elimination of tariff and nontariff barriers to trade which
 may be gradually reduced or eliminated by the developing country over a
 period that does not exceed five years.
 (2) The President is authorized to enter into an agreement under this section
 providing for a gradual reduction or elimination of tariff and nontariff
 barriers by the developing country only if the President determines--
 (A) that such gradual reduction or elimination is justified as a transition
 period in view of the per capita income, economic development, and
 international competitive position of the developing country, and
 (B) that such gradual reduction or elimination will promote the achievement
 of an eventual mutual elimination of trade barriers.
 (c) TERMINATION AND MODIFICATION OF AGREEMENTS- Any agreement entered into
 with a developing country under subsection (a) shall provide authority for
 the President to terminate or suspend such agreement if the President
 determines that the developing country has failed to carry out its
 obligations under the agreement.
 (d) DEVELOPING COUNTRY- For purposes of this section, the term `developing
 country' means any foreign country designated as a beneficiary developing
 country under section 502 of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C. 2462).
SEC. 104. PARTIAL, RECIPROCAL TRADE AGREEMENTS.
 In negotiating agreements under this title, the President is authorized
 to exclude from any of such agreements, on a reciprocal basis, any article
 or articles if the President determines that the exclusion of such article
 or articles is necessary to achieve an agreement for a free trade area or
 an expanded trade area.
SEC. 105. IMPLEMENTATION OF TRADE AGREEMENTS.
 (a) REQUIREMENTS- Any trade agreement entered into under this title shall
 enter into force with respect to the United States only if--
 (1) the President has, at least forty-five days before the day on which he
 enters into such trade agreement, notified the House of Representatives and
 the Senate of his intention to enter into such an agreement, and promptly
 thereafter publishes notice of such intention in the Federal Register,
 (2) after entering into the agreement, the President transmits a document
 to the Congress containing a copy of the final legal text of such agreement
 together with--
 (A) a statement of any administrative action proposed to implement such
 agreement,
 (B) if the trade agreement is described in paragraph (3)(A), a draft of
 an implementing bill,
 (C) an explanation of how the proposed administrative and implementing bill,
 if any, change or affect existing law, and
 (D) a statement of the reasons as to how the agreement serves the interests
 of the United States and as to why the proposed administrative action and
 implementing bill, if any, are required or appropriate to carry out the
 agreement, and
 (3) either--
 (A) in the case of a trade agreement that is entered into with any country
 described in section 2(b)(2)(B) of the Export-Import Bank Act of 1945
 (12 U.S.C. 635(b)(2)(B)), an implementing bill is enacted into law with
 respect to such agreement, or
 (B) in the case of a trade agreement not described in subparagraph (A),
 a disapproval bill is not enacted into law within the 90-day period
 beginning on the date on which the document described in paragraph (2)
 is submitted to the Congress.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE OF AGREEMENTS- If the requirements of subsection (a)
 are met with respect to a trade agreement entered into under this title, the
 trade agreement shall enter into force with respect to the United States on--
 (1) if the trade agreement is described in subsection (a)(3)(A), the
 date on which the implementing bill is enacted with respect to such trade
 agreement, or
 (2) if the trade agreement is not described in subsection (a)(3)(A), the day
 after the close of the ninety-day period described in subsection (a)(3)(B).
 (c) IMPLEMENTATION AUTHORITY- The President may, by proclamation or
 Executive order, reduce, modify, or eliminate--
 (1) such duties, and
 (2) such restrictions and limitations on the importation of articles,
as may be necessary to implement any trade agreement entered into under
this section after such agreement enters into force with respect to the
United States.
 (d) DISAPPROVAL BILLS-
 (1) For purposes of this section, the term `disapproval bill' means a bill,
 the only matter after the enacting clause of which is as follows: `That
 the Congress disapproves of the trade agreement submitted to the Congress
 on .', the blank space being filled with the appropriate date.
 (2) Any disapproval bill that is introduced in the Senate or House of
 Representatives shall be treated as an implementing bill for purposes of
 subsections (d), (e), (f), and (g) of section 151 of the Trade Act of 1974
 (19 U.S.C. 2191).
 (e) COMPUTATION OF TIME- Each period of time described in paragraphs (1)
 and (3) of subsection (a) shall be computed without regard to--
 (1) the days on which either House of Congress is not in session because
 of an adjournment of more than 3 days to a day certain or an adjournment
 of the Congress sine die, and
 (2) any Saturday and Sunday, not excluded under paragraph (1), when either
 House of the Congress is not in session.
 (f) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Paragraph (1) of section 151(b) of the Trade
 Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C. 2191(b)(1)) is amended by striking out `or section
 1103(a)(1) of the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988' and
 inserting in lieu thereof `, section 1103(a)(1) of the Omnibus Trade and
 Competitiveness Act of 1988, or section 105(a) of the American Trade,
 Growth, and Employment Promotion Act'.