S 794 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 794
To amend the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 to provide that
such Act does not preempt certain State laws.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
April 9, 1991
Mr. METZENBAUM (for himself and Mr. KENNEDY) introduced the following bill;
which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources
A BILL
To amend the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 to provide that
such Act does not preempt certain State laws.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. ERISA PREEMPTION RULES NOT TO APPLY TO CERTAIN STATE LAWS.
 (a) STATE UNFAIR INSURANCE CLAIMS PRACTICES LAW- Paragraph (2)(A) of
 section 514(b) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974
 (29 U.S.C. 1144(b)(2)(A)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(2)(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), nothing in this title
 shall be construed to relieve or exempt--
 `(i) any person from any law of any State which regulates insurance,
 banking, or securities, or
 `(ii) any insurance company from any provision of the statutory or common
 law of any State to the extent that such provision provides a remedy against
 insurance companies regarding such companies' practices in administering
 an employee benefit plan or in processing insurance claims thereunder.'.
 (b) PREVAILING WAGE AND APPRENTICESHIP TRAINING LAWS- Section 514(b) of
 such Act (29 U.S.C. 1144(b)) is amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new paragraph:
 `(9) Subsection (a) shall not apply to--
 `(A) any State law providing for the payment of prevailing wages; or
 `(B) any State law--
 `(i) establishing minimum standards for the certification or registration
 of apprenticeship or other training programs,
 `(ii) regarding the establishment, maintenance, or operation of a certified
 or registered apprenticeship or other training program, or
 `(iii) making certified or registered apprenticeship or other training an
 occupational qualification.'.
 (c) Study of Preemption Laws-
 (1) STUDY- The Secretary of Labor or the Secretary's delegate shall conduct
 a study on the effects of the provisions of the Employee Retirement Income
 Security Act of 1974 which provide for the preemption of State laws relating
 to employee benefit plans.
 (2) REPORT- Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this
 Act, the Secretary of Labor shall submit to the Committee on Education
 and Labor of the House of Representatives and to the Committee on Labor
 and Human Resources of the Senate the results of the study conducted under
 paragraph (1), together with any recommendations for legislative reforms
 which the Secretary finds necessary.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by this section shall apply to
 actions taken on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.