101st CONGRESS
2d Session
H. R. 1236
AN ACT
To establish evidentiary standards for Federal civil antitrust claims based
on resale price fixing.
HR 1236 EH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 1236
AN ACT
To establish evidentiary standards for Federal civil antitrust claims based
on resale price fixing.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Price Fixing Prevention Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. EVIDENTIARY STANDARDS IN FEDERAL CIVIL ANTITRUST ACTIONS RELATING
TO PRICE FIXING.
 (a) In any civil action based on a claim arising under section 1 or 3 of
 the Sherman Act (15 U.S.C. 1, 3) and alleging a contract, combination,
 or conspiracy to set, change, or maintain prices (other than a maximum
 price), evidence that a person who sells a good or service to the claimant
 for resale--
 (1) received from a competitor of the claimant a communication regarding
 price competition by the claimant in the resale of a good or service, and
 (2) in response to such communication terminated the claimant as a buyer
 of a good or service for resale, or refused to supply to the claimant some
 or all of such goods or services requested by the claimant,
shall be sufficient to raise the inference that such person and such competitor
engaged in concerted action to set, change, or maintain prices for such good
or service in violation of such section. For purposes of this subsection,
a termination or a refusal to supply is in response to a communication if
such communication is a substantial contributing cause of such termination
or refusal to supply. Nothing herein shall preclude the court from entering
judgment in favor of the defendant, at trial or prior thereto, if the court
determines on the basis of all the evidence and pleadings submitted by the
parties, in accordance with the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and the
requirements of this subsection, that no such inference of concerted action
can reasonably be drawn by a trier of fact.
 (b) In any civil action based on a claim arising under section 1 or 3 of
 the Sherman Act (15 U.S.C. 1, 3), and alleging a contract, combination, or
 conspiracy to set, change, or maintain prices, the fact that the seller of
 a good or service and the purchaser of such good or service entered into
 an agreement to set, change, or maintain the price (other than a maximum
 price) of such good or service for resale shall be sufficient to constitute
 a violation of such section. An agreement between the seller of a good
 or service and the purchaser of such good or service to terminate another
 purchaser as a dealer or to refuse to supply such other purchaser because
 of that purchaser's pricing policies shall constitute a violation of such
 section, whether or not a specific price or price level is agreed upon.
SEC. 3. RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.
 Nothing in this Act shall be construed to change the requirement of the
 Sherman Act that a violation of section 1 or 3 of such Act may only be found
 upon a determination that the defendant entered into an illegal contract,
 combination, or conspiracy.
SEC. 4. RULE-OF-REASON STANDARD.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Nothing in this Act shall affect the application of the
 rule-of-reason standard to vertical location clauses or vertical territorial
 restraints under the antitrust laws.
 (b) DEFINITION- For purposes of subsection (a), the term `antitrust laws'
 has the meaning given it in subsection (a) of the first section of the
 Clayton Act (15 U.S.C. 12(a)).
SEC. 5. APPLICABILITY.
 With the exception of the first sentence in section 2(b), section 2 of
 this Act shall not apply to civil actions commenced before the date of
 enactment of this Act.
Passed the House of Representatives April 18, 1990.
Attest:
Clerk.