S 817 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 817
To provide for standardization of the method of calculating yields which are
payable on accounts and investments and the clear and uniform disclosure
of the key costs associated with such accounts and investments, and for
other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
April 16 (legislative day, APRIL 9), 1991
Mr. DODD introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
A BILL
To provide for standardization of the method of calculating yields which are
payable on accounts and investments and the clear and uniform disclosure
of the key costs associated with such accounts and investments, and for
other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
TITLE I--TRUTH IN SAVINGS AND INVESTMENTS
SECTION 101. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Truth in Savings and Investments Act'.
SEC. 102. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) the ability of consumers to make informed decisions among savings and
 investment options would be enhanced; and
 (2) competition among depository institutions and investment companies
 would be increased,
if there were uniformity in the calculation and disclosure of the yields
and the basic terms and conditions of savings accounts and investment accounts.
 (b) PURPOSE- It is the purpose of this Act to require--
 (1) standardization of the method of calculating yields which are payable
 on accounts and investments; and
 (2) the clear and uniform disclosure of the key costs associated with such
 accounts and investments,
so that consumers can make meaningful comparisons among the competing claims
of depository institutions and investment companies.
SEC. 103. DEFINITIONS.
 For the purposes of this Act--
 (1) ACCOUNT- The term `account' means an account offered other than
 for a business purpose to 1 or more individuals or an unincorporated
 nonbusiness association of individuals by a depository institution into
 which a customer deposits funds. Such term includes a demand account, time
 account, negotiable order of withdrawal account, and share draft account.
 (2) ANNUAL PERCENTAGE YIELD- The term `annual percentage yield' means the
 total amount of interest that would be received on a $100 deposit, based
 on the annual rate of simple interest and the frequency of compounding for
 a 365-day period, expressed as a percentage calculated by a method which
 shall be prescribed by the Board in regulations.
 (3) BOARD- The term `Board' means the Board of Governors of the Federal
 Reserve System.
 (4) DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION- The term `depository institution' has the
 meaning given such term in clauses (i) through (vi) of section 19(b)(1)(A)
 of the Federal Reserve Act.
 (5) INTEREST- The term `interest' includes a dividend paid with respect to a
 share draft account which is an account within the meaning of paragraph (1).
 (6) MULTIPLE RATE ACCOUNT- The term `multiple rate account' means an
 account that has 2 or more annual rates of simple interest which take
 effect in succeeding periods and which are known at the time of disclosure.
SEC. 104. DISCLOSURE OF YIELDS AND TERMS OF ACCOUNTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (c), an advertisement,
 announcement, or solicitation initiated by any depository institution,
 or by any other entity, relating to any account--
 (1) may not include a reference to a specific rate of interest payable on
 amounts held in such account, or to a specific yield or rate of earnings on
 amounts so held, other than a reference to the annual percentage yield; and
 (2) shall, if it contains a reference to the annual percentage yield, state
 the information described in subsection (b) in a clear and conspicuous
 manner.
 (b) INFORMATION REQUIRED TO BE DISCLOSED IF ANNUAL PERCENTAGE YIELD IS
 USED- The information required to be disclosed by subsection (a)(2),
 to the extent applicable, is the following:
 (1) The period during which such annual percentage yield is in effect.
 (2) All minimum account balance and time requirements which must be met
 in order to earn the advertised yield (and, in the case of accounts for
 which more than 1 yield is stated, each annual percentage yield and the
 account minimum balance requirement associated with each such yield shall
 be in close proximity and have equal prominence).
 (3) The minimum amount of the initial deposit which is required to open
 the account in order to obtain the yield advertised, if such minimum amount
 is greater than the minimum balance necessary to earn the advertised yield.
 (4) A statement that regular fees or other conditions could reduce the yield.
 (5) A statement that a penalty shall be imposed for early withdrawal.
 (c) BROADCAST AND ELECTRONIC MEDIA AND OUTDOOR ADVERTISING EXCEPTION-
 The Board may, by regulation, exempt--
 (1) advertisements, announcements, or solicitations made by any broadcast
 or electronic medium,
 (2) any outdoor advertising display not on the premises of the depository
 institution, or
 (3) any advertising display on the premises of the depository institution
 or other entity offering the account or investment,
from any disclosure requirements described in paragraph (3) or (4)
of subsection (b) if the Board finds that any such disclosure would be
unnecessarily burdensome.
 (d) MISLEADING DESCRIPTIONS OF FREE OR NO-COST ACCOUNTS PROHIBITED-
 No advertisement, announcement, or solicitation made by any depository
 institution may refer to or describe an account as a free or no-cost
 account if--
 (1) in order to avoid fees or service charges for any period--
 (A) a minimum balance must be maintained in the account during such
 period; or
 (B) the number of transactions are limited during such period; or
 (2) any regular service or transaction fee is imposed.
 (e) MISLEADING OR INACCURATE ADVERTISEMENTS, ETC., PROHIBITED- No
 depository institution shall make any advertisement, announcement, or
 solicitation relating to an account that is inaccurate or misleading or
 that misrepresents its deposit contracts.
SEC. 105. ACCOUNT SCHEDULE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each depository institution shall maintain a schedule of
 fees, charges, yields, and other terms and conditions applicable to each
 class of accounts offered by the depository institution, in accordance with
 the requirements of this section and regulations which the Board shall
 prescribe. The schedule for each class may be in the form of separate
 schedules or one comprehensive document. The Board shall specify, in
 regulations, which fees, charges, penalties, terms, conditions, and
 account restrictions must be included in a schedule required under this
 subsection. A depository institution need not include in such schedule
 any information not specified in such regulation.
 (b) INFORMATION ON FEES AND CHARGES- The schedule required under subsection
 (a) with respect to any account shall contain the following information:
 (1) A description of all fees, periodic service charges, and penalties which
 may be charged or assessed against the account (or against the account holder
 in connection with such account), the amount of any such fees, charges,
 or penalties (or the method by which such amounts will be calculated),
 and the conditions under which any such amounts will be assessed.
 (2) All minimum balance requirements that affect fees, charges, and
 penalties, including a clear description of how each minimum balance
 is calculated.
 (3) Any minimum amount required with respect to the initial deposit in
 order to open the account.
 (c) INFORMATION ON YIELDS- The schedule required under subsection (a)
 with respect to any account shall include the following information:
 (1) Any annual percentage yield.
 (2) The period during which any annual percentage yield will be in effect.
 (3) Any annual rate of simple interest.
 (4) The frequency with which interest will be compounded and credited.
 (5) Any minimum balance which must be maintained to earn the rates and
 obtain the yields disclosed pursuant to this subsection and a clear
 description of how such minimum balance is calculated.
 (6) A clear description of any minimum time requirement which must be met
 in order to obtain the yields disclosed pursuant to this subsection and
 any information described in paragraph (1), (2), (3), or (4) that will
 apply if any time requirement is not met.
 (7) A statement, if applicable, that any interest which has accrued but
 has not been credited to an account at the time of a withdrawal from, or
 the closing of, the account will not be paid by the depository institution
 or credited to the account by reason of such withdrawal or closing.
 (8) Any provision or requirement relating to nonpayment of interest,
 including any charge or penalty for early withdrawal, and the conditions
 under which any such charge or penalty may be assessed.
The information described in paragraphs (1), (3), and (4) shall be provided
for each period during which a different annual rate of simple interest is
in effect (or, if applicable, the method for computing such information).
 (d) OTHER INFORMATION- The schedule required under subsection (a) shall
 include such other disclosures as the Board may determine to be necessary
 to allow consumers to understand and compare accounts, including frequency
 of interest rate adjustments, account restrictions, and renewal policies
 for time accounts.
 (e) STYLE AND FORMAT- Schedules required under subsection (a) shall be
 written in clear and plain language and be presented in a format designed
 to give consumers the ability to readily understand the terms of the
 accounts offered.
SEC. 106. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN ACCOUNTS.
 The Board shall by regulation prescribe such modifications in the disclosure
 requirements under this Act relating to annual percentage yields as may
 be necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act in the case of--
 (1) accounts with respect to which determination of annual percentage yield
 is based on an annual rate of interest that is guaranteed for a period of
 less than 1 year;
 (2) variable rate accounts;
 (3) accounts which, pursuant to law, do not guarantee payment of a stated
 rate; and
 (4) multiple rate accounts.
SEC. 107. DISTRIBUTION OF SCHEDULES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Any schedule required under section 105 shall be--
 (1) made available to any person upon request; and
 (2) provided to any potential customer before an account is opened or a
 service is rendered,
beginning not more than 6 months after the publication of regulations issued
by the Board in final form.
 (b) NOTICE TO CURRENT ACCOUNT HOLDERS- For any account for which the
 depository institution delivers an account statement on a quarterly or
 more frequent basis, the depository institution shall include on or with
 any regularly scheduled mailing posted or delivered within 6 months
 after publication of regulations issued by the Board in final form,
 a statement that the account holder has the right to request an account
 schedule containing the terms, charges, and interest rates of the account,
 and that the account holder may wish to request such an account schedule.
 (c) DISTRIBUTION IN CASE OF CERTAIN INITIAL DEPOSITS- If--
 (1) a depositor is not physically present at an office of a depository
 institution at the time an initial deposit is accepted with respect to an
 account established by or for such person; and
 (2) the schedule required under section 105(a) has not been furnished
 previously to such depositor,
the depository institution shall mail the schedule to the depositor at the
address shown on the records of the depository institution for such account
not later than 10 days after the date of the initial deposit.
 (d) DISTRIBUTION OF NOTICE OF CERTAIN CHANGES- If--
 (1) any change is made in any term or condition which is required to be
 disclosed in the schedule required under section 105(a) with respect to
 any account; and
 (2) the change may reduce the yield or adversely affect any holder of
 the account,
all account holders who may be affected by such change shall be notified and
provided with a description of the change by mail at least 30 days before
the change takes effect. This subsection does not apply to changes in annual
percentage yields of variable rate accounts.
 (e) DISTRIBUTION IN CASE OF ACCOUNTS ESTABLISHED BY MORE THAN 1 INDIVIDUAL
 OR BY A GROUP- If an account is established by more than 1 individual or
 for a person other than an individual, any distribution described in this
 section with respect to such account meets the requirements of this section
 if the distribution is made to 1 of the individuals who established the
 account or 1 individual representative of the person on whose behalf such
 account was established.
SEC. 108. PERIODIC STATEMENTS.
 A depository institution shall provide on or accompanying each periodic
 statement to each of its account holders the following clear and conspicuous
 disclosures:
 (1) AVERAGE DAILY BALANCE METHOD- If such depository institution uses
 the average daily balance method of calculating interest, as described in
 section 109(a)(1), the statement shall disclose--
 (A) the average daily balance in such account during the period covered
 by the statement;
 (B) the applicable periodic interest rate or rates during such period;
 (C) the number of days during such period (and the number of days to which
 each rate disclosed under subparagraph (B) applies);
 (D) the amount of interest earned during such period; and
 (E) any fees or charges imposed during such period.
 (2) DAY OF DEPOSIT TO DAY OF WITHDRAWAL METHOD- If such depository
 institution uses the day of deposit to day of withdrawal method of
 calculating interest, as defined by the Board, the statement shall disclose--
 (A) the applicable annual percentage yield;
 (B) the amount of interest earned during such period; and
 (C) any fees or charges imposed during such period.
SEC. 109. PAYMENT OF INTEREST.
 (a) DETERMINATION OF BALANCE ON WHICH INTEREST IS CALCULATED- Except as
 provided in subsection (c), interest shall be calculated on the principal
 balance in an interest-bearing account at a depository institution by using--
 (1) the average daily balance method, which is the sum of each day's
 closing balance divided by the number of days in the period, or
 (2) the day of deposit to day of withdrawal method, as defined by the Board.
Each agency referred to in section 111 shall, in connection with its
examination functions, examine the accuracy of depository institutions'
balance calculations.
 (b) DATE BY WHICH INTEREST MUST ACCRUE- Interest on accounts that are
 subject to this Act shall begin to accrue not later than the business day
 specified for interest-bearing accounts in section 606 of the Expedited
 Funds Availability Act, subject to subsections (b) and (c) of such section.
 (c) SPECIAL RULE FOR CREDIT UNIONS- Subsection (a) shall not apply to an
 account at a depository institution described in section 19(b)(1)(A)(iv)
 of the Federal Reserve Act if the depository institution--
 (1) calculates the accrual of interest or dividends by a method other
 than the method described in subsection (a) with respect to all funds,
 including cash, deposited in such account; and
 (2) provides notice of interest payment policy in the manner required by
 section 605(e) of the Expedited Funds Availability Act.
 (d) CALCULATED ON FULL AMOUNT OF PRINCIPAL- Interest on an interest-bearing
 account at any depository institution shall be calculated by such institution
 on the full amount of principal in the account for each day of the stated
 calculation period at the rate or rates of interest disclosed pursuant to
 this Act.
 (e) NO PARTICULAR METHOD OF COMPOUNDING INTEREST REQUIRED- Subsection
 (d) shall not be construed as prohibiting or requiring the use of any
 particular method of compounding or crediting interest.
SEC. 110. REGULATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Board, after consultation with each agency referred
 to in section 111(a) and after providing public notice and opportunity
 for comment, shall prescribe regulations to carry out the purpose and
 provisions of this Act. The regulations may contain any classification,
 differentiation, or other provision, and may provide an exception for any
 class of accounts which, in the judgment of the Board, may be necessary
 or proper to carry out the purposes of this Act, to prevent circumvention
 or evasion of the requirements of this Act, or to facilitate compliance
 with the requirements of this Act.
 (b) MODEL FORMS AND CLAUSES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall publish model forms and clauses for
 common disclosures to facilitate compliance with this Act. In devising
 such forms, the Board shall consider the use by depository institutions
 of data processing or similar automated machines.
 (2) USE OF FORMS AND CLAUSES DEEMED IN COMPLIANCE- Nothing in this Act
 may be construed to require a depository institution to use any such
 model form or clause prescribed by the Board under this subsection. A
 depository institution shall be deemed to be in compliance with the
 disclosure provisions of this Act if the depository institution--
 (A) uses any appropriate model form or clause published by the Board; or
 (B) uses any such model form or clause and changes it by--
 (i) deleting any information which is not required by this Act; or
 (ii) rearranging the format,
if in making such deletion or rearranging the format, the depository
institution does not affect the substance, clarity, or meaningful sequence
of the disclosure.
 (3) PUBLIC NOTICE AND OPPORTUNITY FOR COMMENT- The Board shall adopt
 model disclosure forms and clauses after giving appropriate notice and
 opportunity for public comment in accordance with section 553 of title 5,
 United States Code.
SEC. 111. ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Compliance with the requirements imposed under this Act
 shall be enforced under--
 (1) section 8 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, in the case of--
 (A) national banks, by the Comptroller of the Currency;
 (B) member banks of the Federal Reserve System (other than national banks),
 by the Board; and
 (C) depository institutions described in clause (i), (ii), or (iii) of
 section 19(b)(1)(A) of the Federal Reserve Act (other than member banks
 of the Federal Reserve System) by the Board of Directors of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Corporation;
 (2) section 5(d) of the Home Owners' Loan Act, by the Director of the Office
 of Thrift Supervision in the case of depository institutions described in
 clause (v) or (vi) of section 19(b)(1)(A) of the Federal Reserve Act;
 (3) the Federal Credit Union Act, by the National Credit Union Administration
 Board in the case of Federal credit unions; and
 (4) the Federal Trade Commission Act, by the Federal Trade Commission in
 the case of State-chartered credit unions.
 (b) ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT POWERS-
 (1) VIOLATION OF THIS ACT TREATED AS VIOLATION OF OTHER ACTS- For purposes of
 the exercise by any agency referred to in subsection (a) of such agency's
 powers under any Act referred to in such subsection, a violation of a
 requirement imposed under this Act shall be deemed to be a violation of
 a requirement imposed under that Act.
 (2) ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY UNDER OTHER ACTS- In addition to the powers
 of any agency referred to in subsection (a) under any provision of law
 specifically referred to in such subsection, each agency may exercise,
 for purposes of enforcing compliance with any requirement imposed under
 this Act, any other authority conferred on such agency by law.
 (c) REGULATIONS BY AGENCIES OTHER THAN THE BOARD- The authority of the
 Board to issue regulations under this Act does not impair the authority
 of any other agency referred to in subsection (a) to make rules regarding
 its own procedures in enforcing compliance with the requirements imposed
 under this Act.
SEC. 112. CIVIL LIABILITY.
 (a) CIVIL LIABILITY- Except as otherwise provided in this section, any
 depository institution or other entity offering an account that fails
 to comply with any requirement imposed under this Act or any regulation
 prescribed under this Act with respect to any person who is an account
 holder is liable to such person in an amount equal to the sum of--
 (1) any actual damage sustained by such person as a result of the failure;
 (2)(A) in the case of an individual action, such additional amount as the
 court may allow, except that the liability under this subparagraph shall
 not be less than $100 nor greater than $1,000; or
 (B) in the case of a class action, such amount as the court may allow,
 except that--
 (i) as to each member of the class, no minimum recovery shall be applicable;
 and
 (ii) the total recovery under this subparagraph in any class action or
 series of class actions arising out of the same failure to comply by the
 same depository institution shall not be more than the lesser of $500,000
 or 1 percent of the net worth of the depository institution involved; and
 (3) in the case of any successful action to enforce any liability under
 paragraph (1) or (2), the costs of the action, together with a reasonable
 attorney's fee as determined by the court.
 (b) CLASS ACTION AWARDS- In determining the total amount of an award in
 a class action, the court shall consider, among other relevant factors--
 (1) the amount of any actual damages awarded;
 (2) the frequency and persistence of failures of compliance;
 (3) the resources of the depository institution;
 (4) the number of persons adversely affected; and
 (5) the extent to which the failure of compliance was intentional.
 (c) BONA FIDE ERRORS-
 (1) GENERAL RULE- A depository institution may not be held liable in
 any action brought under this section for a violation of this Act if the
 depository institution demonstrates by a preponderance of the evidence
 that the violation was not intentional and resulted from a bona fide error,
 notwithstanding the maintenance of procedures reasonably adapted to avoid
 any such error.
 (2) EXAMPLES- Examples of a bona fide error include clerical, calculation,
 computer malfunction and programming, and printing errors. An error of
 legal judgment with respect to a depository institution's obligation under
 this Act is not a bona fide error.
 (d) JURISDICTION- Any action under this section may be brought in any United
 States district court, or in any other court of competent jurisdiction,
 within one year after the date of the occurrence of the violation involved.
 (e) RELIANCE ON BOARD RULINGS- No provision of this section imposing any
 liability shall apply to any act done or omitted in good faith in conformity
 with any rule, regulation, or interpretation thereof by the Board, or in
 conformity with any interpretation or approval by an official or employee
 of the Federal Reserve System duly authorized by the Board to issue such
 interpretation or approval under procedures prescribed by the Board,
 notwithstanding the fact that after such act or omission has occurred,
 such rule, regulation, interpretation, or approval is amended, rescinded,
 or determined by judicial or other authority to be invalid for any reason.
 (f) NOTIFICATION OF AND ADJUSTMENT FOR ERRORS- A depository institution shall
 not be liable under this section or section 111 for any failure to comply
 with any requirement imposed under this Act with respect to any account if--
 (1) before--
 (A) the end of the 60-day period beginning on the date on which the
 depository institution discovered the failure to comply;
 (B) any action is instituted against the depository institution by the
 account holder under this section with respect to such failure to comply; and
 (C) any written notice of such failure to comply is received by the
 depository institution from the account holder,
the depository institution notifies the account holder of the failure of
such institution to comply with such requirement; and
 (2) the depository institution makes such adjustments as may be necessary
 with respect to such account to ensure that--
 (A) the account holder will not be liable for any amount in excess of the
 amount actually disclosed with respect to any fee or charge;
 (B) the account holder will not be liable for any fee or charge imposed
 under any condition not actually disclosed; and
 (C) interest on amounts in such account will accrue at the annual percentage
 yield, and under the conditions actually disclosed (and credit will be
 provided for interest already accrued at a different annual percentage
 yield and under different conditions than the yield or conditions disclosed).
 (g) MULTIPLE INTERESTS IN 1 ACCOUNT- If more than 1 person holds an interest
 in any account--
 (1) the minimum and maximum amounts of liability under subsection (a)(2)(A)
 for any failure to comply with the requirements of this Act shall apply
 with respect to such account; and
 (2) the court shall determine the manner in which the amount of any such
 liability with respect to such account shall be distributed among such
 persons.
 (h) CONTINUING FAILURE TO DISCLOSE-
 (1) CERTAIN CONTINUING FAILURES TREATED AS 1 VIOLATION- Except as provided
 in paragraph (2), the continuing failure of any depository institution to
 disclose any particular term required to be disclosed under this Act with
 respect to a particular account shall be treated as a single violation for
 purposes of determining the amount of any liability of such institution
 under subsection (a) for such failure to disclose.
 (2) SUBSEQUENT FAILURE TO DISCLOSE- The continuing failure of any depository
 institution to disclose any particular term required to be disclosed
 under this Act with respect to a particular account after judgment has
 been rendered in favor of the account holder in connection with a prior
 failure to disclose such term shall be treated as a subsequent violation
 for purposes of determining liability under subsection (a).
 (3) COORDINATION WITH SECTION 111- This subsection shall not limit or
 otherwise affect the enforcement power under section 111 of any agency
 referred to in subsection (a) of such section.
SEC. 113. CREDIT UNIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- No regulation prescribed by the Board under this Act shall
 apply directly with respect to any depository institution described in
 clause (iv) of section 19(b)(1)(A) of the Federal Reserve Act.
 (b) REGULATIONS PRESCRIBED BY THE NCUA- Within 90 days of the effective
 date of any regulation prescribed by the Board under this Act, the National
 Credit Union Administration Board shall prescribe a regulation substantially
 similar to the regulation prescribed by the Board taking into account the
 unique nature of credit unions and the limitations under which they may
 pay dividends on member accounts.
SEC. 114. REVIEW OF DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS FOR OPEN-END MANAGEMENT INVESTMENT
COMPANIES.
 The Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-1 et seq.) is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 66. REVIEW OF DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS FOR YIELDS AND TERMS.
 `Not later than January 1, 1992, and annually thereafter, the Commission
 and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System shall consult with
 each other (and with any other agency they deem appropriate) to review
 the regulations prescribed under this Act and the Securities Act of 1933
 and the regulations prescribed under the Truth in Savings and Investments
 Act to assure that such regulations are providing consumers the ability
 to effectively compare savings and investments options.'.
SEC. 115. EFFECT ON STATE LAW.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The provisions of this Act do not supersede any provisions
 of the law of any State relating to the disclosure of yields payable or
 terms for accounts to the extent such State law requires the disclosure of
 such yields or terms for accounts, except to the extent that those laws
 are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, and then only to the
 extent of the inconsistency. The Board is authorized to determine whether
 such inconsistencies exist.
 (b) BALANCE ON WHICH INTEREST IS CALCULATED- The provisions of this Act shall
 supersede any provisions of any State law relating to the determination
 of the balance on which interest is calculated to the extent such State
 law specifies the manner for determining the balance on which interest
 is calculated.
SEC. 116. EFFECTIVE DATE OF REGULATIONS.
 The Board shall issue regulations to carry out this Act in final form not
 later than 9 months after the date of enactment of this Act. Such regulations
 shall take effect not later than 6 months after publication in final form.
TITLE II--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SEC. 201. EXPEDITED FUNDS AVAILABILITY ACT AMENDMENTS.
 (a) AVAILABILITY OF CASH DEPOSITS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 603(a) of the Expedited Funds Availability Act
 (12 U.S.C. 4002(a)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking `staffed by individuals employed by
 such institution';
 (B) in paragraphs (2)(B)(ii) and (2)(C)(ii), by striking `and is staffed
 by individuals employed by such institution';
 (C) in paragraph (2)(F)--
 (i) by striking clause (i); and
 (ii) by redesignating clauses (ii) and (iii) as clauses (i) and (ii),
 respectively; and
 (D) by adding at the end the following:
 `(3) In the case of a deposit subject to paragraph (1)(A) or (2) of
 this subsection that is deposited in a facility that is not staffed by
 individuals employed by such institution the Board may, by regulation or
 order, extend the time by which such funds must be available for withdrawal
 by one business day if the Board determines that, because of operational
 constraints due to the location of the facility, the receiving depository
 institution cannot reasonably be expected to make the funds available for
 withdrawal as provided in paragraph (1)(A) or (2).'.
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by paragraphs (1)(A), (1)(B), and
 (1)(C) shall take effect on April 1, 1992. Notwithstanding the provisions
 of section 605(a), section 605(c), or section 605(d) of the Expedited
 Funds Availability Act, a depository institution is not required to revise
 its disclosures or notices or to provide notice to its customers of the
 amendments made by paragraphs (1)(A), (1)(B), and (1)(C) until June 1, 1991.
 (b) SAFEGUARD EXCEPTIONS- Section 604 of the Expedited Funds Availability
 Act (12 U.S.C. 4003) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b), by inserting `(a)(2),' after `subsection';
 (2) in subsection (c)(1), by striking `(F)' after `subsections (a)(2)';
 (3) in subsection (d), by inserting `(a)(2),' after `subsections';
 (4) in subsection (f)(1)(A)(i), by striking `day' and inserting `time
 period within which'; and
 (5) in subsection (f), by adding at the end of paragraph (2) the following:
 `(D) In the case of a deposit to which subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2) applies,
 the depository institution may, for nonconsumer accounts and other classes
 of accounts, as defined by the Board, that generally have a large number
 of such deposits, provide notice at or before the time it first determines
 that the subsection applies.
 `(E) In the case of a deposit to which subsection (b)(3) applies, the
 depository institution may, subject to regulations of the Board, provide
 notice at the beginning of each time period it determines that the subsection
 applies. In addition to the requirements contained in paragraph (1)(A), the
 notice shall specify the time period for which the exception will apply.'.
 (c) LOSS ALLOCATION- Section 611(f) of the Expedited Funds Availability Act
 (21 U.S.C. 4010(f)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `or other entities participating in the payments system,
 including the States and political subdivisions thereof on which checks
 are drawn,' after `depository institutions'; and
 (2) by inserting `finance charges, reasonable attorneys' fees, and other
 expenses related to the check,' after `amount of the check giving rise to
 loss or liability,'.
 (d) MODIFICATION OF FUNDS AVAILABILITY SCHEDULE- Section 604 of the Expedited
 Funds Availability Act (12 U.S.C. 4003) is amended by striking subsection
 (e) and inserting the following:
 `(e) PREVENTION OF FRAUD LOSSES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Board may, by regulation or by order, modify either
 on a nationwide or narrower basis the funds availability schedule provided
 for in section 603 for not more than 75 days for any classification of
 checks if the Board finds--
 `(A) that a nationwide or narrower pattern of significantly increased losses
 at depository institutions exists that is attributable to the schedule; and
 `(B) that modification of the schedule is necessary to diminish the volume
 of such losses.
In calculating the 75-day period, there shall be excluded that number of
consecutive days in excess of 14 consecutive days during which either House
of Congress is not in session for a period of more than 14 consecutive days.
 `(2) REPORT TO CONGRESS- Not later than 10 days after modifying the funds
 availability schedule pursuant to paragraph (1), the Board shall transmit
 a written report to the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs
 of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing,
 and Urban Affairs of the Senate which shall specify--
 `(A) the action taken by the Board;
 `(B) the Board's specific reasons for modifying the schedule;
 `(C) evidence considered by the Board in making the determination under
 paragraph (1) with respect to such action;
 `(D) specific examples of the check-related fraud giving rise to such
 action; and
 `(E) any legislative or regulatory recommendations for preventing the need
 for future modifications of the schedule.
 `(3) NOTICE OF CHANGE IN POLICY- Notwithstanding the provisions of section
 605(c)(2), a depository institution shall send a written notice to consumer
 customers within 10 days following a change in policy resulting from the
 modification of the funds availability schedule pursuant to paragraph (1)
 with respect to when customers may withdraw funds deposited into consumer
 accounts, and shall promptly post a notice of the modification at all
 branches and automatic teller machines which accept deposits.'.
 (e) GAO REPORT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Not later than 180 days following the date of enactment
 of this subsection, the Comptroller General of the United States shall
 submit a written report to the Congress evaluating the payments system
 changes that were implemented pursuant to the Expedited Funds Availability
 Act and the implementation of the permanent funds availability schedule
 established by section 603(b) of such Act.
 (2) CONTENTS OF REPORT- The report required by paragraph (1) shall contain--
 (A) a description of any changes that have been made in the payments system
 to accelerate the collection or return of checks;
 (B) a description of any increases in check-related losses at depository
 institutions due to the implementation of section 603(b) of such Act;
 (C) an assessment of the risks of check-related losses at depository
 institutions due to the implementation of section 603(b) of such Act and
 an evaluation of the reasonableness of the permanent schedule availability
 deadlines;
 (D) recommendations for actions that can be taken by banks, clearinghouses,
 or the Federal Reserve to facilitate the check clearing process and reduce
 the risk of check-related losses, together with an estimate of the costs
 and effects on consumers and other users of the payments system associated
 with such changes; and
 (E) any other information or recommendations that the Comptroller General
 considers pertinent in effecting improvements to the payments system.
SEC. 202. HOME EQUITY LOAN CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT AMENDMENTS.
 (a) MARGIN DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENT- Section 127A(a)(2)(A) of the Truth
 in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1637a(a)(2)(A)) is amended by inserting after
 `rate will be computed' the following: `, including a statement of any
 margin that applies under the plan,'.
 (b) TERM CHANGED AFTER APPLICATION- Section 137(d) of the Truth in Lending
 Act (15 U.S.C. 1647(d)) is amended by inserting after the first sentence
 the following new sentence: `If a creditor discloses different margins tied
 to the creditor's criteria for determining the consumer's creditworthiness,
 the failure to offer the consumer the lowest margin disclosed in connection
 with creditworthiness constitutes a changed term.'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- Regulations implementing the amendments made by
 subsections (a) and (b) shall become effective on October 1, 1992.