[Congressional Bills 108th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 1219 Introduced in House (IH)]

108th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 1219

To limit frivolous medical malpractice lawsuits, to reform the medical 
 malpractice insurance business in order to reduce the cost of medical 
 malpractice insurance, to enhance patient access to medical care, and 
 for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 March 12, 2003

 Mr. Conyers (for himself and Mr. Dingell) introduced the following 
 bill; which was referred to the Committee on the Judiciary, and in 
 addition to the Committee on Energy and Commerce, for a period to be 
subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration 
 of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee 
 concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

To limit frivolous medical malpractice lawsuits, to reform the medical 
 malpractice insurance business in order to reduce the cost of medical 
 malpractice insurance, to enhance patient access to medical care, and 
 for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Medical 
Malpractice and Insurance Reform Act of 2003''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
 TITLE I--LIMITING FRIVOLOUS MEDICAL MALPRACTICE LAWSUITS

Sec. 101. Statute of limitations.
Sec. 102. Health care specialist affidavit.
Sec. 103. Sanctions for frivolous actions and pleadings.
Sec. 104. Mandatory mediation.
Sec. 105. Limitation on punitive damages.
Sec. 106. Reduction in premiums paid by physicians for medical 
 malpractice insurance coverage.
Sec. 107. Definitions.
Sec. 108. Applicability.
 TITLE II--MEDICAL MALPRACTICE INSURANCE REFORM

Sec. 201. Prohibition on anticompetitive activities by medical 
 malpractice insurers.
Sec. 202. Medical malpractice insurance price comparison.
 TITLE III--ENHANCING PATIENT ACCESS TO CARE THROUGH DIRECT ASSISTANCE

Sec. 301. Grants and contracts regarding health provider shortages.
Sec. 302. Health professional assignments to trauma centers through 
 national health service corps.
 TITLE IV--INDEPENDENT ADVISORY COMMISSION ON MEDICAL MALPRACTICE 
 INSURANCE

Sec. 401. Establishment.
Sec. 402. Duties.
Sec. 403. Report.
Sec. 404. Membership.
Sec. 405. Director and staff; experts and consultants.
Sec. 406. Powers.
Sec. 407. Authorization of appropriations.

 TITLE I--LIMITING FRIVOLOUS MEDICAL MALPRACTICE LAWSUITS

SEC. 101. STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.

 (a) In General.--A medical malpractice action shall be barred 
unless the complaint is filed within 3 years after the right of action 
accrues.
 (b) Accrual.--A right of action referred to in subsection (a) 
accrues upon the last to occur of the following dates:
 (1) The date of the injury.
 (2) The date on which the claimant discovers, or through 
 the use of reasonable diligence should have discovered, the 
 injury.
 (3) The date on which the claimant becomes 18 years of age.
 (c) Applicability.--This section shall apply to any injury 
occurring after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 102. HEALTH CARE SPECIALIST AFFIDAVIT.

 (a) Requiring Submission With Complaint.--No medical malpractice 
action may be brought by any individual unless, at the time the 
individual brings the action (except as provided in subsection (b)(1)), 
it is accompanied by the affidavit of a qualified specialist that 
includes the specialist's statement of belief that, based on a review 
of the available medical record and other relevant material, there is a 
reasonable and meritorious cause for the filing of the action against 
the defendant.
 (b) Extension in Certain Instances.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), subsection (a) 
 shall not apply with respect to an individual who brings a 
 medical malpractice action without submitting an affidavit 
 described in such subsection if, as of the time the individual 
 brings the action, the individual has been unable to obtain 
 adequate medical records or other information necessary to 
 prepare the affidavit.
 (2) Deadline for submission where extension applies.--In 
 the case of an individual who brings an action for which 
 paragraph (1) applies, the action shall be dismissed unless the 
 individual (or the individual's attorney) submits the affidavit 
 described in subsection (a) not later than 90 days after 
 obtaining the information described in such paragraph.
 (c) Qualified Specialist Defined.--In subsection (a), a ``qualified 
specialist'' means, with respect to a medical malpractice action, a 
health care professional who is reasonably believed by the individual 
bringing the action (or the individual's attorney)--
 (1) to be knowledgeable in the relevant issues involved in 
 the action;
 (2) to practice (or to have practiced) or to teach (or to 
 have taught) in the same area of health care or medicine that 
 is at issue in the action; and
 (3) in the case of an action against a physician, to be 
 board certified in a specialty relating to that area of 
 medicine.
 (d) Confidentiality of Specialist.--Upon a showing of good cause by 
a defendant, the court may ascertain the identity of a specialist 
referred to in subsection (a) while preserving confidentiality.

SEC. 103. SANCTIONS FOR FRIVOLOUS ACTIONS AND PLEADINGS.

 (a) Signature Required.--Every pleading, written motion, and other 
paper in any medical malpractice action shall be signed by at least 1 
attorney of record in the attorney's individual name, or, if the party 
is not represented by an attorney, shall be signed by the party. Each 
paper shall state the signer's address and telephone number, if any. An 
unsigned paper shall be stricken unless omission of the signature is 
corrected promptly after being called to the attention of the attorney 
or party.
 (b) Certificate of Merit.--(1) A medical malpractice action shall 
be dismissed unless the attorney or unrepresented party presenting the 
complaint certifies that, to the best of the person's knowledge, 
information, and belief, formed after an inquiry reasonable under the 
circumstances--
 (A) it is not being presented for any improper purpose, 
 such as to harass or to cause unnecessary delay or needless 
 increase in the cost of litigation;
 (B) the claims and other legal contentions therein are 
 warranted by existing law or by a nonfrivolous argument for the 
 extension, modification, or reversal of existing law or the 
 establishment of new law; and
 (C) the allegations and other factual contentions have 
 evidentiary support or, if specifically so identified, are 
 likely to have evidentiary support after a reasonable 
 opportunity for further investigation and discovery.
 (2) By presenting to the court (whether by signing, filing, 
submitting, or later advocating) a pleading, written motion, or other 
paper, an attorney or unrepresented party is certifying that to the 
best of the person's knowledge, information and belief, formed after an 
inquiry reasonable under the circumstances--
 (A) it is not being presented for any improper purpose, 
 such as to harass or to cause unnecessary delay or needless 
 increase in the cost of litigation;
 (B) the claims, defenses, and other legal contentions 
 therein are warranted by existing law or by a nonfrivolous 
 argument for the extension, modification, or reversal of 
 existing law or the establishment of new law; and
 (C) the allegations and other factual contentions have 
 evidentiary support or, if specifically so identified, are 
 reasonable based on a lack of information or belief.
 (c) Mandatory Sanctions.--
 (1) First violation.--If, after notice and a reasonable 
 opportunity to respond, a court, upon motion or upon its own 
 initiative, determines that subsection (b) has been violated, 
 the court shall find each attorney or party in violation in 
 contempt of court and shall require the payment of costs and 
 attorneys fees. The court may also impose additional 
 appropriate sanctions, such as striking the pleadings, 
 dismissing the suit, and sanctions plus interest, upon the 
 person in violation, or upon both such person and such person's 
 attorney or client (as the case may be).
 (2) Second violation.--If, after notice and a reasonable 
 opportunity to respond, a court, upon motion or upon its own 
 initiative, determines that subsection (b) has been violated 
 and that the attorney or party with respect to which the 
 determination was made has committed one previous violation of 
 subsection (b) before this or any other court, the court shall 
 find each such attorney or party in contempt of court and shall 
 require the payment of costs and attorneys fees, and require 
 such person in violation (or both such person and such person's 
 attorney or client (as the case may be)) to pay a monetary 
 fine. The court may also impose additional appropriate 
 sanctions, such as striking the pleadings, dismissing the suit 
 and sanctions plus interest, upon such person in violation, or 
 upon both such person and such person's attorney or client (as 
 the case may be).
 (3) Third violation.--If, after notice and a reasonable 
 opportunity to respond, a court, upon motion or upon its own 
 initiative, determines that subsection (b) has been violated 
 and that the attorney or party with respect to which the 
 determination was made has committed more than one previous 
 violation of subsection (b) before this or any other court, the 
 court shall find each such attorney or party in contempt of 
 court, refer each such attorney to one or more appropriate 
 State bar associations for disciplinary proceedings, require 
 the payment of costs and attorneys fees, and require such 
 person in violation (or both such person and such person's 
 attorney or client (as the case may be)) to pay a monetary 
 fine. The court may also impose additional appropriate 
 sanctions, such as striking the pleadings, dismissing the suit, 
 and sanctions plus interest, upon such person in violation, or 
 upon both such person and such person's attorney or client (as 
 the case may be).

SEC. 104. MANDATORY MEDIATION.

 (a) In General.--In any medical malpractice action, before such 
action comes to trial, mediation shall be required. Such mediation 
shall be conducted by one or more mediators who are selected by 
agreement of the parties or, if the parties do not agree, who are 
qualified under applicable State law and selected by the court.
 (b) Requirements.--Mediation under subsection (a) shall be made 
available by a State subject to the following requirements:
 (1) Participation in such mediation shall be in lieu of any 
 alternative dispute resolution method required by any other law 
 or by any contractual arrangement made by or on behalf of the 
 parties before the commencement of the action.
 (2) Each State shall disclose to residents of the State the 
 availability and procedures for resolution of consumer 
 grievances regarding the provision of (or failure to provide) 
 health care services, including such mediation.
 (3) Each State shall provide that such mediation may begin 
 before or after, at the option of the claimant, the 
 commencement of a medical malpractice action.
 (4) The Attorney General, in consultation with the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, shall, by regulation, 
 develop requirements with respect to such mediation to ensure 
 that it is carried out in a manner that--
 (A) is affordable for the parties involved;
 (B) encourages timely resolution of claims;
 (C) encourages the consistent and fair resolution 
 of claims; and
 (D) provides for reasonably convenient access to 
 dispute resolution.
 (c) Further Redress and Admissibility.--Any party dissatisfied with 
a determination reached with respect to a medical malpractice claim as 
a result of an alternative dispute resolution method applied under this 
section shall not be bound by such determination. The results of any 
alternative dispute resolution method applied under this section, and 
all statements, offers, and communications made during the application 
of such method, shall be inadmissible for purposes of adjudicating the 
claim.

SEC. 105. LIMITATION ON PUNITIVE DAMAGES.

 (a) In General.--Punitive damages may not be awarded in a medical 
malpractice action, except upon proof of--
 (1) gross negligence;
 (2) reckless indifference to life; or
 (3) an intentional act, such as voluntary intoxication or 
 impairment by a physician, sexual abuse or misconduct, assault 
 and battery, or falsification of records.
 (b) Allocation.--In such a case, the award of punitive damages 
shall be allocated 50 percent to the claimant and 50 percent to a 
trustee appointed by the court, to be used by such trustee in the 
manner specified in subsection (d). The court shall appoint the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services as such trustee.
 (c) Exception.--This section shall not apply with respect to an 
action if the applicable State law provides (or has been construed to 
provide) for damages in such an action that are only punitive or 
exemplary in nature.
 (d) Trust Fund.--
 (1) In general.--This subsection applies to amounts 
 allocated to the Secretary of Health and Human Services as 
 trustee under subsection (b).
 (2) Availability.--Such amounts shall be available for use 
 by the Secretary of Health and Human Services under paragraph 
 (3) and shall remain so available until expended.
 (3) Use.--
 (A) Subject to subparagraph (B), the Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services, acting through the Director 
 of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 
 shall use the amounts to which this subsection applies 
 for activities to reduce medical errors and improve 
 patient safety.
 (B) The Secretary of Health and Human Services may 
 not use any part of such amounts to establish or 
 maintain any system that requires mandatory reporting 
 of medical errors.
 (C) The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 shall promulgate regulations to establish programs and 
 procedures for carrying out this paragraph.
 (4) Investment.--
 (A) The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 shall invest the amounts to which this subsection 
 applies in such amounts as such Secretary determines 
 are not required to meet current withdrawals. Such 
 investments may be made only in interest-bearing 
 obligations of the United States. For such purpose, 
 such obligations may be acquired on original issue at 
 the issue price, or by purchase of outstanding 
 obligations at the market price.
 (B) Any obligation acquired by the Secretary in 
 such Secretary's capacity as trustee of such amounts 
 may be sold by the Secretary at the market price.

SEC. 106. REDUCTION IN PREMIUMS PAID BY PHYSICIANS FOR MEDICAL 
 MALPRACTICE INSURANCE COVERAGE.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, each medical malpractice liability insurance 
company shall--
 (1) develop a reasonable estimate of the annual amount of 
 financial savings that will be achieved by the company as a 
 result of this title;
 (2) develop and implement a plan to annually dedicate at 
 least 50 percent of such annual savings to reduce the amount of 
 premiums that the company charges physicians for medical 
 malpractice liability coverage; and
 (3) submit to the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 (hereinafter referred to in this section as the ``Secretary'') 
 a written certification that the company has complied with 
 paragraphs (1) and (2).
 (b) Reports.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act and annually thereafter, each medical malpractice 
liability insurance company shall submit to the Secretary a report that 
identifies the percentage by which the company has reduced medical 
malpractice coverage premiums relative to the date of the enactment of 
this Act.
 (c) Enforcement.--A medical malpractice liability insurance company 
that violates a provision of this section is liable to the United 
States for a civil penalty in an amount assessed by the Secretary, not 
to exceed $11,000 for each such violation. The provisions of paragraphs 
(3) through (5) of section 303(g) of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act apply to such a civil penalty to the same extent and in 
the same manner as such paragraphs apply to a civil penalty under such 
section.
 (d) Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term ``medical 
malpractice liability insurance company'' means an entity in the 
business of providing an insurance policy under which the entity makes 
payment in settlement (or partial settlement) of, or in satisfaction of 
a judgment in, a medical malpractice action or claim.

SEC. 107. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title, the following definitions apply:
 (1) Alternative dispute resolution method.--The term 
 ``alternative dispute resolution method'' means a method that 
 provides for the resolution of medical malpractice claims in a 
 manner other than through medical malpractice actions.
 (2) Claimant.--The term ``claimant'' means any person who 
 alleges a medical malpractice claim, and any person on whose 
 behalf such a claim is alleged, including the decedent in the 
 case of an action brought through or on behalf of an estate.
 (3) Health care professional.--The term ``health care 
 professional'' means any individual who provides health care 
 services in a State and who is required by the laws or 
 regulations of the State to be licensed or certified by the 
 State to provide such services in the State.
 (4) Health care provider.--The term ``health care 
 provider'' means any organization or institution that is 
 engaged in the delivery of health care services in a State and 
 that is required by the laws or regulations of the State to be 
 licensed or certified by the State to engage in the delivery of 
 such services in the State.
 (5) Injury.--The term ``injury'' means any illness, 
 disease, or other harm that is the subject of a medical 
 malpractice action or a medical malpractice claim.
 (6) Mandatory.--The term ``mandatory'' means required to be 
 used by the parties to attempt to resolve a medical malpractice 
 claim notwithstanding any other provision of an agreement, 
 State law, or Federal law.
 (7) Mediation.--The term ``mediation'' means a settlement 
 process coordinated by a neutral third party and without the 
 ultimate rendering of a formal opinion as to factual or legal 
 findings.
 (8) Medical malpractice action.--The term ``medical 
 malpractice action'' means an action in any State or Federal 
court against a physician, or other health professional, who is 
licensed in accordance with the requirements of the State involved 
that--
 (A) arises under the law of the State involved;
 (B) alleges the failure of such physician or other 
 health professional to adhere to the relevant 
 professional standard of care for the service and 
 specialty involved;
 (C) alleges death or injury proximately caused by 
 such failure; and
 (D) seeks monetary damages, whether compensatory or 
 punitive, as relief for such death or injury.
 (9) Medical malpractice claim.--The term ``medical 
 malpractice claim'' means a claim forming the basis of a 
 medical malpractice action.
 (10) State.--The term ``State'' means each of the several 
 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto 
 Rico, American Samoa, Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern 
 Mariana Islands, the Virgin Islands, and any other territory or 
 possession of the United States.

SEC. 108. APPLICABILITY.

 (a) In General.--Except as provided in section 104, this title 
shall apply with respect to any medical malpractice action brought on 
or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) Federal Court Jurisdiction Not Established on Federal Question 
Grounds.--Nothing in this title shall be construed to establish any 
jurisdiction in the district courts of the United States over medical 
malpractice actions on the basis of section 1331 or 1337 of title 28, 
United States Code.

 TITLE II--MEDICAL MALPRACTICE INSURANCE REFORM

SEC. 201. PROHIBITION ON ANTICOMPETITIVE ACTIVITIES BY MEDICAL 
 MALPRACTICE INSURERS.

 Notwithstanding any other provision of law, nothing in the Act of 
March 9, 1945 (15 U.S.C. 1011 et seq., commonly known as the 
``McCarran-Ferguson Act'') shall be construed to permit commercial 
insurers to engage in any form of price fixing, bid rigging, or market 
allocations in connection with the conduct of the business of providing 
medical malpractice insurance. This section does not apply to the 
information-gathering and rate-setting activities of any State 
commissions of insurance, or any other State regulatory body with 
authority to set insurance rates.

SEC. 202. MEDICAL MALPRACTICE INSURANCE PRICE COMPARISON.

 (a) Internet Site.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, and after consultation with the medical 
malpractice insurance industry, the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services shall establish an interactive internet site which shall 
enable any health care provider licensed in the United States to obtain 
a quote from each medical malpractice insurer licensed to write the 
type of coverage sought by the provider.
 (b) Online Forms.--
 (1) In general.--The internet site shall enable health care 
 providers to complete an online form that shall capture a 
 comprehensive set of information sufficient to generate a quote 
 for each insurer. The Secretary shall develop transmission 
 software components which allow such information to be 
 formatted for delivery to each medical malpractice insurer 
 based on the requirements of the computer system of the 
 insurer.
 (2) Protection of confidentiality of information 
 disclosed.--All information provided by a health care provider 
 for purposes of generating a quote through the internet site 
 shall be used only for that purpose.
 (c) Integration of Rating Criteria.--The Secretary shall integrate 
the rating criteria of each insurer into its online form after 
consultation with each insurer. The Secretary shall integrate such 
criteria using one of the following methods:
 (1) Developing a customized interface with the insurer's 
 own rating engine.
 (2) Accessing a third-party rating engine of the insurer's 
 choice.
 (3) Loading the carrier's rating information into a rating 
 engine operated by the Secretary.
 (4) Any other method agreed on between the Secretary and 
 the insurer.
 (d) Presentation of Quotes.--After a health care provider has 
answered all the questions appearing on the online form, such provider 
will be presented with quotes from each medical malpractice insurer 
licensed to write the coverage requested by the provider.
 (e) Accuracy of Quotes.--Quotes provided at the internet site shall 
at all times be accurate. Whenever any insurer changes its rates, such 
rate changes shall be implemented at the internet site by the 
Secretary, in consultation with the insurer, as soon as practicable, 
but in no event later than 10 days after such changes take effect. 
During any period during which an insurer has changed its rates but the 
Secretary has not yet implemented such changed rates on the internet 
site, quotes for that insurer shall not be obtainable at the internet 
site.
 (f) User-Friendly Features.--The Secretary shall design the 
internet site to incorporate user-friendly formats and self-help 
guidance materials, and shall develop a user-friendly internet user-
interface.
 (g) Contact Information.--The internet site shall also provide 
contact information, including address and telephone number, for each 
medical malpractice insurer for which a provider obtains a quote at the 
site.
 (h) Report.--Not later than December 31, 2004, the Secretary shall 
submit a report to the Congress on the development, implementation and 
effects of the internet site. Such report shall be based on--
 (1) the Secretary's consultation with health care 
 providers, medical malpractice insurers, State insurance 
 commissioners, and other interested parties; and
 (2) the Secretary's analysis of other information available 
 to the Secretary.
The report shall describe the Secretary's views concerning the extent 
to which this section has contributed to increasing the availability of 
medical malpractice insurance, and the effect this section has had on 
the cost of medical malpractice insurance.

 TITLE III--ENHANCING PATIENT ACCESS TO CARE THROUGH DIRECT ASSISTANCE

SEC. 301. GRANTS AND CONTRACTS REGARDING HEALTH PROVIDER SHORTAGES.

 Subpart I of part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 254b et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following 
section.

``SEC. 330L. HEALTH PROVIDER SHORTAGES RESULTING FROM COSTS OF MEDICAL 
 MALPRACTICE INSURANCE.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Administrator 
of the Health Resources and Services Administration, may make awards of 
grants or contracts in accordance with this section for geographic 
areas that, as determined by the Secretary, have a shortage of one or 
more types of health providers as a result of the providers making the 
decision to cease or curtail providing health services in the 
geographic areas because of the costs of maintaining malpractice 
insurance.
 ``(b) Recipients of Awards; Expenditure.--In accordance with such 
criteria as the Secretary may establish:
 ``(1) Awards under subsection (a) may be made to health 
 providers who agree to provide health services (or to continue 
 providing health services, as the case may be) in geographic 
 areas described in such subsection for the period during which 
 payments under the awards are made to the health providers.
 ``(2) Health providers who receive such awards may expend 
 the awards to assist the providers with the costs of 
 maintaining medical malpractice insurance for providing health 
 services in the geographic area for which the award is made.
 ``(c) Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `health 
providers' means physicians and other health professionals, and 
organizations that provide health services (including hospitals, 
clinics, and group practices), that meet applicable legal requirements 
to provide the health services involved.''.

SEC. 302. HEALTH PROFESSIONAL ASSIGNMENTS TO TRAUMA CENTERS THROUGH 
 NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE CORPS.

 Section 338H of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254q) is 
amended by adding at the end the following subsection:
 ``(d) Trauma Centers; Separate Authorization Regarding Shortages 
Resulting From Costs of Medical Malpractice Insurance.--
 ``(1) In general.--For the purpose of assigning Corps 
 surgeons, obstetricians/gynecologists, and other health 
 professionals to trauma centers in health professional shortage 
 areas described in paragraph (2), there are authorized to be 
 appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the 
 fiscal years 2003 through 2006. Such authorization is in 
 addition to any other authorization of appropriations that is 
 available for such purpose.
 ``(2) Description of areas.--A health professional shortage 
 area referred to in paragraph (1) is such an area in which, as 
 determined by the Secretary, a medical facility in the area has 
 lost its designation as a trauma center or as a particular 
 level of trauma center, or is at significant risk of losing 
 such a designation, as a result of one or more surgeons, 
 obstetricians/gynecologists, or other health professionals 
 making the decision to cease or curtail practicing at the 
 facility because of the costs of maintaining malpractice 
 insurance. For purposes of paragraph (1), (A) the term `trauma 
 center' includes such a medical facility; and (B) the Secretary 
 may adjust the criteria for designation as a health 
 professional shortage area to the extent necessary to make 
 funds appropriated under paragraph (1) available with respect 
 to any medical facility to ensure that the facility does not 
 lose any such designation as a result of such decisions by 
 health professionals.''.

 TITLE IV--INDEPENDENT ADVISORY COMMISSION ON MEDICAL MALPRACTICE 
 INSURANCE

SEC. 401. ESTABLISHMENT.

 (a) Findings.--The Congress finds as follows:
 (1) The sudden rise in medical malpractice premiums in 
 regions of the United States can threaten patient access to 
 doctors and other health providers.
 (2) Improving patient access to doctors and other health 
 providers is a national priority.
 (b) Establishment.--There is established a national commission to 
be known as the ``Independent Advisory Commission on Medical 
Malpractice Insurance'' (in this title referred to as the 
``Commission'').

SEC. 402. DUTIES.

 (a) In General.--The Commission shall evaluate the causes and scope 
of the recent and dramatic increases in medical malpractice insurance 
premiums and formulate additional proposals to reduce such medical 
malpractice premiums and make recommendations to avoid any dramatic 
increases in medical malpractice premiums in the future, in light of 
proposals for tort reform regarding medical malpractice.
 (b) Considerations.--In formulating proposals under this section, 
the Commission shall, at a minimum, consider the following:
 (1) Alternatives to the current medical malpractice tort 
 system that would ensure adequate compensation for patients, 
 preserve access to providers, and improve health care safety 
 and quality.
 (2) Modifications of, and alternatives to, the existing 
 State and Federal regulations and oversight that affect, or 
 could affect, medical malpractice lines of insurance.
 (3) State and Federal reforms that would distribute the 
 risk of medical malpractice more equitably among health care 
 providers.
 (4) State and Federal reforms that would more evenly 
 distribute the risk of medical malpractice across various 
 categories of providers.
 (5) The effect of a Federal medical malpractice reinsurance 
 program administered by the Department of Health and Human 
 Services.
 (6) The effect of a Federal medical malpractice insurance 
 program, administered by the Department of Health and Human 
 Services, to provide medical malpractice insurance based on 
 customary coverage terms and liability amounts in States where 
 such insurance is unavailable or is unavailable at reasonable 
 and customary terms.
 (7) Programs that would reduce medical errors and increase 
 patient safety, including new innovations in technology and 
 management.
 (8) The effect of State policies under which--
 (A) any health care professional licensed by the 
 State has standing in any State administrative 
 proceeding to challenge a proposed rate increase in 
 medical malpractice insurance; and
 (B) a provider of medical malpractice insurance in 
 the State may not implement a rate increase in such 
 insurance unless the provider, at minimum, first 
 submits to the appropriate State agency a description 
 of the rate increase and a substantial justification 
 for the rate increase.

SEC. 403. REPORT.

 (a) In General.--The Commission shall transmit to Congress--
 (1) an initial report not later than 180 days after the 
 date of the initial meeting of the Commission; and
 (2) a report not less than each year thereafter until the 
 Commission terminates.
 (b) Contents.--Each report transmitted under this section shall 
contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the 
Commission, including proposals for addressing the current dramatic 
increases in medical malpractice insurance rates and recommendations 
for avoiding any such dramatic increases in the future.
 (c) Voting and Reporting Requirements.--With respect to each 
proposal or recommendation contained in the report submitted under 
subsection (a), each member of the Commission shall vote on the 
proposal or recommendation, and the Commission shall include, by 
member, the results of that vote in the report.

SEC. 404. MEMBERSHIP.

 (a) Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 15 
members appointed by the Comptroller General of the United States.
 (b) Membership.--
 (1) In general.--The membership of the Commission shall 
 include individuals with national recognition for their 
 expertise in health finance and economics, actuarial science, 
 medical malpractice insurance, insurance regulation, health 
 care law, health care policy, health care access, allopathic 
 and osteopathic physicians, other providers of health care 
 services, patient advocacy, and other related fields, who 
 provide a mix of different professionals, broad geographic 
 representations, and a balance between urban and rural 
 representatives.
 (2) Inclusion.--The membership of the Commission shall 
 include the following:
 (A) Two individuals with expertise in health 
 finance and economics, including one with expertise in 
 consumer protections in the area of health finance and 
 economics.
 (B) Two individuals with expertise in medical 
 malpractice insurance, representing both commercial 
 insurance carriers and physician-sponsored insurance 
 carriers.
 (C) An individual with expertise in State insurance 
 regulation and State insurance markets.
 (D) An individual representing physicians.
 (E) An individual with expertise in issues 
 affecting hospitals, nursing homes, nurses, and other 
 providers.
 (F) Two individuals representing patient interests.
 (G) Two individuals with expertise in health care 
 law or health care policy.
 (H) An individual with expertise in representing 
 patients in malpractice lawsuits.
 (3) Majority.--The total number of individuals who are 
 directly involved with the provision or management of 
 malpractice insurance, representing physicians or other 
 providers, or representing physicians or other providers in 
 malpractice lawsuits, shall not constitute a majority of the 
 membership of the Commission.
 (4) Ethical disclosure.--The Comptroller General of the 
 United States shall establish a system for public disclosure by 
 members of the Commission of financial or other potential 
 conflicts of interest relating to such members.
 (c) Terms.--
 (1) In general.--The terms of the members of the Commission 
 shall be for 3 years except that the Comptroller General of the 
 United States shall designate staggered terms for the members 
 first appointed.
 (2) Vacancies.--Any member appointed to fill a vacancy 
 occurring before the expiration of the term for which the 
 member's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for 
 the remainder of that term. A member may serve after the 
 expiration of that member's term until a successor has taken 
 office. A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the 
 manner in which the original appointment was made.
 (3) Compensation.--Members of the Commission shall be 
 compensated in accordance with section 1805(c)(4) of the Social 
 Security Act.
 (4) Chairman; vice chairman.--The Comptroller General of 
 the United States shall designate at the time of appointment a 
 member of the Commission as Chairman and a member as Vice 
 Chairman. In the case of vacancy of the Chairmanship or Vice 
 Chairmanship, the Comptroller General may designate another 
 member for the remainder of that member's term.
 (5) Meetings.--
 (A) In general.--The Commission shall meet at the 
 call of the Chairman.
 (B) Initial meeting.--The Commission shall hold an 
 initial meeting not later than the date that is 1 year 
after the date of the enactment of this title, or the date that is 3 
months after the appointment of all the members of the Commission, 
whichever occurs earlier.

SEC. 405. DIRECTOR AND STAFF; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.

 Subject to such review as the Comptroller General of the United 
States deems necessary to assure the efficient administration of the 
Commission, the Commission may--
 (1) employ and fix the compensation of an Executive 
 Director (subject to the approval of the Comptroller General) 
 and such other personnel as may be necessary to carry out its 
 duties (without regard to the provisions of title 5, United 
 States Code, governing appointments in the competitive 
 service);
 (2) seek such assistance and support as may be required in 
 the performance of its duties from appropriate Federal 
 departments and agencies;
 (3) enter into contracts or make other arrangements, as may 
 be necessary for the conduct of the work of the Commission 
 (without regard to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 
 U.S.C. 5));
 (4) make advance, progress, and other payments which relate 
 to the work of the Commission;
 (5) provide transportation and subsistence for persons 
 serving without compensation; and
 (6) prescribe such rules and regulations as it deems 
 necessary with respect to the internal organization and 
 operation of the Commission.

SEC. 406. POWERS.

 (a) Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly 
from any department or agency of the United States information 
necessary to enable it to carry out this section. Upon request of the 
Chairman, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that 
information to the Commission on an agreed upon schedule.
 (b) Data Collection.--In order to carry out its functions, the 
Commission shall--
 (1) utilize existing information, both published and 
 unpublished, where possible, collected and assessed either by 
 its own staff or under other arrangements made in accordance 
 with this section;
 (2) carry out, or award grants or contracts for, original 
 research and experimentation, where existing information is 
 inadequate; and
 (3) adopt procedures allowing any interested party to 
 submit information for the Commission's use in making reports 
 and recommendations.
 (c) Access of General Accounting Office to Information.--The 
Comptroller General of the United States shall have unrestricted access 
to all deliberations, records, and nonproprietary data of the 
Commission, immediately upon request.
 (d) Periodic Audit.--The Commission shall be subject to periodic 
audit by the Comptroller General of the United States.

SEC. 407. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 (a) In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums 
as may be necessary to carry out this title for each of fiscal years 
2004 through 2008.
 (b) Requests for Appropriations.--The Commission shall submit 
requests for appropriations in the same manner as the Comptroller 
General of the United States submits requests for appropriations, but 
amounts appropriated for the Commission shall be separate from amounts 
appropriated for the Comptroller General.
 <all>