[Congressional Bills 116th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 2968 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

<DOC>

116th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 S. 2968

 To provide consumers with foundational data privacy rights, create 
 strong oversight mechanisms, and establish meaningful enforcement.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 December 3, 2019

 Ms. Cantwell (for herself, Mr. Schatz, Ms. Klobuchar, and Mr. Markey) 
introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the 
 Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To provide consumers with foundational data privacy rights, create 
 strong oversight mechanisms, and establish meaningful enforcement.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Consumer Online 
Privacy Rights Act''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Definitions.
Sec. 3. Effective date.
 TITLE I--DATA PRIVACY RIGHTS

Sec. 101. Duty of loyalty.
Sec. 102. Right to access and transparency.
Sec. 103. Right to delete.
Sec. 104. Right to correct inaccuracies.
Sec. 105. Right to controls.
Sec. 106. Right to data minimization.
Sec. 107. Right to data security.
Sec. 108. Civil rights.
Sec. 109. Prohibition on waiver of rights.
Sec. 110. Limitations and applicability.
 TITLE II--OVERSIGHT AND RESPONSIBILITY

Sec. 201. Executive responsibility.
Sec. 202. Privacy and data security officers; comprehensive privacy and 
 data security programs; risk assessments 
 and compliance.
Sec. 203. Service providers and third parties.
Sec. 204. Whistleblower protections.
Sec. 205. Digital content forgeries.
 TITLE III--MISCELLANEOUS

Sec. 301. Enforcement, civil penalties, and applicability.
Sec. 302. Relationship to Federal and State laws.
Sec. 303. Severability.
Sec. 304. Authorization of appropriations.

SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act:
 (1) Affirmative express consent.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``affirmative express 
 consent'' means an affirmative act by an individual 
 that clearly communicates the individual's 
 authorization for an act or practice, in response to a 
 specific request that meets the requirements of 
 subparagraph (B).
 (B) Request requirements.--The requirements of this 
 subparagraph with respect to a request from a covered 
 entity to an individual are the following:
 (i) The request is provided to the 
 individual in a standalone disclosure.
 (ii) The request includes a description of 
 each act or practice for which the individual's 
 consent is sought and--
 (I) clearly distinguishes between 
 an act or practice which is necessary 
 to fulfill a request of the individual 
 and an act or practice which is for 
 another purpose; and
 (II) is written in easy-to-
 understand language and includes a 
 prominent heading that would enable a 
 reasonable individual to identify and 
 understand the act or practice.
 (iii) The request clearly explains the 
 individual's applicable rights related to 
 consent.
 (C) Express consent required.--An entity shall not 
 infer that an individual has provided affirmative 
 express consent to an act or practice from the inaction 
 of the individual or the individual's continued use of 
 a service or product provided by the entity.
 (2) Algorithmic decision-making.--The term ``algorithmic 
 decision-making'' means a computational process, including one 
 derived from machine learning, statistics, or other data 
 processing or artificial intelligence techniques that makes a 
 decision or facilitates human decision-making with respect to 
 covered data.
 (3) Biometric information.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``biometric information'' 
 means any covered data generated from the measurement 
 or specific technological processing of an individual's 
 biological, physical, or physiological characteristics, 
 including--
 (i) fingerprints;
 (ii) voice prints;
 (iii) iris or retina scans;
 (iv) facial scans or templates;
 (v) deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) 
 information; and
 (vi) gait.
 (B) Exclusions.--Such term does not include writing 
 samples, written signatures, photographs, voice 
 recordings, demographic data, or physical 
 characteristics such as height, weight, hair color, or 
 eye color, provided that such data is not used for the 
 purpose of identifying an individual's unique 
 biological, physical, or physiological characteristics.
 (4) Collect; collection.--The terms ``collect'' and 
 ``collection'' mean buying, renting, gathering, obtaining, 
 receiving, accessing, or otherwise acquiring covered data by 
 any means, including by passively or actively observing the 
 individual's behavior.
 (5) Common branding.--The term ``common branding'' means a 
 shared name, servicemark, or trademark.
 (6) Control.--The term ``control'' means, with respect to 
 an entity--
 (A) ownership of, or the power to vote, more than 
 50 percent of the outstanding shares of any class of 
 voting security of the entity;
 (B) control in any manner over the election of a 
 majority of the directors of the entity (or of 
 individuals exercising similar functions); or
 (C) the power to exercise a controlling influence 
 over the management of the entity.
 (7) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Federal 
 Trade Commission.
 (8) Covered data.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``covered data'' means 
 information that identifies, or is linked or reasonably 
 linkable to an individual or a consumer device, 
 including derived data.
 (B) Exclusions.--Such term does not include--
 (i) de-identified data;
 (ii) employee data; and
 (iii) public records.
 (9) Covered entity.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``covered entity'' means 
 any entity or person that--
 (i) is subject to the Federal Trade 
 Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.); and
 (ii) processes or transfers covered data.
 (B) Inclusion of commonly controlled and commonly 
 branded entities.--Such term includes any entity or 
 person that controls, is controlled by, is under common 
 control with, or shares common branding with a covered 
 entity.
 (C) Exclusion of small business.--Such term does 
 not include a small business.
 (10) De-identified data.--Term ``de-identified data'' means 
 information that cannot reasonably be used to infer information 
 about, or otherwise be linked to, an individual, a household, 
 or a device used by an individual or household, provided that 
 the entity--
 (A) takes reasonable measures to ensure that the 
 information cannot be reidentified, or associated with, 
 an individual, a household, or a device used by an 
 individual or household;
 (B) publicly commits in a conspicuous manner--
 (i) to process and transfer the information 
 in a de-identified form; and
 (ii) not to attempt to reidentify or 
 associate the information with any individual, 
 household, or device used by an individual or 
 household; and
 (C) contractually obligates any person or entity 
 that receives the information from the covered entity 
 to comply with all of the provisions of this paragraph.
 (11) Derived data.--The term ``derived data'' means covered 
 data that is created by the derivation of information, data, 
 assumptions, or conclusions from facts, evidence, or another 
 source of information or data about an individual, household, 
 or device used by an individual or household.
 (12) Employee data.--The term ``employee data'' means--
 (A) covered data that is collected by a covered 
 entity or the covered entity's service provider about 
 an individual in the course of the individual's 
 employment or application for employment (including on 
 a contract or temporary basis) provided that such data 
 is retained or processed by the covered entity or the 
 covered entity's service provider solely for purposes 
 necessary for the individual's employment or 
 application for employment;
 (B) covered data that is collected by a covered 
 entity or the covered entity's service provider that is 
 emergency contact information for an individual who is 
 an employee, contractor, or job applicant of the 
 covered entity provided that such data is retained or 
 processed by the covered entity or the covered entity's 
 service provider solely for the purpose of having an 
 emergency contact for such individual on file; and
 (C) covered data that is collected by a covered 
 entity or the covered entity's service provider about 
 an individual (or a relative of an individual) who is 
 an employee or former employee of the covered entity 
 for the purpose of administering benefits to which such 
 individual or relative is entitled on the basis of the 
 individual's employment with the covered entity, 
 provided that such data is retained or processed by the 
 covered entity or the covered entity's service provider 
 solely for the purpose of administering such benefits.
 (13) Executive agency.--The term ``Executive agency'' has 
 the meaning given such term in section 105 of title 5, United 
 States Code.
 (14) Individual.--The term ``individual'' means a natural 
 person residing in the United States, however identified, 
 including by any unique identifier.
 (15) Large data holder.--The term ``large data holder'' 
 means a covered entity that, in the most recent calendar year--
 (A) processed or transferred the covered data of 
 more than 5,000,000 individuals, devices used by 
 individuals or households, or households; or
 (B) processed or transferred the sensitive covered 
 data of more than 100,000 individuals, devices used by 
 individuals or households, or households.
 (16) Process.--The term ``process'' means any operation or 
 set of operations performed on covered data including 
 collection, analysis, organization, structuring, retaining, 
 using, or otherwise handling covered data.
 (17) Processing purpose.--The term ``processing purpose'' 
 means an adequately specific and granular reason for which a 
 covered entity processes covered data that clearly describes 
 the processing activity.
 (18) Publicly available information.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``publicly available 
 information'' means--
 (i) information that a covered entity has a 
 reasonable basis to believe is lawfully made 
 available to the general public from widely 
 distributed media; and
 (ii) information that is directly and 
 voluntarily disclosed to the general public by 
 the individual to whom the information relates.
 (B) Limitation.--Such term does not include--
 (i) information derived from publicly 
 available information;
 (ii) biometric information; or
 (iii) nonpublicly available information 
 that has been combined with publicly available 
 information.
 (19) Public records.--The term ``public records'' means 
 information that is lawfully made available from Federal, 
 State, or local government records provided that the covered 
 entity processes and transfers such information in accordance 
 with any restrictions or terms of use placed on the information 
 by the relevant government entity.
 (20) Sensitive covered data.--The term ``sensitive covered 
 data'' means the following forms of covered data:
 (A) A government-issued identifier, such as a 
 Social Security number, passport number, or driver's 
 license number.
 (B) Any information that describes or reveals the 
 past, present, or future physical health, mental 
 health, disability, or diagnosis of an individual.
 (C) A financial account number, debit card number, 
 credit card number, or any required security or access 
 code, password, or credentials allowing access to any 
 such account.
 (D) Biometric information.
 (E) Precise geolocation information that reveals 
 the past or present actual physical location of an 
 individual or device.
 (F) The content or metadata of an individual's 
 private communications or the identity of the parties 
 to such communications unless the covered entity is an 
 intended recipient of the communication.
 (G) An email address, telephone number, or account 
 log-in credentials.
 (H) Information revealing an individual's race, 
 ethnicity, national origin, religion, or union 
 membership in a manner inconsistent with the 
 individual's reasonable expectation regarding 
 disclosure of such information.
 (I) Information revealing the sexual orientation or 
 sexual behavior of an individual in a manner 
 inconsistent with the individual's reasonable 
 expectation regarding disclosure of such information.
 (J) Information revealing online activities over 
 time and across third party websites or online 
 services.
 (K) Calendar information, address book information, 
 phone or text logs, photos, or videos maintained on an 
 individual's device.
 (L) A photograph, film, video recording, or other 
 similar medium that shows the naked or undergarment-
 clad private area of an individual.
 (M) Any other covered data processed or transferred 
 for the purpose of identifying the above data types.
 (N) Any other covered data that the Commission 
 determines to be sensitive covered data through a 
 rulemaking pursuant to section 553 of title 5, United 
 States Code.
 (21) Service provider.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``service provider'' 
 means a covered entity that processes or transfers 
 covered data in the course of performing a service or 
 function on behalf of, and at the direction of, another 
 covered entity, but only to the extent that such 
 processing or transferral--
 (i) relates to the performance of such 
 service or function; or
 (ii) is necessary to comply with a legal 
 obligation or to establish, exercise, or defend 
 legal claims.
 (B) Exclusion.--Such term does not include a 
 covered entity that processes or transfers the covered 
 data outside of the direct relationship between the 
 service provider and the covered entity.
 (22) Service provider data.--The term ``service provider 
 data'' means covered data that is collected by or has been 
 transferred to a service provider by a covered entity for the 
 purpose of allowing the service provider to perform a service 
 or function on behalf of, and at the direction of, such covered 
 entity.
 (23) Small business.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``small business'' means 
 an entity that can establish that, with respect to the 
 3 preceding calendar years (or for the period during 
 which the entity has been in existence if, as of such 
 date, such period is less than 3 years) the entity does 
 not--
 (i) maintain annual average gross revenue 
 in excess of $25,000,000;
 (ii) annually process the covered data of 
 an average of 100,000 or more individuals, 
 households, or devices used by individuals or 
 households; and
 (iii) derive 50 percent or more of its 
 annual revenue from transferring individuals' 
 covered data.
 (B) Common control; common branding.--For purposes 
 of subparagraph (A), the annual average gross revenue, 
 data processing volume, and percentage of annual 
 revenue of an entity shall include the revenue and 
 processing activities of any person that controls, is 
 controlled by, is under common control with, or shares 
 common branding with such entity.
 (24) Third party.--The term ``third party''--
 (A) means any person or entity that--
 (i) processes or transfers third party 
 data; and
 (ii) is not a service provider with respect 
 to such data; and
 (B) does not include a person or entity that 
 collects covered data from another entity if the two 
 entities are related by common ownership or corporate 
 control and share common branding.
 (25) Third party data.--The term ``third party data'' means 
 covered data that is transferred to a third party by a covered 
 entity.
 (26) Transfer.--The term ``transfer'' means to disclose, 
 release, share, disseminate, make available, sell, license, or 
 otherwise communicate covered data by any means to a service 
 provider or third party--
 (A) in exchange for consideration; or
 (B) for a commercial purpose.
 (27) Unique identifier.--The term ``unique identifier'' 
 means an identifier that is reasonably linkable to an 
 individual, household, or device used by an individual or 
 household, including a device identifier, an Internet Protocol 
 address, cookies, beacons, pixel tags, mobile ad identifiers, 
 or similar technology, customer number, unique pseudonym, or 
 user alias, telephone numbers, or other forms of persistent or 
 probabilistic identifiers that can be used to identify a 
 particular individual, a household, or a device.
 (28) Widely distributed media.--The term ``widely 
 distributed media'' means information that is available to the 
 general public, including information from a telephone book or 
 online directory, a television, internet, or radio program, the 
 news media, or an internet site that is available to the 
 general public on an unrestricted basis, but does not include 
 an obscene visual depiction as defined in section 1460 of title 
 18, United States Code.

SEC. 3. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 This Act shall take effect on the date that is 180 days after the 
date of enactment of this Act.

 TITLE I--DATA PRIVACY RIGHTS

SEC. 101. DUTY OF LOYALTY.

 (a) In General.--A covered entity shall not--
 (1) engage in a deceptive data practice or a harmful data 
 practice; or
 (2) process or transfer covered data in a manner that 
 violates any provision of this Act.
 (b) Definitions.--
 (1) Deceptive data practice.--The term ``deceptive data 
 practice'' means an act or practice involving the processing or 
 transfer of covered data in a manner that constitutes a 
 deceptive act or practice in violation of section 5(a)(1) of 
 the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45(a)(1)).
 (2) Harmful data practice.--The term ``harmful data 
 practice'' means the processing or transfer of covered data in 
 a manner that causes or is likely to cause any of the 
 following:
 (A) Financial, physical, or reputational injury to 
 an individual.
 (B) Physical or other offensive intrusion upon the 
 solitude or seclusion of an individual or the 
 individual's private affairs or concerns, where such 
 intrusion would be offensive to a reasonable person.
 (C) Other substantial injury to an individual.

SEC. 102. RIGHT TO ACCESS AND TRANSPARENCY.

 (a) Right To Access.--A covered entity, upon the verified request 
of an individual, shall provide the individual, in a human-readable 
format that a reasonable individual can understand, with--
 (1) a copy or accurate representation of the covered data 
 of the individual processed or transferred by the covered 
 entity; and
 (2) the name of any third party to whom covered data of the 
 individual has been transferred by the covered entity and a 
 description of the purpose for which the entity transferred 
 such data to such third party.
 (b) Right to Transparency.--A covered entity shall make publicly 
and persistently available, in a conspicuous and readily accessible 
manner, a privacy policy that provides a detailed and accurate 
representation of the entity's data processing and data transfer 
activities. Such privacy policy shall include, at a minimum--
 (1) the identity and the contact information of the covered 
 entity, including the contact information for the covered 
 entity's representative for privacy and data security 
 inquiries;
 (2) each category of data the covered entity collects and 
 the processing purposes for which such data is collected;
 (3) whether the covered entity transfers covered data and, 
 if so--
 (A) each category of service provider and third 
 party to which the covered entity transfers covered 
 data and the purposes for which such data is 
 transferred to such categories; and
 (B) the identity of each third party to which the 
 covered entity transfers covered data and the purposes 
 for which such data is transferred to such third party, 
 except for transfers to governmental entities pursuant 
 to a court order or law that prohibits the covered 
 entity from disclosing such transfer;
 (4) how long covered data processed by the covered entity 
 will be retained by the covered entity and a description of the 
 covered entity's data minimization policies;
 (5) how individuals can exercise the individual rights 
 described in this title;
 (6) a description of the covered entity's data security 
 policies; and
 (7) the effective date of the privacy policy.
 (c) Languages.--A covered entity shall make the privacy policy 
required under this section available to the public in all of the 
languages in which the covered entity provides a product or service or 
carries out any other activities to which the privacy policy relates.
 (d) Right To Consent to Material Changes.--A covered entity shall 
not make a material change to its privacy policy or practices with 
respect to previously collected covered data that would weaken the 
privacy protections applicable to such data without first obtaining 
prior affirmative express consent from the individuals affected. The 
covered entity shall provide direct notification, where possible, 
regarding material changes to affected individuals, taking into account 
available technology and the nature of the relationship.

SEC. 103. RIGHT TO DELETE.

 A covered entity, upon the verified request of an individual, 
shall--
 (1) delete, or allow the individual to delete, any 
 information in the covered data of the individual that is 
 processed by the covered entity; and
 (2) inform any service provider or third party to which the 
 covered entity transferred such data of the individual's 
 deletion request.

SEC. 104. RIGHT TO CORRECT INACCURACIES.

 A covered entity, upon the verified request of an individual, 
shall--
 (1) correct, or allow the individual to correct, inaccurate 
 or incomplete information in the covered data of the individual 
 that is processed by the covered entity; and
 (2) inform any service provider or third party to which the 
 covered entity transferred such data of the corrected 
 information.

SEC. 105. RIGHT TO CONTROLS.

 (a) Right to Data Portability.--A covered entity, upon the verified 
request of an individual, shall export the individual's covered data, 
except for derived data, without licensing restrictions--
 (1) in a human-readable format that allows the individual 
 to understand such covered data of the individual; and
 (2) in a structured, interoperable, and machine-readable 
 format that includes all covered data or other information that 
 the covered entity collected to the extent feasible.
 (b) Right To Opt Out of Transfers.--
 (1) In general.--A covered entity--
 (A) shall not transfer an individual's covered data 
 to a third party if the individual objects to the 
 transfer; and
 (B) shall allow an individual to object to the 
 covered entity transferring covered data of the 
 individual to a third party through a process 
 established under the rule issued by the Commission 
 pursuant to paragraph (2).
 (2) Rulemaking.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 18 months after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall 
 issue a rule under section 553 of title 5, United 
 States Code, establishing one or more acceptable 
 processes for covered entities to follow in allowing 
 individuals to opt out of transfers of covered data.
 (B) Requirements.--The processes established by the 
 Commission pursuant to this subparagraph shall--
 (i) be centralized, to the extent feasible, 
 to minimize the number of opt-out designations 
 of a similar type that a consumer must make;
 (ii) include clear and conspicuous opt-out 
 notices and consumer friendly mechanisms to 
 allow an individual to opt out of transfers of 
 covered data;
 (iii) allow an individual that objects to a 
 transfer of covered data to view the status of 
 such objection;
 (iv) allow an individual that objects to a 
 transfer of covered data to change the status 
 of such objection;
 (v) be privacy protective; and
 (vi) be informed by the Commission's 
 experience developing and implementing the 
 National Do Not Call Registry.
 (c) Sensitive Data.--A covered entity--
 (1) shall not process the sensitive covered data of an 
 individual without the individual's prior, affirmative express 
 consent;
 (2) shall not transfer the sensitive covered data of an 
 individual without the individual's prior, affirmative express 
 consent;
 (3) shall provide an individual with a consumer-friendly 
 means to withdraw affirmative express consent to process the 
 sensitive covered data of the individual; and
 (4) is not required to obtain prior, affirmative express 
 consent to process or transfer publicly available information.

SEC. 106. RIGHT TO DATA MINIMIZATION.

 A covered entity shall not process or transfer covered data beyond 
what is reasonably necessary, proportionate, and limited--
 (1) to carry out the specific processing purposes and 
 transfers described in the privacy policy made available by the 
 covered entity as required under section 102;
 (2) to carry out a specific processing purpose or transfer 
 for which the covered entity has obtained affirmative express 
 consent; or
 (3) for a purpose specifically permitted under subsection 
 (d) of section 110.
Covered data processing and transfers consistent with this section 
shall not supersede any other provision of this Act.

SEC. 107. RIGHT TO DATA SECURITY.

 (a) In General.--A covered entity shall establish, implement, and 
maintain reasonable data security practices to protect the 
confidentiality, integrity, and accessibility of covered data. Such 
data security practices shall be appropriate to the volume and nature 
of the covered data at issue.
 (b) Specific Requirements.--Data security practices required under 
subsection (a) shall include, at a minimum, the following:
 (1) Assess vulnerabilities.--Identifying and assessing any 
 reasonably foreseeable risks to, and vulnerabilities in, each 
 system maintained by the covered entity that processes or 
 transfers covered data, including unauthorized access to or 
 risks to covered data, human vulnerabilities, access rights, 
 and use of service providers. Such activities shall include a 
 plan to receive and respond to unsolicited reports of 
 vulnerabilities by entities and individuals.
 (2) Preventive and correction action.--Taking preventive 
 and corrective action to mitigate any risks or vulnerabilities 
 to covered data identified by the covered entity, which may 
 include implementing administrative, technical, or physical 
 safeguards or changes to data security practices or the 
 architecture, installation, or implementation of network or 
 operating software.
 (3) Information retention and disposal.--Disposing covered 
 data that is required to be deleted or is no longer necessary 
 for the purpose for which the data was collected unless an 
 individual has provided affirmative express consent to such 
 retention. Such process shall include destroying, permanently 
 erasing, or otherwise modifying the covered data to make such 
 data permanently unreadable or indecipherable and unrecoverable 
 and data hygiene practices to ensure ongoing compliance with 
 this subsection.
 (4) Training.--Training all employees with access to 
 covered data on how to safeguard covered data and protect 
 individual privacy and updating that training as necessary.
 (c) Training Guidelines.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Commission, in conjunction with the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology, shall publish guidance for 
covered entities on how to provide effective data security and privacy 
training as described in subsection (b)(4).

SEC. 108. CIVIL RIGHTS.

 (a) Protections.--
 (1) In general.--A covered entity shall not process or 
 transfer covered data on the basis of an individual's or class 
 of individuals' actual or perceived race, color, ethnicity, 
 religion, national origin, sex, gender, gender identity, sexual 
 orientation, familial status, biometric information, lawful 
 source of income, or disability--
 (A) for the purpose of advertising, marketing, 
 soliciting, offering, selling, leasing, licensing, 
 renting, or otherwise commercially contracting for a 
 housing, employment, credit, or education opportunity, 
 in a manner that unlawfully discriminates against or 
 otherwise makes the opportunity unavailable to the 
 individual or class of individuals; or
 (B) in a manner that unlawfully segregates, 
 discriminates against, or otherwise makes unavailable 
 to the individual or class of individuals the goods, 
 services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or 
 accommodations of any place of public accommodation.
 (2) Exception.--Nothing in this section shall limit a 
 covered entity from processing covered data for legitimate 
 internal testing for the purpose of preventing unlawful 
 discrimination or otherwise determining the extent or 
 effectiveness of the covered entity's compliance with this Act.
 (3) FTC advisory opinions.--A covered entity may request 
 advice from the Commission concerning the covered entity's 
 potential compliance with this subsection, in accordance with 
 the Commission's rules of practice on advisory opinions.
 (b) Algorithmic Decision-Making Impact Assessment.--
 (1) Impact assessment.--Notwithstanding any other provision 
 of law, a covered entity engaged in algorithmic decision-
 making, or in assisting others in algorithmic decision-making 
 for the purpose of processing or transferring covered data, 
 solely or in part to make or facilitate advertising for 
 housing, education, employment or credit opportunities, or an 
 eligibility determination for housing, education, employment or 
 credit opportunities or determining access to, or restrictions 
 on the use of, any place of public accommodation, must annually 
 conduct an impact assessment of such algorithmic decision-
 making that--
 (A) describes and evaluates the development of the 
 covered entity's algorithmic decision-making processes 
 including the design and training data used to develop 
 the algorithmic decision-making process, how the 
 algorithmic decision-making process was tested for 
 accuracy, fairness, bias and discrimination; and
 (B) assesses whether the algorithmic decision-
 making system produces discriminatory results on the 
 basis of an individual's or class of individuals' 
 actual or perceived race, color, ethnicity, religion, 
 national origin, sex, gender, gender identity, sexual 
 orientation, familial status, biometric information, 
 lawful source of income, or disability.
 (2) External, independent auditor or researcher.--A covered 
 entity may utilize an external, independent auditor or 
 researcher to conduct such assessments.
 (3) Availability.--The covered entity--
 (A) shall make the impact assessment available to 
 the Commission upon request; and
 (B) may make the impact assessment public.
 A covered entity may redact and segregate trade secrets as 
 defined by section 1839 of title 18, United States Code, from 
 public disclosure under this subsection.
 (4) Study.--Not later than 3 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Commission shall publish a report 
 containing the results of a study, using the Commission's 
 authority under section 6(b) of the Federal Trade Commission 
 Act (15 U.S.C. 46(b)), examining the use of algorithms for the 
 purposes described in this subsection. Not later than 3 years 
 after the publication of the initial report, and as necessary 
 thereafter, the Commission shall publish a new and updated 
 version of such report.

SEC. 109. PROHIBITION ON WAIVER OF RIGHTS.

 A covered entity shall not condition the provision of a service or 
product to an individual on the individual's agreement to waive privacy 
rights guaranteed by--
 (1) sections 101, 105(a), and 106 through 109 of this Act; 
 and
 (2) sections 102 through 104, and 105(b) and (c) of this 
 Act, except in the case where--
 (A) there exists a direct relationship between the 
 individual and the covered entity initiated by the 
 individual;
 (B) the provision of the service or product 
 requested by the individual requires the processing or 
 transferring of the specific covered data of the 
 individual and the covered data is strictly necessary 
 to provide the service or product; and
 (C) an individual provides affirmative express 
 consent to such specific limitations.

SEC. 110. LIMITATIONS AND APPLICABILITY.

 (a) Verification of Requests.--
 (1) In general.--A covered entity shall not permit an 
 individual to exercise a right described in sections 102 
 through 105(a) if--
 (A) the covered entity cannot reasonably verify 
 that the individual making the request to exercise the 
 right is the individual whose covered data is the 
 subject of the request or an individual authorized to 
 make such a request on the individual's behalf; or
 (B) the covered entity reasonably believes that the 
 request is made to interfere with a contract between 
 the covered entity and another individual.
 (2) Additional information.--If a covered entity cannot 
 reasonably verify that a request to exercise a right described 
 in sections 102 through 105(a) is made by the individual whose 
 covered data is the subject of the request (or an individual 
 authorized to make such a request on the individual's behalf), 
 the covered entity shall request the provision of additional 
 information necessary for the sole purpose of verifying the 
 identity of the individual and shall not process or transfer 
 such additional information for any other purpose.
 (3) Burden minimization.--A covered entity shall minimize 
 the inconvenience to consumers relating to the verification or 
 authentication of requests.
 (b) Cost of Access.--A covered entity shall carry out the rights 
described in sections 102 through 105(a) free of charge.
 (c) Exceptions to Sections 102 Through 105(b).--A covered entity 
may decline to comply with an individual's request to exercise a right 
described in sections 102 through 105(b) if--
 (1) complying with the request would be demonstrably 
 impossible (for purposes of this paragraph, the receipt of a 
 large number of verified requests, on its own, shall not be 
 considered to render compliance with a request demonstrably 
 impossible);
 (2) complying with the request would prevent the covered 
 entity from carrying out internal audits, performing accounting 
 functions, processing refunds, or fulfilling warranty claims, 
 provided that the covered data that is the subject of the 
 request is not processed or transferred for any purpose other 
 than such specific activities;
 (3) the request is made to correct or delete publicly 
 available information, and then only to the extent the data is 
 publicly available information;
 (4) complying with the request would impair the publication 
 of newsworthy information of legitimate public concern to the 
 public by a covered entity, or the processing or transfer of 
 information by a covered entity for such purpose;
 (5) complying with the request would impair the privacy of 
 another individual or the rights of another to exercise free 
 speech; or
 (6) the covered entity processes or will process the data 
 subject to the request for a specific purpose described in 
 subsection (d) of this section, and complying with the request 
 would prevent the covered entity from using such data for such 
 specific purpose.
 (d) Exceptions to Affirmative Express Consent.--
 (1) In general.--A covered entity may process or transfer 
 covered data without the individual's affirmative express 
 consent for any of the following purposes, provided that the 
 processing or transfer is reasonably necessary, proportionate, 
 and limited to such purpose:
 (A) To complete a transaction or fulfill an order 
 or service specifically requested by an individual, 
 such as billing, shipping, or accounting.
 (B) To perform system maintenance, debug systems, 
 or repair errors to ensure the functionality of a 
 product or service provided by the covered entity.
 (C) To detect or respond to a security incident, 
 provide a secure environment, or maintain the safety of 
 a product or service.
 (D) To protect against malicious, deceptive, 
 fraudulent, or illegal activity.
 (E) To comply with a legal obligation or the 
 establishment, exercise, or defense of legal claims.
 (F) To prevent an individual from suffering harm 
 where the covered entity believes in good faith that 
 the individual is in danger of suffering death or 
 serious physical injury.
 (G) To effectuate a product recall pursuant to 
 Federal or State law.
 (H) To conduct scientific, historical, or 
 statistical research in the public interest that 
 adheres to all other applicable ethics and privacy laws 
 and is approved, monitored, and governed by an 
 institutional review board or a similar oversight 
 entity that meets standards promulgated by the 
 Commission pursuant to section 553 of title 5, United 
 States Code.
 (2) Biometric information.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall promulgate 
 regulations pursuant to section 553 of title 5, United States 
 Code, identifying privacy protective requirements for the 
 processing of biometric information for a purpose described in 
 subparagraph (C) or (D) of paragraph (1). Such regulations 
 shall include--
 (A) strict data processing limitations, including a 
 prohibition on the processing of biometric information 
 unless the covered entity has a reasonable suspicion, 
 after a specific criminal incident involving the 
 covered entity, that the individual may engage in 
 criminal activity;
 (B) strict data transfer limitations, including a 
 prohibition on the transfer of biometric information to 
 a third party other than to comply with a legal 
 obligation or to establish, exercise, or defend a legal 
 claim; and
 (C) strict transparency obligations, including 
 requiring disclosures in a conspicuous and readily 
 accessible manner regarding specific data processing 
 and transfer activities.
 (e) Journalism Exception.--Nothing in this title shall apply to the 
publication of newsworthy information of legitimate public concern to 
the public by a covered entity, or to the processing or transfer of 
information by a covered entity for that purpose.
 (f) Applicability of Other Data Privacy Requirements.--A covered 
entity that is required to comply with title V of the Gramm-Leach-
Bliley Act (15 U.S.C. 6801 et seq.), the Health Information Technology 
for Economic and Clinical Health Act (42 U.S.C. 17931 et seq.), part C 
of title XI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320d et seq.), the 
Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681 et seq.), the Family 
Educational Rights and Privacy Act (20 U.S.C. 1232g; part 99 of title 
34, Code of Federal Regulations), or the regulations promulgated 
pursuant to section 264(c) of the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996 (42 U.S.C. 1320d-2 note), and is in 
compliance with the data privacy requirements of such regulations, 
part, title, or Act (as applicable), shall be deemed to be in 
compliance with the related requirements of this title, except for 
section 107, with respect to data subject to the requirements of such 
regulations, part, title, or Act. Not later than 1 year after the date 
of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall issue guidance 
describing the implementation of this subsection.
 (g) Applicability of Other Data Security Requirements.--A covered 
entity that is required to comply with title V of the Gramm-Leach-
Bliley Act (15 U.S.C. 6801 et seq.), the Health Information Technology 
for Economic and Clinical Health Act (42 U.S.C. 17931 et seq.), part C 
of title XI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320d et seq.), or 
the regulations promulgated pursuant to section 264(c) of the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (42 U.S.C. 1320d-2 
note), and is in compliance with the information security requirements 
of such regulations, part, title, or Act (as applicable), shall be 
deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of section 107 with 
respect to data subject to the requirements of such regulations, part, 
title, or Act. Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Commission shall issue guidance describing the 
implementation of this subsection.
 (h) In General.--The Commission shall have authority under section 
553 of title 5, United States Code, to promulgate regulations necessary 
to carry out the provisions of this title.

 TITLE II--OVERSIGHT AND RESPONSIBILITY

SEC. 201. EXECUTIVE RESPONSIBILITY.

 (a) In General.--Beginning 1 year after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the chief executive officer of a covered entity that is a 
large data holder (or, if the entity does not have a chief executive 
officer, the highest ranking officer of the entity) and each privacy 
officer and data security officer of such entity shall annually certify 
to the Commission, in a manner specified by the Commission, that the 
entity maintains--
 (1) adequate internal controls to comply with this Act; and
 (2) reporting structures to ensure that such certifying 
 officers are involved in, and are responsible for, decisions 
 that impact the entity's compliance with this Act.
 (b) Requirements.--A certification submitted under subsection (a) 
shall be based on a review of the effectiveness of a covered entity's 
internal controls and reporting structures that is conducted by the 
certifying officers no more than 90 days before the submission of the 
certification.

SEC. 202. PRIVACY AND DATA SECURITY OFFICERS; COMPREHENSIVE PRIVACY AND 
 DATA SECURITY PROGRAMS; RISK ASSESSMENTS AND COMPLIANCE.

 (a) Privacy and Data Security Officer.--A covered entity shall 
designate--
 (1) 1 or more qualified employees as privacy officers; and
 (2) 1 or more qualified employees (in addition to any 
 employee designated under paragraph (1)) as data security 
 officers.
 (b) Comprehensive Privacy and Data Security Programs, Risk 
Assessments, and Compliance.--An employee who is designated by a 
covered entity as a privacy officer or a data security officer shall be 
responsible for, at a minimum--
 (1) implementing a comprehensive written data privacy 
 program and data security program to safeguard the privacy and 
 security of covered data throughout the life cycle of 
 development and operational practices of the covered entity's 
 products or services;
 (2) annually conducting privacy and data security risk 
 assessments, data hygiene, and other quality control practices; 
 and
 (3) facilitating the covered entity's ongoing compliance 
 with this Act.

SEC. 203. SERVICE PROVIDERS AND THIRD PARTIES.

 (a) Service Providers.--A service provider--
 (1) shall not process service provider data for any 
 processing purpose other than one performed on behalf of, and 
 at the direction of, the covered entity that transferred such 
 data to the service provider, except that a service provider 
 may process data to comply with a legal obligation or the 
 establishment, exercise, or defense of legal claims;
 (2) shall not transfer service provider data to a third 
 party without the affirmative express consent, obtained by, or 
 on behalf of, the covered entity, of the individual to whom the 
 service provider data is linked or reasonably linkable;
 (3) shall delete or de-identify service provider data after 
 the agreed upon end of the provision of services;
 (4) is exempt from the requirements of sections 102(a), 
 103, 104, and 105(a) with respect to service provider data, but 
 shall, to the extent practicable--
 (A) assist the covered entity from which it 
 received the service provider data in fulfilling 
 requests made by individuals under such sections; and
 (B) shall delete, de-identify, or correct (as 
 applicable), any service provider data that is subject 
 to a verified request from an individual described in 
 section 103 or 104; and
 (5) is exempt from the requirements of section 106 with 
 respect to service provider data, but shall have the same 
 responsibilities and obligations as a covered entity with 
 respect to such data under all other provisions of this Act.
 (b) Third Parties.--A third party--
 (1) shall not process third party data for a purpose that 
 is inconsistent with the expectations of a reasonable 
 individual;
 (2) may reasonably rely on representations made by the 
 covered entity that transferred third party data regarding the 
 expectation of a reasonable individual, provided the third 
 party conducts reasonable due diligence on the representations 
 of the covered entity and finds those representations to be 
 credible; and
 (3) upon receipt of any third party data, is exempt from 
 the requirements of section 105(c) with respect to such data, 
 but shall have the same responsibilities and obligations as a 
 covered entity with respect to such data under all other 
 provisions of this Act.
 (c) Additional Obligations on Covered Entities.--
 (1) In general.--A covered entity shall--
 (A) exercise reasonable due diligence in selecting 
 a service provider and conduct reasonable oversight of 
 its service providers to ensure compliance with the 
 applicable requirements of this section; and
 (B) exercise reasonable due diligence in deciding 
 to transfer covered data to a third party, and conduct 
 oversight of third parties to which it transfers data 
 to ensure compliance with the applicable requirements 
 of this subsection.
 (2) Guidance.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Commission shall issue guidance for 
 covered entities regarding compliance with this subsection.
 (d) In General.--The Commission shall have authority under section 
553 of title 5, United States Code, to promulgate regulations necessary 
to carry out the provisions of this section.

SEC. 204. WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTIONS.

 (a) In General.--A covered entity shall not, directly or 
indirectly, discharge, demote, suspend, threaten, harass, or in any 
other manner discriminate against a covered individual of the covered 
entity because--
 (1) the covered individual, or anyone perceived as 
 assisting the covered individual, takes (or the covered entity 
 suspects that the covered individual has taken or will take) a 
 lawful action in providing to the Federal Government or the 
 attorney general of a State information relating to any act or 
 omission that the covered individual reasonably believes to be 
 a violation of this Act or any regulation promulgated under 
 this Act;
 (2) the covered individual provides information that the 
 covered individual reasonably believes evidences such a 
 violation to--
 (A) a person with supervisory authority over the 
 covered individual at the covered entity; or
 (B) another individual working for the covered 
 entity who the covered individual reasonably believes 
 has the authority to investigate, discover, or 
 terminate the violation or to take any other action to 
 address the violation;
 (3) the covered individual testifies (or the covered entity 
 expects that the covered individual will testify) in an 
 investigation or judicial or administrative proceeding 
 concerning such a violation; or
 (4) the covered individual assists or participates (or the 
 covered entity expects that the covered individual will assist 
 or participate) in such an investigation or judicial or 
 administrative proceeding, or the covered individual takes any 
 other action to assist in carrying out the purposes of this 
 Act.
 (b) Enforcement.--An individual who alleges discharge or other 
discrimination in violation of subsection (a) may bring an action 
governed by the rules, procedures, statute of limitations, and legal 
burdens of proof in section 42121(b) of title 49, United States Code. 
If the individual has not received a decision within 180 days and there 
is no showing that such delay is due to the bad faith of the claimant, 
the individual may bring an action for a jury trial, governed by the 
burden of proof in section 42121(b) of title 49, United States Code, in 
the appropriate district court of the United States for the following 
relief:
 (1) Temporary relief while the case is pending.
 (2) Reinstatement with the same seniority status that the 
 individual would have had, but for the discharge or 
 discrimination.
 (3) Three times the amount of back pay otherwise owed to 
 the individual, with interest.
 (4) Consequential and compensatory damages, and 
 compensation for litigation costs, expert witness fees, and 
 reasonable attorneys' fees.
 (c) Waiver of Rights and Remedies.--The rights and remedies 
provided for in this section shall not be waived by any policy form or 
condition of employment, including by a predispute arbitration 
agreement.
 (d) Predispute Arbitration Agreements.--No predispute arbitration 
agreement shall be valid or enforceable if the agreement requires 
arbitration of a dispute arising under this section.
 (e) Covered Individual Defined.--In this section, the term 
``covered individual'' means an applicant, current or former employee, 
contractor, subcontractor, grantee, or agent of an employer.

SEC. 205. DIGITAL CONTENT FORGERIES.

 (a) Reports.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of 
this Act, and annually thereafter, the Director of the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology shall publish a report regarding 
digital content forgeries.
 (b) Requirements.--Each report under subsection (a) shall include 
the following:
 (1) A definition of digital content forgeries along with 
 accompanying explanatory materials. The definition developed 
 pursuant to this section shall not supersede any other 
 provision of law or be construed to limit the authority of any 
 executive agency related to digital content forgeries.
 (2) A description of the common sources in the United 
 States of digital content forgeries and commercial sources of 
 digital content forgery technologies.
 (3) An assessment of the uses, applications, and harms of 
 digital content forgeries.
 (4) An analysis of the methods and standards available to 
 identify digital content forgeries as well as a description of 
 the commercial technological counter-measures that are, or 
 could be, used to address concerns with digital content 
 forgeries, which may include the provision of warnings to 
 viewers of suspect content.
 (5) A description of the types of digital content 
 forgeries, including those used to commit fraud, cause harm or 
 violate any provision of law.
 (6) Any other information determined appropriate by the 
 Director.

 TITLE III--MISCELLANEOUS

SEC. 301. ENFORCEMENT, CIVIL PENALTIES, AND APPLICABILITY.

 (a) Enforcement by the Federal Trade Commission.--
 (1) New bureau.--
 (A) In general.--The Commission shall establish a 
 new Bureau within the Commission comparable in 
 structure, size, organization, and authority to the 
 existing Bureaus with the Commission related to 
 consumer protection and competition.
 (B) Mission.--The mission of the Bureau established 
 under this paragraph shall be to assist the Commission 
 in exercising the Commission's authority under this Act 
 and under other Federal laws addressing privacy, data 
 security, and related issues.
 (C) Timeline.--Such Bureau shall be established, 
 staffed, and fully operational within 2 years of 
 enactment of this Act.
 (2) Treatment as violation of rule.--A violation of this 
 Act or a regulation promulgated under this Act shall be treated 
 as a violation of a rule defining an unfair or deceptive act or 
 practice prescribed under section 18(a)(1)(B) of the Federal 
 Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 57a(a)(1)(B)).
 (3) Powers of commission.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
 (C), the Commission shall enforce this Act and the 
 regulations promulgated under this Act in the same 
 manner, by the same means, and with the same 
 jurisdiction, powers, and duties as though all 
 applicable terms and provisions of the Federal Trade 
 Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.) were incorporated 
 into and made a part of this Act.
 (B) Privileges and immunities.--Any person who 
 violates this Act or a regulation promulgated under 
 this Act shall be subject to the penalties and entitled 
 to the privileges and immunities provided in the 
 Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.).
 (C) Independent litigation authority.--The 
 Commission may commence, defend, or intervene in, and 
 supervise the litigation of any civil action under this 
 subsection (including an action to collect a civil 
 penalty) and any appeal of such action in its own name 
 by any of its attorneys designated by it for such 
 purpose. The Commission shall notify the Attorney 
 General of any such action and may consult with the 
 Attorney General with respect to any such action or 
 request the Attorney General on behalf of the 
 Commission to commence, defend, or intervene in any 
 such action.
 (4) Data privacy and security relief fund.--
 (A) Establishment of relief fund.--There is 
 established in the Treasury of the United States a 
 separate fund to be known as the ``Data Privacy and 
 Security Relief Fund'' (referred to in this paragraph 
 as the ``Relief Fund'').
 (B) Deposits.--
 (i) Deposits from the commission.--The 
 Commission shall deposit into the Relief Fund 
 the amount of any civil penalty obtained 
 against any covered entity in any judicial or 
 administrative action the Commission commences 
 to enforce this Act or a regulation promulgated 
 under this Act.
 (ii) Deposits from the attorney general.--
 The Attorney General of the United States shall 
 deposit into the Relief Fund the amount of any 
 civil penalty obtained against any covered 
 entity in any judicial or administrative action 
 the Attorney General commences on behalf of the 
 Commission to enforce this Act or a regulation 
 promulgated under this Act.
 (C) Use of fund amounts.--Notwithstanding section 
 3302 of title 31, United States Code, amounts in the 
 Relief Fund shall be available to the Commission, 
 without fiscal year limitation, to provide redress, 
 payments or compensation, or other monetary relief to 
 individuals affected by an act or practice for which 
 civil penalties have been obtained under this Act. To 
 the extent that individuals cannot be located or such 
 redress, payments or compensation, or other monetary 
 relief are otherwise not practicable, the Commission 
 may use such funds for the purpose of consumer or 
 business education relating to data privacy and 
 security or for the purpose of engaging in 
 technological research that the Commission considers 
 necessary to enforce this Act.
 (D) Amounts not subject to apportionment.--
 Notwithstanding any other provision of law, amounts in 
 the Relief Fund shall not be subject to apportionment 
 for purposes of chapter 15 of title 31, United States 
 Code, or under any other authority.
 (b) Enforcement by State Attorneys General.--
 (1) Civil action.--In any case in which the attorney 
 general of a State or a consumer protection officer of a State 
 has reason to believe that an interest of the residents of that 
 State has been or is adversely affected by the engagement of 
 any covered entity in an act or practice that violates this Act 
 or a regulation promulgated under this Act, the attorney 
 general of the State, or a consumer protection officer of the 
 State acting on behalf of the State, as parens patriae, may 
 bring a civil action on behalf of the residents of the State in 
 an appropriate district court of the United States to--
 (A) enjoin that act or practice;
 (B) enforce compliance with this Act or the 
 regulation;
 (C) obtain damages, civil penalties, restitution, 
 or other compensation on behalf of the residents of the 
 State; or
 (D) obtain such other relief as the court may 
 consider to be appropriate.
 (2) Notice to the commission and rights of the 
 commission.--Except where not feasible, the State shall notify 
 the Commission in writing prior to initiating a civil action 
 under paragraph (1). Such notice shall include a copy of the 
 complaint to be filed to initiate such action. If prior notice 
 is not practicable, the State shall provide a copy of the 
 complaint to the Commission immediately upon instituting the 
 action. Upon receiving such notice, the Commission may 
 intervene in such action and, upon intervening--
 (A) be heard on all matters arising in such action; 
 and
 (B) file petitions for appeal of a decision in such 
 action.
 (3) Preservation of state powers.--No provision of this 
 section shall be construed as altering, limiting, or affecting 
 the authority of a State attorney general or a consumer 
 protection officer of a State to--
 (A) bring an action or other regulatory proceeding 
 arising solely under the law in effect in that State; 
 or
 (B) exercise the powers conferred on the attorney 
 general or on a consumer protection officer of a State 
 by the laws of the State, including the ability to 
 conduct investigations, to administer oaths or 
 affirmations, or to compel the attendance of witnesses 
 or the production of documentary or other evidence.
 (4) Venue; service of process.--
 (A) Venue.--Any action brought under paragraph (1) 
 may be brought in the district court of the United 
 States that meets applicable requirements relating to 
 venue under section 1391 of title 28, United States 
 Code.
 (B) Service of process.--In an action brought under 
 paragraph (1), process may be served in any district in 
 which the defendant--
 (i) is an inhabitant; or
 (ii) may be found.
 (c) Enforcement by Individuals.--
 (1) In general.--Any individual alleging a violation of 
 this Act or a regulation promulgated under this Act may bring a 
 civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction, State or 
 Federal.
 (2) Relief.--In a civil action brought under paragraph (1) 
 in which the plaintiff prevails, the court may award--
 (A) an amount not less than $100 and not greater 
 than $1,000 per violation per day or actual damages, 
 whichever is greater;
 (B) punitive damages;
 (C) reasonable attorney's fees and litigation 
 costs; and
 (D) any other relief, including equitable or 
 declaratory relief, that the court determines 
 appropriate.
 (3) Injury in fact.--A violation of this Act or a 
 regulation promulgated under this Act with respect to the 
 covered data of an individual constitutes a concrete and 
 particularized injury in fact to that individual.
 (d) Invalidity of Pre-Dispute Arbitration Agreements and Pre-
Dispute Joint Action Waivers.--
 (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 law, no pre-dispute arbitration agreement or pre-dispute joint 
 action waiver shall be valid or enforceable with respect to a 
 privacy or data security dispute arising under this Act.
 (2) Applicability.--Any determination as to whether or how 
 this subsection applies to any privacy or data security dispute 
 shall be made by a court, rather than an arbitrator, without 
 regard to whether such agreement purports to delegate such 
 determination to an arbitrator.
 (3) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection:
 (A) The term ``pre-dispute arbitration agreement'' 
 means any agreement to arbitrate a dispute that has not 
 arisen at the time of the making of the agreement.
 (B) The term ``pre-dispute joint-action waiver'' 
 means an agreement, whether or not part of a pre-
 dispute arbitration agreement, that would prohibit, or 
 waive the right of, one of the parties to the agreement 
 to participate in a joint, class, or collective action 
 in a judicial, arbitral, administrative, or other 
 forum, concerning a dispute that has not yet arisen at 
 the time of the making of the agreement.
 (C) The term ``privacy or data security dispute'' 
 means any claim relating to an alleged violation of 
 this Act, or a regulation promulgated under this Act, 
 and between an individual and a covered entity.

SEC. 302. RELATIONSHIP TO FEDERAL AND STATE LAWS.

 (a) Federal Law Preservation.--Nothing in this Act or a regulation 
promulgated under this Act shall be construed to limit--
 (1) the authority of the Commission, or any other Executive 
 agency, under any other provision of law; or
 (2) any other provision of Federal law unless as 
 specifically authorized by this Act.
 (b) State Law Preservation.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed 
to preempt, displace, or supplant the following State laws, rules, 
regulations, or requirements:
 (1) Consumer protection laws of general applicability such 
 as laws regulating deceptive, unfair, or unconscionable 
 practices.
 (2) Civil rights laws.
 (3) Laws that govern the privacy rights or other 
 protections of employees, employee information, or students or 
 student information.
 (4) Laws that address notification requirements in the 
 event of a data breach.
 (5) Contract or tort law.
 (6) Criminal laws governing fraud, theft, unauthorized 
 access to information or unauthorized use of information, 
 malicious behavior, and similar provisions, and laws of 
 criminal procedure.
 (7) Laws specifying remedies or a cause of action to 
 individuals.
 (8) Public safety or sector specific laws unrelated to 
 privacy or security.
 (c) Preemption of Directly Conflicting State Laws.--Except as 
provided in subsections (b) and (d), this Act shall supersede any State 
law to the extent such law directly conflicts with the provisions of 
this Act, or a standard, rule, or regulation promulgated under this 
Act, and then only to the extent of such direct conflict. Any State 
law, rule, or regulation shall not be considered in direct conflict if 
it affords a greater level of protection to individuals protected under 
this Act.
 (d) Preservation of Common Law or Statutory Causes of Action for 
Civil Relief.--Nothing in this Act, nor any amendment, standard, rule, 
requirement, assessment, law or regulation promulgated under this Act, 
shall be construed to preempt, displace, or supplant any Federal or 
State common law rights or remedies, or any statute creating a remedy 
for civil relief, including any cause of action for personal injury, 
wrongful death, property damage, or other financial, physical, 
reputational, or psychological injury based in negligence, strict 
liability, products liability, failure to warn, an objectively 
offensive intrusion into the private affairs or concerns of the 
individual, or any other legal theory of liability under any Federal or 
State common law, or any State statutory law.

SEC. 303. SEVERABILITY.

 If any provision of this Act, or the application thereof to any 
person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of this Act and 
the application of such provision to other persons not similarly 
situated or to other circumstances shall not be affected by the 
invalidation.

SEC. 304. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 There are authorized to be appropriated to the Commission such sums 
as may be necessary to carry out this Act.
 <all>