HR 3030 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3030
To amend the Clean Air Act to provide for the attainment and maintenance
of the national ambient air quality standards, the control of toxic air
pollutants, the prevention of acid deposition, and other improvements in
the quality of the Nation's air.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
July 27, 1989
Mr. DINGELL (for himself, Mr. LENT, Mr. BLILEY, Mr. BROOKS, Mr. MOORHEAD,
Mr. FLIPPO, Mr. DELAY, Mr. BONIOR, Mr. WHITTAKER, Mr. ANNUNZIO, Mr. FRENZEL,
Mr. DREIER of California, Mr. BROWN of Colorado, Mr. VANDER JAGT,
Mr. ESPY, Mr. ANTHONY, Mr. GRANDY, Mr. BROOMFIELD, Mr. COOPER, Mr. GIBBONS,
Mr. GINGRICH, Mr. FIELDS, Mr. FORD of Michigan, Mr. TAUKE, Mr. HANSEN,
Mr. THOMAS A. LUKEN, Mr. BAKER, Mr. ROWLAND of Georgia, Mr. QUILLEN,
Mr. NIELSON OF UTAH, Mr. HALL of Texas, Mr. MURTHA, Mr. PURSELL, Mr. RAY,
Mr. WALGREN, Mr. MANTON, Mr. FISH, Mr. ANDERSON, Mr. HORTON, Mrs. LLOYD,
Mr. BOSCO, Mr. LEATH of Texas, Mr. HOUGHTON, Mr. GOSS, Mr. BOUCHER,
Mr. DANNEMEYER, Mr. MONTGOMERY, Mr. SCHAEFER, Ms. SNOWE, Mr. COBLE,
Mr. HENRY, Mr. BARTON of Texas, Mr. SISISKY, Mr. IRELAND, Mrs. JOHNSON of
Connecticut, Mr. CALLAHAN, Mr. WILSON, Mr. WYLIE, Mr. BOEHLERT, Mr. MARTIN
of New York, Mr. MCCOLLUM, Mr. MCGRATH, Mr. WALKER, Mr. MCNULTY, Ms. KAPTUR,
Mr. MCMILLEN of Maryland, Mr. GUNDERSON, Mr. BALLENGER, Mr. KILDEE, Mr. SMITH
of New Hampshire, Mr. BILIRAKIS, Mr. WOLPE, Mr. HERTEL, Mr. HAMMERSCHMIDT,
Mr. TOWNS, Mr. MCCRERY, Mr. HUCKABY, Mr. LIGHTFOOT, Mr. MILLER of Washington,
Mr. PALLONE, Mr. PARRIS, Mr. MORRISON of Washington, Mr. CLEMENT, Mr. TALLON,
Mr. GILMAN, Mr. WEBER, Mr. GALLEGLY, Mr. MCMILLAN of North Carolina, Mr. GALLO,
Mr. UPTON, Mr. PAYNE OF Virginia, Mrs. SMITH of Nebraska, Mr. BUSTAMANTE,
Mr. YOUNG of Alaska, Mr. HUNTER, Mr. STENHOLM, Mr. ROBERT F. SMITH, Mr. WALSH,
Mr. SUNDQUIST, Mr. HAYES of Illinois, Mr. DAVIS, Mr. SMITH of Mississippi,
Mr. SOLOMON, Mr. PARKER, Mr. DARDEN, Mr. SMITH of Texas, Mr. SAWYER,
Mr. WELDON, Mr. ROTH, Mr. TRAXLER, Mr. RHODES, Mr. LEVIN of Michigan,
Mrs. SAIKI, Mr. SCHUETTE, Mr. GOODLING, Mr. DYSON, Ms. SLAUGHTER of Virginia,
Mr. ARMEY, Mr. BATEMAN, Mr. COUGHLIN, Mr. ROBINSON, Mr. CROCKETT, Mr. JONES
of North Carolina, Mr. EDWARDS of Oklahoma, Mr. DOUGLAS, Mr. STANGELAND,
Mr. CARR, Mr. HAYES of Louisiana, Mr. BARTLETT, Mr. CHANDLER, Mr. YATRON,
Mr. DENNY SMITH, Mr. SAXTON, Mr. SKEEN, Mr. SARPALIUS, Mr. RAVENEL,
Mr. HOLLOWAY, Mr. HARRIS, Mr. CRAIG, Mr. CHAPMAN, Mr. KOLBE, Mr. INHOFE,
Mr. LIPINSKI, Mr. LIVINGSTON, Mr. LEWIS of Florida, Mr. LOWERY of California,
and Mr. ROWLAND of Connecticut) introduced the following bill; which was
referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Clean Air Act to provide for the attainment and maintenance
of the national ambient air quality standards, the control of toxic air
pollutants, the prevention of acid deposition, and other improvements in
the quality of the Nation's air.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 This Act may be cited as the `Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989'.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE I--PROVISIONS FOR ATTAINMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF AMBIENT AIR QUALITY
STANDARDS
Sec. 101. General planning requirements.
Sec. 102. General provisions for nonattainment areas.
Sec. 103. Additional provisions for ozone nonattainment areas.
Sec. 104. Additional provisions for carbon monoxide nonattainment areas.
Sec. 105. Additional provisions for particulate matter (PM-10) nonattainment
areas.
Sec. 106. Additional provisions for areas designated nonattainment for sulfur
oxides, nitrogen dioxide, or lead.
Sec. 107. Provisions related to Indian tribes.
Sec. 108. Miscellaneous provisions.
Sec. 109. Conforming amendments.
TITLE II--PROVISIONS RELATING TO MOBILE SOURCES
Sec. 201. Clean fuel requirements.
Sec. 202. Emissions of hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide and oxides of nitrogen
from passenger cars.
Sec. 203. Emissions of hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide from light-duty trucks.
Sec. 204. Carbon monoxide emissions at cold temperatures.
Sec. 205. Evaporative emissions.
Sec. 206. Mobile source-related air toxics.
Sec. 207. Emission control diagnostics systems.
Sec. 208. Heavy-duty trucks.
Sec. 209. Nonroad engines and vehicles.
Sec. 210. Vehicle certification.
Sec. 211. In-use compliance--recall.
Sec. 212. Compliance program fees.
Sec. 213. Information collection.
Sec. 214. Fuel volatility.
Sec. 215. Diesel fuel sulfur content.
Sec. 216. Nonroad fuels.
Sec. 217. Fuel waivers.
Sec. 218. Market-based alternative controls.
Sec. 219. Preemption of State fuels regulations.
Sec. 220. Enforcement.
Sec. 221. Technical amendments.
TITLE III--HAZARDOUS AIR POLLUTANTS
Sec. 301. Technology-based standards for hazardous air pollutants.
TITLE IV--PERMITS
Sec. 401. Permits.
TITLE V--ACID DEPOSITION CONTROL
Sec. 501. Acid deposition control.
TITLE VI--PROVISIONS RELATING TO ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 601. Section 113 enforcement.
Sec. 602. Reviewability of administrative orders.
Sec. 603. Compliance certification.
Sec. 604. Contractor inspections.
Sec. 605. Administrative enforcement subpoenas.
Sec. 606. Enforcement of administrative orders.
Sec. 607. Scope of emergency orders.
Sec. 608. Contractor listings.
Sec. 609. Judicial review pending reconsideration of regulation.
Sec. 610. Citizen suits.
Sec. 611. Enhanced implementation and enforcement of new source review
requirements.
Sec. 612. Moveable stationary sources.
Sec. 613. Enforcement of new titles of the Act.
TITLE VII--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sec. 701. Grants for support of air pollution planning and control programs.
Sec. 702. Annual report repeal.
Sec. 703. NOx and VOC study.
Sec. 704. Review and revision of criteria and standards.
Sec. 705. Air Pollutant Release Investigation Board.
TITLE I--PROVISIONS FOR ATTAINMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF NATIONAL AMBIENT AIR
QUALITY STANDARDS
SEC. 101. GENERAL PLANNING REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) IMPLEMENTATION PLAN ELEMENTS- (1) Section 110 of the Clean Air Act
 is amended by striking paragraph (1) of 110(a) through subparagraph (a)
 of 110(a)(3) and inserting the following:
`IMPLEMENTATION PLANS IN GENERAL
 `SEC. 110. (a) INITIAL PLANS- After promulgating a new or revised national
 ambient air quality standard under section 109, the Administratror may
 require any State to submit a plan that meets any of the requirements
 of subsection (d). The State must submit such plan within nine months of
 the notification by the Administrator of such requirement, or within such
 longer period as the Administrator may prescribe.
 `(b) DESIGNATIONS-
 `(1) DESIGNATIONS GENERALLY-
 `(A) INITIAL DESIGNATIONS- By such date as the Administrator may reasonably
 require after promulgating a new or revised national ambient air quality
 standard for any pollutant under section 109, the Governor of each State
 shall (and at any other time the Governor of a State deems appropriate the
 governor may) submit to the Administrator a list of all areas (or portions
 thereof) in the State, designating as--
 `(i) nonattainment, any area that does not meet (or that contributes to
 ambient air quality in a nearby area that does not meet) the national
 primary or secondary ambient air quality standard for the pollutant,
 `(ii) attainment, any area (other than an area identified in clause (i))
 that meets the national primary or secondary ambient air quality standard
 for the pollutant, or
 `(iii) unclassifiable, any area that cannot be classified on the basis of
 available information as meeting or not meeting the national primary or
 secondary ambient air quality standard for the pollutant.
The Administrator may not require the Governor to submit the required list
sooner than one hundred and twenty days after promulgating a new or revised
national ambient air quality standard.
 `(B) STATE SUBMISSION AND EFFECTIVENESS OF DESIGNATIONS-
 `(i)(I) Upon promulgation or revision of a national ambient air quality
 standard, the Administrator shall promulgate the designations of all areas
 (or portions thereof) submitted under subparagraph (a) as expeditiously
 as practicable, but in no case later than two years from the date
 of promulgation of the new or revised national ambient air quality
 standard. Such period may be extended for up to one year in the event the
 Administrator has insufficient information to promulgate the designations.
 `(II) In making the promulgations required under subclause (I), the
 Administrator may make such modifications as he deems necessary to the
 designations of the areas (or portions thereof) submitted under subparagraph
 (A) (including to the boundaries of such areas or portions thereof). Whenever
 the administrator intends to make a modification, he shall notify the
 State and provide such State with an opportunity to demonstrate why any
 proposed modification is inappropriate. The Administrator shall give such
 notification no later than one hundred and twenty days prior to the date
 he promulgates the designation, as may be modified. If the Governor fails
 to submit the list in whole or in part, as required under subparagraph
 (A), the Administrator shall promulgate the designation that he deems
 appropriate for any area (or portion thereof) not designated by the State.
 `(III) If the Governor of any State, on his own motion, under subparagraph
 (a), submits a list of areas (or portions thereof) in the State designated
 as nonattainment, attainment, or unclassifiable, the Administrator shall
 act on such designations in accordance with the procedures under paragraph
 (3)(B) (relating to redesignation).
 `(ii) A designation for an area (or portion thereof) made pursuant to
 this subsection shall remain in effect until the area (or portion thereof)
 is redesignated pursuant to paragraph (3).
 `(C) CURRENT DESIGNATIONS- Any area designated with respect to any air
 pollutant under the provisions of--
 `(i) section 107(d)(1) (A), (B), or (C), as in effect immediately before
 the date of enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989, is hereby
 designated, by operation of law, as a nonattainment area for such pollutant
 within the meaning of clause (a)(i);
 `(ii) section 107(d)(I)(E), as in effect immediately before the date of
 enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989, is hereby designated,
 by operation of law, as an attainment area for such pollutant within the
 meaning of clause (A)(ii); and
 `(iii) section 107(d)(1)(D), as in effect immediately before the date of
 enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989, is hereby designated,
 by operation of law, as an unclassifiable area for such pollutant within
 the meaning of clause (A)(iii).
 `(2) PROCEDURE-
 `(A) The Administrator shall publish a notice in the Federal Register
 promulgating any designation under paragraph (1), (4)(A), or (5), or
 announcing any designation under paragraph (4)(B), or promulgating any
 redesignation under paragraph (3).
 `(B) Promulgation or announcement of a designation under paragraph (1),
 (4) or (5) shall not be subject to the provisions of sections 553 through
 557 of title 5 of the United States Code (concerning notice and comment).
 `(3) REDESIGNATION-
 `(A)(i) Subject to the requirements of subparagraph (C), and on the basis
 of air quality data, planning and control considerations, or any other
 considerations the Administrator deems appropriate, the Administrator may
 at any time notify the Governor of any State that available information
 indicates that the designation of any area or portion of an area within the
 State or interstate area should be revised. In issuing such notification
 to the Governor, the Administrator shall provide such information as the
 Administrator may have available.
 `(ii) No later than one hundred and twenty days after receiving
 such notification, the Governor must submit to the Administrator such
 redesignation, if any, of the appropriate area (or areas) or portion thereof
 within the State or interstate area, as the Governor considers appropriate.
 `(iii) No later than one hundred and twenty days after the date described
 under clause (ii), the Administrator shall promulgate the redesignation,
 if any, of the area or portion thereof, submitted by the Governor in
 accordance with clause (ii), making such modifications as he may deem
 necessary, in the same manner and under the same procedure as under
 subclause (II) of subparagraph (1)(B)(i), except that the phrase `sixty
 days' shall be substituted for the phrase `one hundred and twenty days'
 in that subclause. If the Governor does not submit, in accordance with
 clause (ii), a redesignation for an area (or portion thereof) identified
 by the Administrator under clause (i), the Administrator shall promulgate
 such redesignation, if any, that he deems appropriate.
 `(B) The Governor of any State may, on his own motion, submit to the
 Administrator a revised designation of any area or portion thereof
 within the State. Within eighteen months of receipt of a complete State
 redesignation submittal, the Administrator shall approve or deny such
 redesignation. The submission of a redesignation by a Governor shall not
 affect the effectiveness or enforceability of the applicable implementation
 plan for the State.
 `(C) The Administrator may not promulgate a redesignation of a nonattainment
 area (or portion thereof) to attainment unless--
 `(i) the Administrator determines that the area has attained the national
 ambient air quality standard;
 `(ii) the Administrator has fully approved the applicable implementation
 plan for the area under subsection (e);
 `(iii) the Administrator determines that the improvement in air quality
 is due to permanent and enforceable reductions in emissions resulting from
 implementation of the applicable implementation plan and applicable Federal
 air pollutant control regulations and other permanent and enforceable
 reductions;
 `(iv) the Administrator has fully approved a maintenance plan for the area
 as meeting the requirements of section 175; and
 `(v) the State containing such area has met all requirements applicable
 to the area under sections 176 and 110 (d) (4) and (8), and (e)(4).
 `(D) The Administrator shall not promulgate any redesignation of any area
 (or portion thereof) from nonattainment to unclassifiable.
 `(4) New designations for ozone, carbon monoxide (co) and particulate matter
 (pm-10)-
 `(A) REQUIREMENT TO DESIGNATE- (i) Within one hundred and twenty days of the
 date of enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989, each Governor
 of each State shall submit to the Administrator a list that designates,
 affirms or reaffirms the designation of, or redesignates (as the case may be)
 all areas (or portions thereof) of his State as attainment, nonattainment,
 or unclassifiable with respect to the national ambient air quality standards
 for ozone and carbon monoxide.
 `(ii) No later than one hundred and twenty days after the date the Governor
 is required to submit the list of areas (or portions thereof) required
 under clause (i), the Administrator shall promulgate such designations,
 making such modifications as he may deem necessary, in the same manner,
 and under the same procedure, as under subclause (1)(B)(i)(II), except that
 the phrase `sixty days' shall be substituted for the phrase `one hundred
 and twenty days' in that subclause. If the Governor does not submit, in
 accordance with clause (i), a designation for an area (or portion thereof),
 the Administrator shall promulgate the designation that he deems appropriate.
 `(B) PM-10 DESIGNATIONS- By operation of law, until redesignation by the
 Administrator pursuant to paragraph (3)--
 `(i) areas identified in 52 Federal Register 29383 (Aug. 7, 1987) as Group
 I areas, except to the extent that such identification was modified by
 the Administrator prior to the date of enactment of the Clean Air Act
 Amendments of 1989, are hereby designated nonattainment for PM-10;
 `(ii) any county containing a site for which air quality monitoring data
 show a violation of the national ambient air quality standard for PM-10
 before January 1, 1989, as determined under part 50, appendix K of title
 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, is hereby designated nonattainment
 for PM-10; and
 `(iii) all areas of the country not described in clause (i) or (ii) are
 hereby designated unclassifiable for PM-10.
Any designation for particulate matter (measured in terms of total suspended
particulates) that the Administrator promulgated pursuant to section 107(d)
(as in effect immediately before the date of enactment of the Clean Air
Amendments of 1989) shall remain in effect for purposes of implementing the
maximum allowable increases in concentrations of particulate matter (measured
in terms of total suspended particulates) pursuant to section 163(d), until
the Administrator determines that such designation is no longer necessary
for that purpose.
 `(5) DESIGNATIONS FOR LEAD- The Administrator may, in his discretion at any
 time he deems appropriate, require a State to designate areas (or portions
 thereof) with respect to the national ambient air quality standard for
 lead, in accordance with the procedures under subparagraphs (A) and (B)
 of paragraph (1) except that the term `two years' in subparagraph (B)(i)(I)
 shall be replaced by `one year'.
 `(c) Maintenance Plans-
 `(1) Plan submission-
 `(A) INITIAL PLAN- For any area designated attainment or unclassifiable
 with respect to a national ambient air quality standard, the Administrator
 may require the State containing such area to submit an implementation plan
 (including such emissions inventories as he may prescribe) that provides
 for maintenance of such standard for such period as he may prescribe.
 `(B) SUBSEQUENT PLAN- At any time before or after the expiration of the
 initial period for maintenance of a national ambient air quality standard
 prescribed pursuant to subparagraph (A), the Administrator may require the
 State to submit an additional plan or plans (including emissions inventories)
 providing for maintenance of such national ambient air quality standard
 for such additional periods as he may reasonably prescribe.
 `(2) PLAN REQUIREMENTS- Any plan required to be submitted pursuant to
 paragraph (1) shall meet the applicable requirements of subsection (d)
 (concerning general plan requirements).
 `(3) DEADLINES- Any plan required to be submitted pursuant to paragraph
 (1) shall be submitted by the State in accordance with such schedules as
 the Administrator may reasonably prescribe.
 `(d) REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL IMPLEMENTATION PLAN SUBMITTALS- Each implementation
 plan (or revision thereof) submitted by a State under this Act shall
 be adopted by the State after reasonable notice and public hearing and,
 except as otherwise provided under subsection (a), shall--
 `(1) include enforceable emission limitations or other control measures,
 means, or techniques, including economic incentives (including, but not
 limited to, fees, marketable permits, and auctions of emissions rights),
 as well as schedules and timetables for compliance, as may be necessary
 or appropriate to meet the applicable requirements of this Act;
 `(2) provide for establishment and operation of appropriate devices,
 methods, systems, and procedures necessary to--
 `(A) monitor, compile, and analyze data on ambient air quality, and
 `(B) upon request, make such data available to the Administrator;
 `(3) include a program to provide for the enforcement of the measures
 described in paragraph (1), and regulation of the modification, construction,
 and operation of any stationary source within such region as necessary to
 assure that national ambient air quality standards are achieved, including
 a permit program as required in parts C and D;
 `(4) contain adequate provisions--
 `(A) prohibiting any source or other type of emissions activity within
 the State from emitting any air pollutant in amounts which will--
 `(i) contribute significantly to nonattainment in, or interfere with
 maintenance by, any other State or any such national primary or secondary
 ambient air quality standard, or
 `(ii) interfere with measures required to be included in the applicable
 implementation plan for any other State under part C to prevent significant
 deterioration of air quality or to protect visibility,
 `(B) insuring compliance with the requirements of sections 126 and 115,
 relating to interstate and international pollution abatement;
 `(5) provide--
 `(A) necessary assurances that the State (or, except where the Administrator
 deems inappropriate, the general purpose local government or governments,
 or a regional agency designated by the State or general purpose local
 governments for such purpose) will have adequate personnel, funding, and
 authority under State (and, as appropriate, local) law to carry out such
 implementation plan (and is not prohibited by any provision of Federal law
 from carrying out such implementation plan), including a statement from
 the attorney general (or the attorney for those relevant State (or, as
 appropriate, local) air pollution control agencies which have independent
 legal counsel) that the laws of such State (or locality) provide adequate
 authority to carry out such implementation plan,
 `(B) requirements that the State comply with the requirements respecting
 State boards under section 128, and
 `(C) necessary assurances that, where the State has relied on a local or
 regional government, agency, or instrumentality for the implementation
 of any plan provision, the State has responsibility for ensuring adequate
 implementation of such plan provision;
 `(6) require, as may be prescribed by the Administrator--
 `(A) the installation, maintenance, and replacement of equipment, and
 the implementation of other necessary steps, by owners or operators of
 stationary sources to monitor emissions from such sources,
 `(B) periodic reports on the nature and amounts of emissions and
 emissions-related data from such sources, and
 `(C) correlation of such reports by the State agency with any emission
 limitations or standards established pursuant to this Act, which reports
 shall be available at reasonable times for public inspection;
 `(7) provide for authority comparable to that in section 303, and adequate
 contingency plans to implement such authority;
 `(8) provide for revision, after public hearing, of such plan--
 `(A) from time to time as may be necessary to take account of revisions
 of such national primary or secondary ambient air quality standard or the
 availability of improved or more expeditious methods of attaining such
 standard, and
 `(B) except as provided in section 110(j)(2), whenever the Administrator
 finds on the basis of information available to him that the plan
 is substantially inadequate to attain the national ambient air quality
 standard which it implements or to otherwise comply with any additional
 requirements established under this Act;
 `(9) in the case of a plan or plan revision for an area designated as
 nonattainment under subsection (b), meet the applicable requirements of
 part D (relating to nonattainment areas);
 `(10) meet the applicable requirements of section 121 (relating to
 consultation), section 127 (relating to public notification), and part C
 (relating to prevention of significant deterioration of air quality and
 visibility protection);
 `(11) provide for--
 `(A) the performance of such air quality modeling as the Administrator
 may prescribe for the purpose of predicting the effect on ambient air
 quality of any emissions of any air pollutant for which the Administrator
 has established a national ambient air quality standard, and
 `(B) upon request, the submission of data related to such air quality
 modeling to the Administrator; and
 `(12) require the owner or operator of each major stationary source to pay
 to the permitting authority, as a condition of any permit required under
 this chapter, a fee sufficient to cover--
 `(A) the reasonable costs of reviewing and acting upon any application
 for such a permit, and
 `(B) if the owner or operator receives a permit for such source, the
 reasonable costs of implementing and enforcing the terms and conditions of
 any such permit (not including any court costs or other costs associated
 with any enforcement action),
until such fee requirement is superseded with respect to such sources by
the Administrator's approval of a fee program under section 402(b)(3).
Compliance with the applicable requirements of title IV (relating to operating
permits) shall constitute compliance with the corresponding provisions of
this subsection.
 `(e) Energy Protection Agency Action on Plan Submissions-
 `(1) Completeness of plan submissions-
 `(A) COMPLETENESS CRITERIA- The Administrator shall promulgate minimum
 criteria that any plan submission, except as provided under subparagraph
 (D), must meet before the Administrator is required to act on such submission
 under this subsection.
 `(B) COMPLETENESS FINDING- Except as provided under subparagraph (D), within
 sixty days of the Administrator's receipt of a plan or plan revision, but no
 later than six months after the date, if any, by which a State is required
 to submit the plan or revision, the Administrator shall determine whether
 each part of the plan or revision meets the minimum criteria established
 pursuant to subparagraph (A).
 `(C) EFFECT OF FINDING OF INCOMPLETENESS- Where the Administrator determines
 that a plan submission (or part thereof) does not meet the minimum criteria
 established pursuant to subparagraph (A), the State shall be treated as
 not having made the submission (or, in the Administrator's discretion,
 part thereof).
 `(D) INITIAL PLAN PROVISIONS- Notwithstanding any other provision of
 this paragraph, the Administrator may, but is not required to, make any
 determination under subparagraph (B) with respect to any plan or plan
 revision required to be submitted under subsection (a).
 `(2) DEADLINE FOR ACTION- Within twelve months of submission of a plan
 or plan revision (or, in the Administrator's discretion, part thereof)
 that meets the minimum criteria established pursuant to paragraph (1),
 if applicable (or, if those criteria are not applicable, within twelve
 months of submission of the plan or revision), the Administrator shall
 approve or disapprove the plan or plan revision (or such part thereof).
 `(3) FULL AND PARTIAL APPROVAL AND DISAPPROVAL- In the case of any submittal
 that the Administrator is required to approve or disapprove under paragraph
 (2), the Administrator shall--
 `(A) approve such submittal as a whole if it meets all of the applicable
 requirements of this Act, or
 `(B) disapprove the submittal in whole (or approve it in part and,
 simultaneously with such partial approval or subsequently within the
 twelve-month period under paragraph (2), disapprove it in part) if it does
 not meet all of the applicable requirements of this Act.
 `(4) CALLS FOR PLAN REVISIONS- Whenever the Administrator finds that the
 applicable implementation plan for any area is substantially inadequate
 to attain or maintain the relevant national ambient air quality standard,
 to mitigate adequately the interstate pollutant transport described in
 section 176, or to otherwise comply with any requirement of this Act, the
 Administrator shall require the State to revise the plan as necessary to
 correct such inadequacies. The Administrator shall notify the State of the
 inadequacies, and may establish reasonable deadlines for the submission of
 such plan revisions. Any finding under this paragraph shall, to the extent
 the Administrator deems appropriate, subject the State to the requirements
 of this Act to which the State was subject when it developed and submitted
 the plan for which such finding was made, except that the Administrator may
 adjust any dates applicable under such requirements as appropriate (except
 that the Administrator may not adjust any attainment date prescribed under
 part D, unless such date has elapsed).
 `(5) CORRECTIONS- Whenever the Administrator determines that his action
 approving, disapproving, or promulgating any plan or plan revision
 (or part thereof), area designation, redesignation, classification, or
 reclassification was in error, the Administrator may revise such action
 as appropriate without requiring any further submission from the State.
 `(f) PLAN REVISIONS- The Administrator shall approve a revision to a plan if,
 and only if, the revision (or portion thereof) will not interfere with any
 applicable requirement concerning attainment and reasonable further progress
 (as defined in section 170), or any other applicable requirement of this Act.
 `(g) SANCTIONS AND FEDERAL IMPLEMENTATION PLANS- The Administrator may
 apply any of the sanctions listed in section 179(b), or promulgate a
 Federal implementation plan, at any time (or at any time after), he--
 `(1) finds that a State has failed, for an area designated nonattainment
 under section 110(b), to submit one or more of the elements required by
 the provisions of this Act applicable to such an area, or has failed to
 make a submission for such an area that satisfies the minimum criteria
 established in relation to any such element under section 110(e)(1)(A),
 `(2) disapproves a submission in whole or in part, under section 110(e),
 for an area designated nonattainment under 110(b), based on the submission's
 failure to meet one or more of the elements required by the provisions of
 this Act applicable to such an area,
 `(3)(A) determines that a State has failed to make any submission as may be
 required under this Act, other than one described under paragraph (1) or (2),
 including but not limited to an adequate maintenance plan, or has failed
 to make any submission, as may be required under this Act, other than one
 described under paragraph (1) or (2), that satisfies the minimum criteria
 established in relation to such submission under section 110(e)(1)(A), or
 `(B) disapproves, in whole or in part, a submission described under
 subparagraph (A), or
 `(4) finds that any requirement of an approved plan (or approved part of
 a plan) is not being implemented.
The Administrator may apply such sanction or sanctions, or promulgate a
Federal implementation plan, with respect to any portion of the State he
determines reasonable and appropriate for the purpose of ensuring that the
requirements of this Act relating to such plan or plan revision are met.
 `(h) Savings Clauses-
 `(1) Plan provisions under existing standards-
 `(A) RETENTION OF APPROVED PLAN PROVISIONS- Any provision of any applicable
 implementation plan that was approved or promulgated by the Administrator
 pursuant to section 110 as in effect prior to the date of enactment of
 the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989 shall remain in effect as part of
 such applicable implementation plan, unless a revision to such provision
 is approved or promulgated by the Administrator pursuant to this Act.
 `(B) ATTAINMENT DATES- For any area not designated nonattainment within
 the meaning of section 110(b), any plan or plan revision submitted or
 required to be submitted by a State--
 `(i) in response to the promulgation or revision of a national primary
 ambient air quality standard, or
 `(ii) in response to a finding of substantial inadequacy under section
 110(a)(2)(H)(ii) as in effect immediately prior to the date of enactment
 of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989,
must provide for attainment of the primary national ambient air quality
standards within three years of the date of enactment of the Clean Air
Act Amendments of 1989 or within five years of issuance of such finding of
substantial inadequacy, whichever is later.
 `(2) RETENTION OF CONSTRUCTION MORATORIUM IN CERTAIN AREAS- In the case
 of an area to which, immediately prior to the date of enactment of the
 Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989, the prohibition on construction or
 modification of major stationary sources prescribed in section 110(a)(2)(I)
 (as in effect immediately prior to the date of enactment of the Clean Air
 Act Amendments of 1989) applied by virtue of a finding of the Administrator
 that the State containing such area had not submitted an implementation plan
 meeting the requirements of section 172(b)(6) (relating to establishment
 of a permit program) or 172(a)(1) (to the extent such requirements relate
 to provision for attainment of the primary national ambient air quality
 standard for sulfur oxides by December 31, 1982) as in effect immediately
 prior to the date of enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989,
 no major stationary source of the relevant air pollutant or pollutants
 shall be constructed or modified in such area until the Administrator finds
 that the plan for such area meets the applicable requirements of section
 172(c)(5) (relating to permit programs) or subpart 5 of part D (relating
 to attainment of the primary national ambient air quality standard for
 sulfur oxides), respectively.'.
 (2) Section 110 of the Clean Air Act is amended as follows:
 (A) Redesignate subparagraph (B) of section 110(a)(3) as paragraph (1) of
 section 110(j) and, in this newly designated paragraph, strike the phrase
 `paragraph (2) of this subsection' and insert `subsection (d)'.
 (B) Redesignate subparagraph (C) of section 110(a)(3) as paragraph (2)
 of section 110(j) and, in this newly designated paragraph--
 (i) strike the word `subsection' after the phrase `approved under this'
 and insert `section',
 (ii) strike the reference to subsection (c) and insert `subsection (g)
 or section 180',
 (iii) strike `section 110 (f) or (g)' and insert `section 110 (o) or (p)'.
 (C) Delete subparagraph (D) of section 110(a)(3).
 (D) Delete paragraph (4) of section 110(a).
 (E) Redesignate paragraph (5) of section 110(a) as subsection (k) of
 section 110 and, in this newly designated subsection--
 (i) redesignate the subparagraphs and clauses therein accordingly,
 (ii) in newly designated subparagraph 110(k)(1)(B), strike `subparagraph
 (B)' and insert `paragraph (2)',
 (iii) in newly designated subparagraph 110(k)(1)(C), strike `section 110(a)'
 and insert `this section',
 (iv) in newly designated paragraph 110(k)(2), strike `110(c)' and insert
 `110(g) or section 180',
 (v) in newly designated paragraph 110(k)(3), strike each reference to
 `this paragraph' and insert `this subsection', and, strike `section
 110(c)(2)(D)(ii)' and insert `section 110(m)(2)(A)',
 (vi) in newly designated paragraph 110(k)(4), strike `this paragraph'
 and insert `this subsection', and
 (vii) in newly designated paragraph 110(k)(5), strike `this paragraph and
 paragraph (2)(B)' and insert `this subsection'; and,
 (F) redesignate paragraph (6) of section 110(a) as subsection (e) of
 section 110.
 (3) Section 110 of the Clean Air Act is amended by deleting subsection (b).
 (4) Subsection 110(c) of the Clean Air Act is amended as follows:
 (A) Delete paragraph (1) of section 110(c).
 (B) Delete subparagraph (A) of section 110(c)(2).
 (C) Redesignate subparagraph (B) of section 110(c)(2) as paragraph (1) of
 section 110(m), and, in this newly designated paragraph, strike `paragraph
 (1) of this subsection' and insert `subsection (g) of this subsection or
 under section 180'.
 (D) Delete subparagraph 110(c)(2)(C).
 (E) Redesignate subparagraph (D) of section 110(c)(2) as paragraph (2)
 of section 110(m), redesignate the clauses therein accordingly, and,
 in this newly designated paragraph, strike `this paragraph' and insert
 `this subsection'.
 (F) Redesignate subparagraph (E) of section 110(c)(2) as paragraph (3)
 of section 110(m), and, in this newly designated paragraph, strike `this
 paragraph' and insert `this subsection' and insert `or section 180' after
 `this section'.
 (G) Redesignate paragraph (3) of section 110(c) as paragraph (4) of section
 110(m) and, in this newly designated paragraph, strike each reference to
 `under this subsection' and insert in lieu thereof `under subsection (g)
 or section 180'.
 (H) Delete paragraph (4) of section 110(c)(4).
 (I) Redesignate paragraph (5) of section 110(c) as paragraph (5) of section
 110(m) and, in that newly designated paragraph, delete `(including the
 written evidence required by Part D),'.
 (5) Section 110 of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking subsection
 (d) and inserting the following new subsection:
 `(n) APPLICABLE IMPLEMENTATION PLAN- (1) For purposes of this Act,
 an applicable implementation plan is the portion (or portions) of the
 implementation plan, or most recent revision thereof, which has been
 approved under this section, promulgated under subsection (g) or section
 180, or promulgated or approved pursuant to regulations promulgated under
 section 301(d) and which implements the relevant requirements of the Act.'.
 (6) Section 110 of the Clean Air Act is amended by deleting subsection (e).
 (7) Subsection (f) of section 110 of the Clean Air Act is redesignated as
 subsection (o).
 (8) Section 110 of the Clean Air Act is amended by redesignating subsection
 (g) as subsection (p), and, in this newly designated subsection, striking
 `the required four month period' and inserting `twelve months of submission
 of the proposed plan revision'.
 (9) Section 110 of the Clean Air Act is amended by redesignating subsection
 (h) as (q) and, in this newly designated subsection--
 (A) striking `one year after the date of enactment of the Clean Air Act
 Amendments of 1977 and annually thereafter' and inserting `five years
 after the date of enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989,
 and every three years thereafter'; and
 (B) striking the second sentence of paragraph (1).
 (10) Section 110 of the Clean Air Act is amended by redesignating subsection
 110(i) as subsection 110(r) and, in this newly designated subsection--
 (A) striking `110 (f) or (g)' and inserting `110 (o) or (p)';
 (B) striking `110(c)' and inserting `110(g) or section 180'; and
 (C) striking `110(a)(3)' and inserting `110(f)'.
 (11) Subsection (j) of section 110 of the Clean Air Act is redesignated
 as subsection (s).
 (b) FEDERAL FACILITIES- Section 118(a) of the Clean Air Act is amended by
 inserting `, including fees that meet the requirements of section 402(b)(3)
 or any other reasonable service charges that are equally applicable to
 and paid by facilities owned or operated by State, regional, or local
 government entities,' immediately after the phrase `respecting the control
 and abatement of air pollution'.
 (c) STACK HEIGHTS AND DISPERSION TECHNIQUES- Section 123 of the Clean Air
 Act is amended as follows:
 (1) Amend the second sentence of subsection (a) to read as follows:
 `The preceding sentence shall not apply with respect to stack heights in
 existence, or dispersion techniques implemented before December 31, 1970,
 nor shall it apply to any source that is an `affected source' under title
 V, or that is subject to the new source performance standards issued under
 section 111.'.
 (2) Amend subsection (b) to read as follows:
 `(b) For the purposes of this section, the term `dispersion technique'
 includes any intermittent or supplemental control of air pollutants, by
 a major stationary source, varying with atmospheric conditions, but shall
 not include the use of a single stack for two or more units or sources if
 incorporated into the original design of the facility.'.
 (3) Insert `shall equal the height prescribed by formula as established
 by the Administrator, but' in subsection (c) immediately after `For the
 purposes of this section such height'.
 (4) Insert `and after pollutant emissions have been controlled to levels
 equivalent to section 111 standards applicable to the source category'
 immediately after `as provided under the preceding sentence' in section
 123(c).
 (d) CONFORMITY OF PROJECTS WITH PLANS- Section 176 of the Clean Air Act
 is amended by--
 (1) redesignating subsection (c) as paragraph (1) of section 110(i); and
 (2) redesignating subsection (d) as paragraph (2) of section 110(i) and,
 in this newly designated paragraph striking `those portions of plans
 prepared under this section' in the first sentence, and inserting `the
 plan provisions developed, approved, or promulgated under this Act'.
SEC. 102. GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR NONATTAINMENT AREAS.
 (a) DEFINITIONS AND APPLICABILITY- (1) Part D of title I of the Clean Air
 Act is amended by inserting `SUBPART 1--NONATTAINMENT AREAS IN GENERAL'
 immediately after the heading `Part D--Plan Requirements for Nonattainment
 Areas'.
 (2) Section 171 of the Clean Air Act is amended by redesignating the section
 as 170, inserting immediately after the heading `SUBPART 1--NONATTAINMENT
 AREAS IN GENERAL', and in this newly designated section--
 (A) revising the introductory language to read as follows: `For the purposes
 of this part and section 110(d)(9) and except as otherwise provided in
 this part--';
 (B) revising paragraph (1) to read as follows:
 `(1) The term `reasonable further progress' means such annual incremental
 reductions in emissions of the relevant air pollutant as are required
 by this part or may reasonably be required by the Administrator for the
 purpose of ensuring attainment of the applicable national ambient air
 quality standard by the applicable date.'; and
 (C) revising paragraph (2) to read as follows:
 `(2) The term `nonattainment area' means, for any air pollutant, an area
 which is designated `nonattainment' with respect to that pollutant within
 the meaning of section 110(b).'.
 (3) The Clean Air Act is amended by adding a new section 171 to read
 as follows:
`APPLICABILITY
 `SEC. 171. Each provision of this subpart applies as set forth herein,
 except to the extent it is inconsistent with a provision in another subpart,
 in which case the provision in such other subpart shall apply.'.
 (b) NONATTAINMENT PLAN PROVISIONS IN GENERAL- Section 172 of the Clean
 Air Act is amended to read as follows:
`NONATTAINMENT PLAN PROVISIONS IN GENERAL
 `SEC. 172. (a) Classifications and Attainment Dates-
 `(1) INITIAL CLASSIFICATION- (A) On or after the date the Administrator
 promulgates the designation of an area as nonattainment pursuant to section
 110(b) with respect to any national ambient air quality standard (or any
 revised standard, including a revision of any standard in effect on the date
 of enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989), the Administrator may
 classify the area for the purpose of applying an attainment date pursuant
 to paragraph (2), and for other purposes. In determining the appropriate
 classification, if any, for a nonattainment area, the Administrator may
 consider such factors as the severity of nonattainment in such area and
 the availability and feasibility of the pollution control measures that
 he believes may be necessary to provide for attainment of such standard
 in such area.
 `(B) The Administrator shall publish a notice in the Federal Register
 announcing such classification. Such classification shall not be subject to
 the provisions of sections 553 through 557 of title 5 of the United States
 Code (concerning notice and comment) and shall not be subject to judicial
 review until the Administrator takes final action under subsection (e) or (f)
 (concerning action on plan submissions) or section 179 (concerning sanctions)
 with respect to any plan submissions required by virtue of such designation.
 `(2) Attainment dates for nonattainment areas-
 `(A) The attainment date for an area designated nonattainment with respect
 to a primary national ambient air quality standard shall be the date by
 which attainment can be achieved as expeditiously as practicable, but no
 later than five years from the date such area was designated nonattainment
 under section 110(b), except that the Administrator may extend the attainment
 date to the extent he determines appropriate, for a period no greater than
 twenty years from the date of designation as nonattainment, considering
 the severity of nonattainment and the availability and feasibility of
 pollution control measures.
 `(B) The attainment date for an area designated nonattainment with respect
 to a secondary national ambient air quality standard shall be within a
 reasonable time after the date such area was designated nonattainment
 under section 110(b).
 `(C) Upon application by any State, the Administrator may extend for one
 additional year (the Extension Year) the attainment date determined by
 the Administrator under subparagraph (A) or (B) if--
 `(i) the State has complied with all requirements and commitments pertaining
 to the area in the applicable implementation plan, and
 `(ii) in accordance with guidance issued by the Administrator, no more than
 a minimal number of exceedances of the relevant national ambient air quality
 standard has occurred in the area in the year preceding the Extension Year.
No more than two one-year extensions may be issued under this subparagraph
for a single nonattainment area.
 `(b) SCHEDULE FOR PLAN SUBMISSIONS- At the time the Administrator promulgates
 the designation of an area as nonattainment with respect to a national
 ambient air quality standard under section 110(b), he shall establish a
 schedule according to which the State containing such area shall submit
 a plan or plan revision (including the plan items) meeting the applicable
 requirements of subsection (C) and section 110(d). Such schedule must, at
 a minimum, include a date or dates, extending no later than three years
 from the date of the nonattainment designation, for the submission of a
 plan or plan revision (including the plan items) meeting the applicable
 requirements of subsection (c) and section 110(d).
 `(c) NONATTAINMENT PLAN PROVISIONS- The plan provisions (including plan
 items) required to be submitted pursuant to subsection (b) shall--
 `(1) provide for the implementation, by such dates as the Administrator may
 prescribe, of reasonably available control measures (including measures to
 apply reasonably available control technology) for such emission sources
 or categories of emission sources as the Administrator may identify;
 `(2) require reasonable further progress;
 `(3) include a comprehensive, accurate, current inventory of actual emissions
 from all sources of the relevant pollutant or pollutants in such area,
 including such periodic revisions as the Administrator may determine
 necessary to assure that the requirements of this part are met;
 `(4) expressly identify and quantify the emissions, if any, of any such
 pollutant or pollutants which will be allowed, in accordance with section
 173(a)(1)(B), from the construction and operation of major new or modified
 stationary sources in each such area. The plan shall demonstrate to the
 satisfaction of the Administrator that the emissions quantified for this
 purpose will be consistent with the achievement of reasonable further
 progress and will not interfere with attainment of the applicable national
 ambient air quality standard by the applicable attainment date;
 `(5) require permits for the construction and operation of new or modified
 major stationary sources anywhere in the nonattainment area, in accordance
 with section 173; and
 `(6) include enforceable emission limitations, schedules and timetables
 for compliance, and such other measures, means or techniques (including
 economic incentives such as fees, marketable permits, and auctions of
 emissions rights) as the Administrator may determine to be necessary or
 appropriate to provide for attainment of such standard in such area by
 the attainment date specified in subsection (a).
 `(d) PLAN REVISIONS REQUIRED IN RESPONSE TO FINDING OF PLAN INADEQUACY- Any
 plan revision for a nonattainment area which is required to be submitted in
 response to a finding by the Administrator pursuant to section 110(e)(4)
 must correct the plan deficiency (or deficiencies) specified by the
 Administrator and meet all other applicable plan requirements of section
 110 and this part. The Administrator may reasonably adjust the dates
 otherwise applicable under such requirements to such revision (except
 for attainment dates), to the extent necessary to achieve a consistent
 application of such requirements.'.
 (c) NEW SOURCE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS- Section 173 of the Clean Air Act is
 amended by--
 (1) inserting `(a)' after `SEC. 173.';
 (2) inserting at the beginning of paragraph (1) of section 173(a) the
 following: `in accordance with regulations issued by the Administrator
 for the determination of baseline emissions in a manner consistent with
 the assumptions underlying the applicable implementation plan approved
 under section 110(e) and this part,';
 (3) in subparagraph (A) of section 173(a)(1)--
 (A) inserting `sufficient offsetting emissions reductions have been
 obtained, such that' immediately after the comma following `operation'
 in the first phrase,
 (B) striking `allowed under the applicable implementation plan' and
 inserting `(as determined in accordance with the regulations described in
 this paragraph)', and
 (C) striking `171' and inserting `170';
 (4) in subparagraph (B) of section 173(a)(1)--
 (A) inserting `in the case of a new or modified major stationary source
 which is located in a zone (within the nonattainment area) identified by
 the Administrator, in consultation with the Secretary of Housing and Urban
 Development, as a zone to which economic development should be targeted,'
 at the beginning thereof, and
 (B) striking `172(b)' and inserting `172(c)';
 (5) in paragraph (4) of section 173(a)--
 (A) inserting `The Administrator has not determined that' at the start
 thereof;
 (B) striking `being carried out' and inserting `not being adequately
 implemented'; and
 (C) replacing the period at the end thereof with a semicolon;
 (6) adding a new paragraph (5) to newly designated subsection 173(a),
 to read as follows:
 `(5) an analysis of alternative sites, sizes, production processes, and
 environmental control techniques for such proposed source demonstrates that
 benefits of the proposed source significantly outweigh the environmental
 and social costs imposed as a result of its location, construction,
 or modification.';
 (7) striking `(1)(A) shall be legally binding' in the concluding sentence of
 a newly designated section 173(a) immediately following the phrase `a permit
 under paragraph', and inserting `(1) shall be federally enforceable'; and
 (8) adding a new subsection (b) to read as follows:
 `(b) PROHIBITION ON USE OF OLD GROWTH ALLOWANCES- Any growth allowance
 included in an applicable implementation plan to meet the requirements of
 section 172(b)(5) (as in effect immediately before the date of enactment
 of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989) shall not be valid for use in any
 area that received or receives a notice under section 110(a)(2)(H)(ii)
 (as in effect immediately before the date of enactment of the Clean Air
 Act Amendments of 1989) or under section 110(e)(4) that its applicable
 implementation plan containing such allowance is substantially inadequate.'.
 (d) PLANNING PROCEDURES- Section 174 of the Clean Air Act is amended to
 read as follows:
`PLANNING PROCEDURES
 `SEC. 174. IN GENERAL- (a) For any ozone or carbon monoxide nonattainment
 area, the State containing such area and elected officials of affected
 local governments shall, prior to the date required for submittal of
 the inventory described under sections 182(a)(1) and 187(a)(1), jointly
 review and update as necessary the planning procedures adopted pursuant to
 this subsection as in effect immediately before the date of enactment of
 the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989, or develop new planning procedures
 pursuant to this subsection, as appropriate. In preparing such procedures
 the State and local elected officials shall determine which elements of a
 revised implementation plan will be developed, adopted, and implemented
 (through means including enforcement) by the State and which by local
 governments or regional agencies, or any combination of local governments,
 regional agencies, or the State. The implementation plan required by this
 part shall be prepared by an organization certified by the State for this
 purpose. Where such an organization has not been designated by agreement
 within six months after enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989,
 the Governor, after consultation with elected officials of local governments
 and in accordance with the detemination under the second sentence of this
 subsection, shall designate an organization to prepare such plan. Such
 organization shall include elected officials of local governments in the
 affected area, and representatives of the State air quality planning
 agency, the State transportation planning agency, the metropolitan
 planning organization designated to conduct the continuing, cooperative and
 comprehensive transportation planning process for the area under section
 134 of title 23, United States Code, the Organization responsible for the
 air quality maintenance planning process under regulations implementing
 this Act, and any other organization with responsibilities for developing,
 submitting, or impelmenting the plan required by this part.
 `(b) COORDINATION- The preparation of implementation plan provisions and
 subsequent plan revisions under the continuing transportation-air quality
 planing process described in section 108(e) shall be coordinated with the
 continuing, cooperative and comprehensive transportation planning process
 required under section 134 of title 23, United States Code, and such
 planning processes shall take into account the requirements of this part.
 `(c) JOINT PLANNING- In the case of a nonattainment area that is included
 within more than one State, the affected States may jointly, through
 interstate compact or otherwise, undertake and implement all or part of
 the planning procedures described in this section.'.
 (e) MAINTENANCE PLANS- Section 175 of the Clean Air Act is amended to read
 as follows:
`MAINTENANCE PLANS
 `SEC. 175. The maintenance plan required under section 110(b)(3)(C) as a
 precondition to redesignation of an area shall provide for the maintenance of
 the national ambient air quality standard for the relevant air pollutant in
 such area for at least ten years after the date the redesignation petition
 is submitted to the Administrator.'.
 (f) INTERSTATE TRANSPORT PROVISIONS-
 (1) INTERSTATE TRANSPORT COMMISSIONS- The section heading for section
 176 is amended to read: `SEC. 176. INTERSTATE TRANSPORT COMMISSIONS' and
 section 176 of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking subsections (a)
 and (b) and inserting the following:
 `(a) AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH INTERSTATE TRANSPORT REGIONS- Whenever,
 on his own motion or by petition from the Governor of any State, the
 Administrator has reason to believe that the interstate transport of air
 pollutants from one or more States contributes significantly to a violation
 of a national ambient air quality standard in one or more other States,
 he may establish a transport region for such pollutant that includes such
 States. The Administrator, on his own motion or upon petition from the
 Governor of any State, or upon the recommendation of a transport commission
 established under subsection (b), may--
 `(1) add any State or portion of a State to any region established under
 this subsection whenever he has reason to believe that the interstate
 transport of air pollutants from such State significantly contributes to
 a violation of the standard in the transport region, or
 `(2) remove any State or portion of a State from the region whenever he has
 reason to believe that the control of emissions in that State or portion
 of the State pursuant to this section will not significantly contribute
 to the attainment of the standard in any area in the region.
The Administrator shall approve or disapprove any such petition or
recommendation within eighteen months of its receipt.
 `(b) Transport Commissions-
 `(1) Whenever the Administrator establishes a transport region under
 subsection (a), he shall establish a transport commission comprised of
 the following members:
 `(A) An air pollution control official representing each State in the
 region, appointed by the Governor;
 `(B) the Administrator or his designee; and
 `(C) the Regional Administrator (or his designee) for each Regional Office
 for each Environmental Protection Agency Region affected by the transport
 region concerned. Decisions of, and recommendations and requests to the
 Administrator by, each transport commission may be made only by a majority
 vote of all members other than the Administrator and Regional Administrators
 (or designees thereof).
 `(2) The transport commission shall assess the degree of interstate transport
 of the pollutant or precursors to the pollutant throughout the transport
 region, assess strategies for mitigating the interstate pollution, and
 recommend to the Administrator such measures as the Commission determines,
 by majority vote, to be necessary to ensure that the plans for the relevant
 States meet the requirements of section 110(d)(4). Such commission shall
 not be subject to the provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act
 (5 U.S.C. App.).
 `(c) COMMISSION REQUESTS- A transport commission established under subsection
 (b) may request the Administrator to issue a finding under section 110(e)(4)
 that the implementation plan for one or more of the States in the transport
 region is substantially inadequate to meet the requirements of section
 110(d)(4). The Administrator shall approve, disapprove, or partially approve
 and partially disapprove such a request within eighteen months of its receipt
 and, to the extent he approves such request, issue the finding under section
 110(e)(4) to that extent at the time of such approval. In acting on such
 request, the Administrator shall address each specific recommendation
 made by the commission. Approval or disapproval of such a request shall
 constitute final agency action within the meaning of section 307(b).'.
 (2) AMENDMENTS CONFORMING TO TRANSPORT PROVISIONS- Section 106 of the
 Clean Air Act is amended by--
 (A) inserting `or of implementing section 176 (relating to control of
 interstate air pollution)' immediately following `section 107';
 (B) inserting `any commission established under section 176 (relating
 to control of interstate ozone air pollution) or' immediately following
 `program costs of';
 (C) inserting `or such commission' in the last sentence immediately following
 `such agency'; and
 (D) inserting `or commission' at the end thereof, immediately before
 the period.
 (g) SANCTIONS AND FEDERAL PLANS- Subpart 1 of part D of the Clean Air Act
 is amended by adding new sections 179 and 180 to the end thereof to read
 as follows:
`SANCTIONS AND CONSEQUENCES OF FAILURE TO ATTAIN
 `SEC. 179. (a) INITIAL REASONABLE EFFORTS DETERMINATION- For any
 implementation plan or plan revision required under this part (or required
 in response to a finding of substantial inadequacy as described in section
 110(e)(4)), at such time as the Administrator--
 `(1) finds that a State has failed, for an area designated nonattainment
 under section 110(b), to submit one or more of the elements required by
 the provisions of this Act applicable to such an area, or has failed to
 make a submission for such an area that satisfies the minimum criteria
 established in relation to any such element under section 110(e)(1)(A),
 `(2) disapproves a submission in whole or in part, under section 110(e),
 for an area designated nonattainment under 110(b), based on the submission's
 failure to meet one or more of the elements required by the provisions of
 this Act applicable to such an area,
 `(3)(A) determines that a State has failed to make any submission as may be
 required under this Act, other than one described under paragraph (1) or (2),
 including but not limited to, an adequate maintenance plan, or has failed
 to make any submission, as may be required under this Act, other than one
 described under paragraph (1) or (2), that satisfies the minimum criteria
 established in relation to such submission under section 110(e)(1)(A), or
 `(B) disapproves, in whole or in part, a submission described under
 subparagraph (A), or
 `(4) finds that any requirement of an approved plan (or approved part of
 a plan) is not being implemented,
he shall (and at any other time the Administrator may) publish in the Federal
Register a proposed determination of whether the State is making reasonable
efforts to cure the relevant failure. If the Administrator proposes to
determine that the State is not making reasonable efforts to cure the failure,
he shall simultaneously propose to apply, with respect to the relevant area
within such State, at least one of the sanctions specified in subsection
(b) (for the purposes of encouraging the State to undertake reasonable
efforts and preventing further deterioration of the State's air quality)
and describe why application of such sanction or sanctions is appropriate
under the circumstances. The Administrator shall take final action on
these proposals no later than six months after the date such proposals are
published. If the Administrator makes a final determination that the State
is not making reasonable efforts, he shall simultaneously apply at least
one of the sanctions listed in subsection (b), to take effect no later than
sixty days following final action. No sanction under subsection (b), imposed
because of a failure by a State, may be applied, based on such failure,
outside the borders of that State.
 `(b) AVAILABLE SANCTIONS- (1) A moratorium on the construction
 or modification of any major stationary source (as defined in section
 302(j)) of the relevant pollutant or pollutants in the nonattainment area
 (or portion thereof, where the Administrator in his discretion determines
 that the State failure relates exclusively to such portion). Where the
 State failure relates to ozone, the moratorium is available with respect
 to both the nonattainment area and the area within 25 miles of the boundary
 of such area.
 `(2) Upon a finding by the Administrator under section 110 (g)(1) or
 (g)(2), or under section 179 (a)(1) or (a)(2), where the Administrator
 believes that attainment and maintenance of a national ambient air
 quality standard cannot reasonably be achieved without the inclusion of
 transportation control measures in the applicable implementation plan,
 the Secretary of Transportation, upon selection by the Administrator of
 the sanction described in this paragraph, shall not approve any project
 or award any grant under title 23, United States Code, other than for:
 `(A) safety,
 `(B) mass transit, or
 `(C) transportation projects related to air quality improvement or
 maintenance.
The Secretary shall consult with the Administrator before approving any
project under paragraph (C). This sanction may be imposed as to a particular
nonattainment area (or portion thereof) located within a particular State,
no more than once in each of the consecutive five-year periods beginning
with the date of enactment of this section.
 `(3) An order by the Administrator prohibiting any public water system
 regulated under title XIV of the Public Health Service Act from providing
 drinking water service in the nonattainment area (or portion thereof,
 where the State failure relates exclusively to such portion) to any
 structure to which such service was not provided before the Administrator's
 determination under this section that the State is not making reasonable
 efforts, except that the Administrator may not prohibit any public water
 system from providing water service to any customer requiring such service
 to correct an existing public health hazard.
 `(4) A withholding of all or part of the grants for support of air
 pollution planning and control programs that the Administrator may award
 under section 105.
 `(c) SUBSEQUENT REASONABLE EFFORTS DETERMINATIONS- Except as provided
 under subsection (d), not later than twelve months after the Administrator
 takes final action on a reasonable efforts determination under subsection
 (a) or under this subsection, he shall publish in the Federal Register,
 in accordance with the procedures under subsection (a), one of the following:
 `(1) In the case of a State that had previously been determined to be
 making reasonable efforts, a determination of whether the State still is
 making reasonable efforts. If the Administrator determines that the State
 no longer is making reasonable efforts, he shall follow the procedure under
 subsection (a) relating to a finding that a State is not making reasonable
 efforts (including applying at least one sanction).
 `(2) In the case of a State that had previously been determined not to
 be making reasonable efforts, a determination of whether the State now is
 making reasonable efforts, and
 `(A) if the Administrator determines that the State is making reasonable
 efforts, he shall lift any sanctions previously imposed, or
 `(B) if the Administrator determines that the State still is not making
 reasonable efforts, he shall determine, in his discretion, whether it
 is necessary to apply one or more additional sanctions under subsection
 (b) to further encourage the State or cure its failure. In the event
 the Administrator decides to apply another sanction, he shall follow
 the procedure described in subsection (a); if he decides not to apply
 another sanction, he shall explain the basis for his decision in the
 Federal Register.
 `(d) FAILURE TO SUBMIT REVIEWABLE PLAN WITHIN EIGHTEEN MONTHS OF THE
 REQUIRED DATE- Notwithstanding any provision of subsection (c), if the
 Administrator has determined that a State has failed to submit, within
 eighteen months following the date that it was due, an implementation plan
 or plan revision required under this part that meets the minimum criteria,
 if any, established under section 110(e)(1)(A), the Administrator shall, no
 later than six months after such eighteen-month period, take any final action
 necessary to assure that at least one of the sanctions under subsection
 (b) is in effect within sixty days of the date of such final action. Such
 sanction shall remain in effect until the Administrator determines that
 the State has made such submission.
 `(e) NOTICE OF FAILURE TO ATTAIN- (1) As expeditiously as practicable after
 the applicable attainment date for any nonattainment area, the Administrator
 shall determine, based on the area's air quality as of the attainment date,
 whether the area attained the standard by that date.
 (2) Upon making the determination under paragraph (1), the Administrator
 shall publish a notice in the Federal Register identifying each area that
 he has determined to have failed to attain. The Administrator may revise or
 supplement such determination at any time based on more complete information
 or analysis concerning the area's air quality as of the attainment date.
 `(f) CONSEQUENCES FOR FAILURE TO ATTAIN- (1) At the time the Administrator
 publishes the notice under subsection (e)(2), he shall establish a schedule
 according to which the State containing the nonattainment area shall submit
 a revision to the applicable implementation plan meeting the requirements of
 paragraph (2) of this subsection. Such schedule must, at a minimum, include
 a date or dates, extending no later than three years from the date of the
 notice under subsection (e)(2), for the submission of the plan revision.
 `(2) The revision required under paragraph (1) shall meet the requirements of
 section 110(d) and section 172(c). In addition, the revision shall include
 such additional measures as the Administrator may reasonably prescribe
 (including all measures that can feasibly be implemented in the area in
 light of technological achievability, costs, and any nonair quality and
 other air quality-related health and environmental impacts).
 `(3) The attainment date applicable to the revision required under paragraph
 (1) shall be the same as provided in section 172(a)(2), except that the
 phrase `from the date of the notice required under section 179(e)(2)'
 shall be substituted for the phrase `such area was designated nonattainment
 under section 110(b)' and for the phrase `designation of nonattainment'.
 `(g) CONSTRUCTION BANS- No major stationary source of any pollutant shall
 be constructed or modified in a nonattainment area for such pollutant
 after December 31, 1992, or forty two months from the date such area was
 designated nonattainment for such pollutant, whichever is later, unless,
 as of the later of such dates, the Administrator has approved a plan
 submission for the area meeting the requirements of section 172(c)(5) with
 respect to such pollutant. Before the later of the dates set forth above,
 no State shall issue a permit for construction or modification of a major
 stationary source unless such permit meets the requirements of section 173.
`FEDERAL IMPLEMENTATION PLANS
 `SEC. 180. (a) GENERAL AUTHORITY- The Administrator may promulgate a
 Federal implementation plan at any time after he--
 `(1) finds that a State has failed to make a required submission or finds
 that the plan or plan revision submitted by the State does not satisfy
 the minimum criteria established under section 110(e)(1)(A), or
 `(2) disapproves a State implementation plan submission in whole or in part.
 `(b) REQUIREMENT FOLLOWING REASONABLE EFFORTS DETERMINATION- At the
 time the Administrator proposes under section 179(c) to determine that
 a State is not making reasonable efforts, he shall also decide, in his
 discretion, whether to propose to promulgate a Federal implementation
 plan. In determining whether to promulgate a Federal implementation
 plan, the Administrator shall consider the practicality of issuing
 and implementing (including enforcing) such a plan, the severity of the
 nonattainment problem, the amount of time remaining before the attainment
 date, the amount of emissions reductions that would be achieved by the
 plan, costs, and the nature of the State's efforts to cure the relevant
 failure. He shall describe the Federal Register each State failure and,
 for each failure, the reasons that he is proposing to promulgate or not
 to promulgate a Federal implementation plan. The Administrator shall take
 final action on such proposal within six months. The Administrator may
 promulgate a plan only if such a plan results in significant additional
 progress toward meeting the requirements of this Act.
 `(c) FEDERAL IMPLEMENTATION PLAN OBLIGATIONS- The Administrator shall
 not be required to promulgate any Federal implementation plan initiated
 or required under section 110(c) as in effect immediately before the
 date of enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989, regardless
 of whether the promulgation of such a plan was ordered (or was required
 under a settlement agreement entered) by a court of law prior to the date
 of enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989.'.
SEC. 103. ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR OZONE NONATTAINMENT AREAS.
 Part D of title I of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new subpart after subpart 1:
`Subpart 2--Additional Provisions for Ozone Nonattainment Areas
`Sec. 181. Classifications and attainment dates.
`Sec. 182. Plan submissions and requirements.
`Sec. 183. Federal ozone measures.
`Sec. 184. Northeast transport region and commission.
`Sec. 185. Sanction for severe ozone nonattainment areas for failure to attain.
CLASSIFICATIONS AND ATTAINMENT DATES
 `Sec. 181. (a) CLASSIFICATION AND ATTAINMENT DATES FOR 1988 NONATTAINMENT
 AREAS- (1) Each area designated nonattainment for ozone pursuant to
 section 110(b)(4) is hereby classified under table 1, by operation of
 law, as a marginal area, a moderate area, a serious area, or a severe
 area, based on the design value for the area. The design value shall
 be calculated according to the interpretation methodology issued by the
 United States Environmental Protection Agency most recently before the
 date of enactment of this section. For each area classified under this
 subsection, the primary national ambient air quality standard attainment
 date for ozone shall be as provided in table 1.
`Table 1
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Area classification Design value Primary standard attainment date
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Marginal .13 ppm December 31, 1995.
 Moderate .14-.15 ppm December 31, 1995.
 Serious .16-.18 ppm December 31, 2000.
 Severe .19 ppm and above As expeditiously as practicable,
 but no later than December 31, 2010.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 `(2) At the time of publication of the notice required under section
 110(b)(4) (promulgating ozone area designations), the Administrator shall
 publish a notice announcing the classification (as may be adjusted under
 paragraph (4)) of each ozone nonattainment area. The provisions of section
 172(a)(1)(B) (relating to lack of notice-and-comment and judicial review)
 shall apply to such classification.
 `(3) An area designated nonattainment for ozone under section
 110(b)(1)(C)(i), but the design value of which is less than .13 ppm,
 shall be classified as a marginal area.
 `(4) ADJUSTMENT OF CLASSIFICATION FOR BORDERLINE AREAS- If an area
 classified under paragraph (1), table 1, would have been classified in
 another category if the design value in the area were 5 per centum greater
 or 5 per centum less than the level on which such classification was based,
 the Administrator may, in his descretion, by the procedure required under
 paragraph (2), adjust the classification to place the area in such other
 category. In making such adjustment, the Administrator may consider the
 number of exceedances of the national primary ambient air quality standard
 for ozone in the area, the level of pollution transport between the area and
 other affected areas, and the mix of sources and air pollutants in the area.
 `(5) Upon application by any State, the Administrator may extend for one
 additional year (the `Extension Year') the date specified in table 1 of
 subsection (a) if--
 `(A) the State has complied with all requirements and commitments pertaining
 to the area in the applicable implementation plan, and
 `(B) no more than one exceedance of the national ambient air quality
 standard level for ozone has occurred in the area in the year preceding
 the Extension Year.
No more than two one-year extensions may be issued under this paragraph for
a single nonattainment area.
 `(b) New Designations and Reclassifications-
 `(1) NEW DESIGNATIONS TO NONATTAINMENT- Any area that is designated
 attainment or unclassifiable for ozone under section 110(b)(4), and that
 is subsequently redesignated to nonattainment for ozone under section
 110(b)(3), shall, at the time of the redesignation, be classified by
 operation of law in accordance with table 1 under subsections (a)(1)
 and (a)(4). Upon its classification, the area shall be subject to the
 same requirements under section 110, subpart 1 of this part, and this
 subpart that would have applied had the area been so classified at the
 time of the notice under subsection (a)(2), except that any absolute,
 fixed date applicable in connection with any such requirement is extended
 by operation of law by a period equal to the length of time between the
 date of enactment of this section and the date the area is classified.
 `(2) RECLASSIFICATION UPON FAILURE TO ATTAIN- (A) Within six months
 following the applicble attainment date for an ozone nonattainment area,
 the Administrator shall determine, based on the area's design value as
 of the attainment date, whether the area attained the standard by that
 date. Except for any severe area, any area that the Administrator finds has
 not attained the standard by that date shall be reclassified by operation
 of law in accordance with table 1 of subsection (a)(1) to the higher of--
 `(i) the next higher classification for the area, or
 `(ii) the classification applicable to the area's design value as determined
 at the time of the notice required under subparagraph (B).
 `(B) The Administrator shall publish a notice in the Federal Register, no
 later than six months following the attainment date, identifying each area
 that he has determined under subparagraph (A) as having failed to attain and
 identifying the reclassification, if any, described under subparagraph (A).
 `(c) REFERENCES TO TERMS- (1) Any reference in this subpart to a `marginal
 area', a `moderate area', a `serious area', or a `severe area' shall be
 considered a reference to a marginal ozone nonattainment area, a moderate
 ozone nonattainment area, a serious ozone nonattainment area, or a severe
 ozone nonattainment area as classified under this section.
 `(2) Any reference in this subpart to `next higher classification' or
 comparable terms shall be considered a reference to the classification
 related to the next higher set of design values in table 1.
`PLAN SUBMISSIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
 `SEC. 182. (a) MARGINAL AREAS- Each State in which all or part of a marginal
 area is located shall, with respect to the marginal area (or portion thereof,
 to the extent specified in this subsection), submit to the Administrator the
 State implementation plan revisions (including the plan items) described
 under paragraphs (1), (2), and (3), except to the extent the State has
 made such submissions as of the date of enactment of this section.
 `(1) INVENTORY- Within two years of the date of enactment of this section,
 the State shall submit a comprehensive, accurate, current inventory of
 actual emissions from all sources, as described in section 172(c)(3),
 in accordance with guidance provided by the Administrator.
 `(2) CORRECTIONS TO THE STATE IMPLEMENTATION PLAN- Within the periods
 prescribed in this paragraph, the State shall submit a revision to the
 State implementation plan that meets the following requirements--
 `(A) REASONABLY AVAILABLE CONTROL TECHNOLOGY CORRECTIONS- For any marginal
 area (or, within the Administrator's discretion, portion thereof) the State
 shall submit, within six months of the date of classification under section
 181(a)(2), a revision that includes such provisions to correct requirements
 in (or add requirements to) the plan concerning reasonably available control
 technology as were required under section 172(b) (as in effect immediately
 before the date of enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989),
 as interpreted in guidance issued by the United States Environmental
 Protection Agency prior to the date of enactment of this section.
 `(B) SAVINGS CLAUSE FOR VEHICLE INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE- For any marginal
 area (or, within the Administrator's discretion, portion thereof), the
 plan for which already includes, or was required by section 172(b)(11)(B)
 (as in effect immediately before the date of enactment of the Clean Air Act
 Amendments of 1989) to have included, a specific schedule for implementation
 of a vehicle emission control inspection and maintenance program, the State
 shall submit, immediately after the date of enactment of this section, a
 revision that includes any provisions necessary to provide for a vehicle
 inspection and maintenance program of no less stringency than that of
 either the program defined in House Report Numbered 95-294, 95th Congress,
 1st Session, 281-291 (1977) as interpreted in guidance of the Administrator
 issued pursuant to section 172(b)(11)(B) (as in effect immediately before the
 date of enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989) or the program
 already included in the plan, whichever is more stringent. No later than
 two years after the Administrator promulgates regulations under section
 202(g)(3), the State shall submit a revision to such program to meet any
 requirements that the Administrator prescribes under that section.
 `(C) NEW SOURCE REVIEW- Within two years of the date of enactment of
 this section, the State shall submit a revision that includes each of
 the following:
 `(i) Provisions to require permits, in accordance with sections 172(c)(5)
 and 173, for the construction and operation of each new or modified major
 stationary source (with respect to ozone) to be located in the area.
 `(ii) Provisions to correct requirements in (or add requirements to) the
 plan concerning permit programs as were required under section 172(b)(6)
 (as in effect immediately before the date of enactment of this section),
 as interpreted in regulations of the Administrator promulgated as of the
 date of enactment of this section.
 `(3) Periodic inventory-
 `(A) GENERAL REQUIREMENT- By September 30, 1996, and no later than the
 end of each three-year period thereafter, until the area is redesignated
 to attainment, the State shall submit a revised inventory meeting the
 requirements of subsection (a)(1).
 `(B) Emissions statements-
 `(i) Within two years of the date of enactment of this section, the State
 shall submit a revision to the State implementation plan to require that
 the owner or operator of each stationary source of oxides of nitrogen or
 volatile organic compounds provide the State with a statement, in such
 form as the Administrator may prescribe (or the State may prescribe,
 if the Administrator does not) for classes or categories of sources,
 showing the actual emissions of oxides of nitrogen and volatile organic
 compounds from that source during the previous calendar year. The first
 such statement shall be submitted within two years of the date of enactment
 of this section. Subsequent statements shall be submitted at least every
 year thereafter.
 `(ii) The State may waive the application of subparagraph (A) to any class
 or category of stationary sources which emit less than twenty-five tons
 per year of volatile organic compounds or oxides of nitrogen if the State,
 in it submissions under subparagraphs (1) or (3)(A), provides an inventory
 of emissions from such class or category of sources, based on the use of
 the emission factors established by the Administrator or other methods
 acceptable to the Administrator.
The Administrator may, in his discretion, require States to submit a
schedule for submitting any of the revisions or other items required under
this subsection. The requirements of this subsection shall apply in lieu of
any requirement that the State submit a demonstration that the applicable
implementation plan provides for attainment of the ozone standard by the
applicable attainment date in any marginal area.
 `(b) MODERATE AREAS- Each State in which all or part of a moderate area
 is located shall, with respect to the moderate area, make the submissions
 described under subsection (a) (relating to marginal areas), and submit
 the revisions to the applicable implementation plan described under this
 subsection.
 `(1) Plan provisions for reasonable further progress-
 `(A) GENERAL RULE- By no later than three years from the date of enactment
 of this section, the State shall submit a revision to the applicable
 implementation plan to provide, and a demonstration that the plan as
 revised will provide, for emission reductions, by December 31, 1995, of
 at least 15 per centum from baseline emissions, accounting for any growth
 in emissions after the year of enactment of this section.
 `(B) BASELINE EMISSIONS- For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `baseline
 emissions' is defined as the total amount of actual VOC emissions from
 all sources in the moderate area during the calendar year of enactment
 of this section, excluding emissions that would be eliminated under the
 regulations described in subparagraph (D) (i) and (ii).
 `(C) GENERAL RULE FOR CREDITABILITY OF REDUCTIONS- Except as provided
 under subparagraph (D), emissions reductions are creditable toward the
 15 per centum required under subparagraph (A) to the extent they have
 actually occurred, as of December 31, 1995, from the implementation of
 measures required under either the applicable implementation plan or rules
 promulgated by the Administrator.
 `(D) LIMITS ON CREDITABILITY OF REDUCTIONS- Emission reductions from the
 following measures are not creditable toward the 15 per centum reductions
 required under subparagraph (A):
 `(i) Any measure relating to motor vehicle tailpipe or evaporative emissions
 promulgated by the Administrator by the date of enactment of this section.
 `(ii) Regulations concerning Reid Vapor Pressure promulgated by the
 Administrator by the date of enactment of this section or required to be
 promulgated under section 211(h).
 `(iii) Measures required under subsection (a)(2)(A) (concerning corrections
 to implementation plans prescribed under guidance by the Administrator).
 `(iv) Measures required under subsection (a)(2)(B) to be submitted
 immediately after the date of enactment of this section (concerning motor
 vehicle inspection and maintenance).
 `(E) EXEMPTION FROM CERTAIN OTHER REQUIREMENTS- The requirement to submit
 a revision under subparagraph (A) shall apply in lieu of--
 `(i) the requirement under sections 172(c)(2) and 170(i) (concerning
 reasonable further progress), and
 `(ii) any requirement that the State submit a demonstration that the
 applicable implementation plan provides for attainment of the ozone standard
 by the applicable attainment date in any moderate area.
 `(2) REASONABLY AVAILABLE CONTROL TECHNOLOGY- The State shall submit a
 revision or revisions to the applicable implementation plan to include
 provisions to require the implementation of reasonably available control
 technology, under section 172(b)(1), with respect to--
 `(A) each category of VOC sources in the area covered by a Control Techniques
 Guideline (CTG) document issued by the Administrator between the date of
 enactment of this section and the date of attainment;
 `(B) all VOC sources in the area covered by any CTG issued before the date
 of enactment of this section; and
 `(C) all other stationary sources with the potential to emit at least one
 hundred tons per year of VOC's and that are located in the area.
Each revision described in subparagraph (A) shall be submitted within the
period set forth by the Administrator in issuing the relevant CTG document. The
revisions described in subparagraphs (B) and (C) shall be submitted by two
years after the date of enactment of this section, and shall provide for the
implementation of the required measures as expeditiously as practicable but
no later than May 31, 1995.
 `(3) Gasoline vapor recovery-
 `(A) GENERAL RULE- Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act,
 not later than two years after the date of enactment of this section,
 the State shall submit a revision to the applicable implementation plan to
 require all owners or operators of gasoline dispensing systems (except as
 the Administrator may, in his discretion, otherwise provide with respect
 to owners or operators of gasoline dispensing systems at small gasoline
 dispensing facilities) to install and operate, by the date prescribed under
 subparagraph (B), a system for gasoline vapor recovery of emissions from
 the fueling of motor vehicles. The Administrator shall issue guidance as
 appropriate as to the effectiveness of such system.
 `(B) EFFECTIVE DATE- The date required under subparagraph (A) shall be--
 `(i) six months after the adoption date, in the case of gasoline dispensing
 facilities for which construction commenced after the date of enactment
 of this section;
 `(ii) one year after the adoption date, in the case of gasoline dispensing
 facilities which dispense at least one hundred thousand gallons of gasoline
 per month, based on average monthly sales for the two-year period prior
 to the adoption date; or
 `(iii) two years after the adoption date, in the case of all other gasoline
 dispensing facilities.
Any gasoline dispensing facility described under both clause (i) and clause
(ii) shall meet the requirements of clause (i).
 `(C) Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to prohibit any State from
 adopting or enforcing any regulations related to any system for gasoline
 vapor recovery of emissions from the fueling of motor vehicles that are
 more stringent than the requirements of this paragraph.
 `(D) REFERENCE TO TERMS- For purposes of this paragraph, any reference to the
 term `adoption date' shall be considered a reference to the date of adoption
 by the State of requirements for the installation and operation of a system
 for gasoline vapor recovery of emissions from the fueling of motor vehicles.
 `(c) SERIOUS AREAS- Except as otherwise specified in paragraph (3), each
 State in which all or part of a serious area is located shall, with respect
 to the serious area (or portion thereof, to the extent specified in this
 subsection), make the submissions described under subsection (b) (relating
 to moderate areas), and submit the revisions to the applicable implementation
 plan (including the plan items) described under this subsection.
 `(1) ATTAINMENT AND REASONABLE FURTHER PROGRESS DEMONSTRATIONS- By December
 31, 1995, the State shall submit a revision to the applicable implementation
 plan that includes--
 `(A) ATTAINMENT DEMONSTRATION- A demonstration that the plan, as revised,
 will provide for attainment of the ozone national ambient air quality
 standard by the applicable attainment date. This attainment demonstration
 must be based on photochemical grid modelling or any other analytical
 method determined by the Administrator, in his discretion, to be at least
 as effective;
 `(B) REASONABLE FURTHER PROGRESS DEMONSTRATION- Except as provided under
 subparagraph (C), a demonstration that the plan, as revised, will result in
 VOC emissions reductions from the baseline emissions described in subsection
 (b)(1)(B) equal to the following amount, averaged over each consecutive
 three-year period beginning January 1, 1996 until the attainment date--
 `(i) at least 3 per centum of each baseline emissions each year;
 `(ii) an amount less than 3 per centum of such baseline emissions each year,
 if the State demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Administrator that the
 plan reflecting such lesser amount includes all measures that can feasibly
 be implemented in the area, in light of technological achievability,
 costs, and any nonair quality and other air quality-related health and
 environmental impacts; or
 `(iii) an amount less than 3 per centum of such baseline emissions each
 year, if the State demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Administrator
 that no greater than such amount is necessary to provide for attainment
 by the attainment date.
The emission reductions described in clauses (i), (ii), and (iii) shall
be calculated in accordance with subsection (b)(1)(C) and (D) (concerning
creditability of reductions). The reductions creditable for the year beginning
January 1, 1996, may include reductions that occurred by December 31, 1995,
computed in accordance with paragraph (b)(1), that exceed the 15-per centum
amount of reductions required under subparagraph (b)(1)(A). The requirements
of this subparagraph apply in lieu of the requirements under section 172(c)(2)
and 170(1) (concerning reasonable further progress).
 `(C) NOX control- The revision may contain, in lieu of the demonstration
 required under subparagraph (B), a demonstration to the satisfaction of the
 Administrator that the applicable implementation plan, as revised, provides
 for reductions of emissions of VOC's and oxides of nitrogen (calculated
 according to the creditability provisions of subsection (b)(1)(C) and
 (D)), that would result in a reduction in ozone concentrations at least
 equivalent to that which would result from the amount of VOC emission
 reductions required under subparagraph (B).
 `(2) Enhanced vehicle inspection and maintenance program-
 `(A) REQUIREMENT FOR SUBMISSION- Within two years from the date of enactment
 of this section, the State shall submit a revision to the applicable
 implementation plan to provide for an enhanced program to reduce hydrocarbon
 emissions from in-use motor vehicles registered in each urbanized area
 (in the nonattainment area), as defined by the Bureau of the Census,
 with a 1980 population of two hundred thousand or more.
 `(B) GUIDANCE- The State program required under subparagraph (A) shall take
 effect no later than two years from the date of enactment of this section
 and shall comply in all respects with guidance published (and from time
 to time revised) by the Administrator for enhanced vehicle inspection and
 maintenance programs. Such guidance shall include--
 `(i) a performance standard achievable by a program combining emission
 testing with inspection to detect tampering with emission control devices and
 misfueling for all light-duty vehicles and all light-duty trucks subject to
 standards under section 202. Compliance with this performance standard shall
 be determined using a method to be established by the Administrator; and
 `(ii) program administration features necessary to reasonably assure that
 adequate management resources, tools, and practices are in place to attain
 and maintain the performance standard.
 `(C) STATE PROGRAM- The State program required under subparagraph (A)
 shall include at a minimum each of the following elements--
 `(i) computerized emission analyzers;
 `(ii) no waivers for vehicles and parts covered by the emission control
 performance warranty as provided for in section 207(b) unless a warranty
 remedy has been denied in writing, or for tampering-related repairs;
 `(iii) if waivers are permitted for emissions-related repairs not covered
 by warranty, a required expenditure, to quality for the waiver, on pre-1981
 model year vehicles of not less than $75, and on 1981 and subsequent model
 year vehicles of not less than $200 for the initial waiver period and $75 in
 an immediately subsequent period. The dollar amounts in this clause shall be
 adjusted, beginning in the fifth year beginning after the year of enactment
 of this section, and each fifth year beginning thereafter, in accordance
 with section 402(b)(3)(B)(v) (relating to inflation adjustment), except
 that the phrase `each fifth year' shall be substituted for the phrase
 `each year' therein. Each dollar amount, so adjusted, shall be rounded
 upward to the nearest whole dollar;
 `(iv) enforcement through denial of vehicle registration (except for any
 program in operation prior to the effective date of this section whose
 enforcement mechanism is demonstrated to the Administrator to be more
 effective than the applicable vehicle registration program in assuring
 that non-complying vehicles are not operated on public roads); and
 `(v) any requirements that the Administrator may prescribe under section
 202(g)(3).
 `(3) Clean-fuel vehicle programs-
 `(A) Except to the extent that substitute provisions have been approved
 by the Administrator under subparagraph (B), the State shall submit to
 the Administrator, within forty two months of enactment of this section,
 a revision to the applicable implementation plan for each area described
 under section 212(b)(2)(C)(i) to include such measures as may be necessary
 to ensure the effectiveness of the applicable provisions of the clean-fuel
 vehicle program prescribed under section 212(b)(2), including all measures
 necessary to make the use of clean alternative fuels in clean-fuel vehicles
 (as defined in section 216) economic from the standpoint of vehicle
 owners. Such a revision shall also be submitted for each area included in
 the clean fuel-vehicle program under section 212(b)(2)(C)(ii).
 `(B) The Administrator shall approve, as a substitute for all or a
 portion of the clean-fuel vehicle program prescribed under section
 212(b)(2), any revision to the relevant applicable implementation plan
 that in the Administrator's judgment will achieve long-term reductions in
 ozone-producing and toxic air emissions equal to the applicable performance
 standard prescribed under section 212(b)(1), or the percentage thereof
 attributable to the portion of the clean-fuel vehicle program for which
 the revision is to substitute. The Administrator may approve such revision
 only if it consists exclusively of provisions other than those required
 under the Act for the area. Any State seeking approval of such revision
 must submit the revision to the Administrator within twenty-four months
 of enactment of this section. The Administrator must approve or disapprove
 any such revision within thirty months of enactment of this section. (The
 Administrator shall publish the revision submitted by a State in the Federal
 Register upon receipt. Such notice shall constitute a notice of proposed
 rulemaking on whether or not to approve such revision and shall be deemed
 to comply with the requirements concerning notices of proposed rulemaking
 contained in sections 553 through 557 of title 5 of the United States Code
 (related to notice and comment).) Where the Administrator approves such
 revision for any area, the State need not submit the revision required by
 subparagraph (A) for the area with respect to the portions of the Federal
 clean-fuel vehicle program for which the Administrator has approved the
 revision as a substitute.
 `(C) Where the Administrator approves under section 214 any market-based
 alternative emissions reduction plan applicable in an area, the Administrator
 may approve a plan revision for the area providing for changes to the plan
 provisions otherwise required by this paragraph, to ensure consistency
 with such alternative emissions reduction plan.
 `(D) If the Administrator determines, under section 179, that the State has
 failed to submit any portion of the program required under subparagraph
 (A), then, in addition to any sanctions available under section 179,
 the State may not receive credit, in any demonstrations of attainment
 or reasonable further progress for the area, for any emission reductions
 from implementation of the corresponding aspects of the Federal clean-fuel
 vehicle requirements established in section 212(b)(2).
 `(4) TRANSPORTATION CONTROL- Within one year after any determination by
 the Administrator that the levels of vehicle miles traveled or congestion
 levels in the area exceed the levels projected for purposes of the area's
 demonstration of attainment or reasonable further progress (or, where
 applicable, maintenance), the State shall submit a revision to the applicable
 implementation plan that includes a transportation demand management program
 for the area. Such program shall consist of measures selected from section
 108(f) as necessary to reduce vehicle mile and congestion levels to levels
 consistent with the plan, and shall be developed consistent with guidance
 issued by the Administrator pursuant to section 108. In the alternative,
 the State may offset the impact of increased vehicle miles traveled and
 congestion levels by implementing other transportation control measures,
 other mobile source controls, or controls on other source categories that
 will produce reductions comparable to those that would be achieved by
 implementation of such transportion demand management program, consistent
 with the emission reduction schedules in the plan.
Any reference to `attainment date' in subsection (b), which is incorporated
by reference into this subsection, shall refer to the attainment date for
serious areas.
 `(d) SEVERE AREAS- Each State in which all or part of a severe area
 is located shall, with respect to the severe area, make the submissions
 described under subsection (c) (relating to serious areas), and shall submit
 by December 31, 2000, an attainment demonstration that meets the requirements
 of subsection (c)(1), and that includes the provisions required under section
 185 (relating to sanctions). Any reference to the term `attainment date'
 in subsection (b) or (c), which is incorporated by reference into this
 subsection (d), shall refer to the attainment date for severe areas.
 `(e) CERTAIN NON-SELF-GENERATING (NON-MSA) AREAS- (1) Notwithstanding any
 other provision of section 181 or this section, a State containing an ozone
 nonattainment area that does not include and is not adjacent to any part
 of a Metropolitan Statistical Area or, where one exists, a consolidated
 Metropolitan Statistical Area (as defined by the United States Office
 of Management and Budget), which area is treated by the Administrator,
 in his discretion, as non-self-generating within the meaning of paragraph
 (2), shall be treated by operation of law as satisfying the requirements
 of this section if it makes the submissions required under subsection (a)
 of this section (relating to marginal areas).
 `(2) The Administrator may treat an ozone nonattainment area as
 non-self-generating if he finds that sources of VOC (and, where the
 Administrator determines relevant, NOx) emissions within the area do not
 make a significant contribution to the ozone concentrations measures in
 the area or in other areas.
 `(f) Reclassified Areas-
 `(1) GENERAL RULE- Except as provided under paragraph (2), each State
 containing an ozone nonattainment area reclassified under section 181(b)(2)
 shall meet such requirements of subsections (b) through (d) of this
 section as may be applicable to the area as reclassified, according to the
 schedules prescribed in connection with such requirements, except that the
 Administrator may adjust any applicable deadlines (except for attainment
 dates) to the extent such adjustment is necessary or appropriate to assure
 consistency among the required submissions.
 `(2) EXCEPTION FOR AREAS RECLASSIFIED AS MODERATE- The requirements of
 paragraph (1) shall apply to areas reclassified under section 181(b)(1)
 as moderate areas, except that--
 `(A) the attainment date for such reclassified areas shall be December
 31, 2000;
 `(B) the requirements of subsection (c)(1) (B)-(C) (relating to reasonable
 further progress for serious areas) shall apply to such reclassified areas
 in lieu of the requirements of subsection (b)(1); and
 `(C) the date for submittal of the provisions required by subparagraph
 (B) shall be no later than two years from the date of such reclassification.
`FEDERAL OZONE MEASURES
 `SEC. 183. (a) CONTROL TECHNIQUES GUIDELINES FOR VOC SOURCES- Within three
 years after the date of enactment of this section, the Administrator shall
 issue control techniques guidelines, in accordance with section 108(c),
 for seven categories of stationary sources of VOC emissions for which such
 guidelines have not been issued as of the date of enactment.
 `(b) ALTERNATIVE CONTROL TECHNIQUES DOCUMENT FOR NOX SOURCES- Within three
 years after the date of enactment of this section, the Administrator shall
 issue a document analyzing alternative control techniques for stationary
 sources of oxides of nitrogen.
 `(c) Consumer or Commercial Products-
 `(1) DEFINITIONS- For the purposes of this subsection:
 `(A) the term `reasonably available controls' means the degree of emissions
 reduction that the Administrator determines, on the basis of technological
 and economic feasibility, health, environmental, and energy impacts, is
 reasonably achievable through the application of any equipment, measures,
 processes, methods, systems or techniques, including, but not limited to,
 chemical reformulation, product or feedstock substitution, repackaging,
 or directions for use, consumption, storage, or disposal.
 `(B) The term `consumer or commercial products' means any substance, product,
 or article (including any container or packaging) held by any person,
 the use, consumption, storage, disposal, destruction, or decomposition of
 which may result in the release of volatile organic compounds. The term
 does not include fuels or fuel additives regulated under section 211, or
 motor vehicles, non-road vehicles, and non-road engines as defined under
 section 216.
 `(C) The term `regulated entities' means--
 `(i) manufacturers, processors, wholesale distributors, or importers of
 consumer or commercial products; or
 `(ii) manufacturers, processors, wholesale distributors, or importers that
 supply the entities listed under clause (i).
 `(2) REPORT- Within two years after the date of enactment of this section,
 the Administrator shall submit to the Congress a final report on emissions
 of volatile organic compounds from consumer or commercial products. The
 report shall list classes or categories of commercial and consumer products
 which emit significant quantities of volatile organic compounds. The report
 should consider alternative regulatory approaches for those products,
 including fees, marketable permits and auctions.
 `(3) REGULATIONS- (A) Following submission of the report required under
 paragraph (2), the Administrator may promulgate such regulations as he deems
 necessary to aid in the attainment of the ozone national ambient air quality
 standard by decreasing emissions of volatile organic compounds from classes
 or categories of consumer or commercial products. Such regulations shall
 be designed to achieve reductions from the selected product categories to
 a level equal to the level that would be achieved by the application of
 reasonably available controls to each such class or category of consumer
 or commercial products.
 `(B) Such regulations may be imposed only with respect to regulated entities.
 `(C) Such regulations may include any system or systems of regulation
 as the Administrator may deem appropriate, including but not limited to
 requirements for registration and labeling, self-monitoring and reporting,
 prohibitions, limitations, or fees and other economic incentives (including
 but not limited to marketable permits and auctions of emissions rights)
 concerning the manufacture, processing, distribution, use, consumption,
 or disposal of the product.
 `(D) The regulations may exempt health use products for which the
 Administrator determines there are no suitable substitutes.
 `(E) Any fees, charges, or other funds established and collected under
 such regulations shall be deposited in a special fund in the United
 States Treasury for licensing and other services, which thereafter shall
 be available for appropriation, to remain available until expended, to
 carry out the activities of the United States Environmental Protection
 Agency for which such fees, charges, or collections are made.
 `(4) ENFORCEMENT- Any regulation established under this subsection shall
 be treated, for purposes of enforcment of this Act, as a regulation under
 section 111.
 `(5) STATE ADMINISTRATION- Each State may develop and submit to the
 Administrator a procedure under State law for implementing and enforcing
 regulations promulgated under this subsection. If the Administrator finds
 the State procedure is adequate, he shall approve such procedure. Nothing
 in this paragraph shall prohibit the Administrator from enforcing any
 applicable regulations under this subsection.
 `(d) MARINE VESSEL STANDARDS-
 `(1) SCHEDULE FOR STANDARDS- (A) Within four years after the date of
 enactment of this section, the Administrator shall promulgate standards
 applicable to the emission of any air pollutant from loading and unloading
 of marine tank vessels which he finds causes, or contributes, to, air
 pollution that may be reasonably anticipated to endanger pulbic health or
 welfare. In setting such standards, the Administrator shall consider costs,
 any non-air-quality benefits, environmental impacts, energy requirements
 and safety factors associated with alternative control techniques.
 `(B) Any regulation prescribed under this section (and any revision
 thereof) shall take effect after such period as the Administrator finds
 (after consultation with the Secretary of the department in which the Coast
 Guard is operating) necessary to permit the development and application
 of the requisite technology, giving appropriate consideration to the cost
 of compliance within such period.
 `(2) Within six months after the date of enactment of this section, the
 Secretary of the Department in which the Coast Guard is operating shall
 issue regulations to ensure the safety of the equipment and operations
 which are to control emissions from the loading and unloading of marine
 tank vessels, under section 3703 of title 46 of the United States Code
 and section 1225 of title 33 of the United States Code.
 `(3)(A) The Administrator shall ensure compliance with the vessel emission
 standards prescribed under paragraph (1)(A).
 `(B) The Secretary of the Department in which the Coast Guard is operating
 shall ensure compliance with the regulations issued under paragraph (2).
 `(4) Until the Administrator promulgates standards under this section,
 no State or political subdivisions thereof may adopt or attempt to enforce
 any standard respecting emissions from marine vessels.
 `(5) After the Administrator promulgates standards under this section,
 no State or political subdivision thereof may adopt or attempt to enforce
 any standard respecting emissions from marine vessels subject to regulation
 under subparagraph (1) unless such standard is no less stringent than the
 standards promulgated under paragraph (1).
 `(6) Any standard established under paragraph (1)(A) shall be treated,
 for purposes of enforcmeent of this Act, as a standard under section 111.
 `(e) OZONE DESIGN VALUE STUDY- The Administrator shall conduct a study of
 whether the methodology in use by the Environmental Protection Agency as of
 the date of enactment of this section for establishing a design value for
 ozone provides a reasonable indicator of the ozone air quality of ozone
 nonattainment areas. The study shall be completed and a report submitted
 to Congress not later than three years after the date of enactment of this
 section. The results of the study shall be subject to peer review.
`NORTHEAST TRANSPORT REGION AND COMMISSION
 `SEC. 184. A single transport region (within the meaning of section
 176(a)), comprised of the States of Connecticut, Delaware, Maine, Maryland,
 Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode
 Island, Vermont, and the Consolidated Metropolitan Statistical Area that
 includes the District of Columbia, is hereby established by operation of
 law. The provisions of section 176(a) (1)-(2) shall apply with respect
 to the transport region established under this section. The Administrator
 shall convene the commission required (under section 176(b)) as a result of
 the establishment of such region within 6 months of the date of enactment
 of this section.
`SANCTION FOR SEVERE OZONE NONATTAINMENT AREAS FOR FAILURE TO ATTAIN
 `SEC. 185. (a) GENERAL RULE- The revision to the applicable implementation
 plan required under section 182(d) (relating to the attainment plan for
 severe ozone nonattainment areas) shall provide that, if the Administrator
 determines, under section 181(b)(2), that the area has failed to attain by
 the applicable attainment date, each majority stationary source of VOC's
 located in the area shall, except as otherwise provided under subsection
 (c), pay a fee, computed in accordance with subsection (b), for each
 calendar year beginning after the attainment year, until the area is
 redesignated attainment.
 `(b) COMPUTATION OF FEE- (1) The fee shall equal $5,000, adjusted in
 accordance with paragraph (3), per ton of VOC emitted during the calendar
 year in excess of 80 percentum of the baseline amount, computed under
 paragraph (2).
 `(2) For purposes of this section, the baseline amount shall be computed, in
 accordance with such guidance as the Administrator may provide, as the lower
 of the amount of actual VOC emissions (`actuals') or VOC emissions allowed
 under the permit applicable to the source (or, if no such permit has been
 issued for the attainment year, the amount of VOC emissions allowed under
 the applicable implementation plan (`allowables')) during the attainment
 year. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the Administrator may issue
 guidance authorizing the baseline amount to be determined in accordance
 with the lower of average actuals or average allowables, determined over
 a period of more than one calendar year.
 `(3) The fee amount under paragraph (1) shall be adjusted annually,
 beginning in the year beginning after the year of enactment, in accordance
 with section 402(b)(3)(B)(v) (relating to inflation adjustment).
 `(c) EXCEPTION- Notwithstanding any provision of this section, no source
 shall be required to pay any fee under subsection (a) with respect to
 emissions during any year that is treated as an Extension Year under
 section 181(b)(5).
 `(d) FEE COLLECTION BY THE ADMINISTRATOR- If the Administrator has
 determined, under section 179(a)(1) (A) or (B) (related to disapproval
 of an implementation plan) that the fee provisions of the implementation
 plan do not meet the requirements of this section, or if the Administrator
 makes a determination, under section 179(a)(1)(C) (related to failure to
 implement or enforce an applicable implementation plan) that the State is
 not administering and enforcing the fee required under this section, the
 Administrator shall, in addition to any other action authorized under this
 title, collect the fees required under subsection (a). If the Administrator
 makes such a determination under section 179(a)(1)(C), he may collect fees
 for periods prior to the determination, plus interest computed in accordance
 with section 6621(a)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to
 computation of interest on underpayment of Federal taxes), to the extent he
 finds such fees have not been paid to the State. The provisions of section
 402(b)(3)(C) (ii)-(iii) (and the flush language following clause (iii))
 (relating to penalties and use of the funds, respectively) shall apply
 with respect to fees collected under this subsection.
 `(e) EXEMPTIONS FOR CERTAIN SMALL AREAS- For areas with a total population
 under two hundred thousand which fail to attain the standard by the
 applicable attainment date, no sanction under this or any other sanction of
 the Act shall apply if the area can demonstrate, consistent with guidance
 issued by the Administrator, that attainment in the area is prevented
 because of ozone or ozone precursors transported from other areas. The
 prohibition applies only in cases in which the area has met all requirements
 and implemented all measures applicable to the area under this Act.'.
SEC. 104. ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR CARBON MONOXIDE NONATTAINMENT AREAS.
 Part D of title I of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new subpart at the end:
`Subpart 3--Additional Provisions for Carbon Monoxide Nonattainment
Requirements
`Sec. 186. Classifications and attainment dates.
`Sec. 187. Plan submissions and requirements.
`CLASSIFICATIONS AND ATTAINMENT DATES
 `SEC. 186. (a) CLASSIFICATION BY OPERATION OF LAW AND ATTAINMENT DATES
 FOR 1988 NONATTAINMENT AREAS- (1) Each area designated nonattainment for
 carbon monoxide pursuant to section 110(b)(4) is hereby classified under
 table 1, by operation of law, as a moderate area or a serious area based
 on the design value for the area. The design value shall be calculated
 according to the interpretation methodology issued by the United States
 Environmental Protection Agency most recently before the date of enactment
 of this section. For each area classified under this subsection, the primary
 standard attainment date for carbon monoxide shall be as provided in table 1.
,
`Table 1
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Area classification Design value Primary standard attainment date
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Moderate 9.5-16.4 ppm December 31, 1995
 Serious 16.5 ppm and above December 31, 2000.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 `(2) At the time of publication of the notice required under section
 110(b)(4) (promulgating carbon monoxide area designations), the Administrator
 shall publish a notice announcing the classification (as may be adjusted
 under paragraph (4)) of each carbon monoxide nonattainment area. The
 provisions of section 172(a)(1)(B) (relating to lack of notice-and-comment
 and judicial review) shall apply with respect to such classification.
 `(3) An area designated nonattainment for carbon monoxide under section
 110(b)(1)(C)(i), but the design value of which is less than 9.5 ppm,
 shall be classified as a moderate area.
 `(4) ADJUSTMENT OF CLASSIFICATION FOR BORDERLINE AREAS- If an area
 classified under paragraph (1), table 1, would have been classified in
 another category if the design value in the area were 5 per centum greater
 or 5 per centum less than the level on which such classification was based,
 the Administrator may, in his discretion, by the procedure required under
 paragraph (2), adjust the classification of the area. In making such
 adjustment, the Administrator may consider the number of exceedances of
 the national primary ambient air quality standard for carbon monoxide in
 the area, the level of pollution transport between the area and the other
 affected areas, and the mix of sources and air pollutants in the area.
 `(5) Upon application by any State, the Administrator may extend for one
 additional year (the `Extension Year') the date specified in table 1 of
 subsection (a) if--
 `(A) the State has complied with all requirements and commitments pertaining
 to the area in the applicable implementation plan, and
 `(B) no more than one exceedance of the national ambient air quality
 standard level for carbon monoxide has occurred in the area in the year
 preceding the Extension Year.
No more than two one-year extensions may be issued under this paragraph for
a single nonattainment area.
 `(b) New Designations and Reclassifications-
 `(1) NEW DESIGNATIONS TO NONATTAINMENT- Any area that is designated
 attainment or unclassifiable for carbon monoxide under section 110(b)(4),
 and that is subsequently redesignated to nonattainment for carbon monoxide
 under section 110(b)(3), shall, at the time of the redesignation, be
 classified by operation of law in accordance with table 1 under subsections
 (a)(1) and (a)(4). Upon its classification, the area shall be subject
 to the same requirements under section 110, subpart 1 of this part, and
 this subpart that would have applied had the area been so classified at
 the time of the notice under subsection (a)(2), except that any absolute,
 fixed date applicable in connection with any such requirement is extended
 by operation of law by a period equal to the length of time between the
 date of enactment and the date the area is classified.
 `(2) Reclassification of moderate areas upon failure to attain-
 `(A) GENERAL RULE- Within six months following the applicable attainment
 date for a carbon monoxide nonattainment area, the Administrator shall
 determine, based on the area's design value as of the attainment date,
 whether the area attained the standard by that date. Any moderate areas
 that the Administrator finds has not attained the standard by that date
 shall be reclassified by operation of law in accordance with table 1 of
 subsection (a)(1) as a serious area.
 `(B) PUBLICATION OF NOTICE- The Administrator shall publish a notice in
 the Federal Register, no later than six months following the attainment
 date, identifying each area that he has determined, under subparagraph
 (A), as having failed to attain and identifying the reclassification,
 if any, described under subparagraph (A).
 `(c) REFERENCES TO TERMS- Any reference in this subpart to a `moderate area'
 or a `serious area' shall be considered a reference to a moderate carbon
 monoxide nonattainment area or a serious carbon monoxide nonattainment area,
 as classified under this section.
`PLAN SUBMISSIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
 `SEC. 187. (a) MODERATE AREAS- Each State in which all or part of a
 moderate area is located shall, with respect to the moderate area (or
 portion thereof, to the extent specified in guidance of the United States
 Environmental Protection Agency issued before the date of enactment of
 this section), submit to the Administrator the State implementation plan
 revisions (including the plan items) described under paragraphs (1), (2),
 and (3) within such periods prescribed under those paragraphs, except to
 the extent the State has made such submissions as of the date of enactment
 of this section:
 `(1) INVENTORY- No later than two years from the date of enactment of this
 section, a comprehensive, accurate, current inventory of actual emissions
 from all sources, as described in section 172(c)(3), in accordance with
 guidance provided by the Administrator.
 `(2) SAVINGS CLAUSE FOR VEHICLE INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE PROVISIONS OF
 THE STATE IMPLEMENTATION PLAN- Immediately after the date of enactment
 of this section, for any moderate area (or, within the Administrator's
 discretion, portion thereof) the plan for which is of the type described in
 section 182(a)(2)(B), any provisions necessary to ensure that the applicable
 implementation plan includes the vehicle inspection and maintenance program
 described in section 182(a)(2)(B).
 `(3) PERIODIC INVENTORY- No later than September 30, 1996, and no later than
 the end of each three year period thereafter, until the area is redesignated
 to attainment, a revised inventory meeting the requirements of subsection
 (a)(1).
The Administrator may, in his discretion, require States to submit a
schedule for submitting any of the revisions or other items required under
this subsection. The requirements of this subsection shall apply in lieu of
any requirement that the State submit a demonstration that the applicable
implementation plan provides for attainment of the carbon monoxide standard
by the applicable attainment date in any moderate area.
 `(b) SERIOUS AREAS- Each State in which all or part of a serious area
 is located shall, with respect to the serious area, make the submissions
 described under subsection (a) (relating to moderate areas), and submit
 the revision and other items described under this subsection.
 `(1) ATTAINMENT DEMONSTRATION- By December 31, 1995, a revision to provide,
 and a demonstration that the plan as revised will provide, for attainment
 of the carbon monoxide NAAQS by the applicable attainment date.
 `(2) ENHANCED VEHICLE INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE- Within two years of
 the date of enactment of this section, a revision that includes provisons
 for an enhanced vehicle inspection and maintenance program as required in
 section 182(c)(2) (concerning serious ozone nonattainment areas), except
 that such program shall be for the purpose of reducing carbon monoxide
 rather than hydrocarbon emissions.
 `(3) TRANSPORTATION CONTROL MEASURES- Provisions to comply with the
 requirements for transportation control measures as provided under section
 182(c)(4) (concerning serious ozone nonattainment areas), within the period
 prescribed in that paragraph.
 `(4) OXYGENATED FUELS- Within two years from the date of enactment of this
 section, a revision to require that gasoline sold, supplied, offered for
 sale or supply, dispensed, transported or introduced into commerce in the
 larger of--
 `(A) the Consolidated Metropolitan Statistical Area (as defined by the
 United States Office of Management and Budget) (CMSA) in which the area
 is located, or
 `(B) if the area is not located in a CMSA, the Metropolitan Statistical
 Area (as defined by the United States Office of Management and Budget)
 in which the area is located,
be blended, during the portion of the year in which the area is prone
to high ambient concentrations of carbon monoxide (as determined by the
Administrator), with fuels containing such level of oxygen as is necessary,
in combination with other measures, to provide for attainment of the carbon
monoxide national ambient air quality standard by the applicable attainment
date and maintenance of the national ambient air quality standard thereafter in
the area. The revision shall provide that such requirement shall take effect
no later than October 1, 1993, and shall include a program for implementation
and enforcement of the requirement consistent with guidance to be issued by
the Administrator. Notwithstanding the preceding sentences in this paragraph,
the revision described in this paragraph shall not be required for an area
if the State demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Administrator that the
revision is not necessary to provide for attainment of the carbon monoxide
national ambient air quality standard by the applicable attainment date
and maintenance of the national ambient air quality standard thereafter in
the area.
 `(c) RECLASSIFIED AREAS- Each State containing a carbon monoxide
 nonattainment area reclassified under section 186(b)(2) shall meet the
 requirements of subsection (b) of this section, as may be applicable to the
 area as reclassified, according to the schedules prescribed in connection
 with such requirements, except that the Administrator may adjust any
 applicable deadlines (other than the attainment date) to the extent such
 adjustment is necessary or appropriate to assure consistency among the
 required submissions.
 `(d) SERIOUS AREAS THAT FAIL TO ATTAIN- Within three years following
 publication of a notice under subsection (b)(2)(B) identifying any serious
 area as having failed to attain the standard, the State within which such
 area is located shall submit a revision to the applicable implementation plan
 that includes such additional measures as the Administrator may prescribe
 (considering all measures that can feasibly be implemented in the area,
 in light of technological achievability, costs, and any non-air quality
 and other air quality related health and environmental impacts).'.
SEC. 105. ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR PARTICULATE MATTER (PM-10) NONATTAINMENT
AREAS.
 Part D of title I of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new subpart after subpart 3:
`Subpart 4--Additional Provisions for Parciulate Matter Nonattainment Areas
`Sec. 188. Classifications and attainment dates.
`Sec. 189. Plan provisions and schedules for plan submissions.
`Sec. 190. Issuance of RACM guidance.
`CLASSIFICATIONS AND ATTAINMENT DATES
 `SEC. 188. (a) INITIAL CLASSIFICATIONS- Every area designated nonattainment
 for PM-10 shall be classified by operation of law as a moderate PM-10
 nonattainment area (identified in this subpart also as a `moderate area')
 at the time of such designation. The Administrator must publish in the
 Federal Register a notice announcing the classification of each PM-10
 nonattainment area within sixty days of such designation. The provisions of
 section 172(a)(1)(B) (relating to lack of notice-and-comment and judicial
 review) shall apply with respect to such classification.
 `(b) Reclassification as Serious-
 `(1) RECLASSIFICATION BEFORE ATTAINMENT DATE- The Administrator may
 reclassify as a serious PM-10 nonattainment area (identified in this subpart
 also as a `serious area') any area that he determines cannot practicably
 attain the national ambient air quality standard for PM-10 by the attainment
 date (as prescribed in subsection (c)) for moderate areas. The Administrator
 shall reclassify appropriate areas as serious by the following dates:
 `(A) For areas designated nonattainment for PM-10 under section 110(b)(4),
 the Environmental Protection Agency shall propose to reclassify appropriate
 areas by June 30, 1991, and take final action by December 31, 1991; and
 `(B) For areas subsequently designated nonattainment, the Environmental
 Protection Agency shall reclassify appropriate areas within eighteen
 months after the required date for the State's submission of a SIP for
 the moderate area.
 `(2) RECLASSIFICATION UPON FAILURE TO ATTAIN- If the Administrator finds that
 any moderate area is not in attainment after the applicable attainment date--
 `(A) the area shall be reclassified by operation of law as a serious
 area; and
 `(B) the Administrator shall publish a notice in the Federal Register no
 later than six months following the attainment date, identifying the area
 as having failed to attain and identifying the reclassification described
 under subparagraph (A).
 `(c) ATTAINMENT DATES- Except as provided under subsection (d), the
 attainment dates for PM-10 nonattainment areas shall be--
 `(1) for a moderate area, as expeditiously as practicable but no later
 than the end of the sixth calendar year after the area's designation as
 nonattainment, except that, for areas designated nonattainment for PM-10
 under section 110(b)(4), the attainment date shall not extend beyond
 December 31, 1994;
 `(2) for a serious area, as expeditiously as practicable but no later than
 the end of the tenth calendar year beginning after the area's designation
 as nonattainment, except that, for areas designated nonattainment for PM-10
 under section 110(b)(4), the date shall not exceed beyond December 31, 2001.
 `(d) EXTENSION OF ATTAINMENT DATE FOR MODERATE AREAS- Upon application
 by any State, the Administrator may extend for one additional year (the
 `Extension Year') the date specified in paragraph (c)(1) if--
 `(1) the State has complied with all requirements and commitments pertaining
 to the area in the applicable implementation plan, and
 `(2) no more than one exceedance of the twenty-four-hour national ambient
 air quality standard level for PM-10 has occurred in the area in the year
 preceding the Extension Year, and the annual mean concentration of PM-10
 in the area for such year is less than or equal to the standard level.
No more than two one-year extensions may be issued under the subsection for
a single nonattainment area.
 `(e) EXTENSION OF ATTAINMENT DATE FOR SERIOUS AREAS- Upon application by
 any State, the Administrator may extend the attainment date for a serious
 area beyond the date specified under subsection (c), if attainment by the
 date established under subsection (c) would be impracticable, the State has
 complied with all requirements and commitments pertaining to that area in
 the implementation plan, and the State demonstrates to the satisfaction of
 the Administrator that the plan for that area includes the most stringent
 measures that are included in the implementation plan of any State or are
 achieved in practice in any State, and can feasibly be implemented in the
 area. At the time of such application, the State must submit a revision
 to the implementation plan that includes a demonstration of attainment
 by the most expeditious alternative date practicable. In determining
 whether to grant an extension, and the appropriate length of time for any
 such extension, the Administrator may consider the nature and extent of
 nonattainment, the types and numbers of sources or other emitting activities
 in the area (including the influence of uncontrollable natural sources and
 transboundary emissions from foreign countries), the population exposed to
 concentrations in excess of the standard, the presence and concentration
 of potentially toxic substances in the mix of particulate emissions in the
 area, and the technological and economic feasibility of various control
 measures. The Administrator may not approve an extension until the State
 submits an attainment demonstration for the area. The Administrator may
 grant at most one such extension for an area, of no more than five years.
 `(f) WAIVERS FOR CERTAIN AREAS- The Administrator may, on a case-by-case
 basis, waive any requirement applicable to any serious area under this
 subpart where he determines that anthropogenic sources of PM-10 do not
 contribute significantly to the violation of the PM-10 standard in the
 area. The Administrator may also waive a specific date for attainment of
 the standard where he determines that nonanthropogenic sources of PM-10
 contribute significantly to the violation of the PM-10 standard in the area.
`PLAN PROVISIONS AND SCHEDULES FOR PLAN SUBMISSIONS
 `SEC. 189. (a) Moderate Areas-
 `(1) PLAN PROVISIONS- Each State in which all or part of a moderate area is
 located shall submit, according to the applicable schedule under paragraph
 (2), an implementation plan that includes--
 `(A) for the purpose of meeting the requirements of section 172(c)(5),
 a program providing that permits meeting the requirements of section 173
 are required for the construction and operation of new and modified major
 stationary sources of PM-10; and
 `(B) either--
 `(i) a demonstration (including air quality modeling) that the plan will
 provide for attainment by the applicable attainment date; or
 `(ii) a demonstration that attainment by such date is impracticable.
 `(2) SCHEDULE FOR PLAN SUBMISSIONS- A State shall submit the plan required
 under subparagraph (1) no later than--
 `(A) June 30, 1990, for areas designated nonattainment under section
 110(b)(4), except that the provision required under subparagraph (1)(A)
 (concerning application of the section 173 permit requirements) shall be
 submitted no later than June 30, 1992;
 `(B) eighteen months after the designation as nonattainment, for those
 areas designated nonattainment after the designations prescribed under
 section 110(b)(4).
 `(b) Serious Areas-
 `(1) PLAN PROVISIONS- In addition to the provisions submitted to meet
 the requirements of paragraph (a)(1) (relating to moderate areas), each
 State in which all or part of a serious area is located shall submit an
 implementation plan for such area that includes--
 `(A) a demonstration (including air quality modeling)--
 `(i) that the plan provides for attainment of the PM-10 national ambient
 air quality standard by the applicable attainment date, or
 `(ii) for any area for which the State is seeking, pursuant to section
 188(d), an extension of the attainment date beyond the date set forth in
 section 188(c), that attainment by that date would be impracticable, and
 that the plan provides for attainment by the most expeditious alternative
 date practicable; and
 `(B) provisions requiring that such reasonably available control measures
 as the Administrator has determined necessary (including the adoption of
 reasonably available control technology by all major stationary sources)
 be implemented within five years of reclassification of the area to serious,
 or within three years of issuance by the Administrator of guidance concerning
 such measures, whichever is later.
 `(2) SCHEDULE FOR PLAN SUBMISSIONS- A State shall submit the demonstration
 required for an area under paragraph (a)(A) no later than five years after
 reclassification of the area to serious, except that for areas reclassified
 under section 188(b)(2), the State shall submit the attainment demonstration
 within eighteen months after reclassification to serious. A State shall
 submit the provisions described under paragraph (1)(B) no later than
 eighteen months after reclassification of the area as a serious area.
`ISSUANCE OF RACM GUIDANCE
 `SEC. 190. The Administrator shall issue technical guidance on reasonably
 available control measures for urban fugitive dust, and emissions from
 residential wood combustion and prescribed silvicultural and agricultural
 burning, no later than eighteen months following the date of enactment of
 this section. He shall also examine other categories of sources contributing
 to nonattainment of the PM-10 standard, and determine whether additional
 guidance on reasonably available control measures is needed, and issue
 any such guidance no later than five years after enactment of this section.'.
SEC. 106. ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR AREAS DESIGNATED NONATTAINMENT FOR SULFUR
OXIDES, NITROGEN DIOXIDE, AND LEAD.
 Part D of title I of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding a new subpart
 after subpart 4, to read as follows:
`Subpart 5--Additional Provisions for Areas Designated Nonattainment for
Sulfur Oxides, Nitrogen Dioxide, or Lead
`Sec. 191. Plan submission deadlines.
`Sec. 192. Attainment dates.
`PLAN SUBMISSION DEADLINES
 `SEC. 191. (a) SUBMISSION- Any State containing an area designated or
 redesignated under section 110(b) as nonattainment with respect to the
 national primary ambient air quality standards for sulfur oxides, nitrogen
 dioxide, or lead subsequent to the date of enactment of this section shall
 submit to the Administrator, within eighteen months of the designation,
 an applicable implementation plan meeting the requirements of this part.
 `(b) STATES LACKING FULLY APPROVED STATE IMPLEMENTATION PLANS- Any State
 containing an area designated nonattainment with respect to national primary
 ambient air quality standards for sulfur oxides or nitrogen dioxide under
 section 110(b)(1)(C)(i), but lacking a fully approved implementation plan
 complying with the requirements of this Act (including part D) as in effect
 immediately prior to the date of enactment of this section, shall submit
 to the Administrator, within eighteen months of enactment of this section,
 an implementation plan meeting the requirements of subpart 1 (except as
 otherwise prescribed by section 192).
`ATTAINMENT DATES
 `SEC. 192. (a) PLANS UNDER SECTION 191(a)- Implementation plans required
 under section 191(a) shall provide for attainment of the relevant primary
 standard as expeditiously as practicable but, subject to subsection (d),
 no later than 5 years from the date of the nonattainment designation.
 `(b) PLANS UNDER SECTION 191(b)- Implementation plans required under
 section 191(b) shall provide for attainment of the relevant primary national
 ambient air quality standard within five years from the date of enactment
 of this section.
 `(c) INADEQUATE PLANS- Implementation plans for nonattainment areas for
 sulfur oxides or nitrogen dioxide with plans that were approved by the
 Administrator before the date of enactment of this subpart but, subsequent
 to such approval, were found by the Administrator to be substantially
 inadequate, shall provide for attainment of the relevant primary standard
 within five years from the date of such finding.'.
SEC. 107. PROVISIONS RELATED TO INDIAN TRIBES.
 (a) Section 105(a)(1)(B) of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking `or
 (4)' and inserting in lieu thereof `(4), or (5)'.
 (b) Section 302(b) of the Clean Air Act is amended by--
 (1) deleting `or' at the end of paragraph (3);
 (2) striking the period at the end of paragraph (4) and inserting in lieu
 thereof a semicolon and `or'; and
 (3) adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph to read as follows:
 `(5) An agency of an Indian tribe.'.
 (c) Section 302 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding new subsection
 (q) to read as follows:
 `(q) The term `Indian tribe' means any Indian tribe, band, nation, or other
 organized group or community, including any Alaska Native village, which
 is recognized as eligible for the special programs and services provided
 by the United States to Indians because of their status as Indians.'.
 (d) Section 110 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new subsection (t) at the end thereof:
 `(t) INDIAN TRIBES- If an Indian tribe submits an implementation plan to
 the Administrator pursuant to section 301(d), the plan shall be reviewed
 in accordance with the provisions for review set forth in subsections (d),
 (e), and (f) of this section for State plans except as otherwise provided
 by regulation promulgated pursuant to section 301(d)(2). When such plan
 becomes effective in accordance with the regulations promulgated under
 section 301(d), the plan shall become applicable to all areas (except
 as expressly provided otherwise in the plan) located within the exterior
 boundaries of the reservation, notwithstanding the issuance of any patent
 and including rights-of-way running through the reservation.'.
 (e) Section 301 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding at the end
 thereof the following new subsection:
 `(d) TRIBAL AUTHORITY- (1) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (2),
 the Administrator--
 `(A) is authorized to treat Indian tribes as States under this Act except
 for purposes of the requirement that makes available for application by
 each State no less than one-half of 1 per centum of annual appropriations
 under section 105; and
 `(B) may provide any such Indian tribe grant and contract assistance to
 carry out functions provided by this Act.
 `(2) The Administrator may promulgate regulations specifying those
 provisions of this Act for which it is appropriate to treat Indian tribes
 as States. Such treatment shall be authorized only if--
 `(A) the Indian tribe has a governing body carrying out substantial
 governmental duties and powers;
 `(B) the functions to be exercised by the Indian tribe pertain to the
 management and protection of air resources within the exterior boundaries
 of the reservation; and
 `(C) the Indian tribe is reasonably expected to be capable, in the judgment
 of the Administrator, of carrying out the functions to be exercised
 in a manner consistent with the terms and purposes of this Act and all
 applicable regulations.
 `(3) The Administrator may promulgate regulations which establish the
 elements of tribal implementation plans and procedures for approval or
 disapproval of tribal implementation plans and portions thereof.
 `(4) In any case in which the Administrator determines that the treatment of
 Indian tribes as identical to States is inappropriate or administratively
 infeasible, the Administrator may provide, by regulation, other means by
 which the Administrator will directly administer such provisions so as to
 achieve the appropriate purpose.
 `(5) Until such time as the Administrator promulgates regulations pursuant
 to this subsection, the Administrator may continue to provide financial
 assistance to eligible Indian tribes under section 105.'.
SEC. 108. MISCELLANEOUS.
 (a) TRANSPORTATION PLANNING GUIDANCE- Section 108 of the Clean Air Act is
 amended by--
 (1) revising the first sentence of subsection (e) to read as follows:
 `(e) Within nine months after the date of enactment of the Clean Air Act
 Amendments of 1989 and periodically thereafter as necessary to maintain a
 continuous process of transportation and air quality planning, including
 emissions inventory development, the Administrator shall, after consultation
 with the Secretary of Transportation and State and local officials, update
 the June 1978 Transportation-Air Quality Planning Guidelines.'; and
 (2) amending so much of subsection (f)(1) as precedes subparagraph (g)
 to read as follows:
 `(f)(1) The Administrator shall, from time to time, publish and make
 available to appropriate Federal, State, and local environmental and
 transportation agencies--
 `(A) information, prepared as appropriate after consultation with the
 Secretary of Transportation, regarding the emission reduction potential
 of transportation control measures, including but not limited to--
 `(i) trip-reduction ordinances;
 `(ii) employer-based transportation management plans;
 `(iii) transit improvements;
 `(iv) traffic-flow improvements;
 `(v) areawide rideshare programs;
 `(vi) no-drive days;
 `(vii) parking-management programs;
 `(viii) park-and-ride and fringe parking programs;
 `(ix) work-schedule changes; and
 `(x) road-pricing and tolls;'.
 (b) STATE REPORTS ON EMISSIONS-RELATED DATA- Section 110 of the Clean
 Air Act is amended by adding a new subsection (u) at the end thereof,
 to read as follows:
 `(u) REPORTS- Any State shall submit, according to such schedule as the
 Administrator may prescribe, such reports as the Administrator may require
 relating to emission reductions, vehicle miles traveled, congestion levels,
 and any other information the Administrator may deem necessary to assess
 the development effectiveness, need for revision, or implementation of
 any plan or plan revision required under this Act.'.
 (c) NEW SOURCE STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE- (1) Section 111(b)(1)(B) of the
 Clean Air Act is amended by--
 (A) striking `120 days' and inserting `one year';
 (B) striking `90 days' and inserting `one year';
 (C) striking `four years' and inserting `8 years';
 (D) inserting `Notwithstanding the requirements of the previous sentence,
 the Administrator need not review any such standard if he determines that
 such review is not appropriate in light of readily available information on
 the efficacy of such standard.' immediately before the sentence beginning
 `Standards of performance or revisions thereof'; and
 (E) adding a new sentence at the end thereof, to read as follows: `When
 implementation and enforcement of any requirement of this Act indicate
 that emission limitations and percent reductions beyond those required by
 the standards promulgated under this section are achieved in practice, the
 Administrator shall, when revising those standards, consider the emission
 limitations and percent reductions achieved in practice.'.
 (2) Section 111(f)(1) of the Clean Air Act is amended to read as follows:
 `(1) For those categories of major stationary sources that the Administrator
 listed under subsection (b)(1)(A) prior to the date of enactment of the
 Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989 and for which regulations had not been
 proposed by the Administrator by such date, the Administrator shall:
 `(A) propose regulations establishing standards of performance for at least
 25 per centum of such categories of sources within two years of the date
 of enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989;
 `(B) propose regulations establishing standards of performance for at least
 50 per centum of such categories of sources within four years of the date
 of enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989; and
 `(C) propose regulations for the remaining categories of sources within
 six years of the date of enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989;'.
 (d) REGULATION OF EXISTING SOURCES- Section 111(d)(1)(A)(i) of the Clean
 Air Act is amended by striking `or 112(b)(1)(A)' and inserting `or emitted
 from a source category which is regulated under section 112.'.
 (e) AUTHORITY TO OBTAIN INFORMATION- Section 114(a)(1) of the Clean Air
 Act is amended by--
 (1) striking the term `or' and inserting a comma immediately after the
 phrase `any emission source'; and
 (2) inserting `or who manufactures emission control equipment or process
 equipment, or who the Administrator believes may have information necessary
 for the purposes set forth in this subsection' immediately after `any
 person who owns or operates an emission source.'.
 (f) CONSULTATION- The second-to-last sentence of section 121 of the Clean
 Air Act is amended to read as follows: `The Administrator shall update as
 necessary the original regulations required and promulgated under this
 section (as in effect immediately before the date of enactment of the
 Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989) to ensure adequate consultation.'.
 (g) PERMIT PROCESS FOR ADDRESSING INTERSTATE EFFECTS- Section 126 of Clean
 Air Act is amended by adding a new subsection (d), to read as follows:
 `(d) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any source or
 implementation plan in a State with a permit program fully approved under
 title IV.'.
 (h) INCREMENT EXEMPTIONS- Section 163(c)(1) of the Clean Air Act is
 amended by--
 (1) replacing the comma and `and' at the end of subparagraph (C) with
 a period;
 (2) replacing the period at the end of subparagraph (D) with a comma and
 `and'; and
 (3) adding a new subparagraph (E), to read as follows:
 `(E) except for purposes of determining compliance with the maximum
 allowable increases in ambient concentrations in any area designated as
 class I under this part, concentrations of particulate matter attributable
 to the increase in fugitive emissions resulting directly or indirectly
 from surface coal mines.'.
 (i) PM-10 INCREMENTS- (1) Part C of the Clean Air Act is amended, in
 section 163, by--
 (A) striking the table contained in paragraph (b)(1) and inserting the
 following table:
--Maximum allowable increase
`Pollutant
--(micrograms per cubic meter)
Particulate matter (measured by PM-10):
Annual arithmetic mean
--4
Twenty-four-hour maximum
--8
Sulfur dioxide:
Annual arithmetic mean
--2
Twenty-four-hour maximum
--5
Three-hour maximum
--25';
 (B) striking the table contained in paragraph (b)(2) and inserting the
 following table:
--Maximum allowable increase
`Pollutant
--(micrograms per cubic meter)
Particulate matter (measured by PM-10):
Annual arithmetic mean
--17
Twenty-four-hour maximum
--30
Sulfur dioxide:
Annual arithmetic mean
--20
Twenty-four-hour maximum
--91
Three-hour maximum
--512';
 (C) striking the table in paragraph (b)(3) and inserting the following table:
--Maximum allowable increase
`Pollutant
--(micrograms per cubic meter)
Particulate matter (measured by PM-10):
Annual arithmetic mean
--34
Twenty-four-hour maximum
--60
Sulfur dioxide:
Annual arithmetic mean
--40
Twenty-four-hour maximum
--182
Three-hour maximum
--700';
 (D) adding a new paragraph (b)(5) immediately after paragraph (b)(4)
 to read as follows:
 `(5) For determining compliance with the maximum allowable increases
 in concentrations of particulate matter specified in this subsection and
 section 165, the baseline areas and baseline dates (for measuring increases
 over the baseline concentration) in effect with respect to particulate
 matter prior to the enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989
 shall remain in effect.'; and
 (E) adding a new subsection (d) immediately after subsection (c) to read
 as follows:
 `(d) Notwithstanding the amendments to the maximum allowable increases
 in concentrations of particulate matter in section 163(b) made pursuant
 to the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989, or any subsequent revisions to
 regulations promulgated by the Administrator implementing the maximum
 allowable increases for particulate matter in section 163(b) as in effect
 prior to the date of enactment of such Amendments, the maximum allowable
 increases in concentrations of particulate matter (measured in terms
 of total suspended particulates) in an applicable implementation plan,
 and the provisions in such a plan concerning implementation of those
 maximum allowable increases, shall remain in effect as to an area until
 plan provisions with respect to sources of PM-10 meeting the requirements
 of either part C or section 172(c)(5) (as applicable) have been approved
 by the Administrator and made effective in the applicable implementation
 plan for that area.'.
 (2) Section 165 of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking the table
 contained in subclause (d)(2)(C)(iv) and inserting the following table:
--Maximum allowable increase
`Pollutant
--(micrograms per cubic meter)
Particulate matter (measured by PM-10):
Annual arithmetic mean
--17
Twenty-four-hour maximum
--30
Sulfur dioxide:
Annual arithmetic mean
--20
Twenty-four-hour maximum
--91
Three-hour maximum
--325'.
 (3) Section 166(a) of the Clean Air Act is amended to read as follows:
 `(a)(1) In the case of any pollutant other than sulfur dioxide or particulate
 matter for which a national ambient air quality standard is promulgated or
 revised, the Administrator may promulgate or revise air quality increments or
 other regulations to prevent the significant deterioration of air quality
 which would result from emissions of such pollutant.
 `(2) If, after the date of enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of
 1989, the Administrator changes the indicator for the particulate matter
 national ambient air quality standard, he may also, in his discretion, modify
 the maximum allowable increases in concentrations for particulate matter
 specified in sections 163 and 165. Any new maximum allowable increases
 shall be comparable in terms of stringency to the maximum allowable
 increases in effect at the time of such change in the national ambient air
 quality standard. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require
 the Administrator to promulgate new maximum allowable increases if he
 promulgates a new particulate matter national ambient air quality standard.'.
 (j) DELEGATION- The second sentence of section 301(a)(1) of the Clean Air
 Act is amended by inserting the phrase `subject to section 307(d) of the
 Act' immediately following the word `regulations'.
 (k) DEFINITIONS- Section 302 of the Clean Air Act is amended by--
 (1) inserting a new subsection (r) immediately after new subsection (q)
 to read as follows:
 `(r) The term `Federal implementation plan' means a plan (or portion
 thereof) promulgated by the Administrator to fill all or a portion of
 a gap or otherwise correct all or a portion of an inadequacy, in a State
 implementation plan, and which includes enforceable emission limitations or
 other control measures, means or techniques (including economic incentives,
 such as fees, marketable permits, or auctions of emissions allowances),
 but does not necessarily provide for attainment of the relevant national
 ambient air quality standard.';
 (2) inserting a new subsection (s) at the end thereof to read as follows:
 `(s) The term--
 `(1) `VOC' means volatile organic compound, as defined by the Administrator.
 `(2) `PM-10' means particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter less
 than or equal to a nominal ten micrometers, as measured by such method as
 the Administrator may determine.
 `(3) `NAAQS' means national ambient air quality standard.
 `(4) `NOx' means oxides of nitrogen.
 `(5) `CO' means carbon monoxide.'; and
 (3) Adding a new sentence at the end of subsection (g) to read as follows:
 `Such term includes any precursors to the formation of any air pollutant,
 to the extent the Administrator has identified such precursor or precursors
 for the particular purpose for which the term `air pollutant' is used.'.
 (l) PREENFORCEMENT REVIEW-
 (1) Section 304(e) is amended by striking the phrase `the Administrator or'.
 (2) Section 307(e) is amended to read as follows:
 `(e) Judicial review of regulations, or other actions of the Administrator
 under color of this Act, is not authorized, except as provided in this
 section.'.
 (m) INTERPRETATION OF STATE IMPLEMENTATION PLAN- Section 307 of the Clean
 Air Act is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(h) INTERPRETATION OF STATE IMPLEMENTATION PLAN- An interpretation of an
 applicable implementation plan by the Administrator issued or presented
 before or after the date of enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments
 of 1989 (including an interpretation presented in a judicial proceeding
 before or after such date) shall, if contested by a State or other party,
 be given deference by a court if the interpretation concerns the extent to
 which the applicable implementation plan complies with the requirements of
 the Clean Air Act, and if the Administrator's interpretation is rational.'.
 (n) ETHICS, FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE, AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST- The Clean
 Air Act is amended by repealing section 318.
 (o) POLLUTION PREVENTION- Section 101 of the Clean Air Act is amended
 as follows:
 (1) Amend section (a)(3) to read as follows:
 `(3) that air pollution prevention (that is, the reduction or elimination,
 through any measures, of the amount of pollutants produced or created
 at the source) and air pollution control at its source is the primary
 responsibility of States and local governments; and'.
 (2) Amend subsection (b)(4) by inserting `prevention and' immediately after
 `pollution'.
 (3) Add a new subsection (c) to read as follows:
 `(C) A primary goal of this Act is to require or otherwise promote Federal,
 State, and local governmental actions for pollution prevention.'.
 (p) Title I of the Clean Air Act is amended to add new section 193 to read
 as follows:
`GENERAL SAVINGS CLAUSE
 `SEC. 193. All regulations, standards, rules, notices, orders or guidance
 promulgated or issued by the Administrator under this Act, as in effect
 before the date of enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989,
 shall remain in effect, except to the extent provided otherwise under
 this Act, inconsistent with any provision of this Act, or revised by the
 Administrator.'.
 (q) BOUNDARY CHANGES- Section 162(a) of the Clean Air Act is amended by
 adding at the end thereof the following: `The extent of the areas designated
 as Class I under this section shall conform to any changes in the boundaries
 of such areas which have occurred subsequent to the enactment of the Clean
 Air Act Amendments of 1977, or which may occur subsequent to the enactment
 of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989.'.
 (r) BOUNDARIES- Section 164(a) of the Clean Air Act is amended by inserting
 immediately before the sentence beginning `Any area (other than an area
 referred to in paragraph (1) or (2)' the following: `The extent of the
 areas referred to in paragraph (1) and (2) shall conform to any changes
 in the boundaries of such areas which have occurred subsequent to the
 enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1977, or which may occur
 subsequent to the enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989.'.
 (s) RESEARCH- Section 108 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding at
 the end thereof a new subsection (g) to read as follows:
 `(g) RESEARCH ON RISKS TO ECOSYSTEMS- The Administrator may assess the risks
 to ecosystems from exposure to criteria air pollutants (as identified by
 the Administrator in his sole discretion).'.
 (t) JUSTICE REVIEW OF REPORTS- Section 307 of the Clean Air Act is amended
 by adding new subsection (i) to read as follows:
 `(i) REPORTS- No report required by this Act to be submitted to Congress
 shall be subject to judicial review.'.
SEC. 109. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
 (a) The Clean Air Act is amended by--
 (1) striking, in section 106, the reference to `section 107' and inserting
 `section 110';
 (2) striking, in section 107(d) and redesignating the succeeding subsections
 accordingly;
 (3) striking, in section 111(d)(2)(A), the reference to `section 110(c)'
 and inserting `section 110(g) and section 180';
 (4) striking, in section 113(a)(5), `section 110(a)(2)(I) and';
 (5) inserting, in section 114(d)(1) after `section 110(c)', `(as in effect
 before the date of enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989),
 section 110(g) or section 180';
 (6) striking, in section 115(b), the reference to `section 110(a)(2)(H)'
 and inserting `section 110(e)(4)';
 (7) striking, in section 120(a)(2)(B)(v), the reference to `section 110(f)
 or (g)' and inserting `section 110(o) or (p)';
 (8) inserting, in section 125(f) after `section 110(c)', `(as in effect
 before the date of enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989),
 section 110(g) or section 180';
 (9) striking, in section 126, each reference to `section 110(a)(2)(E)(i)'
 and inserting `section 111(d)(4)(A)';
 (10) striking, in section 161, `identified pursuant to section (d)(1)(D) or
 (E)' and inserting `designated pursuant to section 110(b) as attainment
 or unclassifiable within the meaning of sections 110(b)(1)(A)(ii) or
 (iii) respectively';
 (11) striking, in section 162(b), `identified pursuant to section
 107(d)(1)(D) or (E)' and inserting `designated pursuant to section 110(b) as
 attainment or unclassifiable within the meaning of section 110(b)(1)(A)(ii)
 or (iii) respectively';
 (12) striking, in section 165(a)(3), the reference to `section 110(j)'
 and inserting `section 110(s)';
 (13) striking, in section 166(e), the reference to `section 110(c)' and
 inserting `section 110(g)';
 (14) striking, in section 167, the reference to `included in the list
 promulgated pursuant to paragraph (1)(D) or (E) of subsection (d) of section
 107 of this Act' and inserting `designated pursuant to section 110(b) as
 attainment or unclassifiable within the meaning of section 110(b)(1)(A)(ii)
 or (iii) respectively';
 (15) striking, in section 169A, all references to `section 110(c)' and
 inserting `section 110(g)';
 (16) striking sections 176(a) and (b);
 (17) striking, in section 307(a)(1), the reference to `section 110(f)'
 and inserting `section 110(o)'; and
 (18) striking, in section 313, the reference to `section 110(a)(2)(F)(v)'
 and inserting `section 110(d)(7)'.
TITLE II--PROVISIONS RELATING TO MOBILE SOURCES
SEC. 201. CLEAN FUEL REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) Section 216 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new paragraphs at the end:
 `(7) The term `urban bus' has the meaning provided under regulations of
 the Administrator promulgated under section 202(a).
 `(8) The term `clean alternative fuel' means methanol, ethanol, natural gas,
 propane, electricity, or other motor vehicle fuel or power source such as
 reformulated gasoline if such other fuel or power source has comparably
 low emissions, as determined under regulations of the Administrator.
 `(9) The term `clean-fuel vehicle' means any light-duty vehicle or light-duty
 truck that (A) can operate on clean alternative fuel, and (B), when operated
 on clean alternative fuel, complies with emissions standards (as prescribed
 by regulations of the Administrator) that require substantially lower (i)
 ozone-producing hydrocarbon emissions and (ii) total air toxic emissions,
 than are emitted from conventional gasoline-fueled vehicles in compliance
 with applicable standards prescribed under this Act.
 `(10) The term `light-duty truck' has the meaning provided under regulations
 of the Administrator promulgated under section 202(a).'.
 (b) Section 212 of the Clean Air Act is amended to read as follows:
`CLEAN FUEL REQUIREMENTS
 `SEC. 212. (a) URBAN BUSES- (1)(A) Not later than twelve months after the
 enactment of this section, the Administrator shall promulgate regulations
 requiring the use of clean alternative fuel in new urban buses operated
 primarily in a Metropolitan Statistical Area (as defined by the United States
 Office of Management and Budget) with a 1980 population of one million or
 more. The regulations shall provide that all new urban buses purchased or
 placed into service by owners or operators of urban buses in such areas
 must be capable of operating, and must be exclusively operated, on clean
 alternative fuel. The Administrator shall prescribe a schedule phasing
 in the applicability of the requirements established by this paragraph
 over the 1991 through 1994 model years as follows: 10 per centum of new
 urban buses purchased or placed into service in model year 1991; 25 per
 centum of new urban buses purchased or placed into service in model year
 1992; 60 per centum of new urban buses purchased or placed into service
 in model year 1993; 100 per centum of new urban buses purchased or placed
 into service in 1994 and later model years. Emissions of particulate matter
 from buses purchased or placed into service as required by this paragraph
 shall not exceed 0.10 grams per brake horsepower-hour.
 `(B) Application of the requirements prescribed under this paragraph may
 be delayed by up to two years if the Administrator determines that such
 a delay will substantially advance the technology, improve the benefits,
 or lower the costs of the urban bus program established by this subsection.
 `(2) The regulations under section 202(a)(1) applicable to emissions of
 particulate matter from 1991 through 1993 model year urban buses capable
 of operating on diesel fuel shall contain a standard which provides that
 emissions of particulate matter from such buses may not exceed 0.25 grams
 per brake horsepower-hour. The emission standard shall be prescribed by
 regulation within one hundred and eighty days after enactment of this
 section.
 `(b) CLEAN-FUEL VEHICLE PROGRAM- The Administrator shall establish a
 program to significantly increase the number of clean-fuel vehicles in
 the most serious ozone nonattainment areas:
 `(1) PERFORMANCE STANDARDS- Not later than twelve months after enactment of
 this section, the Administrator shall promulgate regulations establishing
 performance standards for the clean-fuel vehicle program required under
 this subsection. The Administrator shall base the performance standards
 on the long-term reductions in ozone-producing and toxic air emissions
 that, in his judgment, may reasonably be anticipated to result from the
 use of clean alternative fuels formulated to provide maximum reductions
 of such emissions. Such performance standards shall be the measure of
 the emissions reductions that programs submitted as substitutes for
 the clean-fuel vehicle program by States under section 182(c)(3)(B),
 or by motor vehicle manufacturers or fuel refiners under section 214,
 must achieve to receive the Administrator's approval under those sections.
 `(2) PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS- Not later than eighteen months after the enactment
 of this section, the Administrator shall promulgate regulations establishing
 initial requirements, and subsequently may revise such regulations as
 necessary, for attainment of the performance standards prescribed under
 paragraph (1). The regulations shall provide for the following:
 `(A) CLEAN-FUEL VEHICLES- Clean-fuel vehicles shall be produced, sold,
 and distributed to ultimate purchasers in numbers that meet or exceed the
 following schedule (as may be revised under subparagraph (D)): five hundred
 thousand vehicles in model year 1995, seven hundred fifty thousand vehicles
 in model year 1996, and one million vehicles per year in model years 1997
 through 2004. The Administrator may by regulation grant a manufacturer an
 appropriate amount of credits toward (i) compliance with applicable emission
 standards prescribed under 202(a) for selling clean-fuel vehicles that
 achieve emission reductions greater than those required of such vehicles;
 and (ii) fulfillment of the requirements prescribed under this subparagraph
 for selling more clean-fuel vehicles than regulations under this subparagraph
 require or heavy-duty truck engines capable of operating on clean alternative
 fuel. A manufacturer granted credits may transfer some or all of the credits
 for use by one or more other manufacturers in demonstrating compliance
 with emission standards prescribed under section 202(a) or the requirements
 prescribed under this subparagraph. The Administrator may make the credits
 available for use after consideration of enforceability, environmental and
 economic factors and upon such terms and conditions as he finds appropriate.
 `(B) CLEAN FUELS- The clean alternative fuels on which the vehicles
 required under subparagraph (A) can operate shall be made available in
 the areas where the vehicles are to be sold and operated in a manner to
 be specified in the Administrator. At a minimum, one such fuel shall
 be offered for retail sale at service stations dispensing at least
 fifty thousand gallons of motor vehicle fuel per month, on average. The
 Administrator shall determine the clean alternative fuels to be made
 available based on motor vehicle manufacturers' projections of future sales
 of clean-fuel vehicles and consultations with the affected State and local
 governments. If the Administrator determines that the sale of clean-fuel
 vehicles has created a demand for clean alternative fuels outside of the
 areas in which such vehicles are required to be sold, or motor vehicle
 manufacturers are prepared to make vehicles designed to operate exclusively
 on clean alternative fuel available on a broad basis, he may require that
 the clean alternative fuels on which the vehicles sold under subparagraph
 (A) can operate also be made available in major nationwide transportation
 corridors. The Administrator may by regulation grant persons subject to the
 requirements prescribed under this subparagraph an appropriate amount of
 credits for exceeding such requirements, and any person granted credits
 may transfer some or all of the credits for use by one or more persons
 in demonstrating compliance with such requirements. The Administrator may
 make the credits available for use after consideration of enforceability,
 environmental and economic factors and upon such terms and conditions as
 he finds appropriate. The Administrator may also by regulation establish
 specifications for any clean alternative fuel made available under this
 subparagraph as he finds necessary to reduce or eliminate an unreasonable
 risk to public health, welfare, or safety associated with its use or to
 ensure acceptable vehicle maintenance and performance characteristics.
 `(C) PROGRAM SCOPE- The clean-fuel vehicles required under subparagraph
 (A) shall be sold in--
 `(i) areas designated nonattainment for ozone under section 110(b)(5), having
 a 1988 ozone design value at or above 0.18 parts per million (as calculated
 according to the most recent interpretation methodology issued prior to
 the enactment of this section by the United States Environmental Protection
 Agency), having a 1980 population of two hundred and fifty thousand or more,
 and for which the Administrator has not approved, under section 182(c)(3)(B),
 State provisions wholly replacing the clean-fuel vehicle program, and
 `(ii) any other area at the request of the Governor of the State in which the
 area is located, upon the approval of the Administrator. The Administrator
 shall approve any such request where the Governor of the State has made
 a determination that inclusions of the area in the clean fuel vehicle
 program is appropriate and would result in progress toward attainment of
 any national ambient air quality standard and the Administrator finds that
 such determination is not arbitrary or capricious.
Sales of the clean-fuel vehicles shall be allocated among such areas based on
population, vehicles sales and such other factors as the Administrator finds
appropriate (including State provisions approved under section 182(c)(3)(B)
partly replacing the clean-fuel vehicle program and requests under subparagraph
(D) for an increase in the number of clean-fuel vehicles required to be sold
under this subsection).
 `(D) Adjustments to program-
 `(i) Except as provided under clause (ii), if one or more areas are
 exempted in whole or in part from the clean-fuel vehicle program under
 section 182(c)(3)(B), or included in the clean-fuel vehicle program under
 subparagraph (C)(ii), the Administrator, by regulation, shall--
 `(I) revise the total number of clean-fuel vehicles that must be produced,
 sold, and distributed under subparagraph (A) by an amount proportional to
 the change in the total population covered by the program as a result of
 such area or areas being exempted in whole or in part from or included in
 the program, and
 `(II) revise as appropriate the requirements prescribed under subparagraph
 (B) regarding the availability of clean alternative fuels in such area
 or areas.
 `(ii) The Governor of any State containing an area included in the clean-fuel
 vehicle program under subparagraph (C)(ii) may submit to the Administrator a
 request to increase the number of clean-fuel vehicles required to be sold in
 the area under the program. The Administrator shall approve any such request
 where the Governor of the State has made a determination that the requested
 increase is appropriate and would result in progress toward attainment of
 any national ambient air quality standard and the Administrator finds that
 such determination is not arbitrary or capricious. If the Administrator
 approves one or more such requests, he shall, by regulation--
 `(I) increase the total number of clean-fuel vehicles that must be produced,
 sold, and distributed to ultimate purchasers under subparagraph (A) by
 the amount requested, and
 `(II) revise as appropriate the requirements prescribed under subparagraph
 (B) regarding the availability of clean alternative fuels in the areas
 affected.
 `(iii) The requirements prescribed under subparagraphs (A) and (B) may be
 delayed by up to two years or decreased if the Administrator determines
 `(I) within eighteen months of enactment of this section that a delay will
 substantially advance the technology, improve the benefits, or lower the
 costs of the clean-fuel vehicle program, or
 `(II) that a delay or decrease is appropriate due to the likelihood of a
 national economic recession.
In the event the Administrator makes such a determination, he may revise
as appropriate the number of clean-fuel vehicles required to be sold in a
particular year.
 `(iv) Any additional requirements prescribed under this subparagraph
 shall become applicable after such period as the Administrator finds
 necessary for the requisite vehicles and fuels to be made available,
 giving appropriate consideration to model availability and the cost of
 compliance within such period.
In developing the regulations to implement and enforce the clean-fuel
vehicle program prescribed by this subsection, the Administrator shall
hold at least one public hearing and shall consider the ozone, toxic and
global warming benefits of the program; safety and public health issues
and measures necessary to avoid any risks involved; ways to ensure customer
acceptance; the expected cold start performance, serviceability, durability,
and reliability of the vehicles likely to be produced; other environmental,
economic, energy, national security, and safety implications of the program;
along with the results of ongoing problems demonstrating the use of motor
vehicles operated on clean alternative fuels.
 `(c) INFORMATION COLLECTION- `(1) For purposes of enforcing regulations
 implementing this section, the Administrator may by regulation require
 manufacturers, distributors, and retailers of motor vehicles or motor
 vehicle fuels to establish and maintain records, make reports, and provide
 information concerning the sales of (A) motor vehicles capable of operating
 on clean alternative fuel, and (B) clean alternative fuels. Nothing in
 this subsection shall be construed to limit the Administrator's authority
 under sections 114, 206, or 208.
 `(2) Any records, reports or information obtained under this subsection
 shall be available to the public, except that upon a showing satisfactory
 to the Administrator by any person that records, reports, or information,
 or particular portions thereof (other than emission data), to which the
 Administrator has access under this subsection would, if made public,
 divulge methods or processes entitled to protection as trade secrets of
 such person, the Administrator shall consider such record, report, or
 information or particular portion thereof confidential in accordance with
 the purposes of section 1905 of title 18 of the United States Code. Any
 authorized representative of the administrator (including an authorized
 contractor acting as a representative of the Administrator) shall be
 considered an employee of the United States for purposes of section 1905
 of title 18. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Administrator or
 authorized representative of the Administrator (including any authorized
 contractor acting as a representative of the Administrator) from disclosing
 records, reports, or information to other officers, employees, or authorized
 representatives of the United States (including any authorized contractor
 acting as a representative of the Administrator) concerned with carrying
 out this Act or, when relevant, in any proceeding under this Act. Nothing
 in this section shall authorize the withholding of information by the
 Administrator or any officer or employee under his control (including any
 authorized contractor acting as a representative of the Administrator)
 from the duly authorized committees of the Congress.
 `(d) CONSULTATION WITH DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY AND DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION-
 The Administrator shall consult with the Secretaries of the Department
 of Energy and the Department of Transportation in carrying out his duties
 under this section.'.
 (c) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 202(a)(4) of the Clean Air Act is amended
 by striking the phrase `standards prescribed under this subsection' every
 place it occurs and inserting the phrase `requirements prescribed under
 this title.'
SEC. 202. EMISSIONS OF HYDROCARBONS, CARBON MONOXIDE, AND OXIDES OF NITROGEN
FROM PASSENGER CARS.
 (a) Subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section 202(b)(1) of the Clean Air Act
 are amended to read as follows:
 `(A) The regulations under subsection (a) of this section applicable to
 emissions of hydrocarbons from 1980 and later model year light-duty vehicles
 and engines shall contain standards which provide that emissions of total
 hydrocarbons from such vehicles may not exceed 0.41 gram per vehicle
 mile. The regulations under subsection (a) applicable to emissions of
 hydrocarbons from 1993 and later model year light-duty vehicles and engines
 also shall contain standards which provide that emissions of nonmethane
 hydrocarbons from 40 and 80 percent of each manufacturer's 1993 and 1994
 model year vehicles and engines respectively, and 100 percent of 1995 and
 later model year vehicles and engines, may not exceed 0.25 gram per vehicle
 mile. The regulations under subsection (a) of this section applicable
 to emissions of carbon monoxide from 1981 and later model year light-duty
 vehicles and engines shall contain standards which provide that emissions of
 carbon monoxide from such vehicles may not exceed 3.4 grams per vehicle mile.
 `(B) The regulations under subsection (a) of this section applicable
 to emissions of oxides of nitrogen from 1981 through 1992 model year
 light-duty vehicles and engines shall contain standards which provide that
 such emissions from such vehicles and engines may not exceed 1.0 gram per
 vehicle mile. The regulations under subsection (a) of this section applicable
 to 1993 and later model year light-duty vehicles and engines shall contain
 standards which provide that such emissions from each manufacturer's
 vehicles and engines may not exceed the levels specified in table 1:
`Table 1- Emissions of NOx from 1993 and later model year light-duty vehicles
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Model year Standard Percentage of
 each manufacturer's fleet subject to standard
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 1993 1.0 gram per vehicle-mile (`gpm') 60 percent.
 0.7 gpm 40 percent.
 1994 1.0 gpm 20 percent.
 0.7 gpm 80 percent.
 1995 and later model years 0.7 gpm 100 percent.'
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 (b) Subparagraph (c) of section 202(b)(1) of the Clean Air Act is amended
 to read as follows:
 `(C) The Administrator may promulgate regulations under subsection (a)(1)
 revising any standard prescribed or previously revised under this subsection,
 as needed to protect public health or welfare, taking costs into account. Any
 revised standard shall require a reduction of emissions from the standard
 that was previously applicable.'.
 (c) Section 202(b)(2) of the Clean Air Act is amended to read as follows:
 `(2) Emission standards under paragraph (1), and measurement techniques on
 which such standards are based (if not promulgated prior to the enactment
 of paragraph (1)), shall be prescribed by regulations within one hundred
 eighty days after such date.'.
SEC. 203. EMISSIONS OF HYDROCARBONS AND CARBON MONOXIDE FROM LIGHT-DUTY TRUCKS.
 (a) Section 202(c) of the Clean Air Act is amended to read as follows:
 `(c) EMISSIONS OF HC AND CO FROM LIGHT-DUTY TRUCKS- (1) The regulations
 under subsection (a) applicable to emissions of hydrocarbons and carbon
 monoxide from the light-duty trucks specified in table 2 shall contain
 standards which provide that such emissions from 40 and 80 per centum of
 each manufacturer's 1994 and 1995 model year light-duty trucks respectively
 and 100 per centum of 1996 and later model year light-duty trucks, may
 not exceed the levels specified in the table:
`Table 2- Emissions of HC and CO from light-duty trucks
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Light-duty truck (`LDT') class
 Pollutant Standard
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 LDT's with loaded vehicle weight of 3,750 lbs. and less (`Light-LDT's')
 Total HC 0.41 gpm.
 LDT's with loaded vehicle weight of greater than 3,750 lbs. (`Heavy-LDT's')
 Total HC 0.50 gpm.
 Light-LDT's CO
 4.20 gpm.
 Heavy-LDT's CO
 5.50 gpm.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 `(2) Emission standards under paragraph (1) and measurement techniques on
 which the standards are based (if not promulgated prior to the enactment
 of paragraph (1)), shall be prescribed by regulations within 180 days
 after such date.
 `(3) The Administrator may promulgate regulations under subsection
 (a)(1) revising any standard prescribed or previously revised under this
 subsection, as needed to protect public health and welfare, taking costs
 into account. Any revised standard shall require a reduction of emissions
 from the standard which was previously applicable.'.
 (b) Section 206(f)(1) of the Clean Air Act is amended by inserting `and
 light-duty trucks' immediately after `light-duty vehicles and engines'.
SEC. 204. CARBON MONOXIDE EMISSIONS AT COLD TEMPERATURES.
 Section 202 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following new
 subsection after subsection (g), as added by section 207 of this Act:
 `(h) COLD CO STANDARD- (1) Not later than twelve months after the enactment
 of this subsection, the Administrator shall promulgate regulations under
 subsection (a) of this section applicable to emissions of carbon monoxide
 from 1993 and later model year light-duty vehicles and light-duty trucks
 when operated at 20 degrees Fahrenheit. The regulations shall contain
 standards which provide that, on average, emissions of carbon monoxide from
 a manufacturer's vehicles when operated at 20 degrees Fahrenheit may not
 exceed, in the case of light-duty vehicles, 10.0 grams per mile, and in the
 case of light-duty trucks, a level comparable in stringency to the standard
 applicable to light-duty vehicles. The standards also shall provide that
 each manufacturer's light-duty vehicle and light-duty truck fleets shall
 comply with applicable standards according to the following schedule: at
 least 40 per centum of 1993 model year vehicles; at least 80 per centum
 of 1994 model year vehicles; and 100 per centum of 1995 and later model
 year vehicles. The regulations shall provide that such standards be met by
 averaging emission levels established for every engine family subject to
 the standards at the time the engine family is certified under section 206.
 `(2)(A) Not later than December 31, 1993, the Administrator shall complete
 a study assessing the need for further reductions in emissions of carbon
 monoxide and the maximum reductions in such emissions achievable from
 1998 and later model year light-duty vehicles and light-duty trucks when
 operated at 20 degrees Fahrenheit.
 `(B) The Administrator may promulgate (and from time to time revise)
 regulations under subsection (a)(1) of this section applicable to emissions
 of carbon monoxide from 1998 and later model year light-duty vehicles and
 light-duty trucks when operated at 20 degrees Fahrenheit, as needed to
 protect public health and welfare, taking costs into account.
 `(3) The Administrator also may promulgate regulations under subsection
 (a)(1) applicable to emissions of carbon monoxide from heavy-duty vehicles
 and engines when operated at cold temperatures.'.
SEC. 205. EVAPORATIVE EMISSIONS.
 Section 202 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following new
 subsection after subsection (h), as added by section 204 of this Act.
 `(i) CONTROL OF EVAPORATIVE EMISSIONS- The Administrator may promulgate (and
 from time to time revise) regulations applicable to evaporative emissions of
 hydrocarbons from all gasoline-fueled motor vehicles (1) during operation and
 (2) over two or more days of nonuse, under ozone-prone summertime conditions
 (as determined by regulations of the Administrator). The regulations shall
 take effect as expeditiously as possible and shall require the greatest
 degree of emission reduction achievable by means reasonably expected to
 be available for production during any model year to which the regulations
 apply, giving appropriate consideration to cost, energy and safety factors
 associated with the application of the technology.'.
SEC. 206. MOBILE SOURCE-RELATED AIR TOXICS.
 Section 202 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following new
 subsection after subsection (i), as added by section 205 of this Act.
 `(j) MOBILE SOURCE-RELATED AIR TOXICS- (1) Not later than 18 months after
 the enactment of this subsection, the Administrator shall complete a
 study of the need for and feasibility of controlling emissions of toxic
 air pollutants which are unregulated under this title and associated with
 motor vehicles and motor vehicle fuels, and the need for and feasibility
 of controlling such emissions. The Administrator may focus the study on
 those categories of emissions that in his judgment pose the greatest risk
 to human health or about which significant uncertainties remain.
 `(2) After completing the study prescribed under paragraph (1), the
 Administrator may promulgate (and from time to time revise) regulations
 under subsection (a)(1) of this section or section 211(c)(1) containing such
 requirements as the Administrator in his discretion deems approriate based
 on the study prescribed under subparagraph (1) and such other information
 as is available to him.'.
SEC. 207. EMISSION CONTROL DIAGNOSTICS SYSTEMS.
 (a) Section 202 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new subsection after subsection (f):
 `(g) Emissions Control Diagnostics-
 `(1) RULEMAKING- The Administrator, after consideration of environmental
 benefits and economic factors, may promulgate (and from time to time revise)
 regulations requiring manufacturers to install on all new motor vehicles
 and motor vehicle engines diagnostics systems capable of--
 `(A) accurately identifying emission-related systems deterioration or
 malfunction which could cause or result in failure of the vehicle to comply
 with emission standards established under this section,
 `(B) alerting the vehicle's owner or operator to the likely need for
 emission-related components or systems maintenance or repair,
 `(C) storing and retrieving fault codes specified by the Administrator, and
 `(D) providing access to stored information in a manner specified by the
 Administrator.
 `(2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The regulations prescribing emission control diagnostics
 systems under paragraph (1) of this subsection (and any revision thereof)
 shall take effect after such period as the Administrator finds necessary to
 permit the development and application of the requisite technology, giving
 appropriate consideration to the cost of compliance within such period.
 `(3) STATE INSPECTION- The Administrator, by regulation, may require States
 that have implementation plans under section 110 containing motor vehicle
 inspection and maintenance programs to amend their plans within two years
 of promulgation of the regulations to provide for inspection of emission
 control diagnostics systems (as prescribed by regulations under paragraph
 (1) of this subsection) and the maintenance or repair of malfunctions or
 system deterioration identified by or affecting such diagnostics systems.
 `(4) INFORMATION AVAILABILITY- The Administrator, by regulation, may require
 manufacturers to provide any person engaged in the business of repairing or
 servicing motor vehicles or motor vehicle engines with any information needed
 to make use of the emission control diagnostics systems prescribed under this
 subsection, including instructions for making emissions-related repairs.'.
 (b) Section 207(a)(3) of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking the last
 sentence and inserting the following: `The term `designed for emission
 control' as used in the preceding sentence means a catalytic converter, a
 thermal reactor, an emission control diagnostics system, or other component
 installed on or in a vehicle for the sole or primary purpose of reducing
 vehicle emissions (not including those vehicle components which were in
 general use prior to model year 1968 and the primary function of which is
 not related to emission control).'.
 (c) Section 207(b) of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking the
 second to last sentence and inserting the following: `For purposes of the
 warranty under this subsection, for the period after twenty-four months
 or twenty-four thousand miles (whichever first occurs) the term `emission
 control device or system' means a catalytic converter, a thermal reactor,
 an emission control diagnostics system, or other component installed on or
 in a vehicle for the sole or primary purpose of reducing vehicle emissions.'.
SEC. 208. HEAVY-DUTY TRUCKS.
 Section 202(a)(3) of the Clean Air Act is amended by--
 (1) striking subparagraphs (A), (B), (C), (D), and (E) and inserting the
 following new subparagraphs:
 `(A)(i) Unless the standard is changed as provided in subparagraph (B),
 regulations under paragraph (1) of this subsection applicable to emissions
 of hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide, oxides of nitrogen and particulate matter
 from classes and categories of heavy-duty vehicles or engines manufactured
 during or after model year 1983 shall contain standards which reflect the
 greatest degree of emission reduction achievable through the application
 of technology which the Administrator determines will be available for the
 model year to which such standards apply, giving appropriate consideration
 to cost, energy, and safety factors associated with the application of
 such technology.
 `(ii) In establishing classes or categories of vehicles or engines for
 purposes of regulations under this paragraph, the Administrator may base
 such classes or categories on gross vehicle weight, horsepower, type of
 fuel used, or other appropriate factors.
 `(B) On the basis of information available to him concerning the effects of
 air pollutants emitted from heavy-duty vehicles or engines and from other
 sources of mobile source related pollutants on the public health and welfare,
 and taking costs into account, the Administrator may promulgate regulations
 under paragraph (1) of this subsection revising any standard promulgated
 under or prior to the enactment of subparagraph (A) (or previously revised
 under this subparagraph).';
 (2) redesignating subparagraph (F) as subparagraph (C); and
 (3) adding a new subparagraph (D) to read as follows:
 `(D) The Administrator shall study the practice of rebuilding heavy-duty
 engines and the impact rebuilding has on engine emissions. On the basis of
 that study and other information available to him, the Administrator may
 prescribe requirements to control rebuilding practices, including standards
 applicable to emissions from any rebuilt heavy-duty engines (whether or not
 the engine is past it statutory useful life), which in his judgment cause,
 or contribute to, air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to
 endanger public health or welfare taking costs into account. Any regulations
 shall take effect after a period the Administrator finds necessary to permit
 the development and application of the requisite control measures, giving
 appropriate consideration to the cost of compliance within the period.'.
SEC. 209. NONROAD ENGINES AND VEHICLES.
 (a) Section 216 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new paragraphs at the end:
 `(11) The term `nonroad engine' means an internal combustion engine
 (including the fuel system) that is not used in a motor vehicle or a
 vehicle used soely for competition, or that is not subject to standards
 promulgated under section 111 of section 202.
 `(12) The term `nonroad vehicle' means a vehicle that is powered by a
 nonroad engine and that is not a motor vehicle or a vehicle used solely
 for competition.'.
 (b) Subsection (1) of section 216 of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking
 the phrase `new motor vehicles or new motor vehicle engines' every place
 it occurs and inserting `new motor vehicles, new motor vehicle engines,
 new nonroad vehicles or new nonroad engines'.
 (c) Section 213 of Clean Air Act is amended to read as follows:
`SEC 213. NONROAD ENGINES AND VEHICLES.
 `(a) EMISSION STANDARDS- The Administrator may promulgate and from time
 to time revise) regulations containing standards applicable to emissions
 from those classes or categories of nonroad engines and nonroad vehicles
 which in his judgment cause, or contribute to, air pollution which may
 reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare, taking
 costs into account. The regulations shall apply to the useful life of the
 engines or vehicles (as determined by the Administrator).
 `(b) EFFECTIVE DATE- Standards under this section shall take effect at the
 earliest possible date considering the lead time necessary to permit the
 development and application of the requisite technology, giving appropriate
 consideration to the cost of compliance within such period.
 `(c) SAFE CONTROLS- Effective with respect to engines or vehicles to which
 standards under this section apply, no emission control device, system,
 or element of design shall be used in a new nonroad engine or new nonroad
 vehicle or purposes of complying with such standards if such device,
 system, or element of design will cause or contribute to an unreasonable
 risk to public health, welfare, or safety in its operation or function. In
 determining whether an unreasonable risk exists, the Administrator shall
 consider factors including those described in section 202(a)(4)(B).
 `(d) ENFORCEMENT- The standards under this section shall be subject to
 sections 206, 207, and 208, with such modifications as the Administrator
 deems appropriate, and shall be enforced in the same manner as standards
 prescribed under section 202. The Administrator shall revise or promulgate
 regulations as may be necessary to determine compliance with and enforce
 standards in effect under this section.'.
SEC. 210. VEHICLE CERTIFICATION.
 (a) Section 206(a) of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new paragraphs after paragraph (3):
 `(4)(A) Not later than twelve months after the enactment of this paragraph,
 the Administrator shall revise the regulations promulgated under this
 subsection to add test procedures capable of determining whether 1993 and
 later model year light-duty vehicles and light-duty trucks, when properly
 maintained and used, will pass the inspection methods and procedures
 established under section 207(b) for that model year, under conditions
 reasonably likely to be encountered in the conduct of inspection and
 maintenance programs, but which those programs cannot reasonably influence
 or control. The conditions shall include, but not necessarily be limited
 to, fuel characteristics, ambient temperature, and short (thirty minutes
 or less) waiting periods before tests are conducted. The Administrator
 shall not grant a certificate of conformity under this subsection for any
 1993 or later model year vehicle or engine that he concludes cannot pass
 the test procedures established under this paragraph.
 `(B) From time to time, the Administrator may revise the regulations
 promulgated under paragraph (A), as he deems appropriate.
 `(5) To the maximum extent feasible, considering costs, environmental
 benefits and technology, the Administrator shall prescribe regulations
 permitting manufacturers to demonstrate compliance with section 202(a)
 emission standards through averaging of emissions of vehicle or engine
 families, within a manufacturer's fleet or among manufacturers' fleets
 and over time, upon such terms and conditions as he finds appropriate. In
 devising any program under this paragraph, the Administrator shall consider
 factors such as the enforceability of any such program and the potential
 for adverse environmental impacts.'.
 (b) Section 206(a)(1) of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking the
 third sentence and inserting the following: `In the case of any original
 equipment manufacturer (as defined by the Administrator in regulations
 promulgated before the enactment of the Clean Air Amendments of 1989) of
 vehicles or vehicle engines whose projected sales in the United States for
 any model year (as determined by the Administrator) will not exceed three
 hundred, the Administrator shall not require, for purposes of determining
 compliance with regulations under section 202 for the useful life of the
 vehicle or engine, operation of any vehicle or engine manufactured during
 such model year for more than five thousand miles or one hundred and sixty
 hours, respectively, unless the Administrator by regulation prescribes
 otherwise. The Administrator shall apply any adjustment factors he deems
 appropriate to assure that each vehicle or engine will comply during its
 useful life (as determined under section 202(d)) with the regulations
 prescribed under section 202.'.
SEC. 211. IN-USE COMPLIANCE--RECALL.
 Section 207(c) of the Clean Air Act is amended by redesignating paragraph
 (3) as paragraph (7) and adding new paragraphs (3), (4), (5), and (6)
 to read as follows:
 `(3) With respect to any determination of nonconformity applicable to
 emissions of nonmethane hydrocarbons (`NMHC') from 1993 and later model
 year light-duty vehicles or engines conforming at the time of certification
 to the 0.25 gram per mile (`gpm') NMHC standard prescribed under section
 202(b)(1)(A), the Administrator shall apply--
 `(A) to 1993 and 1994 model year vehicles, a standard of 0.32 gpm;
 `(B) to 1995 model year vehicles, a standard of 0.25 gpm to 40 per centum,
 and a standard of 0.32 gpm to 60 percent, of each manufacturer's vehicles
 and engines;
 `(C) to 1996 model year vehicles, a standard of 0.25 gpm to 80 per centum,
 and a standard of 0.32 gpm to 20 per centum, of each manufacturer's vehicles
 and engines;
 `(D) to 1997 and later model year vehicles, a standard of 0.25 gpm to 100
 per centum of each manufacturer's vehicles and engines.
In the case of each manufacturer's 1995 and later model year vehicles, the
Administrator shall apply the more stringent of the standards applicable
under this paragraph to those engine families which the manufacturer shall
designate at the time of certification.
 `(4) With respect to any determination of nonconformity applicable to
 emissions of total hydrocarbons (`HC') and carbon monoxide (`CO') from
 1994 and later model year light-duty trucks conforming at the time of
 certification to the standards prescribed under section 202(c)(1), the
 Administrator shall apply--
 `(A) to 1994 and 1995 model year light-duty trucks with mileages of fifty
 thousand or less,
 `(i) standards of 0.41 gpm of HC and 5.20 gpm of CO in the case of trucks
 with a loaded vehicle weight of three thousand seven hundred and fifty
 pounds or less (`Light-LDTs'); and
 `(ii) standards of 0.50 gpm of HC and 6.70 gpm of CO in the case of trucks
 with a loaded vehicle weight of greater than three thousand seven hundred
 and fifty pounds (`Heavy-LDTs');
 `(B) to 1994 and 1995 model year light-duty trucks with mileages greater
 than fifty thousand, standards of 0.80 gpm of HC and 10.0 gpm of CO;
 `(C) to 40 and 80 per centum of each manufacturer's 1996 and 1997 model
 year Light-LDTs and Heavy-LDTs respectively,
 `(i) standards of 0.41 gpm of HC and 4.20 gpm of CO in the case of
 Light-LDTs; and
 `(ii) standards of 0.50 gpm of HC and 5.50 gpm of CO in the case of
 Heavy-LDTs;
 `(D) to 60 and 20 per centum of each manufacturer's 1996 and 1997 model
 year Light-LDTs and Heavy-LDTs respectively,
 `(i) the standards specified in subparagraph (A) to trucks with mileages
 of fifty thousand or less; and
 `(ii) standards specified in subparagraph (B) to trucks with mileages
 greater than fifty thousand; and
 `(E) to 1998 and later model year light-duty trucks, the standards specified
 in subparagraph (C).
In the case of each manufacturer's 1995 and later model year light-duty
trucks, the Administrator shall apply the more stringent of the HC and CO
standards applicable under this paragraph to those engine families which
the manufacturer shall designate at the time of certification.
 `(5) The Administrator may require a manufacturer to audit the effectiveness
 of repairs performed on its vehicles under a remedial plan ordered under
 this subsection or undertaken by the manufacturer on its own initiative.
 `(6) For the purpose of determining whether a notice of nonconformity
 or failure should be issued under this subsection, the Administrator may
 require a manufacturer to procure and test, or have procured and tested
 at the manufacturer's expense, in-use vehicles or engines in a manner the
 Administrator considers appropriate.'.
SEC. 212. COMPLIANCE PROGRAM FEES.
 Part A of title II of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new section at the end thereof:
`SEC. 217. MOTOR VEHICLE COMPLIANCE PROGRAM FEES.
 `(a) FEE COLLECTION- The Administrator may promulgate (and from time to
 time revise) regulations establishing fees to recover all costs to the
 Government associated with--
 `(1) new vehicle or engine certification under section 206(a),
 `(2) new vehicle or engine compliance monitoring and testing under section
 206(b),
 `(3) in-use vehicle or engine compliance monitoring and testing under
 section 207(c), and
 `(4) vehicle fuel economy programs under sections 2003(d) and 2006 of the
 Motor Vehicle Information and Costs Savings Act.
The Administrator may establish a fee schedule based on such factors as he
finds appropriate and equitable, including the number of vehicles or engines
produced under a certificate of conformity.
 `(b) SPECIAL TREASURY FUND- Any fees collected under this section shall
 be deposited in a special fund in the United States Treasury for licensing
 and other services which thereafter shall be available for appropriation,
 to remain available until expended, to carry out the Agency's activities
 for which the fees were collected.
 `(c) LIMITATION ON FUND USE- Moneys in this fund shall not be used until
 after the first fiscal year after the first July 1 when fees are paid into
 the fund.
 `(d) ADMINISTRATOR'S TESTING AUTHORITY- Nothing in this subsection shall
 be construed to limit the Administrator's authority to require manufacturer
 or confirmatory testing as provided in this part.'.
SEC. 213. INFORMATION COLLECTION.
 Section 208 of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking subsections (a)
 and (b) and adding the following new subsections:
 `(a) MANUFACTURER'S RESPONSIBILITY- Every manufacturer of new motor vehicles
 or new motor vehicle engines, and every manufacturer of new motor vehicle
 or engine parts or components, shall establish and maintain records,
 perform tests, make reports and provide information the Administrator may
 reasonably require to determine whether the manufacturer has acted or is
 acting in compliance with this part and regulations thereunder, or to assist
 in the development of regulations authorized by this part, and shall, upon
 request of an officer or employee duly designated by the Administrator
 (including an authorized contractor acting as a representative of the
 Administrator), permit such officer or employee (including an authorized
 contractor acting as a representative of the Administrator) at reasonable
 times to have access to and copy such records.
 `(b) ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY- For the purposes of enforcement of this
 section and section 207(c), officers or employees duly designated by the
 Administrator (including authorized contractors acting as representatives
 of the Administrator), upon presenting appropriate credentials to the
 manufacturer or person in charge, are authorized--
 `(1) to enter, at reasonable times, any establishment of the manufacturer,
 or of any person whom the manufacturer engages to perform any activity
 required by subsection (a), for the purposes of inspecting or observing
 any activity conducted pursuant to subsection (a), and
 `(2) to inspect records, files, papers, processes, controls, and
 facilities used in performing any activity required by subsection (a),
 by such manufacturer or by any person whom the manufacturer engages to
 perform any such activity.
 `(c) AVAILABILITY TO THE PUBLIC; TRADE SECRETS- Any records, reports,
 or information obtained in this section shall be available to the public,
 except that upon a showing satisfactory to the Administrator by any person
 that records, reports, or information, or a particular portion thereof
 (other than emission data), to which the Administrator has access under
 this section, if made public, would divulge methods or processes entitled
 to protection as trade secrets of that person, the Administrator shall
 consider the record, report, or information or particular portion thereof
 confidential in accordance with the purposes of section 1905 of title 18 of
 the United States Code. Any authorized representative of the Administrator
 (including an authorized contractor acting as a representative of the
 Administrator) shall be considered an employee of the United States for
 purposes of section 1905 of title 18 of the United States Code. Nothing in
 this section shall prohibit the Administrator or authorized representative
 of the Administrator (including any authorized contractor acting as a
 representative of the Administrator) from disclosing records, reports or
 information to other officers, employees or authorized representatives
 of the United States (including any authorized contractor acting as a
 representative of the Administrator) concerned with carrying out this Act
 or when relevant in any proceeding under this Act. Nothing in this section
 shall authorize the withholding of information by the Administrator or any
 officer or employee under his control (including any authorized contractor
 acting as a representative of the Administrator) from the duly authorized
 committees of the Congress.'.
214. FUEL VOLATILITY.
 Section 211 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following new
 subsection after subsection (g):
 `(h) REID VAPOR PRESSURE REQUIREMENTS- (1) Not later than six months
 after enactment of this subsection, the Administrator shall promulgate
 regulations making it unlawful for any person during the high ozone season
 (as defined by the Administrator) to sell, offer for sale, dispense, supply,
 offer for supply, transport, or introduce into commerce gasoline whose Reid
 vapor pressure exceeds 9.0 pounds per square inch (psi). Such regulations
 shall also establish more stringent Reid vapor pressure standards as the
 Administrator finds necessary to generally achieve comparable evaporative
 emissions (on a per-vehicle basis) nationwide, taking into consideration
 the enforceability of such standards, the need of an area for emission
 control, and economic factors.
 `(2) Such regulations shall provide that the requirements of this subsection
 shall take effect not later than the high ozone season for 1992, and shall
 include such provisions as the Administrator determines are necessary to
 implement and enforce the requirements of this subsection.
 `(3) In establishing standards for fuel volatility under this subsection,
 the Administrator may permit gasoline containing at least 9 but not more
 than 10 per centum ethanol (by volume) to exceed the applicable Reid vapor
 pressure requirements by up to 1.0 psi.'.
SEC. 215. DIESEL FUEL SULFUR CONTENT.
 Section 211 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following new
 subsection after subsection (h) as added by section 214 of this Act:
 `(i) SULFUR CONTENT REQUIREMENTS FOR DIESEL FUEL- (1) Effective October 1,
 1993, no person shall manufacture, sell, supply, offer for sale or supply,
 dispense, transport or introduce into commerce motor vehicle diesel fuel
 which contains a concentration of sulfur in excess of 0.05 per centum
 (by weight) or which fails to meet a cetane index minimum of 40.
 `(2) Not later than twelve months after the enactment of this subsection,
 the Administrator shall promulgate regulations to implement and enforce the
 requirements of paragraph (1). The Administrator may require manufactures
 and importers of diesel fuel not intended for use in motor vehicles to
 dye such fuel in a particular manner in order to segregate it from motor
 vehicle diesel fuel.
 `(3) The sulfur content of fuel required to be used in the certification
 of 1991 through 1993 model year heavy-duty diesel vehicles and engines
 shall be 0.10 per centum (by weight). The sulfur content and cetane index
 minimum of fuel required to be used in the certification of 1994 and later
 model year heavy-duty diesel vehicles and engines shall comply with the
 regulations promulgated under paragraph (2).'.
SEC. 216. NON-ROAD FUELS.
 (a) Section 211(a) of the Clean Air Act is amended by inserting the phrase
 `(including any fuel or fuel additive used exclusively in nonroad engines
 or nonroad vehicles)' immediately after `fuel or fuel additive', the first
 time that it appears.
 (b) Section 211(b)(2)(B) is amended by striking `or' after `vehicle'
 and inserting in lieu thereof a comma, and by inserting immediately after
 `vehicle engine,' the phrase `nonroad engine or nonroad vehicle,'.
 (c) Section 211(c)(1) is amended by striking `or' after `motor vehicle'
 and inserting in lieu thereof a comma, and by inserting immediately after
 `motor vehicle engine' a comma followed by the phrase `Nonroad engine or
 nonroad vehicle'.
SEC. 217. FUEL WAIVERS.
 (a) Section 211(f)(1) of the Clean Air Act is amended by insering `(A)'
 immediately after `(1)' and by adding the following new subparagraph at
 the end thereof:
 `(B) Effective upon the date of this subparagraph's enactment, it shall
 be unlawful for any manufacturer of any fuel or fuel additive to first
 introduce into commerce, or to increase the concentration in use of, any
 fuel or fuel additive for use by any person in motor vehicles manufactured
 after model year 1974 which is not substantially similar to any fuel or
 fuel additive utilized in the certification of any model year 1975, or
 subsequent model year, vehicle or engine under section 206.'.
 (b) Section 211(f)(3) is amended by inserting `(A)' immediately after `(1)'.
SEC. 218. MARKET-BASED ALTERNATIVE CONTROLS.
 Section 214 of the Clean Air Act is amended to read as follows:
`MARKET-BASED ALTERNATIVE CONTROLS
 `SEC. 214. (a) ALTERNATIVE CONTROLS IN SOME OZONE NONATTAINMENT AREAS-
 (1) Not later than twelve months after the enactment of this section, the
 Administrator shall promulgate regulations that, to the maximum extent
 feasible and notwithstanding any other section of this title, allow any
 manufacturer or fuel refiner to control emissions from motor vehicles and
 motor vehicle fuels by one or more means different in type or degree from,
 and instead of, emission control measures prescribed under this title and
 section 182(b)(3) (relating to refueling vapor recovery), so long as the
 alternative control measures achieve at least the same emissions reductions
 (as determined by the Administrator) over the same time period as the
 control measures that they would replace. The regulations shall establish
 performance standards for motor vehicles and motor vehicle fuels marketed
 in areas described under section 212(b)(2)(C)(i). The Administrator shall
 base such performance standards on the emission reductions that, in his
 judgment, may reasonably be anticipated to result from implementation
 of the control measures for which motor vehicle manufacturers or fuel
 refiners may substitute alternative controls under this subsection. (For
 purposes of this subsection, the emissions reductions to be attributed
 to the requirements prescribed under sections 212(b)(2) (A) and (B)
 shall be the same as those determined by the Administrator under section
 212(b)(1).) The regulations shall provide that any manufacturer or fuel
 refiner may substitute alternative control measures if it demonstrates,
 and the Administrator finds, that the combination of control measures that
 it would employ (including any prescribed control measures) would meet
 or exceed the performance standard applicable to it. Any manufacturer
 or fuel refiner seeking approval of alternative control measures must
 submit a proposal to the Administrator within twenty-four months of
 enactment of this section. The Administrator must approve or disapprove
 any such proposal within thirty months of enactment of this section. The
 Administrator shall publish any proposal to employ alternative control
 measures submitted by a manufacturer or fuel refiner in the Federal
 Register upon receipt. Such notice shall constitute a notice of proposed
 rulemaking on whether to approve or disapprove the proposal and be deemed
 to comply with the requirements concerning notice of proposed rulemaking
 contained in sections 553 through 557 of title 5 of the United States Code
 (relating to notice and comment).) Until the Administrator finds that
 the manufacturer or refiner has succeeded in demonstrating that it would
 meet or exceed the performance standard, the manufacturer or refiner shall
 remain subject to all of the applicable requirements prescribed under this
 title. The regulations also shall provide for enforcement of alternative
 control measures approved under this subsection.
 `(2) The regulations promulgated under this subsection shall allow to the
 maximum extent feasible manufacturers and fuel refiners to demonstrate
 compliance with the performance standards prescribed under paragraph
 (1) through averaging of reductions of ozone-producing emissions among
 manufacturers and fuel refiners, and over time, so long as averaging
 would achieve at least the same emissions reductions (as determined by the
 Administrator) as would be achieved by compliance with such performance
 standards in the absence of such averaging.
 `(b) NATIONWIDE ALTERNATIVE CONTROLS- The Administrator may promulgate
 regulations that, notwithstanding any other section of this title, allow
 any manufacturer or fuel refiner to control emissions from motor vehicles or
 motor vehicles fuels by one or more means different in type or degree from,
 and instead of, emission control measures prescribed under this title or
 section 182(b)(3) of title I (relating to refueling vapor recovery), if
 first it demonstrates, and the Administrator finds, that the alternative
 control measures it would employ would achieve at least the same emissions
 reductions (as determined by the Administrator) over the same time period
 as the control measures that they would replace. The regulations promulgated
 under this subsection may also permit manufacturers, fuel refiners, and fuel
 marketers to demonstrate compliance with applicable control measures through
 averaging of reductions of ozone-producing emissions among manufacturers,
 fuel refiners, and fuel marketers, and over time, so long as such averaging
 would achieve at least the same emissions reductions (as determined by the
 Administrator) as would be achieved by compliance with such performance
 standards in the absence of such averaging. The regulations shall also
 provide for enforcement of alternative control measures approved under
 this section.'.
SEC. 219. PREEMPTION OF STATE FUEL REGULATION.
 Section 211(c)(4)(A) of the Clean Air Act is amended to read as follows:
 `(A) Except as otherwise provided in subparagraph (B) or (C), no State
 (or political subdivision) may prescribe or attempt to enforce, for the
 purposes of motor vehicle emission control, any control or prohibition
 respecting any characteristic or component of a fuel or fuel additive in
 a motor vehicle or motor vehicle engine--
 `(i) if the Administrator has found that no control or prohibition of the
 characteristic or component of a fuel or fuel additive under paragraph
 (1) is necessary and has published his finding in the Federal Register, or
 `(ii) if the Administrator has prescribed under paragraph (1) a control or
 prohibition applicable to such characteristic or component of a fuel or fuel
 additive, unless the State prohibition or control of such characteristic
 or component of a fuel or fuel additive is identical to the prohibition
 or control prescribed by the Administrator.'.
 (2) Section 211(c)(4)(C) is amended by adding the following at the end:
 `The Administrator may find that a State control or prohibition is necessary
 to achieve that standard if no other measures that would bring about timely
 attainment exist, or if other measures exist and are technically possible
 to implement, but are unreasonable or impracticable. The Administrator may
 make a finding of necessity under this subparagraph even if the plan for
 the area does not contain an approved demonstration of timely attainment.'.
SEC. 220. ENFORCEMENT.
 (a) INSPECTIONS AND TESTING- Section 203(a)(2) of the Clean Air Act is
 amended to read as follows:
 `(2)(A) for any person to fail or refuse to permit access to or copying of
 records or to fail to make reports or provide information required under
 section 208;
 `(B) for any person to fail or refuse to permit entry, testing or inspection
 authorized under section 206(c) or section 208;
 `(C) for any person to fail or refuse to perform tests, or have tests
 performed as required under section 207(c) or section 208;'.
 (b) TAMPERING WITH VEHICLE EMISSION CONTROLS- Section 203(a)(3) of the
 Clean Air Act is amended to read as follows:
 `(3)(A) for any person to remove or render inoperative any device or
 element of design installed on or in a motor vehicle or motor vehicle
 engine in compliance with regulations under this title prior to its sale
 and delivery to the ultimate purchaser, or for any person to remove or
 render inoperative any device or element of design after sale and delivery
 to the ultimate purchaser; or
 `(B) for any person to manufacture or sell, or offer to sell, any part
 or component intended for use with, or as part of, any motor vehicle or
 motor vehicle engine, where a principal effect of the part or component is
 to bypass, defeat, or render inoperative any device or element of design
 installed on or in a motor vehicle or motor vehicle engine in compliance
 with regulations under this title, and where the person knows or should
 know that the part or component is being offered for sale for such use or
 put to such use; or'.
 (c) DEFINITION- Section 216 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the
 following at the end:
 `(13) The term `motor vehicle or engine part manufacturer' as used
 in sections 207 and 208 means any person engaged in the manufacturing,
 assembling or rebuilding of any device, system, part, component or element of
 design which is installed in or on motor vehicles or motor vehicle engines.'.
 (d) CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES- Section 205 of the Clean Air Act
 is amended to read as follows:
 `SEC. 205. CIVIL PENALTIES- (a) Any person who violates sections 203(a)(1)
 or 203(a)(4), any manufacturer or dealer who violates section 203(a)(3)(A),
 or any person who violates regulations prescribed under sections 212(a)(1) or
 212(b)(2) shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $25,000. Any
 person other than a manufacturer or dealer who violates section 203(a)(3)(A)
 or any person who violates section 203(a)(3)(B) shall be subject to a
 civil penalty of not more than $2,500. Any such violation with respect to
 paragraph (1), (3)(A), or (4) of section 203(a) shall constitute a separate
 offense with respect to each motor vehicle or motor vehicle engine. Any such
 violation with respect to section 203(a)(3)(B) shall constitute a separate
 offense with respect to each part or component. Any person who violates
 section 203(a)(2), or regulations prescribed under section 212(c), shall
 be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $25,000 per day of violation.
 `(b) CIVIL ACTIONS- The Administrator may commence a civil action to assess
 and recover any civil penalty prescribed in subsection (a) of this section,
 section 211(d), or section 213(d). Any action under this subsection may
 be brought in the district court of the United States for the district in
 which the violation is alleged to have occurred or in which the defendant
 resides or has his principal place of business, and the court shall have
 jurisdiction to assess a civil penalty. In determining the amount of any
 civil penalty to be assessed under this subsection, the court shall take
 into account the gravity of the violation, the economic benefit or savings
 (if any) resulting from the violation, the size of the violator's business,
 the violator's history of compliance with this title, action taken to
 remedy the violation, the effect of the penalty on the violator's ability
 to continue in business, and such other matters as justice may require. In
 any such action, subpoenas for witnesses who are required to attend a
 district court in any district may run into any other district.
 `(c) Administrative Assessment of Certain Penalties-
 `(1) ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY AUTHORITY- The Administrator may assess any
 civil penalty prescribed in subsection (a) of this section, section 211(d),
 or section 213(d), provided that the maximum amount of penalty sought
 against each violator in a penalty assessment proceeding shall not exceed
 $200,000, except where the Administrator and the Attorney General jointly
 determine that a matter involving a larger penalty amount is appropriate
 for administrative penalty assessment. Any such determination by the
 Administrator and the Attorney General shall not be subject to judicial
 review. Assessment of a civil penalty under this subsection shall be by an
 order made on the record after opportunity for a hearing in accordance with
 sections 554 and 556 of title 5 of the United States Code. The Administrator
 may issue rules for discovery and other procedures for hearings under
 this paragraph. Before issuing such an order, the Administrator shall give
 written notice to the person to be assessed an administrative penalty of
 the Administrator's proposal to issue such order and provide such person
 an opportunity to request such a hearing on the order, within fifteen
 days of the date the notice is received by such person. The Administrator
 may compromise, or remit, with or without conditions, any administrative
 penalty which may be imposed under this subsection.
 `(2) DETERMINING AMOUNT- In determining the amount of any civil penalty
 assessed under this subsection, the Administrator shall take into account
 the gravity of the violation, the economic benefit or savings (if any)
 resulting from the violation, the size of the violator's business, the
 violator's history of compliance with this title, action taken to remedy
 the violation, the effect of the penalty on the violator's ability to
 continue in business, and such other matters as justice may require.
 `(3) EFFECT OF ADMINISTRATOR'S ACTION- (A) Action by the Administrator under
 this subsection shall not affect or limit the Administrator's authority to
 enforce any provision of this Act; except that any violation (i) with respect
 to which the Administrator has commenced and is diligently prosecuting an
 action under this subsection, or (ii) for which the Administrator has issued
 a final order not subject to further judicial review and the violator has
 paid a penalty assessment under this subsection, shall not be the subject
 of civil penalty action under subsection (b).
 `(B) No action by the Administrator under this subsection shall affect
 any person's obligation to comply with any section of this Act.
 `(4) FINALITY OF ORDER- An order issued under this subsection shall become
 final thirty days after its issuance unless a petition for judicial review
 is filed under paragraph (5).
 `(5) JUDICIAL REVIEW- Any person against whom a civil penalty is assessed
 in accordance with this subsection may seek review of the assessment
 in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, or
 for the district in which the violation is alleged to have occurred,
 in which such person resides, or where such person's principal place of
 business is located, within the thirty day period beginning on the date a
 civil penalty order is issued and by simultaneously sending a copy of the
 filing by certified mail to the Administrator and the Attorney General. The
 Administrator shall file in the court a certified copy, or certified index,
 as appropriate, of the record on which the order was issued within thirty
 days. The court shall not set aside or remand the order unless there is
 not substantial evidence in the record, taken as a whole, to support the
 finding of a violation or unless the Administrator's assessment of the
 penalty constitutes an abuse of discretion, and the court shall not impose
 additional civil penalties unless the Administrator's assessment of the
 penalty constitutes an abuse of discretion. In any proceedings, the United
 States may seek to recover civil penalties assessed under this section.
 `(6) COLLECTION- If any person fails to pay an assessment of a civil
 penalty imposed by the Administrator as provided in this subsection--
 `(A) after the order making the assessment has become final, or
 `(B) after a court in an action brought under paragraph (5) has entered
 a final judgment in favor of the Administrator,
the Administrator shall request the Attorney General to bring a civil action
in an appropriate district court to recover the amount assessed (plus interest
at rates established pursuant to section 6621(a)(2) of title 26, United States
Code, from the date of the final order or the date of the final judgment, as
the case may be). In such an action, the validity, amount, and appropriateness
of the penalty shall not be subject to review. Any person who fails to pay on
a timely basis the amount of an assessment of a civil penalty as described in
the first sentence of this paragraph shall be required to pay, in addition to
that amount and interest, the United States' enforcement expenses, including
but not limited to attorneys fees and costs for collection proceedings, and
a quarterly nonpayment penalty for each quarter during which such failure
to pay persists. The nonpayment penalty shall be in an amount equal to 10
per centum of the aggregate amount of that person's penalties and nonpayment
penalties which are unpaid as of the beginning of such quarter.'.
 `(e) ENFORCEMENT OF FUELS REGULATIONS- Section 211(d) of the Clean Air
 Act is amended to read as follows:
 `(d) Penalties and Injunctions-
 `(1) CIVIL PENALTIES- Any person who violates subsection (a), (f), or (g)
 of this section or the regulations prescribed under subsection (c), (h), or
 (i) of this section or the regulations prescribed subsection 212(b)(2)(B)
 or who fails to furnish any information or conduct any tests required by
 the Administrator under subsection (b) of this section shall be liable to
 the United States for a civil penalty of not more than the sum of $25,000
 for each and every day of each such violation and the amount of economic
 benefit or savings resulting from the violation. Any violation with respect
 to a regulation prescribed under subsection (c) of this section or subsection
 212(b)(2)(B) which establishes a regulatory standard based upon a multiday
 averaging period shall constitute a separate day of violation for each
 and every day in the averaging period. Civil penalties shall be assessed
 in accordance with the provisions of subsections 205 (b) and (c).
 `(2) INJUNCTIVE AUTHORITY- The district courts of the United States shall
 have jurisdiction to restrain violations of subsections (a), (f), and (g)
 of this section and of the regulations prescribed under subsection (c),
 (h), or (i) of this section or paragraph (2)(B) of section 212(b), to award
 other appropriate relief, and to compel the furnishing of information
 and the conduct of tests required by the Administrator under subsection
 (b) of this section. Actions to restrain such violations and compel such
 actions shall be brought by and in the name of the United States. In any
 such action, subpoenas for witnesses who are required to attend a district
 court in any district may run into any other district.
 (f) MISFUELING- Section 211(g) of the Clean Air Act is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(g) MISFUELING- No person shall introduce, or cause or allow the
 introduction of, leaded gasoline into any motor vehicle which is labeled
 `unleaded gasoline only,' which is equipped with a gasoline tank filler
 inlet designed for the introduction of unleaded gasoline, which is a 1990
 or later model year motor vehicle, or which that person knows or should
 know is a vehicle designed solely for the use of unleaded gasoline. Nothing
 in this section shall limit the applicability of section 211(d)(3).'.
SEC. 221. TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS.
 The Clean Air Act is amended by--
 (1) deleting section 202(a)(6);
 (2) in section 202(b)(3), deleting `(3) For purposes of this part--'
 and redesignating subparagraphs (A), (B) and (C) of section 202(b)(3)
 as paragraphs (14), (15), and (16) of section 216;
 (c) deleting section 202(b)(4);
 (4) deleting section 202(b)(5);
 (5) in section 202(b)(6)--
 (A) deleting `(A)' after `(6)',
 (B) deleting subparagraph (B), and
 (C) redesignating paragraph (6) as paragraph (3);
 (6) deleting section 202(b)(7);
 (7) deleting section 203(c);
 (8) deleting `announce in the Federal Register and' in section 206(e);
 (9) in section 206(f)--
 (A) deleting `(1)' after `(f)', and
 (B) deleting section 206(f)(2);
 (10) striking, in section 207(g), `(but not designed for emission control
 under the terms of the last three sentences of subsection 207(a)(1)' and
 inserting `(but not designed for emission control under the terms of the
 last sentence of section 207(a)(3))'; and
 (11) deleting, in section 231(a), paragraph (1) and redesignating paragraphs
 (2) and (3) as paragraphs (1) and (2) respectively.
TITLE III--HAZARDOUS AIR POLLUTANTS
SEC. 301. TECHNOLOGY-BASED STANDARDS FOR HAZARDOUS AIR POLLUTANTS.
 Section 112 of the Clean Air Act is amended to read as follows:
`HAZARDOUS AIR POLLUTANTS
 `SEC. 112. (a) DEFINITIONS- For the purposes of this section--
 `(1) The term `major source' for pollutants other than radionuclides,
 means any stationary source or group of stationary sources located within
 a contiguous area and under common control that emits or has the potential
 to emit considering controls, in the aggregate, ten metric tons per year
 or more of any hazardous air pollutant or twenty-five metric tons per
 year or more of any combination of hazardous air pollutants which have
 been listed pursuant to subsection (b). The Administrator may establish
 a lesser quantity for major source other than specified in the previous
 sentence, on the basis of the potency, characteristics of the air pollutant,
 or other relevant factors. For radionuclides, such term shall have the
 meaning specified by the Administrator by rule, considering radiation dose.
 `(2) The term `area source' means any source that is not a major source
 but that is a member of a source category listed under this section based
 on aggregate emissions, or potential aggregate emissions, of a listed
 pollutant or pollutants in an area.
 `(3) The term `new source' means a stationary source the construction
 or reconstruction of which is commenced after the Administrator proposes
 regulations under this section establishing an emission standard applicable
 to such source category or subcategory pursuant to subsection (d) or (f).
 `(4) The terms `stationary source', `owner or operator', and `existing'
 source shall have the same meaning as such terms have under section 111(a).
 `(5) The term `electric utility steam generating unit' means any fossil
 fuel fired steam electric generating unit that is constructed for the
 purpose of supplying more than one-third of its potential electric output
 capacity and more than twenty-five megawatts electrical output to any
 utility power distribution system for sale. Any steam supplied to a steam
 distribution system for the purpose of providing steam to a steam-electric
 generator that would produce electrical energy for sale is also considered
 in determining the electrical energy output capacity of the facility.
 `(b) Hazardous Air Pollutant List-
 `(1) The Congress establishes for purposes of this section a list of
 hazardous air pollutants as follows:
----------------------------------------------------------
 CAS number Chemical name
----------------------------------------------------------
 75070 Acetaldehyde
 60355 Acetamide
 75058 Acetonitrile
 98862 Acetophenone
 53963 2-Acetylaminofluorine
 107028 Acrolein
 79061 Acrylamide
 79107 Acrylic acid
 107131 Acrylonitrile
 107051 Allyl chloride
 92671 4-Aminobiphenyl
 7664417 Ammonia
 62533 Aniline
 90040 o-Anisidine
 1332214 Asbestos
 71432 Benzene (including benzene from gasoline)
 92875 Benzidine
 98077 Benzotrichloride
 100447 Benzyl chloride
 92524 Biphenyl
 117817 Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (DEHP)
 542881 Bis(chloromethyl)ether
 75252 Bromoform
 106990 1,3-Butadiene
 156627 Calcium cyanamide
 105602 Caprolactam
 133062 Captan
 63252 Carbaryl
 75150 Carbon disulfide
 56235 Carbon tetrachloride
 463581 Carbonyl sulfide
 120809 Catechol
 133904 Chloramben
 57749 Chlordane
 7782505 Chlorine
 79118 Chloroacetic acid
 532274 2-Chloroacetophenone
 108907 Chlorobenzene
 510156 Chlorobenzilate
 67663 Chloroform
 107302 Chloromethyl methyl ether
 126998 Chloroprene
 1319773 Cresols/Cresylic acid (isomers and mixture)
 95487 Cresols/Cresylic acid (isomers and mixture)
 108394 Cresols/Cresylic acid (isomers and mixture)
 106445 Cresols/Cresylic acid (isomers and mixture)
 98828 Cumene
 94757 2,4-D, salts and esters
 3547044 DDE
 334883 Diazomethane
 132649 Dibenzofurans
 96128 1,2-Dibromo-3-chloropropane
 84742 Dibutylphthalate
 106467 1,4-Dichlorobenzene(p)
 91941 3,3-Dichlorobenzidene
 111444 Dichloroethyl ether (Bis(2-chloroethyl)ether)
 542756 1,3-Dichloropropene
 62737 Dichlorvos
 111422 Diethanolamine
 121697 N,N-Diethyl aniline (N,N-Dimethylaniline)
 64675 Diethyl sulfate
 119904 3,3-Dimethoxybenzidine
 60117 Dimethyl aminoazobenzene
 119937 3,3-Dimethyl benzidine
 79447 Dimethyl carbamoyl chloride
 68122 Dimethyl formamide
 57147 1,1-Dimethyl hydrazine
 131113 Dimethyl phthalate
 77781 Dimethyl sulfate
 534521 4,6-Dinitro-o-cresol, and salts
 51285 2,4-Dinitrophenol
 121142 2,4-Dinitrotoluene
 123911 1,4-Dioxane (1,4-Diethyleneoxide)
 122667 1,2-Diphenylhydrazine
 106898 Epichlorohydrin (1-Chloro-2,3-epoxypropane)
 106887 1,2-Epoxybutane
 140885 Ethyl acrylate
 100414 Ethyl benzene
 51796 Ethyl carbamate (Urethane)
 75003 Ethyl chloride (Chloroethane)
 106934 Ethylene dibromide (Dibromoethane)
 107062 Ethylene dichloride (1,2-Dichloroethane)
 107211 Ethylene glycol
 151564 Ethylene imine (Aziridine)
 75218 Ethylene oxide
 96457 Ethylene thiourea
 75343 Ethylidene dichloride (1,1-Dichloroethane)
 50000 Formaldehyde
 76448 Heptachlor
 118741 Hexachlorobenzene
 87683 Hexachlorobutadiene
 77474 Hexachlorocyclopentadiene
 67721 Hexachloroethane
 822060 Hexamethylene-1,6-diisocyanate
 680319 Hexamethylphosphoramide
 110543 Hexane
 302012 Hydrazine
 7647010 Hydrochloric acid
 7664393 Hydrogen fluoride (Hydrofluoric acid)
 7783064 Hydrogen sulfide
 123319 Hydroquinone
 78591 Isophorone
 58899 Lindane (all isomers)
 108316 Maleic anhydride
 67561 Methanol
 72435 Methoxychlor
 74839 Methyl bromide (Bromomethane)
 74873 Methyl chloride (Chloromethane)
 71556 Methyl chloroform (1,1,1-Trichloroethane)
 78933 Methyl ethyl ketone (2-Butanone)
 60344 Methyl hydrazine
 74884 Methyl iodide (Iodomethane)
 108101 Methyl isobutyl ketone (Hexone)
 624839 Methyl isocyanate
 80626 Methyl methacrylate
 1634044 Methyl tert butyl ether
 101144 4,4-Methylene bis(2-chloroaniline)
 75092 Methylene chloride (Dichloromethane)
 101688 Methylene diphenyl diisocyanate (MDI)
 101779 4,4-Methylenedianiline
 91203 Naphthalene
 98953 Nitrobenzene
 92933 4-Nitrobiphenyl
 100027 4-Nitrophenol
 79469 2-Nitropropane
 684935 N-Nitroso-N-methylurea
 62759 N-Nitrosodimethylamine
 59892 N-Nitrosomorpholine
 56382 Parathion
 82688 Pentachloronitrobenzene (Quintobenzene)
 87865 Pentachlorophenol
 108952 Phenol
 106503 p-Phenylenediamine
 75445 Phosgene
 7803512 Phosphine
 7723140 Phosphorus
----------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------
 CAS Number Chemical Name
-----------------------------------------------------------
 85449 Phthalic anhydride
 1336363 Polychlorinated biphenyls (Aroclors)
 1120714 1,3-Propane sultone
 57578 beta-Propiolactone
 123386 Propionaldehyde
 114261 Propoxur (Baygon)
 78875 Propylene dichloride (1,2-Dichloropropane)
 75569 Propylene oxide
 75558 1,2-Propylenimine (2-Methyl aziridine)
 91255 Quinoline
 106514 Quinone
 100425 Styrene
 96093 Styrene oxide
 1746016 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
 79345 1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane
 127184 Tetrachloroethylene (Perchloroethylene)
 7550450 Titanium tetrachloride
 108883 Toluene
 95807 2,4-Toluene diamine
 584849 2,4-Toluene diisocyanate
 95534 o-Toluidine
 8001352 Toxaphene (chlorinated camphene)
 120821 1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene
 79005 1,1,2-Trichloroethane
 79016 Trichloroethylene
 95954 2,4,5-Trichlorophenol
 88062 2,4,6-Trichlorophenol
 121448 Triethylamine
 1582098 Trifluralin
 540841 2,2,4-Trimethylpentane
 108054 Vinyl acetate
 593602 Vinyl bromide
 75014 Vinyl chloride
 75354 Vinylidene chloride (1,1-Dichloroethylene)
 1330207 Xylenes (isomers and mixture)
 95476 Xylenes (isomers and mixture)
 108383 Xylenes (isomers and mixture)
 106423 Xylenes (isomers and mixture)
 0 Antimony Compounds
 0 Arsenic Compounds (inorganic including arsine)
 0 Beryllium Compounds
 0 Cadmium Compounds
 0 Chromium Compounds
 0 Cobalt Compounds
 0 Coke Oven Emissions
 0 Cyanide Compounds 1
 0 Glycol ethers 2
 0 Lead Compounds
 0 Manganese Compounds
 0 Mercury Compounds
 0 Mineral fibers 3
 0 Nickel Compounds
 0 Polycylic Organic Matter 4
 0 Radionuclides (including radon) 5
 0 Selenium Compounds
-----------------------------------------------------------
NOTE: For all listings above which contain the word `compounds' and for glycol
ethers, the following applies: Unless otherwise specified, these listings
are defined as including any unique chemical substance that contains the
named chemical (i.e., antimony, arsenic, etc.) as part of that chemical's
infrastructure.
 1 X'CN where X = H' or any other group where a formal dissociation may
 occur. For example KCN or Ca(CN)2
 2 includes mono- and di- ethers of ethylene glycol, diethylene glycol,
 and triethylene glycol R-(OCH2CH2)n-OR' where
 n = 1, 2, or 3
 R = alkyl or aryl groups
 R' = R, H, or groups which, when removed, yield glycol ethers with the
 structure: R-(OCH2CH)n-OH
Polymers are excluded from the glycol category
 3 includes glass microfibers, glass wool fibers, rock wool fibers, and slag
 wool fibers, each characterized as `respirable' (fiber diameter less than
 3.5 micrometers) and possessing an aspect ratio (fiber length divided by
 fiber diameter) greater than 3.
 4 includes organic compounds with more than one benzene ring, and which
 have a boiling point greater than or equal to 100«C
 5 a type of atom which spontaneously undergoes radioactive decay
 `(2) IN GENERAL- The Administrator may add or delete a substance from the
 list under this subsection.
 `(A) ADDITIONS- A substance may be added if the Administrator determines
 in his judgment that the substance is an air pollutant and that there is
 sufficient evidence to establish that the pollutant is known to cause or
 can reasonably be anticipated to cause in humans any one of the following:
 `(i) cancer or developmental effects, or
 `(ii) serious or irreversible--
 `(I) reproductive dysfunctions, or
 `(II) neurological disorders, or
 `(III) heritable gene mutations, or
 `(IV) other chronic health effects, or
 `(V) adverse acute human health effects.
 `(B) DELETIONS- The Administrator may delete a pollutant if he determines
 there is not sufficient evidence to establish any of the criteria described
 in paragraph (A).
 `(C) FURTHER INFORMATION- If the Administrator determines that information on
 the health effects of a substance is not sufficient to make a determination
 required by this paragraph the Administrator may use any authority available
 to him to acquire such information.
 `(3) PETITIONS- Any person may petition the Administrator to modify the list
 by adding or deleting a substance. Within eighteen months after receipt
 of a petition the Administrator shall either grant or deny the petition
 by publishing a written explanation of the reasons for his decision. Any
 air pollutant which is listed under section 108(a) may not be added to
 the list under this section.
 `(c) SOURCE CATEGORY LIST- (1) Not later than twelve months after the date
 of enactment, the Administrator shall publish, and may from time to time
 revise in response to public comment or new information, a list of all
 categories and subcategories of major sources and area sources designated
 under paragraph (4) of the air pollutants listed pursuant to subsection (b).
 `(2) For the categories and subcategories he designates, he shall establish
 emission standards under subsection (d), according to the schedule in
 subsection (e).
 `(3) The Administrator may decide not to list a source category or
 subcategory because its emissions into the air are, in his judgment,
 already adequately controlled under this Act or any other Federal statute
 or regulation.
 `(4) The Administrator may designate a category or subcategory of area
 sources that he finds, based on actual or estimated aggregate emissions
 of a listed pollutant or pollutants in an area, warrants regulation under
 this section.
 `(5) The Administrator may, in his discretion, list any category or
 subcategory previously regulated under this section as in effect prior to
 the date of enactment.
 `(6) The Administrator may withdraw a source category or subcate gory from
 the list published under this subsection if he finds, in his discretion,
 that the sources in the category present a negligible risk to public health.
 `(d) MAXIMUM ACHIEVABLE CONTROL TECHNOLOGY EMISSION STANDARDS- (1) The
 Administrator shall promulgate regulations establishing emission standards
 for each category or subcategory of major sources and area sources in
 accordance with the schedule provided in subsection (e). The Administrator
 may distinguish among classes, types and sizes of sources within a category
 or subcategory in establishing such standards. The Administrator may set
 standards for emissions of radionuclides from a category or subcategory
 separately from regulating other listed pollutants emitted by that category
 or subcategory.
 `(2) Emisson standards promulgated under this subsection shall be applicable
 to new and existing major sources and area sources in each category or
 subcategory, and shall require the maximum degree of reduction in emissions
 of the air pollutants subject to this section (including a prohibition
 of such emissions, if achievable) that the Administrator, taking into
 consideration the cost of achieving such emission reduction, and any nonair
 quality and other air quality-related health and environmental impacts,
 and energy requirements, determines is achievable through application of
 measures, processes, methods, systems or techniques including, but not
 limited to, measures which--
 `(A) reduce the volume of, or eliminate emissions of such pollutants through
 process changes, substitution of materials or other modifications such as
 reuse or recycling; or
 `(B) enclose systems or processes to eliminate emissions; or
 `(C) collect, capture or treat such pollutants when released from a process,
 stack, storage or fugitive emissions point; or
 `(D) are design, equipment, work practice or operational methods, or
 radiation dose standards; or
 `(E) requirements for operator training or certification; or
 `(F) are a combination of the above.
If the Administrator finds that it is not feasible to prescribe or enforce
an emission standard, he may instead issue regulalations requiring any of
the measures identified in subparagraphs (D) through (E) of this paragraph,
or any combination of such measures.
 `(3) The maximum degree of reduction in emissions that is deemed achievable
 for new sources in a category or subcategory shall not be less stringent than
 the emission control that is achieved in practice by the best controlled
 similar source, as determined by the Administrator. Emissions standards
 promulgated under this subsection for existing sources of a category or
 subcategory may be less stringent than standards for new sources in the
 same category or subcategory but shall be at least as stringent as the
 emissions controls achieved in practice by the best controlled similar
 sources. These determinations, for new and existing sources, shall take
 into account energy, environmental, economic impacts and other costs,
 as well as any other factors the Administrator deems appropriate. If the
 Administrator finds that no similar source employs controls reflecting the
 maximum available control technolgy, he may establish emissions standards
 or regulations meeting the requirements of this section without regard to
 the performance of similar sources. Emission standards under this section
 for radionuclides shall be set based upon radiation dose.
 `(4) Emission standards promulgated under this subsection shall be effective
 upon promulgation.
 `(5) In promulgating emission standards for a source category under this
 subsection, the Administrator shall prescribe a date for compliance with
 the standards for existing sources. In no event shall such date be later
 than three years after promulgation of the standards.
 `(6) With respect only to categories and subcategories of area sources
 listed pursuant to subsection (c), the Administrator may, in lieu of
 the authorities provided in paragraph (2) and subsection (f), elect to
 promulgate standards or requirements applicable to sources in such categories
 or subcategories which provide for the use of generally available control
 technologies or management practices by such sources to reduce emissions
 of listed air pollutants.
 `(7) The Administrator shall from time to time review, and, if appropriate,
 revise emissions standards promulgated under this subsection.
 `(e) SCHEDULE FOR STANDARDS- (1) The Administrator shall promulgate
 standards for categories and subcategories listed under subsection (c)
 of this section according to the following schedule:
 `(A) Emission standards for not less than ten categories or subcategories
 shall be promulgated not later than two years after the date of enactment
 of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989.
 `(B) Emission standards for 25 per centum of the listed categories or
 subcategories shall be promulgated not later than four years after the
 date of enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989.
 `(C) Emission standards for an additional 25 per centum of the listed
 categories and subcategories shall be promulgated not later than seven
 years after such date.
 `(D) For the remaining categories or subcategories listed under subsection
 (c) for which regulatory action has not been initiated, the Administrator
 shall, within seven years after enactment, review and designate the
 additional categories and subcategories he finds, in his discretion,
 warrant regulation under this section. Emission standards for the designated
 categories and subcategories shall be promulgated not later than ten years
 after enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989.
 `(2) In determining priorities for promulgating standards under subsection
 (d), the Administrator shall consider--
 `(A) the quantity and location of emissions or reasonably anticipated
 emissions of air pollutants subject to this section that each category or
 subcategory will emit;
 `(B) the known or anticipated adverse effects of such pollutants on public
 health; and
 `(C) the efficiency of grouping categories or subcategories according to
 the pollutants emitted, or the processes or technologies used.
 `(f) UNREASONABLE RISK EVALUATION- (1) Within seven years after promulgation
 of emission standards for a category of sources pursuant to subsection (d),
 the Administrator shall evaluate the risks to the public health remaining
 after application of such standards.
 `(2) If the Administrator finds after such evaluation, that the category
 or subcategory, or portion thereof, after application of the prescribed
 standards, presents an unreasonable risk to public health taking into
 account the cost and technical feasibility as well as the health risks
 of such standards, he shall, within two years after completion of such
 evaluation, promulgate standards to protect adequately against such risk.
 `(3) Any standards promulgated under this subsection shall be effective
 upon the date of promulgation.
 `(4) In promulgating emission standards for a source category under this
 subsection, the Administrator shall prescribe a date for compliance with
 the standards by existing sources. In no event shall such date be later
 than six years after promulgation of the standards.
 `(g) ALTERNATIVE EMISSIONS LIMITATIONS- (1) Notwithstanding the requirements
 of subsection (d), a State with a program approved under title IV, may
 issue a permit that authorizes--
 `(A) a major source to comply with alternative emission limitations in lieu
 of standards under this section, if the owner or operator presents evidence
 sufficient to demonstrate that emissions from the source in compliance
 with such limitations present a negligible risk to public health under
 criteria issued by the Administrator under subparagraph (F);
 `(B)(i) any existing source, for which the owner or operator demonstrates
 that it has achieved a voluntary reduction of 90 per centum or more in
 emissions of listed pollutants (95 per centum or more in the case of
 listed particulate pollutants) from the source within five years prior
 to proposal of an applicable standard promulgated pursuant to subsection
 (d), to meet emission limitations based on such voluntary reduction in
 lieu of such standard; the reduction shall be determined with respect to
 verifiable and actual emissions on an annual average basis and in a base
 year not earlier than five years prior to proposal (but in any case no
 earlier than calendar year 1987), unless emissions in the base year are
 artifically or substantially greater than emissions in other years prior
 to implementation of emissions reduction measures;
 `(ii) any existing source to extend its compliance date for a standard
 under subsection (d) for five years if the permit requires the source,
 within five years prior to proposal of the standard under subsection (d),
 to achieve a level of emission rate or emission reduction which complies
 (or would comply if the source is not subject to such standards) with
 the most stringent of any relevant section 111 standard, best available
 control technology determination (as defined in section 169(3)), or
 reasonably available control technology determination (as approved by the
 Administrator) which is applicable to the source category and prevailing
 at the time the reduction is achieved;
 `(iii) any existing source to extend its compliance date for a standard
 under subsection (d) for five years if the source, within five years prior
 to proposal of the standard under subsection (d), has achieved a level of
 emission rate or emission reduction which complies (or would comply if
 the source is not subject to such standard) with the lowest achievable
 emissions rate (as defined by section 171) which is applicable to the
 source category and prevailing at the time the reduction is achieved;
 `(iv) the Administrator shall review emissions from sources subject to
 emissions limitations under this subparagraph according to the provisions
 of subsection (f) at the same time that other sources in the category or
 subcategory are reviewed;
 `(C) For purposes of this paragraph, the term `voluntary' means not
 otherwise required by a Federal, State, or local law or regulation;
 `(D) The Administrator shall promulgate regulations to carry out the
 provisions of this paragraph as expeditiously as practicable, but not
 later than twenty-four months after the date of enactment of the Clean
 Air Act Amendments of 1989;
 `(E) Rules published pursuant to this paragraph may identify categories
 or subcategories of sources listed under subsection (c) for which no
 alternative emission limitations may be established, including categories or
 subcategories of area sources for which emission standards are promulgated
 to control combined emissions from sources, rather than emissions of
 individual sources; and
 `(F) The Administrator shall also publish regulations establishing
 methods for assessing the significance of public health risks and methods
 for evaluating evidence presented by an owner or operator applying for
 alternative emissions limitations under this subsection. Any modeling
 demonstration performed to support a showing of negligible risk shall
 comply with such regulations. Any stack height credit used in a modeling
 demonstration shall be based on the lesser of actual stack height of the
 source as it existed on January 1, 1989, or the stack height credit as
 provided in regulations issued by the Administrator.
 `(2) Any State with a program approved under title IV may issue a permit that
 grants an extension permitting an existing source up to two additional years
 to comply with standards under subsection (d), if such additional period
 is necessary for the installation of controls. An additional extension
 of up to three years may be added if the five-year compliance time is
 insufficient to dry and cover mining waste in order to reduce emissions
 of any pollutant listed under subsection (b).
 `(3) No alternative emission limitation under this paragraph shall take
 effect until it is approved by the Administrator.
 `(4) If the State in which a source is located does not have a program
 approved under title IV, the Administrator may grant any extensions
 authorized under this subsection for such source.
 `(h) PRECONSTRUCTION AND OPERATING REQUIREMENTS- After the effective date
 of any emission standard under paragraph (d)(4) or (f)(3) of this section,
 or an alternative emission limitation under subsection (g)--
 `(1) no person may construct any new major source subject to such
 emission standard, limitation or regulation under this section unless the
 Administrator, or a State with a permit program approved under title IV,
 determines that such source, if properly constructed and operated, will
 comply with the standard or limitation; and
 `(2) no person may operate any new or existing source subject to an emission
 standard or limitation except in compliance with such standard or limitation
 and any applicable schedule under paragraph (d)(5) or (f)(4).
 `(i) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE- The Administrator shall establish and maintain
 an air toxics clearinghouse and centers to provide technical information
 and assistance to State and local agencies on control technology, risk
 analysis, ambient monitoring and modelling, and emissions measurement and
 monitoring. The Administrator may conduct research on methods for preventing,
 measuring, and controlling emissions and evaluating associated health and
 ecological risks.
 `(j) PRESIDENTIAL EXEMPTION- The President may exempt any source from
 compliance with standards or requirements under this section for a period
 of not more than two years if the President determines it to be in the
 national security interests of the United States to do so. An exemption
 under this paragraph may be extended for one or more additional periods,
 each period not to exceed two years. The President shall make a report to
 Congress with respect to each exemption (or extension thereof) made under
 this paragraph.
 `(k) SAVINGS PROVISION- (1) Any standards promulgated under this section
 as in effect prior to the enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of
 1989 shall remain in force, as promulgated, unless modified in accordance
 with this section. If a timely petition for review of any such standard
 under section 307 is pending on such date of enactment, the standard shall
 be upheld if it complies with this section as in effect prior to that
 date. If any such standard is remanded to the Administrator, he may in his
 discretion apply either the requirements of this section, or those of this
 section as in effect prior to the date of enactment of such amendments.
 `(2) Notwithstanding section 307 of this Act, no action of the Administrator
 adding a pollutant to the list under subsection (b) of this section,
 listing a source category under subsection (c), designating a category
 of area sources under paragraph (c)(4), or determining that a category
 of sources presents a significant risk of serious or widespread adverse
 effects on public health under paragraph (f)(2), shall be final agency
 action subject to judicial review, except that any such listing decision
 may be reviewed, if otherwise final, when the Administrator issues emission
 standards for such pollutant or category.
 `(l) APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated such amounts
 as are necessary to carry out the requirements of this section.
 `(m) ELECTRIC UTILITIES- The Administrator shall perform a study of the
 hazards to public health reasonably anticipated to occur as a result
 of emissions by electric utility steam generating units of pollutants
 listed under subsection (b) after imposition of the requirements of this
 Act. The Administrator shall report the results of this study to the
 Congress within three years after the date of enactment. The Administrator
 shall develop and describe in his report to Congress alternative control
 strategies for emissions which may warrant regulation under this section. The
 Administrator may not regulate electric utility steam generating units under
 this section unless he finds such regulation is appropriate and necessary
 after considering the results of the study required in this subsection.'.
TITLE IV--PERMITS
SEC. 401. PERMITS.
 The Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following new title IV, at
 the end:
`TITLE IV--PERMITS
`DEFINITIONS
 `SEC. 401. As used in this title--
 `(1) The term `affected source' shall have the meaning given in title V.
 `(2) The term `major source' means any stationary source (or any group
 of stationary sources located within a contiguous area and under common
 control) that--
 `(A) is a major source as defined under section 112 of this Act; or
 `(B) is a major stationary source as defined in section 302.
 `(3) For sources subject to standards issued under section 112 of this Act,
 the terms `new source', `stationary source', and `area source' shall have
 the meaning given in that section.
 `(4) For sources subject to standards issued under section 111 of this Act,
 the terms `new source', `modification', `existing source', `stationary
 source', and `owner or operator' shall have the meaning given in that
 section.
 `(5) The term `schedule of compliance' means a schedule of remedial measures
 including an enforceable sequence of actions or operations leading to
 compliance with an applicable implementation plan, emission standard,
 emission limitation or emission prohibition.
 `(6) The term `permitting authority' means the Administrator, or the air
 pollution control agency authorized by the Administrator to carry out a
 permit program under this title.
`PERMIT PROGRAMS
 `SEC. 402. (a) Violations after the effective date of any permit program
 approved or promulgated under this title, it shall be unlawful for any
 person to violate any requirement of a permit issued under this title, or
 to operate a major source, any other source (including an area source)
 subject to standards or regulations under sections 111 or 112, any
 source required to have a permit under parts C or D of this Act, or any
 other source designated by regulations promulgated by the Administrator,
 except in compliance with a permit issued by a permitting authority under
 this title. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to alter the
 requirements of section 165, 172, and 173 regarding the requirement that
 a permit be obtained prior to construction. The Administrator may, in his
 discretion, promulgate regulations to exempt one or more source categories
 from the requirements of this subsection if he finds that such an exemption
 would be consistent with the purposes of this Act.
 `(b) REGULATIONS- The Administrator shall promulgate within twelve months
 after the date of enactment of this title regulations establishing the
 minimum elements of a permit program to be administered by any air pollution
 control agency. These elements shall include each of the following:
 `(1) Requirements for permit applications, including a standard application
 form.
 `(2) Monitoring and reporting requirements.
 `(3)(A) A requirement under State law that the owner or operator of each
 source subject to the requirement to obtain a permit under this title pay
 an annual fee, or the equivalent over some other period, sufficient to
 cover all direct and indirect costs of developing and administering the
 permit program, including, but not limited to, the reasonable costs of--
 `(i) reviewing and acting upon any application for such a permit,
 `(ii) if the owner or operator receives a permit for such source, whether
 before or after the date of enactment of this section, implementing and
 enforcing the terms and conditions of any such permit (not including any
 court costs or other costs associated with any enforcement action),
 `(iii) emissions and ambient monitoring,
 `(iv) preparing generally applicable regulations, or guidance,
 `(v) modeling, analyses, and demonstrations, and
 `(vi) preparing inventories and tracking emissions.
 `(B) The total amount of fees collected by the permitting authority shall
 conform to the following requirements:
 `(i) The Administrator shall not approve a program as meeting the
 requirements of this paragraph unless the State demonstrates that, except as
 otherwise provided in subparagraphs (ii) through (v) of this subparagraph,
 the program will result in the collection, in the aggregate, from all
 sources subject to subparagraph (A), of an amount not less than $25 per
 ton of each regulated pollutant, or such other amount as the Administrator
 may determine adequately reflects the costs of the program.
 `(ii) As used in this subparagraph, the term `regulated pollutant' shall
 mean (I) volatile organic compounds; (II) each pollutant regulated under
 section 111 or 112; and (III) each pollutant for which a national primary
 ambient air quality standard has been promulgated (except that carbon
 monoxide shall be excluded from this reference).
 `(iii) In determining the amount under clause (i), the permitting authority
 is not required to include any amount of regulated pollutant emitted by any
 source in excess of four thousand tons per year of that regulated pollutant.
 `(iv) The requirements of clause (i) shall not apply if the permitting
 authority demonstrates that collecting an amount less than the amount
 specified under clause (i) will meet the requirements of subparagraph (A).
 `(v) The fee calculated under clause (i) shall be increased in each year
 beginning after the year of enactment of this section by the percentage,
 if any, by which the Consumer Price Index for the most recent calendar
 year ending before the beginning of such year exceeds the Consumer Price
 Index for the calendar year 1989. For purposes of this clause.
 `(I) the Consumer Price Index for any calendar year is the average of the
 Consumer Price Index for all-urban consumers published by the Department
 of Labor, as of the close of the twelve-month period ending on August 31
 of each calendar year, and
 `(II) the revision of the Consumer Price Index which is most consistent
 with the Consumer Price Index for calendar year 1989 shall be used.
 `(C)(i) If the Administrator determines, under section 402(d), that the fee
 provisions of the operating permit program do not meet the requirements of
 this paragraph, or if the Administrator makes a determination, under section
 402(i), that the permitting authority is not adequately administering or
 enforcing an approved fee program, the Administrator may, in addition to
 taking any other action authorized under this title, collect reasonable
 fees from the sources identified under subparagraph (A) without regard to
 the requirements of paragraph (B).
 `(ii) Any source that fails to pay fees lawfully imposed by the Administrator
 under this subparagraph shall pay a penalty of 50 per centum of the fee
 amount, plus interest on the fee amount computed in accordance with section
 6621(a)(2) of title 26 of the United States Code (relating to computation
 of interest on underpayment of federal taxes).
 `(iii) Any fees, penalties, and interest collected under this subparagraph
 shall be deposited in a special fund in the United States Treasury for
 licensing and other services, which thereafter shall be available for
 appropriation, to remain available until expended, subject to appropriation,
 to carry out the Agency's activities for which the fees were collected.
Any fee required to be collected by a State or interstate agency under this
subsection shall be utilized to support the air pollution control program
of such State or interstate agency.
 `(4) Requirements for adequate personnel and funding to administer the
 program.
 `(5) A requirement that the permitting authority have adequate authority to:
 `(A) issue permits that apply, and assure compliance by all sources required
 to have a permit under this title with each applicable standard, regulation
 or requirement under this Act;
 `(B) issue permits for a fixed term, not to exceed five years;
 `(C) assure that permits incorporate emission limitations and other
 requirements in an applicable implementation plan;
 `(D) terminate, modify, or revoke and reissue permits for cause;
 `(E) enforce permits, permit fee requirements, and the requirement to
 obtain a permit, including authority to recover civil penalties in an
 amount not less than $10,000 per day for each violation, and appropriate
 criminal penalties; and
 `(F) ensure that no permit will be issued if the Administrator timely
 objects to its issuance under section 405.
 `(6) Adequate procedures for public notice, including offering an opportunity
 for public comment and a hearing, on any permit application.
 `(7) Authority to make available to the public any permit application,
 compliance plan, permit, and monitoring or compliance report under section
 403(e).
 `(C) A single permit may be issued for a facility with multiple sources.
 `(d) SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL- Not later than three years after the enactment
 of this title, the Governor of each State shall develop and submit to
 the Administrator a permit program under State law or under an interstate
 compact meeting the requirements of this title. In addition, the Governor
 shall submit a legal opinion from the attorney general (or the attorney
 for those State air pollution control agencies that have independent
 legal counsel), or from the chief legal officer of an interstate agency,
 that the laws of the State, locality, or the interstate and compact provide
 adequate authority to carry out the program. Not later than one year after
 receiving a program, and after notice and opportunity for public comment,
 the Administrator shall approve or disapprove such program, in whole or in
 part. The Administrator may approve a program to the extent that the program
 meets the requirements of this Act, including the regulations issued under
 subsection (b) of this section. If the program is disapproved, in whole
 or in part, the Administrator shal notify the Governor of any revisions
 or modifications necessary to obtain approval. The Governor shall revise
 and resubmit the program for review under this section within one hundred
 and eighty days after receiving notification. If the Governor fails within
 such period to resubmit an approvable program, the Administrator:
 `(1) shall, to the extent the permit program would implement an applicable
 implementation plan, withhold final action on plan revisions affecting one,
 or a small group of, major sources; and
 `(2) may in his discretion take either or both of the following actions:
 `(A) apply any of the sanctions specified in section 179(b) of this Act
 other than the sanction specified in section 179(b)(2); or
 `(B) promulgate a program, or partial program, under this title.
 `(e) SUSPENSION- The Administrator shall suspend the issuance of permits
 promptly upon publication of notice of approval of a permit program under
 this section, but may in such notice retain jurisdiction over permits
 that have been federally issued, but for which the administrative or
 judicial review process is not complete. The Administrator shall continue
 to administer and enforce federally issued permits under this title until
 they are replaced by a permit issued by a permitting program. Nothing in
 this provision should be construed to limit the Administrator's ability
 to enforce permits issued by a State.
 `(f) PARTIAL PERMIT PROGRAM- The Governor of a State may submit, and the
 Administrator may approve, a partial permit program. No partial permit
 programs shall be approved unless, at a minimum, it applies, and ensures
 compliance with, this title and--
 `(1) all requirements established under title V applicable to `affected
 sources';
 `(2) all requirements established under section 112 applicable to `major
 sources', `area sources,' and `new sources'; or
 `(3) all requirements of title I (other than section 112) applicable to
 sources required to have a permit under this title.
Approval of a partial program shall not relieve the State of its obligation
to submit a complete program, nor from the application of any sanctions
under this Act for failure to submit an approvable permit program.
 `(g) INTERIM APPROVAL- If a program (including a partial permit program)
 submitted under this title substantially meets the requirements of
 this title, but is not fully approvable, the Administrator may by rule
 grant the program interim approval. In the notice of final rulemaking,
 the Administrator shall specify the changes that must be made before the
 program can receive full approval. An interim approval under this subsection
 shall expire on a date set by the Administrator not later than two years
 after such approval, and may not be renewed.
 `(h) EFFECTIVE DATE- The effective date of a permit program, or partial
 or interim program, approved under this title, shall be the effective date
 of approval by the Administrator.
 `(i) ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT- Whenever the Administrator makes
 a preliminary determination that a permitting authority is not adquately
 administering and enforcing a program, or portion thereof, in accordance with
 the requirements of this title, he shall notify the permitting authority of
 such determination and the reasons therefor. If the permitting authority
 fails to take action to assure adequate administration and enforcement,
 the Administrator may in his discretion, but not before ninety day after
 issuing such notice, take one or more of the following actions--
 `(1) withdraw approval of the program or portion by rule;
 `(2) propose to apply any of the sanctions specified in section 179(b)
 of this Act other than the sanction specified in section 179(b)(2); or
 `(3) promulgate a program, or portion of a program, under this title.
`PERMIT APPLICATIONS
 `SEC. 403. (a) Any source specified in section 402(a) shall become subject
 to a permit program, and required to have a permit, on the later of the
 following dates--
 `(1) the effective date of a permit program or partial or interim permit
 program applicable to the source; or
 `(2) the date such source becomes subject to section 402(a).
 `(b) The regulations required by section 402(b)(1) shall include a
 requirement that the owner or operator submit with the permit application a
 compliance plan describing how the source will comply with all applicable
 requirements under this Act. The compliance plan shall include a schedule
 of compliance, and a schedule under which the owner or operator will submit
 progress reports to the permitting authority no less frequently than every
 six months. The regulations shall further require any owner or operator
 submitting a compliance plan to periodically certify that the facility is in
 compliance with any applicable requirements under this Act, and to promptly
 report any violations of such requirements to the permitting authority.
 `(c) The owner or operator of any source required to have a permit shall,
 not later than six months after the date on which the source becomes
 subject to a permit program approved or promulgated under this title,
 or such earlier date as the permitting authority may establish, submit to
 the permitting authority a compliance plan and an application for a permit
 signed by a responsible corporate official, who shall certify the accuracy
 of the information submitted.
 `(d) Except for sources required to have a permit prior to construction
 under sections 165, 172, or 173, if an owner or operator has submitted
 a timely and complete application for a permit required by this title,
 but final action has not been taken on the application, the source's
 failure to have a permit shall not be a violation of this Act, unless the
 delay in final action was due to the failure of the applicant timely to
 submit information required or requested to process the application. No
 source required to have a permit under this title shall be in violation of
 section 402(a) before the date on which the source is required to submit
 an application under subsection (c) of this section.
 `(e) A copy of each permit application, compliance plan, emissions or
 compliance monitoring report, certification, and each permit issued under
 this title, shall be available to the public. If an applicant is required
 to submit information entitled to protection from disclosure under section
 114(c) of this Act, the applicant may submit such information separately
 from the application. The requirements of section 114(c) shall apply to
 such information. The contents of a permit or of a compliance plan shall
 not be entitled to protection under section 114(c).
`PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS
 `SEC. 404. (a) CONDITIONS- Each permit issued under this title shall
 include emission limitations and standards, a schedule of compliance,
 and such other conditions as are necessary to assure compliance with
 applicable requirements.
 `(b) MONITORING AND ANALYSIS- The Administrator may by rule prescribe
 procedures and methods for determining compliance and for monitoring and
 analysis of pollutants regulated under this Act.
 `(c) INSPECTION ENTRY, MONITORING CERTIFICATION AND REPORTING- Each permit
 issued under this title shall set forth inspection, entry, monitoring,
 compliance certification, and reporting requirements to assure compliance
 with the permit terms and conditions. Such monitoring and reporting
 requirements shall conform to any applicable regulation under subsection
 (b) of this section. Any report required to be submitted by a permit under
 this title shall be signed by a responsible corporate official, who shall
 certify its accuracy.
 `(d) GENERAL PERMITS- The permitting authority may, after notice and
 opportunity for public hearing, issue a general permit covering numerous
 similar sources. Any general permit shall comply with all requirements
 applicable to permits under this title. No source covered by a general
 permit shall thereby be relieved from the obligation to file an application
 under section 403.
 `(e) TEMPORARY SOURCES- The permitting authority may issue a single permit
 to an owner or operator authorizing emissions from similar operations at
 multiple temporary locations. No such permit shall be issued unless it
 includes conditions that will assure compliance with all the requirements
 of this Act at all authorized locations, including, but not limited to,
 ambient standards and compliance with any applicable increment or visibility
 requirements under part C of title I. Any such permit shall in addition
 require the owner or operator to notify the permitting authority in advance
 of each change in location. The permitting authority may require a separate
 permit fee for operations at each location.
 `(f) LESS STRINGENT REQUIREMENT- (1) A permit may not be reissued or modified
 to contain emission limitations or other requirements that are less stringent
 than the comparable emission limitations or requirements in the previous
 permit or that applied to the source under an applicable implementation plan.
 `(2) Notwithstanding paragraph (1) of this subsection, a permit may be
 reissued or modified, in accordance with section 405 of this title, to
 contain a less stringent emission limitation or other requirement (other
 than standards established under section 111 or 112) if the applicant
 shows that the revised emission limitation or requirement is consistent
 with any demonstration of attainment and any progress requirement in an
 approved implementation plan, the requirements of part C or section 173 of
 the Act, and will not otherwise interfere with attainment of the ambient
 air quality standards, progress requirements, and any other requirements
 of this Act and that--
 `(A) the increased emissions authorized by the permit are compensated for
 by emissions reductions from another permitted facility, as determined
 under rules prescribed by the Administrator;
 `(B) material and substantial alterations or additions to the permitted
 source occurred after permit issuance;
 `(C) information is available that was not available at the time of permit
 issuance (other than revised regulations, guidance, or test methods) and
 that, if known, would have justified the application of a less stringent
 emission limitation or requirement at that time;
 `(D) technical mistakes or mistaken interpretations of law were made in
 issuing the permit; or
 `(E) the permittee demonstrates, in accordance with procedures prescribed
 by the Administrator, that it has installed the controls required to meet
 the emission limitations and requirements in the permit and has properly
 constructed and tested the facility, but has nevertheless been unable to
 achieve the emission limitations specified in the permit, in which case
 the limitations in the revised, reissued, or modified permit may reflect
 the level of emission control actually achieved.
 `(3) No permit may be reissued to contain emission standards less stringent
 than those established under sections 111 or 112 unless the applicable
 standard has been revised, or, for a standard under section 112, an
 alternative emission limitation has been established under section 112(g).
 `(g) COMPLIANCE- Compliance with a permit issued under this title shall
 be deemed compliance with sections 110, 111, 112, 165, 169A, 172, 173,
 and 402 of this Act and (except as provided by the Administrator by rule)
 any requirement under title V. The preceding sentence shall not apply to
 a standard issued under section 112(f). Compliance with a permit issued
 under a partial program under section 402(f) shall be deemed compliance
 only with those requirements for which the program was approved.
`NOTIFICATION TO ADMINISTRATOR AND CONTIGUOUS STATES
 `SEC. 405. (a) TRANSMISSION AND NOTICE- (1) Each permitting authority shall
 transmit to the Administrator a copy of each permit application, including
 any compliance plan and any application for alternative emission limitations
 under section 112(g), or for a permit modification, submitted under this
 title, and shall provide notice, in accordance with regulations promulgated
 by the Administrator, of every action related to the consideration of the
 application, including each permit proposed to be issued by the authority.
 `(2) The permitting authority shall notify all States contiguous to
 the State in which the emission originates of each permit application,
 and each draft permit or proposed permit forwarded to the Administrator
 under this section, and shall provide an opportunity for such States to
 submit written recommendations respecting the issuance of the permit and
 its terms and conditions. If any part of those recommendations are not
 accepted by the permitting authority, such authority shall notify the
 State submitting the recommendations and the Administrator in writing of
 its failure to accept those recommendations and the reasons therefor.
 `(b) OBJECTION BY EPA- No permit shall be issued if the Administrator (1)
 within ninety days after receipt of the proposed permit under subsection
 (a)(1) of this section, or (2) within ninety days after receiving
 notification under subsection (a)(2), objects in writing to its issuance
 as not in compliance with the requirements of this Act, including the
 requirements of section 110(d)(4)(A). The Administrator shall provide with
 the objection a statement of the reasons for the objection.
 `(c) ISSUANCE OR DENIAL- If the permitting authority fails within ninety
 days after the date of the objection, to submit a permit revised to meet
 the objection, the Administrator may issue or deny the permit in accordance
 with the requirements of this title. No objection shall be subject to
 judicial review until the Administrator takes final action to issue or
 deny a permit under this subsection.
 `(d) WAIVER OF NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENT- (1) The Administrator may waive
 the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section at the time of
 approval of a permit program under this title for any category (including any
 class, type, or size within such category) of sources covered by the program.
 `(2) The Administrator may by regulation establish categories of sources
 (including any class, type, or size within such category) to which the
 requirements of subsection (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply.
 `(3) The Administrator may exclude from any waiver under this subsection
 notification under paragraph (a)(2). Any waiver granted under this subsection
 may be revoked or modified by the Administrator by rule.
 `(e) REFUSAL OF PERMITTING AUTHORITY TO TERMINATE, MODIFY, OR REVOKE
 AND REISSUE- If the Administrator finds that cause exists under section
 402(b)(5)(D) to terminate, modify, or revoke and reissue a State permit under
 this title, he shall notify the permitting authority of his finding. The
 permitting authority shall, within ninety days after receipt of such
 notification, forward to the Administrator under this section a proposed
 determination of termination, modification, or revocation and reissuance,
 as appropriate. The Administrator may extend such ninety day period for an
 additional ninety days if he finds that a new or revised permit application
 is necessary, or that the permitting authority must require the permittee
 to submit additional information. The Administrator may review such
 proposed determination under the provisions of subsections (a) and (b)
 of this section. If the permitting authority fails to submit the required
 proposed determination, or if the Administrator objects and the permitting
 authority fails to resolve the objection within the period prescribed in
 subsection (c) of this section, the Administrator may terminate, modify,
 or revoke and reissue the permit.
 `SEC. 406. (a) STATE OR INTERSTATE AUTHORITIES- Nothing in this title
 shall prevent a State or interstate permitting authority from establishing
 additional permitting requirements not inconsistent with this Act.
 `(b) ACID DEPOSITION PROGRAM- Nothing in this title shall be construed to
 authorize the Administrator, or a State, to modify or revoke any allowance
 granted under title V, or to alter or amend any provision of title V.'.
TITLE V--ACID DEPOSITION CONTROL
SEC. 501. ACID DEPOSITION CONTROL.
 The Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following new title after title
 IV as added by section 401 of this Act:
`TITLE V--ACID DEPOSITION CONTROL
`Table of Contents
`Sec. 501. Findings and purposes
`Sec. 502. Definitions
`Sec. 503. Allowance program for existing units
`Sec. 504. First phase sulfur dioxide emission reduction program
`Sec. 505. Second phase sulfur dioxide emission reduction program
`Sec. 506. Nitrogen oxides emission reduction program
`Sec. 507. Permits and compliance plans
`Sec. 508. Repowered sources
`Sec. 509. Election for additional sources
`Sec. 510. Excess emissions
`Sec. 511. Monitoring, reporting, and recordkeeping requirements
`Sec. 512. Compliance with other provisions
`Sec. 513. Enforcement
`Sec. 514. Report to Congress
`Sec. 515. Clean coal technology regulatory incentives
FINDINGS AND PURPOSES
 `SEC. 501. (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 `(1) the presence of acidic compounds and their precursors in the atmosphere
 and in deposition from the atmosphere represents a threat to natural
 resources, ecosystems, materials, visibility, and public health;
 `(2) the principal sources of the acidic compounds and their precursors
 in the atmosphere are emissions of sulfur and nitrogen oxides from the
 combustion of fossil fuels;
 `(3) the problem of acid deposition is of national and international
 significance and cannot be addressed adequately without effective
 State-Federal cooperation;
 `(4) strategies and technologies for the control of precursors to acid
 deposition exist now that are economically feasible, and improved methods
 are expected to become increasingly available over the next decade;
 `(5) current and future generations of Americans will be adversely affected
 by delaying measures to remedy the problem;
 `(6) reduction of total atmospheric loading of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen
 oxides will enhance protection of the public health and welfare and the
 environment;
 `(7) control measures to reduce precursor emissions from steam-electric
 generating units should be initiated without delay.
 `(b) PURPOSES- The purpose of this title is to reduce the adverse effects of
 acid deposition through reductions in annual emissions of sulfur dioxide of
 approximately ten million tons from 1980 emission levels, and of nitrogen
 oxides emissions of approximately two million tons relative to their
 levels in 2000, in the forty-eight contiguous States and the District
 of Columbia. It is also the purpose of this title to encourage energy
 conservation and pollution prevention as a long range strategy for reducing
 air pollution and other adverse impacts of energy production and use.
`DEFINITIONS
 `SEC. 502. As used in this title--
 `(1) The term `affected source' means a source that includes one or more
 affected units.
 `(2) The term `affected unit' means a unit that is subject to emission
 limitation requirements under section 504, 505, 507, or 509.
 `(3) The term `allowance' means an authorization, issued by the Administrator
 under this title, to emit, during a specified calendar year, a ton of
 sulfur dioxide or nitrogen oxides.
 `(4) The term `baseline' means the annual quantity of fossil fuel consumed,
 measured in millions of British thermal units (`mmBtus'), by an affected
 unit, calculated as follows:
 `(A) For each steam-electric unit in operation prior to January 1, 1985,
 the baseline shall be the annual average quantity of mmBtu consumed in
 fuel during calendar years 1985, 1986, and 1987, as recorded pursuant to
 Department of Energy Form 767. For any unit for which these forms were not
 filed, the baseline shall be the level specified for that unit in the 1985
 National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program (NAPAP) Emissions Inventory,
 Version 2. The Administrator may exclude periods during which a unit is
 shutdown for a continuous period of four months or longer.
 `(B) For each steam-electric unit that entered operation on or after
 January 1, 1985, the baseline shall be an annual average quantity of
 mmBtu, as calculated pursuant to a method which the Administrator shall,
 by regulation, prescribe;
 `(C) For any other unit, the baseline shall be the annual average quantity,
 in mmBtu consumed in fuel by that unit, as established by regulation.
 `(5) The term `compliance plan' shall have the meaning given in section
 403(b) of title IV.
 `(6) The term `continuous emission monitoring system' (`CEMS') means the
 equipment used to sample, measure, analyze, and provide on a continuous basis
 a permanent record of emissions and flow (expressed in pounds per million
 British thermal units (lbs./mmBtu) and pounds per hour (lbs./hr.)) or
 such other forms as the Administrator may prescribe by regulations under
 section 511(a) of this title.
 `(7) The term `existing unit' means a unit (including units subject to
 section 111) that is operating prior to the date of enactment of the Clean
 Air Act Amendments of 1987. Any unit modified, reconstructed or repowered
 after the date of enactment shall continue to be an existing unit for
 purposes of this title.
 `(8) The term `new unit' means a unit that commences operation on or after
 the date of enactment.
 `(9) The term `permitting authority' shall have the meaning given in
 title IV.
 `(10) The term `repowering` means replacement of an existing pulverized coal
 boiler with one of the following clean coal technologies: Atmospheric or
 Pressurized Fluidized Bed Combustion, Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle,
 Magnetohydrodynamics, Direct and Indirect Coal-Fired Turbines, Integrated
 Gasification Fuel Cells, or a derivative of one of these technologies,
 as determined by the Administrator, in consultation with the Secretary
 of Energy.
 `(11) The term `State' means one of the forty-eight contiguous States and
 the District of Columbia.
 `(12) The term `unit' means a fossil fuel-fired steam production device
 such as a boiler or furnace used to combust fuel to produce steam.
 `(13) The term `actual 1985 emission rate' means the annual average sulfur
 dioxide or nitrogen oxides emission rate in units of pounds per million
 Btu as reported in the NAPAP Emissions Inventory, Version 2.
`ALLOWANCE PROGRAM FOR EXISTING UNITS
 `SEC. 503. (a) ALLOCATION OF ANNUAL ALLOWANCES FOR EXISTING UNITS- For the
 emission limitation programs under this title, the Administrator shall
 allocate annual allowances to the owner or operator of the affected
 units at an affected source in an amount equal to the annual tonnage
 emission limitation calculated under section 504, 505, 507, or 509 except
 as otherwise specifically provided in this title. The Administrator shall
 issue allowances for each affected unit at an affected source at the time the
 permit is issued for the source, as provided in section 507. If an existing
 affected unit is removed from commercial operation, the annual allocation
 of allowances shall continue to be issued to the owner or operator.
 `(b) ALLOWANCE SYSTEM- Allowances issued under this title may be transferred
 among the owners or operators of affected sources under this title,
 as provided by regulation. In phase I, transfers of allowances shall be
 limited to affected sources within a single State, except that an owner or
 operator of two or more affected sources may transfer allowances among those
 sources, irrespective of State boundaries. In phase II, allowances may be
 transferred among affected sources within each of the geographic regions
 of the country, as prescribed by regulation. Transfers of allowances shall
 not be effective until written certification of the transfer, signed by a
 responsible official of each party to the transfer, is received and recorded
 by the Administrator. The Administrator shall promulgate regulations, not
 later than eighteen months after enactment, to establish the allowance system
 prescribed under this section, including, but not limited to, requirements
 for the issuance, transfer, and use of allowances under this title. Such
 regulations shall provide, consistent with the purposes of this title,
 for the identification of unused allowances, and for such unused allowances
 to be carried forward and added to allowances allocated in subsequent years.
 `(c) INTERPOLLUTANT TRADING- The regulations under subsection (b) shall
 provide for trading of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide allowances,
 including the banking of nitrogen oxide reductions in phase I to be credited
 against reductions required in phase II. Such rules shall provide that,
 for trading purposes, 1.5 pounds of nitrogen oxides shall be equivalent
 to 1.0 pound of sulfur dioxide. Interpollutant trades of these pollutants
 in nonattainment areas shall be subject to approval by the Administrator.
 `(d) ALLOWANCE TRACKING SYSTEM- The Administrator shall establish a system
 for issuing, recording, and tracking allowances, and shall specify by
 regulation the procedures and requirements for that system. All allowance
 allocations and transfers shall upon recordation by the Administrator be
 deemed a part of each unit's permit requirements for purposes of section 507.
 `(e) NEW UNITS- The owner or operator of each new unit must hold allowances
 equal to the annual tonnage of sulfur dioxide emitted by the unit, after
 December 31, 2000. New units shall not be eligible for an allocation
 of sulfur dioxide allowances under subsection (a). Notwithstanding the
 geographic limitations on transfers of allowances in subsection (b),
 new units may obtain allowances from any unit allocated allowances under
 this title.
 `(f) NATURE OF ALLOWANCES- An allowance issued under this title is a limited
 authorization to emit sulfur dioxide or nitrogen oxides in accordance
 with the provisions of the Act. Such allowances may be limited, revoked
 or otherwise modified in accordance with the provisions of this Act,
 or future amendments to it.
 `(g) PROHIBITION- It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or transfer
 any allowance issued under this title, except in accordance with regulations
 issued by the Administrator.
`FIRST PHASE SULFUR DIOXIDE EMISSION REDUCTION PROGRAM
 `SEC. 504. (a) AFFECTED SOURCES- (1) After December 31, 1995, each source
 that includes one or more affected units listed in table A is an affected
 source under this section.
 `(2) Any existing steam-electric unit with nameplate capacity of 100 MWe or
 greater, not included in table A, that emits sulfur dioxide at an annual
 rate of 2.50 lbs./mmBtu or greater, for any calendar year after the date
 of enactment and prior to 2001, shall also be an affected unit for purposes
 of this section.
 `(b) EMISSION LIMITATION- After December 31, 1995, each unit described in
 subsection (a)(1) shall be subject to the annual sulfur dioxide tonnage
 emission limitation listed in table A. The annual limitation for any unit
 described in subsection (a)(2) shall equal the product of each unit's
 baseline multiplied by an emission rate of 2.50 lbs/mmBtu, divided by 2,000.
 `(c) AFFECTED UNIT AUTHORITY- The owner or operator of an affected unit
 under subsection (a) may submit a proposal to reassign the sulfur dioxide
 requirements to any other unit(s) under the control of the same owner or
 operator. In order to reassign the requirements, the owner or operator
 shall submit an alternative proposal to the Administrator for approval in
 conjunction with submission of a permit application and compliance plan
 under section 507(c)(1). Any proposal must include--
 `(1) designation of the substitute affected units to which the obligations
 under subsection (a) shall apply, in addition to, or in lieu of, the
 original affected units designated under that subsection;
 `(2) specification of the baseline, the actual 1985 sulfur dioxide emission
 rate, and the authorized annual tonnage limitation for the original
 affected unit;
 `(3) calculation of the calendar year 1985 annual tonnage emitted by
 the substitute units, based on the baseline for each unit, as defined in
 section 502(d), multiplied by the unit's actual 1985 emission rate;
 `(4) specification of the emission rates, and the annual tonnage limitations
 that would be applicable to the original and substitute affected units;
 `(5) documentation, satisfactory to the Administrator, that the reassigned
 tonnage limits will, in total, achieve the same or a greater reduction
 than would have been achieved by the requirements of subsection (a); and
 `(6) such other information as the Administrator may require.
The Administrator shall review and act on any proposal in accordance with
subsection (d).
 `(d) ADMINISTRATOR'S ACTION ON A PROPOSAL- (1) The Administrator shall
 review, and approve any proposal meeting the requirements of subsection
 (c). If a proposal does not meet the requirements of subsection (c),
 the Administrator shall disapprove it. The Administrator shall act on a
 proposal within six months after receipt of a complete submission.
 `(2) For an approved proposal, each substitute unit and source shall be
 deemed affected under this title, and the Administrator shall act on the
 submission in accordance with section 507(c). The Administrator shall
 also allocate allowances to the affected units in accordance with the
 approved proposal. For a disapproved proposal, the Administrator shall issue
 allowances in accordance with subsection (a). The Administrator's action on
 any proposal submitted under subsection (c) shall not require a hearing or
 opportunity for public comment, and shall not be subject to judicial review.
`TABLE A
Affected sources and units in phase 1 and their sulfur dioxide allowances
(tons)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
 State Plant name Unit Phase 1 allowances Phase 2 allowances
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Alabama Colbert 1 13,600 6,520
 2 15,300 7,350
 3 15,400 7,390
 4 15,400 7,400
 5 37,200 17,800
 E.C. Gaston 1 18,100 8,690
 2 18,500 8,900
 3 18,300 8,790
 4 19,300 9,250
 5 59,800 28,700
 Florida Big Bend 1 28,400 13,600
 2 27,100 13,000
 3 26,700 12,800
 Crist 6 19,200 9,200
 7 28,100 13,500
 Georgia Bowen 1 54,800 26,300
 2 56,300 27,000
 3 71,800 34,400
 4 71,700 34,400
 Hammond 1 8,780 4,220
 2 9,220 4,420
 3 8,910 4,280
 4 37,600 18,100
 Jack McDonough 1 19,900 9,550
 2 20,600 9,880
 Wansley 1 70,800 34,000
 2 65,400 31,400
 Yates 1 7,200 3,460
 2 7,040 3,380
 3 6,950 3,340
 4 8,910 4,280
 5 9,410 4,520
 6 24,800 11,900
 7 21,500 10,300
 Illinois Baldwin 1 42,000 20,200
 2 44,400 21,300
 3 42,600 20,400
 Coffeen 1 11,800 5,600
 2 35,700 17,100
 Grand Tower 4 5,910 2,840
 Hennepin 2 18,400 8,820
 Joppa Steam 1 12,600 6,040
 2 10,800 5,170
 3 12,300 5,890
 4 11,400 5,450
 5 11,400 5,480
 6 10,600 5,100
 Kincaid 1 31,500 15,100
 2 29,100 14,000
 Meredosia 3 13,900 6,670
 Vemillion 2 8,880 4,260
 Indiana Bailly 7 11,100 5,320
 8 12,400 5,970
 Breed 1 18,500 8,880
 Cayuga 1 33,400 16,000
 2 34,100 16,400
 Clifty Creek 1 20,200 9,670
 2 19,800 9,510
 3 20,400 9,800
 4 20,100 9,640
 5 19,400 9,290
 6 20,400 9,780
 Elmer W. Stout 5 3,880 1,860
 6 4,770 2,290
 7 23,600 11,300
 F.B. Culley 2 3,100 1,490
 3 17,000 8,140
 Frank E. Ratts 1 8,330 4,000
 2 8,480 4,070
 Gibson 1 40,400 19,400
 2 41,000 19,700
 3 41,100 19,700
 4 40,300 19,400
 H.T. Pritchard 6 5,770 2,770
 Michigan City 12 23,000 11,100
 Petersburg 1 16,400 7,890
 2 32,400 15,500
 R. Gallagher 1 4,690 2,250
 2 7,280 3,490
 3 6,530 3,130
 4 6,800 3,270
 Tanners Creek 4 24,800 11,900
 Wabash River 1 3,400 1,920
 2 2,860 1,370
 3 3,750 1,800
 5 3,670 1,760
 6 12,300 5,890
 Warrick 4 27,000 12,900
 Iowa Burlington 1 10,700 5,140
 Des Moines 7 1,680 805
 Milton L. Kapp 2 13,800 6,610
 Prairie Creek 4 8,180 3,920
 Riverside 5 3,300 1,590
 Kansas Quindaro 2 4,130 1,980
 Kentucky Coleman 1 11,200 5,390
 2 12,800 6,160
 3 12,300 5,930
 Cooper 1 7,450 3,570
 2 15,300 7,360
 E.W. Brown 1 7,110 3,410
 2 10,900 5,240
 3 26,100 12,500
 Elmer Smith 1 5,440 2,610
 2 14,400 6,920
 Ghent 1 28,400 13,600
 Green River 4 7,820 3,750
 H.L. Spurlock 1 22,800 10,900
 Henderson II 1 13,300 6,410
 2 12,300 5,910
 Paradise 3 59,200 28,400
 Shawnee 10 10,200 4,880
 Maryland Chalk Point 1 21,900 10,500
 2 23,900 11,700
 C.P. Crane 1 10,300 4,960
 2 9,230 4,430
 Morgantown 1 35,200 16,900
 2 38,500 18,500
 Michigan J.H. Campbell 1 19,300 9,250
 2 23,100 11,100
 Mississippi Jack Watson 4 17,800 8,540
 5 36,500 17,500
 Missouri Asbury 1 16,200 7,770
 James River 5 4,830 2,320
 Labadie 1 35,700 17,100
 2 37,700 18,100
 3 40,300 19,400
 4 35,900 17,300
 Montrose 1 7,390 3,550
 2 8,200 3,940
 3 10,100 4,840
 New Madrid 1 28,200 13,600
 2 32,500 15,600
 Sibley 3 15,600 7,480
 Sioux 1 22,600 10,800
 2 21,100 10,100
 Thomas Hill 1 10,300 4,920
 2 17,200 8,270
 New Hampshire Merrimack 1 10,200 4,890
 2 22,000 10,600
 New Jersey B.L. England 1 9,060 4,350
 2 11,700 5,630
 New York Dunkirk 3 12,600 6,050
 Milliken 1 8,380 4,020
 2 12,400 5,960
 Northport 1 19,800 9,510
 2 24,100 11,600
 3 26,500 12,700
 Port Jefferson 3 10,500 5,030
 4 12,300 5,920
 Ohio Ashtabula 5 16,700 8,040
 Avon Lake 8 11,700 5,590
 9 30,500 14,600
 Cardinal 1 34,300 16,400
 2 38,300 18,400
 Conesville 1 4,210 2,020
 2 4,890 2,350
 3 5,500 2,640
 4 48,800 23,400
 Eastlake 1 7,800 3,750
 2 8,640 4,150
 3 10,000 4,810
 4 14,500 6,970
 5 34,100 16,400
 Gen. J.M. Gavin 1 79,100 38,000
 2 80,600 38,700
 Kyger Creek 1 19,300 9,260
 2 18,600 8,910
 3 17,900 8,600
 4 18,700 8,980
 5 18,700 9,000
 Miami Fort 6 11,400 5,460
 7 38,500 18,500
 Muskingum River 1 14,900 7,140
 2 14,200 6,800
 3 14,000 6,700
 4 11,800 5,650
 5 40,500 19,400
 Niles 1 6,940 3,330
 2 9,100 4,370
 Picway 5 4,930 2,370
 R. E. Burger 3 3,080 1,480
 4 10,800 5,170
 5 12,400 5,970
 W.H. Sammis 5 24,200 11,600
 6 39,900 19,200
 7 43,200 20,700
 W.C. Beckjord 5 8,950 4,290
 6 23,000 11,000
 Pennsylvania Armstrong 1 14,400 6,920
 2 15,400 7,410
 Brunner Island 1 27,800 13,300
 2 31,100 14,900
 3 53,800 25,800
 Cheswick 1 39,000 18,700
 Conemaugh 1 59,800 28,700
 2 66,400 31,900
 Hatfield's Ferry 1 37,800 18,200
 2 37,300 17,900
 3 40,300 19,300
 Homer City 1 40,100 19,200
 2 34,700 16,700
 Martins Creek 1 12,700 6,080
 2 12,800 6,150
 Portland 1 5,940 2,850
 2 10,200 4,910
 Shawville 1 10,300 4,960
 2 10,300 4,960
 3 14,200 6,830
 4 14,100 6,760
 Sunbury 3 8,760 4,210
 4 11,500 5,500
 Tennessee Allen 1 15,300 7,360
 2 16,800 8,050
 3 15,700 7,520
 Cumberland 1 86,700 41,600
 2 94,800 45,500
 Gallatin 1 17,600 8,470
 2 17,300 8,310
 3 20,000 9,610
 4 21,300 10,200
 Johnsonville 1 7,790 3,740
 2 8,040 3,860
 3 8,410 4,040
 4 7,990 3,830
 5 8,240 3,950
 6 7,890 3,790
 7 8,980 4,310
 8 8,700 4,180
 9 7,080 3,400
 10 7,550 3,630
 West Virginia Albright 3 10,700 5,120
 Fort Martin 1 41,600 20,000
 2 41,200 19,800
 Harrison 1 48,600 23,300
 2 46,100 22,100
 3 41,500 19,900
 Kammer 1 18,700 9,000
 2 19,500 9,340
 3 17,400 8,350
 Mitchell 1 44,000 21,100
 2 45,500 21,800
 Mount Storm 1 43,700 21,000
 2 35,600 17,100
 3 42,400 20,400
 Wisconsin Edgewater 4 24,700 11,900
 La Crosse/Genoa 3 19,100 9,160
 Nelson Dewey 1 6,010 2,880
 2 6,680 3,210
 North Oak Creek 1 5,220 2,510
 2 5,140 2,470
 Pulliam 8 7,510 3,600
 South Oak Creek 5 9,670 4,640
 6 12,000 5,780
 7 16,200 7,770
 8 15,800 7,580
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
`SECOND PHASE SULFUR DIOXIDE EMISSION REDUCTION PROGRAM
 `SEC. 505. (a) APPLICABILITY- After December 31, 2000, each steam-electric
 existing unit with nameplate capacity of 75 MWe or greater and an actual
 1985 emission rate of 1.20lbs/mmBtu or greater is an affected unit under
 this section. In the case of an existing unit that was not in operation
 during calendar year 1985, the emission rate for a calendar year after 1985,
 as determined by the Administrator, shall be used in lieu of the 1985 rate
 in determining applicablity under this section. Each source that includes
 one or more affected units is an affected source.
 `(b) EMISSIONS LIMITATIONS- After December 31, 2000, each affected unit, as
 described in subsection (a), shall be subject to an annual sulfur dioxide
 tonnage emission limitation equal to the product of the unit's baseline
 multiplied by an emission rate equal to 1.20 lbs/mmBtu, divided by 2000.
 `(c) UNITS BELOW 75 MWE OR 1.20LBS/MMBTU- After December 31, 2000, each
 steam-electric existing unit with nameplate capacity of less than 75 MWe
 or an actual 1985 emission rate less than 1.20bs/mmBtu shall not exceed
 an annual emission rate requirement equal to its actual 1985 emission
 rate. The emission rate requirement for an existing unit that was not
 in operation during calendar year 1985 shall be the emission rate for
 a calendar year after 1985, as determined by the Administrator. Such a
 unit shall not be an affected unit for purposes of this title, except as
 provided under section 509.
`NITROGEN OXIDES EMISSION REDUCTION PROGRAM
 `SEC. 506. (a) APPLICABILITY- After December 31, 2000, emission rate
 requirements for nitrogen oxides shall be met in the second phase of the
 emission reduction program by coal-fired steam-electric existing units
 with a nameplate capacity of 75 MWe or greater.
 `(b) EMISSION LIMITATIONS- After December 31, 2000, each unit described in
 subsection (a) shall not exceed a nitrogen oxides emission rate established
 by the Administrator. The Administrator shall establish emission rates,
 based on the application of low nitrogen oxides burner technology for
 each type of boiler, which are designed to reduce total nitrogen oxides
 emissions by two million tons below 1989 projected emissions for calendar
 year 2000. Any unit subject to an emission rate requirement under this
 section shall not be an affected unit for nitrogen oxides for purposes of
 this title, except as provided in section 509.
`PERMITS AND COMPLIANCE PLANS
 `SEC. 507. (a) PERMIT PROGRAM- This title shall be implemented by permits
 issued in accordance with the provisions of title IV, as modified by this
 title. Any permit issued by the Administrator, or a State with an approved
 permit program, shall prohibit (1) emissions of sulfur dioxide or nitrogen
 oxides in excess of the total allowances or limitations for the affected unit
 or source, (2) exceedances of applicable sulfur dioxide or nitrogen oxide
 emissions rates, or (3) contravention of any other provision of the permit.
 `(b) COMPLIANCE PLAN- Each permit application shall be accompanied by
 a compliance plan for the source to comply with its requirements under
 title V. The compliance plan shall provide all necessary information on
 the schedule and means by which the source will achieve compliance with
 its annual tonnage limitation, including specification of any additional
 allowances beyond the initial allocation that will be used to achieve
 compliance. The Administrator may also require--
 `(1) for a source, a demonstration of attainment of national ambient air
 quality standards, and
 `(2) from the owner or operator of two or more affected sources,
 an integrated compliance plan providing an overall plan for achieving
 compliance at the affected sources.
 `(c) FIRST PHASE PERMITS- The Administrator shall issue permits to the
 affected sources under section 504.
 `(1)(A) Not later than twenty-seven months after the date of enactment
 of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989, the owner or operator or each
 affected source under section 504 shall submit a permit application and
 compliance plan for that source in accordance with regulations issued
 by the Administrator. The owner or operator shall also provide either a
 certification by the Governor or a notification that a certification was
 requested but not issued in accordance with subsection (d). The permit
 application and the compliance plan shall be binding on the owner or
 operator, and be enforceable for purposes of title V requirements, in lieu
 of a permit, until a permit is issued by the Administrator for the source.
 `(B) In the case of a compliance plan for an affected source under section
 504 for which the owner or operator proposes to meet the requirements of
 that section by reducing utilization of the unit by 20 per centum or more,
 as compared with the baseline prescribed in section 502(c)(1)(A), or by
 shutting down the unit, the owner or operator shall include in the compliance
 plan a specification of the units that will provide electrical generation
 to compensate for the reduced output of the affected source. The source,
 and any unit to be used for such compensating generation, if not otherwise
 affected under section 504, shall be deemed affected under section 504,
 subject to the phase I requirements of this title, except that allowances
 shall be allocated to such unit in the amount of an annual limitation equal
 to the product of the unit's baseline multiplied by the unit's actual 1985
 emission rate, divided by 2000.
 `(2) If the Administrator determines that a proposed compliance plan does
 not satisfy the requirements of this title or title IV, the plan shall be
 disapproved within six months after receipt of a complete submission.
 `(3) Not later than eighteen months after enactment of the Clean Air Act
 Amendments of 1989, the Administrator shall promulgate regulations, in
 accordance with title IV, to implement a Federal permit program to issue
 permits for affected sources under this title. Following promulgation, the
 Administrator shall issue a permit to implement the requirements of section
 504 and the allowances provided under section 503 to the owner or operator
 of each affected source under that section. Such a permit shall supersede
 any permit application and compliance plan submitted under paragraph (1).
 `(d) CERTIFICATION- Any owner or operator submitting a phase I permit
 application and compliance plan under subsection (c) shall request a
 certification from the Governor of any State within which the source
 is located that the application and compliance plan are consistent with
 State law. Where required by State law, the Governor's certification may
 preclude the use of coal produced outside the State at the source. The
 Governor's certification or denial of certification shall be a condition of
 any permit issued by the Administrator or a State to the source unless the
 Administrator, within sixty days after receipt, notifies the Governor that
 the certification or denial is inconsistent with the provisions or purposes
 of the Act or with other compelling national interest. In the event that
 the Governor fails or refuses to act on a request for certification within
 ninety days after receipt of the request, the requirements of this subsection
 shall be waived with respect to such application and compliance plan.
 `(e) SECOND PHASE PERMITS- To implement sections 505 and 506, each state
 in which one or more sources subject to those sections are located shall
 submit a permit program to the Administrator for approval, as provided
 under section 402 of title IV. The Administrator shall approve any permit
 program meeting the requirements of section 402 and this title.
 `(1) The owner or operator of each affected source under section 505 shall
 submit a permit application and compliance plan for that source to the
 permitting authority, not later than January 1, 1995.
 `(2) Not later than July 1, 1996, each State with an approved permit
 program shall issue permits to the owners or operators of existing affected
 sources under section 505 that satisfy the requirements of title IV and
 this title. In the case of a State without an approved permit program,
 or a State that fails to issue permits to all of its existing affected
 sources by July 1, 1996, the Administrator shall, not later than July 1,
 1997, issue a permit to the owner or operator of each such affected source
 that has not been issued a State permit.
 `(3) Not later than July 1, 1997, the Administrator shall issue allowances
 to each affected source for the calendar years included within the permit
 term, and these shall be deemed a part of the permit issued for that source,
 as provided in section 503.
 `(4) The owner or operator of any unit subject to an emission rate
 requirement under section 505(c) or 506 shall submit a permit application
 for such unit to the permitting authority, not later than January 1,
 1998. The permitting authority shall issue a permit to the owner or operator
 that satisfies the requirements of title IV and this title, including any
 appropriate monitoring and reporting requirements. Unless designated under
 section 509, such a unit shall not receive, and is not obligated to emit
 in conformance with, allowances issued under this title.
 `(f) NEW UNIT PERMITS- (1) Each State shall submit a permit program for new
 units to the Administrator for approval, as provided under section 402 of
 title IV. The Administrator shall approve any permit program meeting the
 requirements of section 402 and this title.
 `(2) The owner or operator of each source that includes a new unit or units
 shall submit a permit application and compliance plan to the permitting
 authority not later than twenty-four months prior to December 31, 2000,
 or to commencing operation of the unit, whichever is later. The permitting
 authority shall issue a permit to the owner or operator of the unit that
 satisfies the requirements of title IV and this title.
 `(g) AMENDMENT OF APPLICATION AND COMPLIANCE PLAN- At any time after
 the submission of an application and compliance plan under this section,
 the applicant may submit a revised application and compliance plan, in
 accordance with the requirements of this section.
 `(h) PROHIBITION- It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator (1) to
 fail to submit a permit application or compliance plan in accordance
 with the deadlines specified in this section or otherwise to fail to
 comply with regulations implementing this section, or (2) to operate
 any source subject to this title except in compliance with the terms and
 requirements of a permit application and compliance plan or permit issued
 by the Administrator or a State with an approved permit program.
`REPOWERED SOURCES
 `SEC. 508. (a) AVAILABILITY- Not later than January 1, 1998, the owner or
 operator of an existing unit may demonstrate to the permitting authority
 that one or more units will be repowered with a qualifying clean coal
 technology to comply with the requirements under sections 505 or 506. The
 owner or operator shall, as part of any such demonstration, provide, not
 later than December 31, 2000, satisfactory documentation of a preliminary
 design and engineering effort for such repowering and an executed contract
 for the majority of the equipment to repower such unit and such other
 information as the Administrator may require by regulation.
 `(b) EXTENSION- An owner or operator satisfying the requirements of
 subsection (a) shall be granted an extension of the emission limitation or
 rate requirement compliance date for that unit from December 31, 2000 to
 December 31, 2003. The extension shall be specified in the permit issued
 to the source under section 507, together with any compliance schedule
 and other requirements necessary to meet second phase requirements by the
 extended date. Any unit that is granted an extension under this section
 shall not be eligible for a waiver under section 111(j) of ths Act.
 `(c) CONTROL REQUIREMENTS- (1) Any source qualifying for an extension under
 this section shall not be required to meet any standard of peformance
 under section 111. Except as provided in paragraph (2), any qualifying
 source that will not increase emissions of any pollutant relative to its
 pre-repowering level, as measured by its potential to emit, expressed as
 mass per unit of time, shall not be subject to the requirements of parts
 C and D of this Act for that pollutant.
 `(2) Any qualifying source that will increase emissions of a pollutant
 relative to its potential pre-repowering level shall not be subject to the
 requirements of parts C and D of title I of this Act for that pollutant:
 Provided, That the owner or operator of such source submits information
 sufficient to demonstrate to the Administrator (in consultation with the
 Federal Land Manager with respect to subparagraph (C) below) that the
 increased emission level will not:
 `(A) cause or contribute to an exceedance in any area of any national
 ambient air quality standard or any of maximum allowable increase in
 concentrations established under part C of the Act; or
 `(B) interfere with reasonable further progress within the meaning of part
 D of title I: or
 `(C) result in an adverse impact on visibility or air quality related
 values in any Class I area under part C of title I.
Upon receipt of a complete submission, the Administrator shall determine
within ninety days whether the requirements of subparagraphs (A) through
(C) have been met.
 `(d) ALLOWANCES- (1) For the period of the extension under this section, the
 Administrator shall issue to the owner or operator of the affected source,
 annual allowances for sulfur dioxide equal to the affected unit's baseline
 multiplied by the lesser of the unit's federally approved SIP limitation or
 its actual emission rate for 1996. Such allowances may not be transferred or
 used by any other source to meet emission requirements under this title. The
 source owner or operator shall notify the Administrator sixty days in advance
 of the date on which the affected unit for which the extension has been
 granted is to be removed from operation to install the repowering technology.
 `(2) Effective on that date, the emission rate for the source shall revert
 to 1.20 lbs/mmBtu for sulfur dioxide. Allowances for the year in which the
 source is removed from operation to install the repowering technology shall
 be calculated by multiplying that rate times the baseline, divided by 2000,
 and prorated accordingly, and are transferable.
 `(3) Except as provided in paragraph (4), allowances for calendar year
 after the year the repowering is complete shall be based on 1.20 lb./mmBtu
 of sulfur dioxide multiplied by the baseline.
 `(4) In lieu of meeting the requirements of paragraph (3), the owner or
 operator of such unit may elect to receive allowances calcuated as the
 sum of the following:
 `(A) 1.2 lb./mmBtu emission rate multiplied by the baseline, divided by
 2000, and se ministr
 `(B) the annual equivalent emission rate required by the standard under
 section 111 that would apply in the absence of subsection (c)(1) of
 this section, multiplied by the difference between the nameplate electric
 generating capacity of the unit after repowering and the nameplate capacity
 prior to repowering, multiplied by the heat rate of the repowered unit,
 multiplied by 3.1.
 `(5) Allowances issued in accordance with paragraph (4) may not be
 transferred.
 `(e) PROHIBITION- It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a
 repowered source to fail to comply with the requirement of this section,
 and any regulations to implement this section.
`ELECTION FOR ADDITIONAL SOURCES.
 `SEC. 509. (a) APPLICABILITY- The owner or operator of any existing unit or
 process source under subsection (e), that emits sulfur dioxide or nitrogen
 oxides, but that is not an affected unit, may elect to designate that
 unit, or source, to become affected under this title. An election may be
 submitted to the Administrator for approval anytime after promulgation of
 regulations under subsection (g) of this section. The Administrator shall
 approve a designation that meets the requirements of this section and such
 designated unit, or source, shall be affected for purposes of this title.
 `(b) ESTABLISHMENT OF BASELINE- The baseline for a unit designated under
 this section shall be established by the Administrator by regulation,
 based on fuel consumption and operating data for the unit for calendar
 years 1985, 1986, and 1987, or if not available, the Administrator may
 prescribe a baseline based on alternative representative data.
 `(c) EMISSION LIMITATIONS- Annual emission limitations for sulfur dioxide or
 nitrogen oxides shall be equal to the product of the baseline multiplied
 by the lesser of the unit's 1985 actual or allowable emission rate in
 lbs/mmBtu, or, if the unit did not operate in 1985 the emission rate for
 a calendar year after 1985 (as determined by the Administrator), divided
 by 2,000. After December 31, 2000, the emission rate for calculating an
 emission limitation under this subsection shall be the rate prescribed under
 section 505(c) or 506 for any unit subject to those provisions. However,
 any such unit shall be subject only to an emission limitation under this
 section, and not also to an emission rate requirement under those provisions.
 `(d) ALLOWANCES AND PERMITS- The Administrator shall issue allowances
 to an affected unit, or source, under this section in an amount equal to
 the limitation calculated under subsection (c) or (e), in accordance with
 section 503. Such allowances may be transferred to the owner or operator
 of any other affected source in accordance with the provisions of this
 title. The permitting authority shall issue a permit to the affected source
 in accordance with section 507.
 `(e) PROCESS SOURCES- The Administrator may establish, by regulation,
 a program for designation of process sources as affected sources under
 this section. The Administrator shall define the sources that may be
 included (not including any unit as defined under this title), specify
 the operating and emission baselines and data requirements, prescribe
 CEMS or other monitoring requirements, and promulgate permit, reporting,
 and any other requirements necessary to implement such a program.
 `(f) LIMITATION- Any unit designated under this section shall not transfer
 or bank allowances produced as a result of reduced utilization or shutdown.
 `(g) IMPLEMENTATION- The Administrator shall issue regulations to implement
 this section not later than eighteen months after enactment of this section.
`EXCESS EMISSIONS.
 `SEC. 510. (a) EXCESS EMISSIONS FEE- The owner or operator of any affected
 source that emits sulfur dioxide or nitrogen oxides for any calendar year in
 excess of the allowances it possesses for that calendar year shall be liable
 for the payment of an excess emission fee. That fee shall be calculated on
 the basis of the number of tons emitted in excess of allowances multiplied
 by $2,000. Any such fee shall be due and payable without demand to the
 Administrator as provided in regulations issued by the Administrator. Any
 such funds shall be deposited in the United States Treasury pursuant to
 the Miscellaneous Receipts Act. Any fee due and payable under this section
 shall not diminish any fine, penalty or fee imposed on the same source
 under any other section of this Act.
 `(b) EXCESS EMISSIONS OFFSET- The owner or operator of any affected source
 liable for payment of a fee under subsection (a) is also liable to offset
 the excess emissions by an equal tonnage amount in the following calendar
 year, or such longer period as the Administrator may prescribe. The owner
 or operator of the source shall, within sixty days after the end of the
 year, submit to the Administrator, and the State, a plan to achieve the
 required offsets. The Administrator shall also deduct allowances equal to
 the excess tonnage from those issued for the source for the calendar year, or
 succeeding years, following the year in which the excess emissions occurred.
 `(c) FEE ADJUSTMENT- The Administrator shall, by regulation, adjust the
 fee specified in subsection (a) for inflation, based on the Consumer Price
 Index, beginning in calendar year 1996 and annually thereafter.
 `(d) PROHIBITION- It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any
 source liable for a fee and offset under this section to fail to pay
 the fee under subsection (a) or to provide, and thereafter comply with,
 a compliance plan as required by subsection (b), or offset excess emissions
 as required by subsection (b).
`MONITORING, REPORTING, AND RECORDKEEPING REQUIREMENTS.
 `SEC. 511. (a) APPLICABILITY- All sources subject to this title shall be
 required to install and operate CEMS and quality assure the data for sulfur
 dioxide, nitrogen oxides, opacity and volumetric flow for each unit subject
 to this title. The Administrator shall, by regulations issued not later
 than eighteen months after enactment, specify the requirements for CEMS,
 for alternative methods that provide sufficiently reliable and timely
 information, and for recordkeeping and reporting of information from
 such systems.
 `(b) FIRST PHASE REQUIREMENTS- Within thirty-six months after enactment of
 this section, the owner or operator of each affected unit under section 504
 shall install and operate CEMS, quality assure the data, and keep records
 and report in accordance with regulations issued under subsection (a).
 `(c) SECOND PHASE REQUIREMENTS- Not later than January 1, 1995, the owner
 or operator of each source subject to sections 505 and 506 which has not
 previously met the requirements of subsection (a) shall comply with those
 requirements.
 `(d) UNAVAILABILITY OF CEMS- If CEMS data is not available for any affected
 unit during any period of a calendar year in which such data is required
 under this title, and the owner or operator cannot provide information,
 satisfactory to the Administrator, on emissions during that period,
 the Administrator shall deem the unit to be operating in an uncontrolled
 manner and, by regulation, prescribe means to calculate emissions for that
 period. The owner or operator shall be liable for excess emissions fees and
 offsets under section 510 in accordance with such regulation which shall
 be issued not later than eighteen months after enactment of this section.
 `(e) PROHIBITION- It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any
 source subject to this title to operate a source without complying with the
 requirements of this section, and any regulations implementing this section.
`COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER PROVISIONS
 `SEC. 512. (a) GENERAL- Except as expressly provided, compliance with
 the requirements of this title shall not exempt or exclude the owner or
 operator of any source subject to this title from compliance with any
 other applicable requirements of this Act.
 `(b) STACK HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS- Except for requirements relating to
 intermittent or supplemental control systems as defined in section 123(b),
 compliance with the requirements of section 123 of title I is not required
 for any source subject to this title for emission requirement for sulfur
 dioxide and nitrogen oxides.
`ENFORCEMENT
 `SEC. 513. A violation by the owner or operator of a source subject to this
 title of the prohibitions of, requirements of, or regulations promulgated
 pursuant to this title shall be a violation of this Act. Operation of an
 affected source to emit sulfur dioxide or nitrogen oxides in excess of its
 allowances shall be deemed a violation, with each ton emitted in excess
 of allowances held constituting a separate violation.
`REPORT TO CONGRESS
 `SEC. 514. Not later than January 1, 2003, the Administrator shal assess
 and submit a report to Congress on the environmental effects of the emission
 reductions under this title.
`CLEAN COAL TECHNOLOGY REGULATORY INCENTIVES
 `SEC. 515. (a) DEFINITION- For purposes of this section, `clean coal
 technology' means any technology, including technologies applied at the
 precombustion, combustion, or postcombustion stage, at a new or existing
 facility which will achieve significant reductions in air emissions of
 sulfur dioxide or oxides of nitrogen associated with the utilization of
 coal in the generation of electricity, process steam, or industial products,
 which is not in widespread use as of the date of enactment of this title.
 `(b) FEDERAL RATE INCENTIVES- (1) Within twenty-four months after enactment
 of this section, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission shall complete a
 rulemaking to establish a demonstration program for regulatory incentives
 to promote the development of clean coal technologies and other innovative
 control technologies that limit powerplant emissions. The regulatory
 incentives shall include--
 `(A) establishment of an incentive rate of return for clean coal or other
 innovative emission control technologies that recognizes their inherent
 risk; and
 `(B) allowance of a ten-to-twenty-year amortization period to recover
 the capital costs of a clean coal or other innovative emission control
 technology.
 `(2) The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission demonstration program is
 subject to the following--
 `(A) the program initially will have a five-year life;
 `(B) the program will cover no more than four units in each technology
 class; and
 `(C) the technology classes eligible for the program should be reasonably
 likely to realize significant cost reductions when employed.
 `(3) At the end of the five-year demonstration program, the Federal Energy
 Regulatory Commission shall review the merits of the program and determine
 whether it should be extended or made permanent.
 `(c) FERC PREAPPROVAL OF PRUDENCE FOR CLEAN COAL TECHNOLOGY COSTS-
 The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission shall establish a process for
 negotiating with potential developers of clean coal technology or other
 innovative control technology projects to agree upon cost caps for future
 projects and preapproval of the prudency of expenses for those projects
 if the expenses fall within the agreed-upon cap.
 `(d) REVISED REGULATIONS FOR CLEAN COAL TECHNOLOGY DEMONSTRATIONS- (1)
 The Administrator shall promulgate regulations under this subsection to
 revise requirements under section 111 and parts C and D of the title
 I, as appropriate, to facilitate temporary and permanent clean coal
 demonstration projects, consistent with the attainment and maintenance
 of national ambient air quality standards and prevention of significant
 deterioration as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3). Such regulations shall
 address physical or operational changes to existing facilities for the
 sole purpose of installation, operation, cessation, or removal of a clean
 coal technology demonstration project. For the purposes of this section,
 a clean coal technology demonstration shall mean a project conducted
 under title II, section 101(d) of the Further Continuing Appropriations
 Act of 1985 (section 5903(d) of title 42 of the United States Code),
 or subsequent appropriations, up to a total amount of $2.5 billion for
 commercial demonstration of clean coal technology, or similar projects
 funded through appropriations for the Environmental Protection Agency. The
 Federal contribution for a qualifying project shall be at least 20 per
 centum of the total cost of the demonstration project.
 `(2) TEMPORARY PROJECTS- Installation, operation, cessation, or removal of
 a temporary clean coal technology demonstration project that is operated
 for a period of five years or less, and which complies with all State
 implementation plans and other requirements necessary to attain and maintain
 the national ambient air quality standards during and after the project is
 terminated, shall not subject such facility to the requirements of section
 111 or parts C or D of title I.
 `(3) PERMANENT PROJECTS- (A) For permanent clean coal technology
 demonstration projects, any qualifying project shall not be subject to
 standards of performance under section 111.
 `(B) Any permanent demonstration project that complies with all State
 implementation plans and other requirements necessary to attain and maintain
 the national air quality standards shall not be subject to the requirements
 of parts C or D of title I: Provided, That the project will not result in
 an increase, relative to its predemonstration levels, as measured by its
 potential to emit, expressed as mass per unit of time, of any pollutant
 regulated under this Act. For any project that will result in an increase
 in potential emissions of any such pollutant, the owner or operator and
 the Administrator shall follow the procedure specified in section 508(c)(2)
 for that pollutant.
 `(4) PREEXISTING REQUIREMENTS- Any clean coal demonstration technology
 project shall be subject to its pre-existing obligations under this Act
 until such time as it qualifies under regulations implementing this section
 for alternate requirements.
 `(e) ENCOURAGEMENT OF STATE INCENTIVE PROGRAMS- Because the use of clean
 coal technologies is in the national interest, States, including their
 agencies and political subdivisions which regulate public utility rates
 and charges, are encouraged to provide additional incentives for their
 implementation. Those incentives may include, but are not limited to--
 `(1) preapproval of recovery of capital costs and other expenses, within
 reasonable bounds agreed upon before project construction;
 `(2) elimination of retroactive `used and useful' reviews for clean coal
 technologies;
 `(3) rapid amortization of clean coal technology expenditures; and
 `(4) immediate recovery of a portion of clean coal technology expenses
 through a fuel adjustment clause or by some other method.'.
TITLE VI--PROVISIONS RELATING TO ENFORCEMENT
SEC. 601. SECTION 113 ENFORCEMENT.
 (a) Section 113(a) of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking in its
 entirety the heading that begins `FINDING OF VIOLATION' and inserting in
 lieu thereof `NOTIFICATIONS AND COMPLIANCE ORDERS.'
 (b) Section 113(a)(1) of the Clean Air Act is amended as follows:
 (1) In the first sentence, after `finds that any person', insert the words
 `has violated or'; and following the words `shall notify the person'
 replace `in violation of' with `who violated'.
 (2) In the second sentence,
 (A) strike the words `If such violation extends beyond the 30th day after
 the date of the Administrator's notification,' and insert in lieu thereof
 the words `At any time after the expiration of thirty days following the
 date on which such notice of the violation is issued,';
 (B) insert after `. . . of such plan' the following: `, may issue an
 administrative penalty order in accordance with subsection (d),'; and
 (C) insert, at the end of the sentence, the following: `, without regard
 to the period of the violation. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude
 the United States from commencing a criminal action under section 113(c)
 without such notification for any such violation.'
 (c) Section 113(a)(2) of the Clean Air Act is amended as follows:
 (1) In the first sentence:
 (A) Insert after the words `applicable implementation plan' the words
 `or approved permit program'.
 (B) Insert after the words `in which the plan' the words `or program'.
 (C) Insert after the words `enforce the plan' the words `or program'.
 (2) In the third sentence (which begins `During the period'):
 (A) Insert after the words `enforce such plan' the words `or permit program'.
 (B) Insert after the words `requirement of such plan' the words `or program'.
 (3) Strike the `or' at the end of section 113(a)(2)(A), redesignate
 subparagraph `(B)' as `(C)', and insert the following new subparagraph (B):
 `(B) by issuing an administrative penalty order under subsection (d)
 of this section, or'.
 (4) Insert the following new sentence at the end of section 113(a)(2):
 `Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the United States from commencing
 a criminal action under section 113(c) without such notification for any
 such violation.'.
 (d) Section 113(a)(3) of the Clean Air Act is amended as follows:
 (1) Insert the words `has violated or' before the words `is in violation
 of' in the first sentence.
 (2) Strike the words `section 111(e) of this title' and all that follows
 down through `(relating to inspections, etc.), he' and insert in lieu
 thereof the following: `any other requirement of title I, III, IV, or V of
 this Act, including, but not limited to, a requirement of any rule, order,
 waiver or permit promulgated or approved under those titles or for the
 payment of any fee owed the United States under this Act the Administrator:'.
 (3) Strike the words `or he' before the words `may bring a civil action'
 and insert in lieu thereof the following: `may issue an administrative
 penalty order in accordance with subsection (d);'.
 (4) Insert after the words `may commence a civil action in accordance
 with subsection (b)' the words `and section 305; or may ask the Attorney
 General to commence a criminal action in accordance with subsection (c).'.
 (e) Section 113(a)(4) of the Clean Air Act is amended by inserting at
 the end thereof: `An order issued under this subsection shall require the
 person to whom it was issued to comply with the requirement as expeditiously
 as practicable, but in no event longer than one year after the date the
 order was issued, and shall be nonrenewable. No order issued under this
 subsection shall prevent the State or the Administrator from assessing any
 penalties nor otherwise affect or limit the State or the United States'
 authority to enforce under other provisions of this Act, nor affect any
 person's obligations to comply with any section of this Act, or a term or
 condition of any permit or applicable implementation plan promulgated or
 approved under this Act.'
 (f) Section 113(a)(5) of the Clean Air Act is amended as follows:
 (1) Strike the words `regulation referred to' and all that follows through
 `of this subchapter, he' and insert in lieu thereof the following:
 `Act relating to the construction of new sources or the modification of
 existing sources, the Administrator:'.
 (2) Insert a comma after `construction'; strike the word `or' before
 `modification'; and insert', or operation' after `modification'.
 (3) Insert after `such provisions apply' the following: ', may issue an
 administrative penalty order in accordance with subsection (d),'.
 (4) Strike `he' before `may bring'.
 (5) Insert at the end of section 113(a)(5) the following: `Nothing in this
 subsection shall preclude the United States from commencing a criminal
 action under section 113(c) without such finding for any such violation.'
 (g) Section 113(b) of the Clean Air Act is amended as follows:
 (1) Strike the existing heading and insert in lieu thereof the words
 `CIVIL JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT'.
 (2) In the first sentence, insert the words `as appropriate' after `The
 Administrator shall,'.
 (3) In the first sentence, insert after `the owner or operator of', the
 words `an affected source, a major emitting facility, or'.
 (4) Strike `of' after `$25,000 per day' and insert in lieu thereof
 `for each'.
 (5) Strike all of existing paragraphs (1), (3), and (4).
 (6) Redesignate paragraph `(2)' as paragraph `(1)', and amend it as follows:
 (A) After the words `applicable implementation plan' insert `(such action
 shall be commenced'.
 (B) After the words `30 days', strike `after having been notified by
 the Administrator' and insert in lieu thereof `following the date of the
 Administrator's notification'.
 (C) After `violating such requirement' insert `)'.
 (7) Insert new paragraph (2) as follows:
 `(2) violates any other requirement of title I, III, IV or V, including,
 but not limited to, a requirement of any rule, order, waiver or permit
 promulgated or approved under this Act or for the payment of any fee owed
 the United States under this Act; or'.
 (8) Redesignate existing paragraph `(5)' as `(3)' and amend it by inserting
 a comma after `construct'; striking the `or' before `modify'; and inserting
 `, or operate' before `a major stationary source'.
 (9) Strike in its entirety the sentence beginning `The Administrator may
 commence a civil action'.
 (10) Amend the sentence beginning `Any action' thus:
 (A) strike the words `the district court of' from before `the United States';
 (B) after `United States' insert `District Court for the District of
 Columbia, or';
 (C) after `violation' insert `is alleged to have'
 (D) after `assess such civil penalty' insert a comma and delete `and';
 (E) after `to collect any' insert `fees owed the United States under the
 Act and any';
 (F) after `noncompliance' insert `assessment and nonpayment';
 (G) strike `(and nonpayment penalty)'; and
 (H) after `section 120 of this title' insert `, and to award any other
 appropriate relief.'
 (11) Strike in its entirety the sentence beginning `in determining the
 amount of'.
 (h) Section 13(c) of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking the heading
 `PENALTIES' and inserting in lieu thereof `CRIMINAL ENFORCEMENT', and by
 inserting the following new paragraphs (1) and (2):
 `(1) Any person who knowingly fails to pay any fee owed the United States
 under title I, III, IV, or V shall, upon conviction, be punished by a
 fine pursuant to title 18 of the United States Code, or by imprisonment
 for not more than one year, or by both, per day for each violation. If a
 conviction of any person under this paragraph is for a violation committed
 after a first conviction of such person under this paragrpah, the maximum
 punishment shall be doubled with respect to both the fine and imprisonment.
 `(2) Any person who negligently releases into the air any hazardous air
 pollutant listed pursuant to section 112 of this Act or any extremely
 hazardous substance listed pursuant to section 11002(a)(2) of title 42,
 and who at the time negligently places another person in imminent danger
 of death or serious bodily injury shall, upon conviction, be punished
 by a fine under title 18 of the United States Code, or by imprisonment
 for not more than one year, or by both, per day for each violation. If a
 conviction of any person under this paragraph is for a violation committed
 after a first conviction of such person under this paragraph, the maximum
 punishment shall be doubled with respect to both the fine and imprisonment.'.
 (i) Section 113(c)(1) of the Clean Air Act is redesignated as paragraph
 (3) of section 113(c) and amended as follows:
 (1) Strike after `who knowingly' the `--', and strike subparagraphs (A),
 (B), (C), and (D) in their entirety (through `(relating to ozone)') and
 insert the following: `violates any requirement of title I, III, IV or V,
 including, but not limited to, a requirement of any rule, plan, order,
 waiver or permit promulgated or approved under those titles.'.
 (2) Insert `, upon conviction,' before `be punished by a fine'; thereafter,
 strike `of not more than $25,000 per day of violation' and insert in lieu
 thereof `pursuant to title 18 of the United States Code'.
 (3) After `imprisonment for not more than', replace `one year' with `five
 years', and after `or by both' insert `, per day for each violation'.
 (4) Strike the last sentence in the subparagraph and insert in lieu thereof:
 `If a conviction of any person under this paragraph is for a violation
 committed after a first conviction of such person under this paragraph,
 the maximum punishment shall be doubled with respect to both the fine
 and imprisonment.'
 (j) Section 113(c)(2) of the Clean Air Act is redesignated as paragraph
 (4) of section 113(c) and amended as follows:
 (1) Insert a `--' after `who knowingly', and insert a designation of
 subparagraph `(A)' before `makes any false statement'.
 (2) After `or certification in' insert `, or omits material information
 from or knowingly alters, conceals or fails to maintain or file'.
 (3) Before `application, record,' insert `notice,'.
 (4) After `required to be' insert `filed,'; after `maintained', strike
 `under this chapter' and insert in lieu thereof `or used for purposes
 of compliance under this Act (whether with respect to the requirements
 imposed by the Administrator or by a State)'.
 (5) Before `falsifies', strike `who', insert the following new subparagraph
 (B) and designate the provision beginning with `falsifies' as subparagraph
 `(C)':
 `(B) fails to notify or report as required under this Act; or'.
 (6) After `renders inaccurate' insert `, or fails to install'; and after
 `required to be maintained' insert `or followed'.
 (7) After `punished by a fine' strike `of not more than $10,000' and insert
 in lieu thereof `pursuant to title 18 of the United States Code,'.
 (8) Strike `six months' and insert in lieu thereof `two years', and after
 `or by both' insert the following: `, per day for each violation. If a
 conviction of any person under this paragraph is for a violation committed
 after a first conviction of such person under this paragraph, the maximum
 punishment shall be doubled with respect to both the fine and imprisonment.'
 (k) Section 113(c)(3) of the Clean Air Act is redesignated as paragraph
 (6) of section 113(c) and a new section 113(c)(5) is added as follows:
 `(5)(A) Any person who knowingly releases into the air any hazardous air
 pollutant listed pursuant to section 112 of this Act or any extremely
 hazardous substance listed pursuant to section 11002(a)(2) of title 42,
 and who knows at the time that he thereby places another person in imminent
 danger of death or serious bodily injury shall, upon conviction, be punished
 by a fine under title 18 of the United States Code, or by imprisonment of not
 more than fifteen years, or by both, per day for each violation. Any person
 committing such violation which is an organization shall, upon conviction
 under this paragraph, be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000,000 per
 day for each violation. If a conviction of any person under this paragraph
 is for a violation committed after a first conviction of such person under
 this paragraph, the maximum punishment shall be doubled with respect to
 both the fine and imprisonment. For any hazardous air pollutant listed
 pursuant to section 112 for which the Administrator has set an emissions
 standard, a release of such pollutant shall not constitute a violation of
 this paragraph unless it exceeds such standard.
 `(B) In determining whether a defendant who is an individual knew that
 the violation placed another person in imminent danger of death or serious
 bodily injury--
 `(i) the defendant is responsible only for actual awareness or actual
 belief possessed; and
 `(ii) knowledge possessed by a person other than the defendant, but not
 by the defendant, may not be attributed to the defendant;
except that in proving a defendant's possession of actual knowledge,
circumstantial evidence may be used, including evidence that the defendant
took affirmative steps to be shielded from relevant information.
 `(C) The term `organization' means a legal entity, other than a government,
 established or organized for any purpose, and such term includes a
 corporation, company, association, firm, partnership, joint stock company,
 foundation, institution, trust, society, union, or any other association
 of persons.
 `(D) The term `serious bodily injury' means bodily injury which involves
 a substantial risk of death, unconsciousness, extreme physical pain,
 protracted and obvious disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of
 the function of a bodily member, organ, or mental faculty.'.
 (l) section 113(d) of the Clean Air Act is amended to read as follows:
 `(d) ADMINISTRATIVE ASSESSMENT OF CIVIL PENALTIES- (1) The Administrator
 may issue an administrative order against any person assessing a civil
 administrative penalty of up to $25,000, per day for each violation,
 whenever, on the basis of any available information, the Administrator
 finds that such person--
 `(A) violates any requirement of an applicable implementation plan (such
 order shall be issued (i) during any period of federally assumed enforcement,
 or (ii) more than thirty days following the date of the Administrator's
 notification under subsection (a)(1) of this section of a finding that
 such person is violating such requirement); or
 `(B) violates any other requirement of title I, III, IV or V, including,
 but not limited to, a requirement of any rule, order, waiver, or permit
 promulgated or approved under this Act or for the payment of any fee owed
 the United States under this Act; or
 `(C) attempts to construct, modify or operate a major stationary source
 in any area with respect to which a finding under subsection (a)(5) of
 this section has been made.
The Administrator's authority under this paragraph shall be limited to
matters where the total penalty sought does not exceed $200,000 and the
first alleged date of violation occurred no more than twelve months prior to
the initiation of the administrative action, except where the Administrator
and the Attorney General jointly determine that a matter involving a larger
penalty amount or longer period of violation is appropriate for administrative
penalty action. Any such determination by the Administrator and the Attorney
General shall not be subject to judicial review.
 `(2)(A) An administrative penalty assessed under paragraph (1) shall
 be assessed by the Administrator by an order made on the record after
 opportunity for a hearing in accordance with sections 554 and 556 of
 title 5 of the United States Code. The Administrator may issue rules for
 discovery and other procedures for hearings under this paragraph. Before
 issuing such an order, the Administrator shall give written notice to the
 person to be assessed an administrative penalty of the Administrator's
 proposal to issue such order and provide such person an opportunity to
 request such a hearing on the order, within fifteen days of the date the
 notice is received by such person.
 `(B) The Administrator may compromise, modify, or remit, with or without
 conditions, any administrative penalty which may be imposed under paragraph
 (1).
 `(3) The Administrator may implement through regulation, after consultation
 with the Attorney General, a field citation program for appropriate minor
 violations, which authorizes the issuance of field citations assessing civil
 penalties not to exceed $5,000 per day for each violation. Any person to whom
 a field citation is assessed may, within a reasonable time as prescribed by
 the Administrator through regulation, elect to pay the penalty assessment
 or to request a hearing on the field citation. If a request for a hearing
 is not made within the time specified in the regulation, the penalty
 assessment in the field citation shall be final. Such hearing shall not
 be subject to section 554 or 556 of title 5 of the United States Code,
 but shall provide a reasonable opportunity to be heard and to present
 evidence. Payment of a civil penalty required by a field citation shall
 not be a defense to further enforcement by the United States or a State to
 correct a violation, or to assess the statutory maximum penalty pursuant
 to other authorities in the Act, if the violation continues.
 `(4) Any person against whom a civil penalty is assessed under this
 subsection may seek review of such assessment in the United States District
 Court for the District of Columbia, or for the district in which the
 violation is alleged to have occurred, in which such person resides, or
 where such person's principal place of business is located, within thirty
 days following the date the civil penalty order is issued under subsection
 (d)(2), or the final decision in a hearing under subsection (d)(3) is
 rendered, and by simultaneously sending a copy of the filing by certified
 mail to the Administrator and the Attorney General. The Administrator
 shall promptly file in such court a certified copy, or certified index,
 as appropriate, of the record on which the order or final decision was
 issued within thirty days. Such court shall not set aside or remand such
 order or final decision unless there is not substantial evidence in the
 record, taken as a whole, to support the finding of a violation or unless
 the Administrator's assessment of the penalty constitutes an abuse of
 discretion. In any such proceedings, the United States may seek to recover
 civil penalties assessed under this section.
 `(5) If any person fails to pay an assessment of a civil penalty--
 `(A) after the order making the assessment or field citation has become
 final, or
 `(B) after a court in an action brought under paragraph (4) has entered
 a final judgment in favor of the Administrator,
the Administrator shall request the Attorney General to bring a civil action
in an appropriate district court to recover the amount assessed (plus interest
at rates established pursuant to section 6621(a)(2) of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986 from the date of the final order or decision or the date of the
final judgment, as the case may be). In such an action, the validity, amount,
and appropriateness of such penalty shall not be subject to review. Any person
who fails to pay on a timely basis a civil penalty under this section shall
be required to pay, in addition to such penalty and interest, the United
States' enforcement expenses, including but not limited to attorneys fees
and costs incurred by the United States for collection proceedings, and a
quarterly nonpayment penalty for each quarter during which such failure to
pay persists. Such nonpayment penalty shall be in an amount equal to 20 per
centum of the aggregate amount of such person's outstanding penalties and
nonpayment penalties accrued as of the beginning of such quarter.'.
 (m) Section 113 of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking out subsection
 (e) and inserting the following:
 `(e) PENALTY ASSESSMENT CRITERIA- (1) In determining the amount of any
 penalty to be assessed under this section or section 304(a), the court shall
 take into consideration (in addition to such other factors as justice may
 require) the size of the business, the economic impact of the penalty on
 the business, the full violator's compliance history and good faith efforts
 to comply, the duration of the violation as established by any credible
 evidence (including evidence other than the applicable test method), payment
 by the violator of penalties previously assessed for the same violation,
 the economic benefit of noncompliance, and the seriousness of the violation.
 `(2) A penalty may be assessed for each day of each violation. For purposes
 of determining the number of days of violation for which a penalty may be
 assessed under this section or section 304(a), or an assessment may be made
 under section 120, the violation shall be deemed to commence on the first
 provable date of violation and to continue each and every day thereafter
 until the violator establishes that continuous compliance has been achieved,
 except to the extent that the violator can prove by a preponderance of
 the evidence that there were intervening days during which no violation
 occurred or that the violation was not continuing in nature.
 `(f) REWARDS- The Administrator may pay a reward, not to exceed $10,000,
 to any person who furnishes information or services which lead to a
 criminal conviction or a civil judicial or administrative judgment of
 liability for any violation of titles I, III, IV, or V of this Act enforced
 under this section. Any officer, or employee of the United States or any
 State or local government who furnishes information or renders service
 in the performance of an official duty is ineligible for payment under
 this subsection. An authorized contractor acting as a representative of
 the Administrator shall be considered an employee of the United States
 for purposes of this subsection. The Administrator may, by regulation,
 prescribe additional criteria for eligibility for such a reward.'.
SEC. 602. REVIEWABILITY OF ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS.
 (a) Section 307(b)(2) of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding at the end
 thereof: `Orders or notices issued under section 113(a), section 167 and
 section 303, administrative subpoenas under section 307(a), and actions
 under sections 114, 206(c) and 208 of this Act are not considered final
 action for purposes of this section. Such orders, notices, subpoenas and
 actions shall not be subject to judicial review except in a proceeding
 commenced with the United States under sections 113, 120, 204 or 205,
 or in a citizen suit commenced under section 304, to enforce the order,
 notice, subpoena or action. No such order, notice, subpoena or action may
 be challenged in any citizen suit under section 304 unless the Administrator
 and the Attorney General are notified in writing of such challenge.'.
 (b) Section 307(e) of the Clean Air Act is amended by inserting at the
 end thereof: `Orders or notices issued under section 113(a), section
 167 or section 303, subpoenas issued under section 307(a), and actions
 under sections 114, 206(c) and 208 of this Act may only be reviewed in a
 proceeding commenced by the United States under section 113, 120, 204 or
 205, or in a citizen suit under section 304, to enforce the order, notice,
 subpoena or action.'.
SEC. 603. COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATION.
 (a) Section 114(a)(1) of the Clean Air Act is amended by inserting `,
 on a one-time, periodic or continuous basis' immediately before `to (A)
 establish and maintain';
 (2) inserting `audit procedures' immediately before `or methods, (D)';
 (3) inserting `procedures or' immediately before `methods, at such
 locations,';
 (4) inserting `during such continuous periods' immediately before `,
 and in such manner as the Administrator';
 (5) striking `and' immediately before subparagraph (E); and
 (6) redesignating subparagraph (E) as (G) and inserting the following
 new subparagraphs: `(E) keep periodic or continuous records on control
 equipment parameters, production variables or other indirect data when
 direct monitoring of emissions is impractical, (F) submit compliance
 certifications in accordance with section 114(a)(3); and'.
 (b) Section 114(a) of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new paragraph at the end:
 `(3) The Administrator shall in the case of any person which is the owner
 or operator of a major stationary source, and may, in the case of any
 other person, require enhanced monitoring and submission of compliance
 certifications. Compliance certifications shall include (A) identification
 of the applicable requirement that is the basis of the certification, (B)
 the method used for determining the compliance status of the source, (C) the
 compliance status, (D) whether compliance is continuous or intermittent, (E)
 such other facts as the Administrator may require. Compliance certifications
 and monitoring data shall be public information. Submission of a compliance
 certification shall in no way limit the Administrator's authorities to
 investigate or otherwise implement this Act.'.
 (c) Section 307(b)(1) of the Clean Air Act is amended by inserting `or
 revising regulations for enhanced monitoring and compliance certification
 programs under section 114(a)(3) of this Act,' immediately before `or any
 other final action of the Administrator'.
SEC. 604. CONTRACTOR INSPECTIONS.
 (a) Section 114(a)(2) of the Clean Air Act is amended by inserting
 `(including an authorized contractor acting as a representative of the
 Administrator),' immediately before `upon presentation of his credentials'.
 (b) Subsection (c) of section 114 of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking
 `except that such record,' and all that follows down through the period at
 the end of such subsection and inserting: `of the United States Code. Any
 authorized representative of the Administrator (including an authorized
 contractor acting as a representative of the Administrator) shall be
 considered an employee of the United States for purposes of the provisions
 of section 1905 of title 18 of the United States Code. Nothing in this
 subsection shall prohibit the Administrator or an authorized representative
 of the Administrator (including any authorized contractor acting as a
 representative of the Administrator) from disclosing records, reports or
 information to other officers, employees or authorized representatives
 of the United States (including any authorized contractor acting as a
 representative of the Administrator), or to any State concerned with
 carrying out this Act, or when relevant in any proceeding under this Act.'.
SEC. 605. ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT SUBPOENAS.
 Section 307(a) of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking out `(1)'
 after `(a)' and by striking `or section 202(b)(5)' and inserting `,
 any investigation, monitoring, reporting requirement, entry, compliance
 inspection, or administrative enforcement proceeding under this Act
 (including but not limited to section 113, section 114, section 120,
 section 205, section 206, section 208, section 303 or section 306), or
 to otherwise carry out the provisions of this Act,' immediately after
 `section 202(b)(4) or 211(c)(3)'.
SEC. 606. ENFORCEMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS.
 Section 303(b) of the Clean Air Act is repealed.
SEC. 607. SCOPE OF EMERGENCY ORDERS.
 Section 303 of the Clean Air Act, as amended by section 606 of this Act,
 is further amended as follows:
 (1) Strike `the health of persons, and that appropriate State or local
 authorities have not acted to abate such sources' and insert `public health
 or welfare, or the environment'.
 (2) Revise the second sentence to read `If it is not practicable to
 assure prompt protection of public health or welfare or the environment by
 commencement of such a civil action, the Administrator may issue such orders
 as may be necessary to protect public health or welfare or the environment.'.
 (3) Strike the last 2 sentences in their entirety.
SEC. 608. CONTRACTOR LISTINGS.
 Section 306(a) of the Clean Air Act is amended by--
 (1) striking `113(c)(1) of this title' and inserting `113(c), 205(d),
 211(d)(3), and 212(e) of this Act'; and
 (2) inserting at the end thereof `For convictions arising under section
 113(c)(2), the condition giving rise to the conviction also shall be
 considered to include any substantive violation of this Act associated with
 the violation of 113(c)(2). The Administrator may extend this prohibition
 to other facilities owned or operated by the convicted person.'.
SEC. 609. JUDICIAL REVIEW PENDING RECONSIDERATION OF REGULATION.
 Section 307(b)(1) of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding at the end
 thereof: `A petition for reconsideration by the Administrator of any
 otherwise final agency action shall not render the action nonfinal for
 purposes of judicial review nor extend the time within which a petition
 for review may be filed, and shall not postpone the effectiveness of the
 agency action.'.
SEC. 610. CITIZEN SUITS.
 (a) Section 304(a) of the Clean Air Act is amended by inserting immediately
 before the period at the end thereof: `, and to apply any appropriate civil
 penalties (except for actions under paragraph (a)(2)), including those
 pursuant to a consent judgment, payable to the special fund as established
 in subsection (g), taking into account the factors listed in section 113(e)'.
 (b) Section 304 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new subsection after subsection (f):
 `(g) PENALTY FUND- Penalties received under subsection (a) shall be deposited
 in a special fund in the United States Treasury for licensing and other
 services, which shall be available for appropriation, and remain available
 until expended for use by the Administrator to finance air compliance and
 enforcement activities.'.
 (c) Paragraph (2) of subsection 304(c) of the Clean Air Act is amended to
 read as follows:
 `(2) In any action under this section, the Administrator, if not a party,
 may intervene as a matter of right at any time in the proceeding. In such
 intervention, the Administrator may substitute himself as the plaintiff
 with regard to any claim for civil penalties. Upon such substitution,
 the citizen plaintiff's claims for civil penalties shall abate. A judgment
 in an action under this section to which the United States is not a party
 shall not, however, have any binding effect upon the United States.'.
 (d) Section 304(c) of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new paragraph after paragraph (2):
 `(3) Whenever any action is brought under this section the plaintiff shall
 serve a copy of the complaint on the Attorney General of the United States
 and on the Administrator. No consent judgment shall be entered in an action
 brought under this section in which the United States is not a party prior
 to forty-five days following the receipt of a copy of the proposed consent
 judgment by the Attorney General and the Administrator during which time
 the Government may submit its comments on the proposed consent judgment
 to the court and parties or may intervene as a matter of right.'.
SEC. 611. ENHANCED IMPLEMENTATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF NEW SOURCE REVIEW
REQUIREMENTS.
 Section 167 of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking `the construction
 of a major emitting facility' and inserting `the operation, construction,
 or modification of a major emitting facility'.
SEC. 612. MOVABLE STATIONARY SOURCES.
 Section 302 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 subsection after subsection (r):
 `(t) STATIONARY SOURCE- The term `stationary source' means generally any
 source of an air pollutant except those emissions resulting directly from
 an internal combustion engine for transportation purposes.'.
SEC. 613. ENFORCEMENT OF NEW TITLES OF THE ACT.
 Section 120(a)(2)(A) of the Clean Air Act is amended by--
 (1) inserting `167, or 303' after `112' in clause (ii), and deleting `or'
 and inserting a comma after clause (iii);
 (2) inserting in clause (iii), `or (iii)' immediately after `(ii)' and
 deleting `or' and inserting a comma after `(i)';
 (3) redesignating clause (iii) as (iv); and
 (4) inserting the following new clause after clause (ii)
 `(iii) a stationary source which is not in compliance with any requirement
 of title IV, V or VII of this Act, or'.
TITLE VII--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SEC. 701. GRANTS FOR SUPPORT OF AIR POLLUTION PLANNING AND CONTROL PROGRAMS.
 (a) Subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section 105(a)(1) of the Clean Air Act
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(A) The Administrator may make grants to air pollution control agencies,
 within the meaning of paragraph (1), (2), (3), or (4) of section 302,
 in an amount up to three-fifths of the cost of implementing programs for
 the prevention and control of air pollution or implementation of national
 standards. For the purpose of this section, implementation means any
 activity related to the planning, developing, establishing, carrying-out,
 improving, or maintaining of such an air program.
 `(B) Subject to subsections (b) and (c) of this section, those air pollution
 control agencies contributing less than the required two-fifths minimum
 shall have 3 years following the enactment of this section in which to
 attain this required minimum level; should such an agency fail to meet and
 maintain this required level, the Administrator shall reduce the amount
 of the Federal contribution accordingly.'.
 (b) Section 105(a)(1)(C) of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking `(B)'
 and inserting `(A)'.
 (c) Section 105(b) of the Clean Air Act is amended by--
 (1) inserting `(1)' immediately after `(b)'
 (2) striking all that follows `(3) the financial need of the respective
 agencies'; and
 (3) redesignating paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) as subparagraphs (A),
 (B), and (C) respectively.
 (d) Section 105 of the Clean Air Act is amended by redesignating subsection
 (c) as paragraph (2) of subsection (b) and by striking all that follows
 `into which such area extends.' in the newly designated paragraph (2) and
 inserting `Subject to the provisions of paragraph (1) of this subsection,
 no State shall have made available to it for application less than one-half
 of 1 per centum of the annual appropriation for grants under this section
 for grants to agencies within such State.'.
 (e) Section 105 of the Clean Air Act is amended by inserting the following
 new subsection before subsection (d).
 `(c)(1) No agency shall receive any grant under this section during any
 fiscal year when its expenditures of non-Federal funds for recurrent
 expenditures for air pollution control programs will be less than its
 expenditures were for such programs during the preceding fiscal year. In
 order for the Administrator to award grants under this section in a timely
 manner each fiscal year, the Administrator shall compare an agency's
 prospective expenditure level to that of its second preceding fiscal
 year. The Administrator shall revise the current regulations which define
 applicable nonrecurrent and recurrent expenditures, and in so doing,
 give due consideration to exempting an agency from the limitations of
 this paragraph and subsection (a) due to periodic increases experienced
 by that agency from time to time in its annual expenditures for purposes
 acceptable to the Administrator for that fiscal year.
 `(2) The Administrator may still award a grant to an agency not meeting the
 requirements of paragraph (l) of this subsection if the Administrator,
 after notice and opportunity for public hearing, determines that a
 reduction in expenditures is attributable to a non-selective reduction in
 the expenditures in the programs of all Executive branch agencies of the
 applicable unit of Government. No agency shall receive any grant under this
 section with respect to the maintenance of a program for the prevention
 and control of air pollution unless the Administrator is satisfied that
 such a grant will be so used to supplement and, to the extent practicable,
 increase the level of State, local, or other non-Federal funds. No grants
 shall be made under this section until the Administrator has consulted
 with the appropriate official as designated by the Governor or Governors
 of the State or States affected.'.
 (f) Section 106 of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking `three-fourths
 of the air quality planning program costs of such agency' and inserting
 `three-fifths of the air quality implementation program costs of such
 agency'.
SEC. 702. ANNUAL REPORT REPEAL.
 Section 313 of the Clean Air Act is repealed.
SEC. 703. NOx AND VOC STUDY.
 The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, in conjunction
 with the National Academy of Sciences, shall conduct a study on the role
 of ozone precursors in tropospheric ozone formation and control. The study
 should examine the roles of NOx and VOC emission reductions, the role of
 biogenic VOC emissions, and the basic information required for air quality
 models. The study should be completed and a report submitted to Congress
 within two years of enactment of this section.
SEC. 704. REVIEW AND REVISION OF CRITERIA AND STANDARDS.
 (a) Section 109(d)(1) of the Clean Air Act is amended to read as follows:
 `(1)(A) Not later than five years after enactment of this paragraph and
 thereafter as provided in subparagraph (C), the Administrator shall complete
 a review of the criteria published under section 108 and the standards
 promulgated under this section and (i) make such revisions in the criteria
 as may be appropriate to reflect advances in scientific knowledge and (ii)
 determine whether it is appropriate to propose revisions of the standards
 based on the applicable criteria. In making revisions or determinations
 under this subparagraph, the Administrator may use such procedures as he
 deems appropriate. Notice of revisions and determinations made under this
 subparagraph shall be published in the Federal Register not later than
 thirty days after the revisions or determinations, respectively, are made,
 and copies shall be made available to the general public.
 `(B) If the Administrator determines under subparagraph (A) that it is
 appropriate to propose revision of a standard, he shall commence rulemaking
 proceedings under section 307(d) and make such revisions as are appropriate
 as expeditiously as practicable but not later than three years after such
 determination is made. The Administrator may elect to follow the same
 procedure with respect to a determination that it is inappropriate to
 propose revision of a standard.
 `(C) After the first review and (as appropriate) revision of a standard
 under this paragraph, the Administrator shall repeat the process specified
 in subparagraphs (A) and (B) from time to time for such standard. The review
 specified in subparagraph (A) shall be completed not later than five years
 after completion of the last review of the standard or, if the standard
 was revised as a result of such review (or judicial review), not later
 than five years after completion of such revision. For any new standard
 promulgated after the enactment of this paragraph, the first review under
 subparagraph (A) shall be completed not later than five years after the
 date of promulgation.
 `(D) A determination under subparagraph (A) that it is inappropriate
 to propose revision of a standard shall be reviewable as a final action
 under section 307(b). If the Administrator elects to commence rulemaking
 proceedings under subparagraph (B) with respect to such a determination, the
 determination shall be reviewable only upon completion of the rulemaking. A
 determination under subparagraph (A) that it is appropriate to propose
 revision of a standard shall not be subject to judicial review under
 section 307(b) or otherwise.
 `(E) The Administrator may review and revise criteria or standards earlier
 or more frequently than required under this paragraph.'.
 (b) Section 109(d)(2)(B) of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking
 `January 1, 1980, and at five-year intervals thereafter,' and inserting
 five years after enactment of paragraph (1) and thereafter at intervals
 corresponding to the Administrator's review of criteria and standards
 under paragraph (1).'.
 (c) Section 108(a)(2) of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking `twelve
 months' and inserting `three years'.
 (d) Section 108(c) of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking `criteria
 or' in the first sentence.
 (e) Section 109(a)(2) of the Clean Air Act is amended by--
 (1) inserting `first' immediately before `issued' in the first sentence;
 (2) striking `publish, simultaneously with the issuance of such criteria
 and information, proposed' in the first sentence and inserting `promulgate';
 (3) striking `for any such pollutant.' in the first sentence and inserting
 `as appropriate for such pollutant not later than three years after such
 issuance.';
 (4) striking `paragraph (1)(B) of this subsection' in the second sentence
 and inserting `subsection (d)'; and
 (5) striking `promulgation' in the second sentence and inserting `revision'.
 (f) Section 109(b) of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking the second
 sentence of paragraph (1) and by striking the second sentence of paragraph
 (2).
SEC. 705. AIR POLLUTANT RELEASE INVESTIGATION BOARD.
 The Clean Air Act is amended to add the following new section after
 section 191:
`AIR POLLUTANT RELEASE INVESTIGATION BOARD
 `SEC. 192. (a) ESTABLISHMENT- There shall be established within the
 Environmental Protection Agency an Air Pollutant Release Investigation
 Board for the purpose of investigating major life-threatening releases
 of air pollutants. The Board shall consist of one or more panels of five
 members convened by the Administrator to investigate such releases.
 `(b) MEMBERSHIP- Any panel of the Board shall consist of four employees
 of the United States Environmental Protection Agency selected by the
 Administrator, and the Secretary of Labor or his designate. With the consent
 of the head of any other federal agency, the Administrator may select an
 employee of such agency as a member of the panel in place of an employee
 of the Environmental Protection Agency.
 `(c) DUTIES- (1) The Board may investigate or cause to be investigated (in
 such detail as it shall prescribe), and determine the facts, conditions,
 and circumstances and the cause or probable cause or causes of any major
 life-threatening release of an air pollutant except: (A) any release of
 source, byproduct, or special nuclear material from a nuclear incident
 which the Nuclear Regulatory Commission is authorized to investigate,
 and (B) any transportation-related release, including marine oil spills,
 which the National Transportation Safety Board is authorized to investigate.
 `(2) For any investigation performed under paragraph (1) of this subsection,
 the Board shall develop a written report on the facts, conditions, and
 circumstances of the release and shall make such reports available to
 Congress and, upon reasonable cost, available to the public. No report
 shall be subject to judicial review in any court.
 `(d) POWERS- (1) The Board, or upon the authority of the Board, any member
 thereof, or any officer or employee duly designated by the Administrator,
 may, for the purpose of carrying out subsection (c), hold such hearings,
 sit and act at such times and places, and administer such oaths, as the
 Board or such officer or employee deems advisable.
 `(2) In addition to that described in paragraph (1), the Board may use any
 information gathering authority of the Administrator under any statute,
 including the subpoena power provided in section 307(a)(1) of this Act.
 `(e) EVIDENCE- No part of the conclusions, findings, or recommendations
 of any report of the Board relating to any accidental release or the
 investigation thereof shall be admitted as evidence or used in any action
 or suit for damages in which the United States is a party arising out of
 any matter mentioned in such report.'.