333 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 333
Entitled the `Global Environmental Protection Act of 1989'.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
February 2 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. LEAHY (for himself and Mr. JEFFORDS) introduced the following bill; which
was read twice and referred to the Committee on Environment and Public Works
A BILL
Entitled the `Global Environmental Protection Act of 1989'.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Global Environmental Protection Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress, recognizing the profound, irreversible and potentially
 catastrophic impacts of humanity's activities on the global atmosphere
 and the world's environment, and the inability of science to predict
 with certainty the consequences for humanity of any such changes, hereby
 declares that each person has a responsibility and obligation to avoid
 contamination of the atmosphere.
TITLE I--ELIMINATION AND REGULATION OF GLOBAL CHANGE POLLUTANTS
PART A--CHLOROFLUOROCARBONS AND RELATED CHEMICALS
SECTION 101. SHORT TITLE.
 This part may be cited as the `Act to Eliminate Chlorofluorocarbons and
 Related Chemicals'.
SEC. 102. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) the best available scientific evidence shows that manufactured
 substances, including chlorofluorocarbons, are polluting the atmosphere
 and destroying stratospheric ozone, as well as contributing to global
 climate change, and other atmospheric modifications;
 (2) no level of stratospheric ozone depletion or global climate change
 caused by human activities can be deemed safe;
 (3) stratospheric ozone depletion will lead to increased incidence of
 solar ultraviolet radiation at the surface of the Earth;
 (4) increased incidence of solar ultraviolet radiation will cause increased
 rates of disease in humans (including skin cancer), threaten food crops,
 and otherwise damage the natural environment;
 (5) stratospheric ozone depletion and global climate change from continued
 emissions of chlorofluorocarbons and other halogenated carbons with ozone
 depleting potential, and emissions of other gases, imperil human health
 and the environment worldwide;
 (6) in order to stabilize and eventually reduce concentrations of chlorine
 and bromine in the stratosphere, to conserve the stratospheric ozone layer
 (an exhaustible natural resource), and to reduce the extent of global
 climate change--
 (A) emissions of chlorofluorocarbons and other substances covered by this
 Act, including halogenated carbons with ozone depleting potential, should
 be terminated rapidly, and
 (B) it is necessary to control international trade in substances covered
 by this Act and products containing or made with processes that use such
 substances;
 (7) the highest priority must be given to developing and deploying safe
 substitutes to replace ozone depleting substances within six years; and
 (8) the United States needs to develop and deploy safe substitutes to
 replace ozone depleting substances in order to demonstrate to the world
 its commitment to protect the stratosphere.
SEC. 103. OBJECTIVES AND NATIONAL GOAL.
 (a) The objectives of this Act are to restore and maintain the chemical
 and physical integrity of the Earth's atmosphere and to protect human
 health and the global environment from all known and potential dangers
 due to atmospheric or climatic modification, including stratospheric ozone
 depletion, that is or may be related to the chlorofluorocarbons or other
 substances covered by this Act by--
 (1) reducing significantly the production and emission into the atmosphere
 of pollutants caused by human activities,
 (2) promoting the rapid development and deployment of alternatives to the
 use of the chlorofluorocarbons and other substances covered by this Act, and
 (3) promoting additional scientific research on atmospheric or climatic
 modification, including stratospheric ozone depletion, and on the known
 and potential adverse effects therefrom on human health and the global
 environment.
 (b) In order to achieve the objectives of this Act, it is the national goal
 to eliminate atmospheric emissions of manufactured substances with ozone
 depleting potential, including chlorofluorocarbons and other halogenated
 carbons with ozone depleting potential, and to reduce significantly
 emissions of other gases caused by human activities that are likely to
 affect adversely the global climate.
SEC. 104. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act:
 (1) The term `Administrator' means the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency.
 (2) The term `household appliances' means noncommercial personal effects,
 including air-conditioners, refrigerators, and motor vehicles.
 (3) The term `import' means to land on, bring into, or introduce into,
 or attempt to land on, bring into, or introduce into, any place subject
 to the jurisdiction of the United States, whether or not such landing,
 bringing, or introduction constitutes an importation within the meaning
 of the customs laws of the United States.
 (4) The term `manufactured substances' means any organic or inorganic
 chemical substances of a particular molecular identity, or any mixture,
 that has been manufactured for commercial purposes.
 (5) The term `medical purposes' means medical devices and diagnostic products
 (A) for which no safe substitute has been developed and (B) which, after
 notice and opportunity for public comment, has been approved and determined
 to be essential by the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration,
 in consultation with the Administrator.
 (6) The term `person' means an individual, corporation (including a
 government corporation), partnership, firm, joint stock company, trust,
 association, or any other private entity, or any officer, employee, agent,
 department, or instrumentality of the Federal Government, of any State or
 political subdivision thereof (including any interstate body), or of any
 foreign government (including any international instrumentality).
 (7) The term `substances covered by this Act' means those substances
 which are known or may reasonably be anticipated to cause or contribute
 to atmospheric or climatic modification, including stratospheric ozone
 depletion, and are listed under subsections (a) or (b) of section 105.
SEC. 105. LISTING OF REGULATED SUBSTANCES.
 (a) SUBSTANCES TO BE PHASED-OUT- Within sixty days after enactment of
 this Act, the Administrator shall publish a priority list of manufactured
 substances which are known or may reasonably be anticipated to cause or
 contribute to atmospheric or climatic modification, including stratospheric
 ozone depletion. The initial list shall include chlorofluorocarbon-11,
 chlorofluorocarbon-12, chlorofluorocarbon-113, halon-1211, and halon-1301.
 (b) OTHER REGULATED SUBSTANCES- Simultaneously with publication of the
 priority list, the Administrator shall create a list of other manufactured
 substances which, in the judgment of the Administrator, meet the criteria
 set forth in the first sentence of subsection (a). The list of other
 substances shall be subject to the limitations on ozone depletion potential
 under section 109 of this Act and shall include chlorofluorocarbon-22,
 chlorofluorocarbon-114, chlorofluorocarbon-115, carbon tetrachloride,
 methyl chloroform, and methylene chloride. At least annually thereafter,
 the Administrator shall publish a proposal to add to such list each other
 manufactured substance which, in the judgment of the Administrator, meets
 the criteria set forth in the first sentence of subsection (a). Within one
 hundred and eighty days of any such proposal, after allowing an opportunity
 for public comment, the Administrator shall promulgate a regulation adding
 each such substance to the list, unless the Administrator determines that
 such substance clearly does not meet the criteria set forth in the first
 sentence of subsection (a).
 (c) OZONE DEPLETION FACTOR- Simultaneously with publication of the lists
 or additions thereto under this section, and at least annually thereafter,
 the Administrator shall assign to each listed substance a numerical value
 representing the ozone depletion potential of such substance, on a mass (per
 kilogram) basis, as compared with chlorofluorocarbon-11. The numerical value
 shall, for the purposes of section 109, constitute the ozone depletion factor
 of each such substance. Until the Administrator promulgates regulations
 under this subsection, the following ozone depletion factors shall apply:
SUBSTANCE OZONE DEPLETING FACTOR
Chlorofluorocarbon-11
--1.0
Chlorofluorocarbon-12
--1.0
Chlorofluorocarbon-22
--0.05
Chlorofluorocarbon-113
--0.78
Carbon tetrachloride
--1.06
Methyl chloroform
--0.10
Halon-1211
--2.69
Halon-1301
--11.43
SEC. 106. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) PRIORITY LIST- Within ninety days after enactment of this Act,
 each person producing a substance listed pursuant to subsection (a) of
 section 105 shall file a report with the Administrator setting forth the
 amount of the substance that was produced by such person during calendar
 year 1987. Not less than annually thereafter, each producer shall file
 a report with the Administrator setting forth the production levels of
 such substance in each successive twelve-month period until such producer
 ceases production of the substance. Each such report shall be signed and
 attested by a responsible corporate officer.
 (b) OTHER REGULATED SUBSTANCES- Within ninety days of the date on which
 a substance is placed on the list under subsection (b) of section 105,
 each person shall file a report with the Administrator setting forth the
 amount of the substance that was produced by such person during the twelve
 months preceding the date of listing. Not less than annually thereafter,
 each producer shall file a report with the Administrator setting forth
 the production levels of such substance in each successive twelve-month
 period until such producer ceases production of the substance. Each such
 report shall be signed and attested by a responsible corporate officer.
SEC. 107. PRODUCTION PHASEOUT.
 (a) Effective January 1, 1990, it shall be unlawful for any person to
 produce a substance listed pursuant to subsection (a) of section 105 in
 annual quantities greater than that produced by such person during calendar
 year 1987.
 (b) Effective January 1, 1991, it shall be unlawful for any person to
 produce a substance listed pursuant to subsection (a) of section 105 in
 annual quantities greater than 75 per centum of that produced by such
 person during calendar year 1987.
 (c) Effective January 1, 1992, it shall be unlawful for any person to
 produce a substance listed pursuant to subsection (a) of section 105 in
 annual quantities greater than 50 per centum of that produced by such
 person during calendar year 1987.
 (d) Effective January 1, 1994, it shall be unlawful for any person to
 produce a substance listed pursuant to subsection (a) of section 105 in
 annual quantities greater than 5 per centum of that produced by such person
 during calendar year 1987.
 (e) Effective January 1, 1996, it shall be unlawful for any person to
 produce or release a substance listed pursuant to subsection (a) for any
 use other than medical purposes.
 (f) Effective January 1, 2000, it shall be unlawful for any person to
 produce or release a substance listed pursuant to section 105 for any use
 other than medical purposes.
SEC. 108. LIMITATION ON USE.
 (a) Effective January 1, 1995, it shall be unlawful to introduce into
 interstate commerce or to use a substance listed under subsection (a) of
 section 105 except for medical purposes approved by the Commissioner of the
 Food and Drug Administration, in consultation with the Administrator, and,
 for a period not to exceed ten years after January 1, 1995, to maintain
 and service household appliances.
 (b) Effective January 1, 2000, it shall be unlawful to introduce into
 interstate commerce or to use a substance listed under subsection (b) of
 section 105 except for medical purposes approved by the Commissioner of
 the Food and Drug Administration, in consultation with the Administrator,
 and, for a period not to extend beyond January 1, 2005, to maintain and
 service household appliances. For purposes of this subsection and subsection
 107(f), a manufacturing process utilizing such a substance solely as an
 intermediate in a manufacturing process in which the substance is wholly
 consumed and none is released, does not constitute a use.
SEC. 109. LIMITATION ON OZONE DEPLETION POTENTIAL.
 (a) Effective January 1, 1990, it shall be unlawful for any person to produce
 substances covered by this Act in annual quantities that, based upon the
 ozone depletion factor assigned to each such substance under subsection
 (c) of section 105, yield a total ozone depletion potential greater than
 that produced by such person during calendar year 1987.
 (b) Effective January 1, 1991, it shall be unlawful for any person to produce
 substances covered by this Act in annual quantities that, based upon the
 ozone depletion factor assigned to each such substance under subsection
 (c) of section 105, yield a total ozone depletion potential greater than
 75 per centum of that produced by such person during calendar year 1987.
 (c) Effective January 1, 1992, it shall be unlawful for any person to produce
 substances covered by this Act in annual quantities that, based upon the
 ozone depletion factor assigned to each such substance under subsection
 (c) of section 105, yield a total ozone depletion potential greater than
 50 per centum of that produced by such person during calendar year 1987.
 (d) Effective January 1, 1996, it shall be unlawful for any person to
 produce a substance listed pursuant to section 105(a) for any use other
 than medical purposes.
 (e) The Administrator shall promulgate regulations, after notice and
 opportunity for public comment, which require each producer to reduce its
 production of--
 (1) a substance listed under subsection (a) of section 105 more rapidly
 than the schedule provided under this Act; or
 (2) a substance listed under subsection (b) of section 105 on a specific
 schedule not otherwise provided for in this Act.
if the Administrator determines that such revised or specific schedule (A)
based on new information regarding the harmful effects on the stratosphere
or climate which may be associated with a listed substance, is necessary to
protect human health and the environment or (B) based on the availability of
substitutes for a listed substance, is attainable. Any person may petition
the Administrator to issue such regulations. The Administrator shall issue
such regulations within one hundred and eighty days after receipt of any
such petition, unless the Administrator denies the petition.
SEC. 110. PRODUCTION PHASE-OUT EXCEPTION FOR NATIONAL SECURITY.
 (a) The President may issue such orders regarding production and use
 of halon-1211 and halon-1301 at any specified site or facility as may be
 necessary to protect the national security interests of the United States if
 the President personally finds that adequate substitutes are not available
 and that the production and use of such substance is necessary to protect
 such national security interests. Such orders may include, where necessary
 to protect such interests, an exemption from any requirement contained
 in this Act. The President shall notify the Congress within thirty days
 of the issuance of an order under this paragraph providing for any such
 exemption. Such notification shall include a statement of the reasons for
 the granting of the exemption. An exemption under this paragraph shall be
 for a specified period which may not exceed one year. Additional exemptions
 may be granted, each upon the President's issuance of a new order under
 this paragraph. Each such additional exemption shall be for a specified
 period which may not exceed one year. No exemption shall be granted under
 this paragraph due to lack of appropriation unless the President shall
 have specifically requested such appropriation as a part of the budgetary
 process and the Congress shall have failed to make available such requested
 appropriation.
SEC. 111. CERTIFICATION OF EQUIVALENT PROGRAMS.
 (a) IMPORTS- Effective twelve months after the date on which a substance is
 placed on the priority list pursuant to section 105, it shall be unlawful for
 any person to import such substance, any product containing such substance,
 or any product manufactured with a process that uses such substance
 unless the Administrator, in consultation with the Secretary of State
 (the Secretary), has published a decision, after notice and opportunity
 for public comment, certifying that the nations in which such substance
 or product was manufactured and from which such substance or product is
 imported have established and are fully implementing programs that require
 reduced production of such listed substance, and limit production of other
 substances covered by this Act, on a schedule and in a manner that is at
 least as stringent as the reduction schedule for, and limitations on,
 domestic production which apply under this Act. The prohibition on the
 import of any product manufactured with a process that uses a substance
 listed under subsection (a) of section 105 shall include, after notice
 and opportunity for public comment, any product which the Administrator
 has reason to believe may have been manufactured with a process that uses
 such substance. The Administrator's decision that a product may have been
 manufactured with a process that uses such substance shall constitute a
 rebuttable presumption.
 (b) CERTIFICATION OF NATIONAL PROGRAM- The Administrator shall not certify
 any national program under subsection (a) unless it is determined that--
 (1) the Nation has adopted legislation or regulations which give the
 reduction schedule for each listed substance the force of law; and
 (2) the legislation or regulations include reporting requirements and
 enforcement provisions no less stringent than those specified in this Act,
 and that the information contained in such reports is available to the
 Administrator and the Secretary.
 (c) REVOCATION- At least annually, the Administrator, in consultation with
 the Secretary, shall review each certification made under this section and
 shall revoke such certification, after notice and opportunity for public
 comment, unless it is determined that the conditions of subsections (a)
 and (b) remain satisfied and that the reduction schedule for each listed
 substance is in fact being carried out in such nations. Any such revocation
 shall take effect one hundred and eighty days after notice of the revocation
 has been published.
 (d) ALLOCATION- Any person who imports a substance covered by this Act or
 a product containing such substance shall, for the purposes of section 107
 (production phaseout for priority list) and section 109 (limitation on
 ozone depletion potential), shall be deemed to have produced an equivalent
 amount of such substance on the date of such importation.
SEC. 112. LABELING.
 Effective ninety days after the date on which a substance is placed on a
 list maintained under subsection (a) or (b) of section 105, no container
 in which such substance is stored or transported, no product containing
 such substance, and no product manufactured with a process that uses a
 listed substance shall be introduced into interstate commerce unless it
 bears a label stating either of the following, as appropriate--
 (1) Contains (insert name of listed substance) a substance which harms
 public health and environment by destroying ozone in the upper atmosphere
 and by disrupting the climate.
 (2) Manufactured with (insert name of listed substance), a substance
 which harms public health and environment by destroying ozone in the upper
 atmosphere and by disrupting the climate.
The Administrator shall issue regulations to implement the labeling
requirements of this section within six months after enactment of this section,
after notice and opportunity for public comment. Such regulations shall require
all containers and products which are subject to this section and introduced
or reintroduced into commerce later than ninety days after promulgation
of such regulations to bear the appropriate label. Unless and until such
regulations have been promulgated and become effective, the required label
shall be permanently affixed on the face of such product, with the lettering
and background in contrasting colors and the letters themselves not less
than two inches in height (or 20 per centum of the height of the product
which is less than four inches in height). Neither the labeling requirement
nor any other provision of the Global Environmental Protection Act of 1989,
including the Act as a whole, shall constitute, in whole or part, a defense
to liability or a cause for reduction in damages in any suit, whether civil
or criminal, brought under any law, whether Federal or State, other than a
suit for failure to comply with the labeling requirements of this section.
SEC. 113. MANUFACTURE AND DISPOSAL.
 (a) Effective January 1, 1991--
 (1) A substance listed pursuant to this Act shall be deemed to meet the
 requirements of section 3001 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
 (2) A substance listed pursuant to this Act shall be disposed of only
 through incineration or other means which assures 99.999 per centum
 destruction of such substance.
 (3) Any appliance, machine or other goods containing a listed substance
 in bulk (including but not limited to refrigerators and air-conditioners)
 shall be accepted for disposal only by persons licensed to accept such goods
 and shall be disposed of only after such substance has been removed from
 confinement and destroyed pursuant to the requirements of this Act. Unless
 and until regulations establishing a program for approving, licensing,
 and assuring the financial responsibility of persons to accept goods
 containing such substances, only governmental entities, or their agents,
 contractors or employees, are authorized to do so.
 (4) No listed substance shall be vented into the atmosphere or otherwise
 released in a fashion which permits it to enter the environment in other
 than de minimus quantities.
 (5) Any product in which a listed substance has been incorporated so as to
 constitute an inherent element of such product, including but not limited
 to rigid and soft foams, shall be disposed of only through incineration
 or other means which result in not less than 99.999 per centum destruction.
 (b) Effective July 1, 1991--
 (1) No person shall manufacture, process, distribute in commerce or otherwise
 use (except for medical purposes) any listed substance in any manner other
 than a totally enclosed manner. `Totally enclosed' means that during the
 lifetime of the good in question not more than 5 per centum of the original
 charge or volume of such substance will be released during the course of
 ordinary and customary use of such good, including repairs or disposal.
 (2) No person shall manufacture, process, distribute in commerce or otherwise
 use (except for medical purposes) a listed substance in a totally enclosed
 manner without--
 (A) installing on such device a servicing aperture which will allow
 service and repair of such good with release of only de minimus amounts
 of such substance,
 (B) assuring the availability and actual use of servicing equipment
 adequate to assure the achievement of no more than a de minimus release
 of such substance.
 (c) For purposes of this section a `de minimus' amount is 0.050 per centum
 of the total charge of such substance or five pounds, whichever is less,
 released during a period of twelve months.
PART B--CARBON DIOXIDE
SEC. 114. SHORT TITLE.
 This part may be cited as the `Act to Reduce and Stabilize Atmospheric
 Concentrations of Carbon Dioxide'.
SEC. 115. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) there is widespread agreement, and no credible scientific dispute, that
 increases in atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide will increase
 the temperature of the planet;
 (2) current emissions of carbon dioxide are approximately seventy times
 as great as those a century ago;
 (3) average concentrations of carbon dioxide in the absence of major
 contributions from human activity have ranged between one hundred and
 eighty and two hundred and eighty parts per million;
 (4) the current concentration of carbon dioxide is approximate three
 hundred and eighty parts per million;
 (5) concentrations of carbon dioxide because of human activity are increasing
 at the rate of about 4 per centum per decade;
 (6) there has already been an observed increase in globally averaged
 temperature of 0.7 degrees Centigrade during the last century;
 (7) increases in North Atlantic Ocean temperatures of 0.2 to 0.3 degrees
 Centigrade have been measured;
 (8) ocean water levels have increased;
 (9) the years 1981, 1983, and 1987 are the hottest on record;
 (10) elevated temperatures and drought are now prevailing in many of the
 world's agricultural areas;
 (11) all of these changes are consistent with predictions that increases
 in carbon dioxide will lead to global temperature increases;
 (12) further temperature increases may be experienced by the year 2030
 if concentrations of carbon dioxide and other trace gases continue to
 accelerate at current rates;
 (13) even with stringent and immediate controls, global average temperatures
 may increase 1.0 to 2.5 degrees Centigrade;
 (14) scientists are unable to state with certainty whether the global
 environment will respond predictably to further temperature increases,
 especially if they occur in combination with other alterations in the
 atmosphere and oceans;
 (15) probable consequences of further warming will include, but cannot
 with certainty be said to be limited to, the following:
 (A) Sea level rise of between one and four feet, accompanied by widespread
 flooding, estuary destruction, and increased frequency of extreme storm
 events such as cyclones;
 (B) Disappearance of many tree and plant species in areas where they
 now predominate;
 (C) Widespread and endemic drought in many areas of the world which now
 supply the bulk of humanity's foods;
 (16) to minimize further climate destruction and mitigate that which is
 already inevitable will require that atmospheric concentrations of carbon
 dioxide be stabilized;
 (17) the level of carbon dioxide emission reductions necessary to achieve
 atmospheric stabilization is uncertain, but has been estimated by some to
 be 50 per centum or more;
 (18) given the uncertainty of the response of the global environment to
 further temperature increases, the prudent policy is to strive to minimize
 carbon dioxide emissions through all possible means rather than establish
 an arbitrary goal;
 (19) between 20 and 25 per centum of the world-wide emissions of carbon
 dioxide originate in the United States;
 (20) technologies and practices exist which could reduce carbon dioxide
 emissions substantially;
 (21) the adoption of these technologies and practices would increase the
 efficiency and competitiveness of the United States business and industrial
 sector, decrease the Nation's dependence on foreign supplies of fuel,
 protect the agricultural sector, preserve the natural environment, and
 simultaneously achieve reductions in other chemicals which cause acid rain,
 ground level ozone, and fine particle pollution; and
 (22) therefore, the United States can protect the global environment
 directly by reducing emissions of carbon dioxide emissions and indirectly
 protect such environment by demonstrating the technologies and practices
 which can be applied elsewhere.
SEC. 116. STATIONARY SOURCE CONTROLS.
 (a)(1) Not later than January 1, 1991, the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency shall revise the standards under section 111(b) of the
 Clean Air Act to require--
 (A) that such standards be expressed in terms of carbon dioxide emitted
 per unit of electricity output;
 (B) that such standards applicable to fossil fuel fired electric utility
 generating units provide for emissions of carbon dioxide not to exceed
 the following:
 (i) effective January 1, 1991, six hundred and ten pounds of carbon dioxide
 per million British thermal units of heat output;
 (ii) effective January 1, 2001, four hundred and thirty-five pounds of
 carbon dioxide per million British thermal units of heat output; and
 (iii) effective January 1, 2011, two hundred and eighty pounds of carbon
 dioxide per million British thermal units of heat output.
For purposes of this section, `heat output' includes usable energy, whether
electric or thermal, measured at the point of distribution to residential,
commercial, or other customers.
 (2) Effective January 1, 1996, each fossil fuel fired stationary source
 shall comply with the standards established under section 111(b) of the
 Clean Air Act for new sources within such class or category, in the case
 of each electric utility generating source, on and after the date thirty
 years following the completion of construction of such source and, in
 the case of each other source, on and after the date thirty-five years
 following the completion of construction of such source.
 (3) To the extent that the emissions rate limits required by this section
 and section 111 of the Clean Air Act through increases in combustion,
 generation, transmission, and utilization efficiencies, such program for
 achieving reductions shall constitute enforceable continuous emissions
 reduction measures, enforceable by the Federal Government, States other
 than those in which the emissions occur, and citizens under section 304
 of the Clean Air Act.
SEC. 117. MOBILE SOURCE CONTROLS.
 (a) The Clean Air Act is amended as follows:
 (1) In section 202(a)(3)(A)(i) inserting before the period at the end of
 the first sentence, the following: `and, for emissions of carbon dioxide,
 during and after model year 1991'.
 (2) in section 202(a)(3)(A)(ii) inserting the following new clause:
 `(III) 1991 in the case of carbon dioxide shall contain standards which
 require a reduction of at least 10 per centum in 1991; at least 25 per
 centum in 1996; at least 50 per centum in 2001; and at least 75 per centum
 in 2011.'.
 (3) inserting in section 202(b)(1)(B) the following new language immediately
 before the period:
`The regulations under subsection (a) applicable to emissions of carbon
dioxide from light duty vehicles and engines shall provide that emissions
of carbon dioxide may not exceed--
 `three hundred and sixty grams of carbon dioxide per vehicle mile from
 light-duty vehicles and engines manufactured during and after model
 year 1991;
 `three hundred grams per mile for light-duty vehicles and engines
 manufactured during and after model year 1996;
 `two hundred grams per mile for light-duty vehicles and engines manufactured
 during and after model year 2001; and,
 `one hundred grams per mile for light-duty vehicles and engines manufactured
 during and after model year 2011.'.
SEC. 118. RESIDENTIAL CONTROLS.
 (a) Not later than January 1, 1992, the Administrator shall promulgate
 regulations identifying the best available residential control technology
 available for central furnaces, air-conditioners, and hot water heaters
 designed and sold for installation in single-family dwellings. For
 purposes of this section, `best available residential control technology'
 means that technology which achieves in a unit which is commercially
 available the maximum degree of reduction of emissions of carbon dioxide,
 whether directly through combustion or indirectly through consumption of
 electrical energy. Unless and until such regulations are promulgated and
 become effective, the best available control technology shall be deemed
 to be as follows:
 (1) for furnaces, that which achieves an AFUE of 0.90 for oil, an AFUE of
 0.95 for gas and a COP of 2.6 for electric heat pumps;
 (2) for central air-conditioners, that which achieves an Energy Efficiency
 Rating of not less than 15.0; and
 (3) for hot water heaters, that which achieves an EF of 64 for gas and 96
 for electricity.
 (b) Each new single-family dwelling for which a building permit is issued
 on or after January 1, 1993, which is equipped with a central furnace,
 central air-conditioner, or hot water heater, shall be equipped only with
 one which meets or exceeds the emission limitation achieved by the best
 available residential control technology.
 (c) Effective January 1, 1994, each replacement central furnace, central
 air-conditioner, or hot water heater installed in a single-family dwelling
 shall meet or exceed the emissions limit achieved by the best available
 residential control technology.
 (d) Not later than January 1, 1991, the Secretary of the Treasury shall
 recommend to the Congress means of encouraging the replacement of central
 furnaces, air-conditioners and water heaters and otherwise minimizing the
 emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases from residential
 units through a system of tax or other incentives.
PART C--GROUND LEVEL OZONE
SEC. 119. SHORT TITLE.
 This part may be cited as the `Act to Minimize Ground Level Ozone'.
SEC. 120. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (a) ground level ozone, and the pollutants which lead to its formation,
 contribute substantially to the following damages--
 (1) increases in global average temperatures and the consequent threats to
 humanity and the global environment, as described in greater particularity
 in the findings accompanying part B;
 (2) widespread and substantial damage to crops and other vegetation,
 including the forests of eastern North America and Europe;
 (3) injury to human health, including probable long-term damage comparable
 to that resulting from tobacco smoking;
 (4) acidification of the soils and waters of North America and Europe;
 (b) concentrations of free tropospheric ozone have doubled to quadrupled
 in the last century;
 (c) ground level ozone is formed by the reaction of volatile organic
 chemicals with oxides of nitrogen in the presence of sunlight;
 (d) elevated temperatures and extended summer seasons likely to accompany
 the global temperature increases will cause increased production of ground
 level ozone;
 (e) virtually all oxides of nitrogen and the majority of the volatile
 organic chemicals result from human activities;
 (f) technologies and practices exist to reduce substantially emissions of
 oxides of nitrogen and volatile organic chemicals; and
 (g) in the absence of a program to minimize emissions of volatile organic
 chemicals and oxides of nitrogen, emissions and concentrations of these
 pollutants are projected to increase.
SEC. 121. STATIONARY SOURCE CONTROLS: OXIDES OF NITROGEN.
 (a)(1) Not later than January 1, 1991, the Administrator shall propose
 revised standards of performance pursuant to section 111 of the Clean Air
 Act for emissions of oxides of nitrogen (including nitrous oxide) from
 fossil fuel-fired steam or electricity generating units, including both
 electric utility and nonutility units. Not later than January 1, 1992, the
 Administrator shall promulgate such revised standards of performance. Such
 revised standards of performance shall reflect improvements in methods
 for the reduction of emissions of oxides of nitrogen and shall require an
 emissions rate equal to or less than 0.1 pound per million British thermal
 units of heat input or a reduction of not less than 90 per centum from an
 uncontrolled state unless the Administrator determines that such limits
 are technologically infeasible. Unless and until such revised standards
 are promulgated and become final, the application of selective catalytic
 reduction to achieve an emissions reduction of 90 per centum shall be
 deemed to be such standard.
 (2) Not later than January 1, 1991, the Administrator shall propose
 standards of performance pursuant to section 111 of the Clean Air Act
 for emissions of oxides of nitrogen (including nitrous oxide) from large
 stationary diesel and turbine engines. Not later than January 1, 1992,
 the Administrator shall promulgate such standards of performance. Unless
 and until such revised standards are promulgated and become final, the
 application of selective catalytic reduction to achieve an emissions
 reduction of 90 per centum shall be deemed to be such standard.
 (b) Effective January 1, 1994, each unit of a major stationary source that
 is a fossil fuel-fired steam generating unit shall achieve an emissions rate
 of oxides of nitrogen that does not exceed, on an annual average basis,
 1.0 pound per million British thermal units of heat input for cyclone
 boilers, 0.5 pound per million British thermal units of heat input for
 wall-fired boilers, and 0.4 pound per million British thermal units of
 heat input for tangential-fired and other boilers.
SEC. 122. STATIONARY SOURCE CONTROLS: HYDROCARBONS.
 (a) Not later than two years after the enactment of this subsection,
 the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall publish
 control technique guidelines consistent with section 171(6) of the Clean
 Air Act for the following categories of sources:
 (A) wood furniture coating;
 (B) autobody refinishing;
 (C) metal rolling;
 (D) SOCMI distillation; and
 (E) SOCMI batch process.
 (b) SECTION 304(a), part A of title I of the Clean Air Act, is amended by
 adding the following new section:
`HYDROCARBON EMISSION CONTROLS
 `SEC. 130. (a) Not later than two years after the enactment of this
 section, the Administrator shall promulgate regulations establishing
 emission limitations, standards of performance, or standards for product
 composition or application for hydrocarbon emissions associated with the
 following categories of sources--
 `(1) commercial solvents;
 `(2) consumer solvents;
 `(3) architectural coatings;
 `(4) pesticide application;
 `(5) traffic marking coatings; and
 `(6) metal parts coatings in military specification applications and
 aerospace industry applications.
 `(b) With respect to existing sources or activities not subject to section
 111 or section 173, the regulations under this section shall require the
 degree of emission reduction or control, at a minimum, achievable through the
 adoption of reasonably available control technology, as defined in section
 171(6). In developing regulations under subsection (a)(1) and (a)(6) of
 this section, the Administrator shall consult with the affected industry,
 including the industries procuring such parts, and with representatives
 of the Department of Defense, the Federal Aviation Administration, and the
 National Aeronautics and Space Administration involved in the establishment
 of specifications for such parts or coatings.
 `(c) For the purposes of this Act, any requirement of a regulation
 promulgated under this section shall be deemed a requirement of an applicable
 implementation plan.'.
 (b) Section 116 of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking `111 or 112'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `111, 112, or 130'.
 (c) Effective January 1, 1996, each major stationary source of hydrocarbons
 shall comply with the standards established under section 111(b) of the Clean
 Air Act for new sources within such class or category, on and after the date
 thirty-five years following the completion of construction of such source.
SEC. 123. MOBILE SOURCE CONTROLS.
VEHICLE EMISSION STANDARDS
 SEC. 301. (a) Section 202(b)(1)(A) of the Clean Air Act is amended by
 adding at the end thereof the following new sentence: `The regulations
 under subsection (a) applicable to emission of hydrocarbons from light-duty
 vehicles and engines manufactured during and after model year 1993 shall
 contain standards which provide that such emissions may not exceed 0.25
 gram per vehicle mile.'.
 (b) Section 202(b)(1)(B) of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding at the
 end thereof the following new sentence: `The regulations under subsection
 (a) applicable to emissions of oxides of nitrogen from light-duty vehicles
 and engines manufactured during and after model year 1991 shall contain
 standards which provide that such emissions may not exceed 0.4 gram per
 vehicle mile.'.
 (c) Section 202(b)(1) of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the
 following new paragraph:
 `(D) The Administrator shall promulgate regulations under subsection (a)
 applicable to emissions of particulates from light-duty vehicles and engines
 manufactured during and after model year 1991, and such regulations shall
 contain standards which provide that such emissions, may not exceed 0.08
 gram per vehicle mile.'.
 (d) Section 202(a)(3) of the Clean Air Act is amended by inserting after
 subparagraph (E) the following new subparagraphs and redesignating succeeding
 subparagraphs accordingly:
 `(F) Regulations under paragraph (1) applicable to emissions of oxides
 of nitrogen from heavy-duty vehicles and engines shall contain standards
 that provide that such emissions shall not exceed 4.0 grams per brake
 horsepower-hour for vehicles manufactured during and after model year 1992
 and that such emissions shall not exceed 1.7 grams per brake horsepower-hour
 for vehicles manufactured during and after model year 1996. Regulations
 applicable to emissions of particulates from heavy-duty diesel vehicles and
 engines shall require that such emissions may not exceed 0.1 gram per brake
 horsepower-hour, beginning in model year 1992 with respect to buses, and in
 model year 1995 with respect to other heavy-duty diesel vehicles and engines.
 `(G) Regulations under paragraph (1) applicable to emissions from light-duty
 trucks and engines manufactured during and after model year 1991 shall
 contain standards that provide that such emissions may not exceed 0.5
 gram per vehicle mile of oxides of nitrogen, 0.5 gram per vehicle mile of
 hydrocarbons, 0.08 gram per vehicle mile of particulates, and 5.0 grams
 per vehicle mile of carbon monoxide. Such regulations shall require that
 light-duty trucks and engines manufactured during and after model year 1991
 comply with the standard for emissions of carbon monoxide regardless of the
 altitude at which they are sold. For the purposes of this subparagraph,
 the terms `light-duty truck' and `light-duty truck and engine' means any
 motor vehicle (including the engine thereof) with a gross vehicle weight
 (as determined under regulations promulgated by the Administrator) of eight
 thousand five hundred pounds or less and a curb weight of six thousand pounds
 or less (as determined under regulations promulgated by the Administrator)
 and which--
 `(i) is designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or
 is a derivation of such a vehicle,
 `(ii) is designated primarily for transportation of persons and has a
 capacity of more than twelve persons, or
 `(iii) has special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation
 and use.
For the purposes of this section, any motor vehicle with a gross vehicle
weight of six thousand pounds or less shall be a light-duty vehicle.'.
 (e) Section 202(a)(3)(H) of the Clean Air Act (as redesignated by this Act)
 is amended by adding the following new sentence: `Regulations under this
 section applicable to exhaust and evaporative emissions from motorcycles
 and motorcycle engines manufactured during and after model year 1993
 shall contain standards that provide that such emissions, in the case of
 motorcycle engines with a displacement of less than seven hundred cubic
 centimeters, may not exceed 2.0 grams per vehicle mile of hydrocarbons,
 17.6 grams per vehicle mile of carbon monoxide, and 2.0 grams per test
 of evaporative emissions, and in the case of motorcycle engines with a
 displacement of seven hundred cubic centimeters or more, may not exceed
 3.6 grams per vehicle mile of hydrocarbons, 17.6 grams per vehicle mile
 of carbon monoxide, and 4.0 grams per test of evaporate emissions.'.
 (f) Section 202(a)(6) of the Clean Air Act is amended to read as follows:
 `(6) Regulations under this section applicable to vehicles manufactured
 during and after model year 1992 shall require the use of onboard
 hydrocarbon control technology to recover emissions from the fueling
 of such vehicles. Such onboard hydrocarbon control technology shall be
 designed to accommodate all available fuels.'.
 (g) Section 209(b)(1) of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking ',
 in the aggregate,'.
 (h)(1) Section 202(b)(1) of the Clean Air Act is further amended by adding
 the following new paragraph:
 `(E) The Administrator shall promulgate regulations under subsection
 (a) applicable to emissions of formaldehyde from light-duty vehicles and
 engines manufactured during and after model year 1991 which may be fueled,
 in whole or in part, by fuels other than gasoline. In no event may such
 regulations permit emissions of formaldehyde at a higher rate than from
 comparable gasoline-fueled vehicles.'.
 (2) Section 202(a)(3) of the Clean Air Act is further amended by adding
 at the end thereof the following new subparagraph:
 `(I) The Administrator shall promulgate regulations under subsection (1)
 applicable to emissions of formaldehyde (i) from heavy-duty vehicles and
 engines and (ii) from light-duty trucks and engines manufactured during and
 after model year 1992 which may be fueled, in whole or in part, by fuels
 other than gasoline. In no event may such regulations permit emissions
 of formaldehyde at a higher rate than from comparable gasoline-fueled
 vehicles.'.
 (i) Section 202 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new subsection:
 `(g) The Administrator shall promulgate regulations applicable to motor
 vehicle and other engines manufactured during and after model year 1992
 that prohibit the manufacture, sale, or introduction into commerce of any
 engine that requires leaded gasoline.'.
 (j) Section 202(a) of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new paragraph:
 `(7)(A) To augment existing regulations controlling carbon monoxide
 emissions under temperatures between 68 and 86 degrees Fahrenheit, the
 Administrator shall prescribe regulations under paragraph (1) of this
 subsection applicable to emissions of carbon monoxide over a temperature
 range of 20 to 68 degrees Fahrenheit from light-duty vehicles and light-duty
 trucks manufactured during and after model year 1991.
 `(B) Regulations under subparagraph (A) shall require a reduction
 of at least 90 per centum from the average emissions from light-duty
 gasoline-fueled vehicles and trucks manufactured in model year 1970 to a
 level not to exceed 6.2 grams per vehicle mile of carbon monoxide at 20
 degrees Fahrenheit. Demonstration of compliance shall be determined under
 regulations promulgated by the Administrator and may be based on testing
 of randomly selected engine families.'.
ASSURANCE OF IN-USE COMPLIANCE
 SEC. 302. (a)(1) Section 202(d)(1) of the Clean Air Act is amended by
 striking `five years or of fifty thousand miles' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `ten years or of one hundred thousand miles'.
 (2) The amendment made by this subsection shall take effect with respect
 to light-duty vehicles and engines manufactured during and after model
 year 1991.
 (b) Section 202 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new subsection:
 `(h) Each emission standard under this section shall apply to and be met
 by each and every vehicle or engine sold, offered for sale, introduced
 into commerce, or imported, and may not be met or complied with by the
 average of the performance of various vehicles, engines, engine families,
 or models manufactured by the same manufacturer.'.
 (c) Section 206(a) of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new paragraph:
 `(4) Not later than one year after the enactment of this paragraph, the
 Administrator shall promulgate regulations adding an idle test mode to
 the Federal Test Procedure for light-duty vehicles as in effect on such
 date of enactment. Such modified test procedure shall be used for the
 certification of light-duty vehicles and engines manufactured during or
 after model year 1991.'.
 (d) Section 206(b)(2)(A) of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the
 following new clause:
 `(iii) A certificate of conformity shall be suspended or revoked under clause
 (i) with respect to a class or subclass of vehicles if that class or subclass
 fails a sampling plan having an acceptance quality level of 10 per centum.'.
 (e)(1) Section 207(c)(1) of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking the
 word `properly' each time it occurs and inserting in lieu thereof `normally'.
 (2) Section 207(c) of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new paragraphs:
 `(4) In making determinations of nonconformity under this subsection,
 the Administrator shall take into account information collected under any
 State vehicle emission control inspection and maintenance program. Any
 State in which such a program is operating may petition the Administrator
 to make a determination of nonconformity under paragraph (1) on the basis
 of information collected in such program. The Administrator shall act upon
 such petition within sixty days of receipt of such petition.
 `(5) For the purpose of paragraph (1), the phrase `normally maintained and
 used' means the maintenance and use ordinarily to be expected in the hands
 of the ultimate purchasers, not necessarily in accordance with instructions
 under paragraph (3), but not including intentional misfueling or intentional
 violations of section 203(a)(3).'.
 (3) Section 207(c) of the Clean Air Act is further amended by adding the
 following new paragraph at the end thereof:
 `(6) Not later than one hundred and eighty days after enactment of the Clean
 Air Standards Attainment Act of 1987, the Administrator shall establish at
 least one testing center in addition to the existing two testing centers,
 which shall be located at a site that represents high altitude conditions,
 to ascertain whether, when in actual use throughout their useful life (as
 determined under section 202(d)), each class or category of vehicle and
 engine to which regulations under section 202 apply conforms to the emission
 standards of such regulations. The Administrator shall, in cooperation with
 the States, conduct routine testing of a representative sample of classes or
 categories of vehicles and engines to which regulations under section 202
 apply. In carrying out such tests, the Administrator shall assure that the
 testing procedures and methods are of sufficient accuracy and consistency to
 carry out the purposes of this section. For the purposes of this paragraph,
 the term `high altitude conditions' refers to high altitude as defined in
 Environmental Protection Agency regulations in effect as of the enactment
 of this Act.'.
 (f)(1) Section 203(a)(3) of the Clean Air Act is amended to read as follows:
 `(3)(A) for any person to remove or render inoperative any device or
 element of design installed on or in a motor vehicle or motor vehicle
 engine in compliance with regulations under this title prior to its sale
 and delivery to the ultimate purchaser, or for any person knowingly to
 remove or render inoperative any such device or element of design after such
 sale and delivery to the ultimate purchaser, except as may be temporarily
 necessary in the course of routine proper maintenance; or
 `(B) for any person to manufacture or sell, or offer to sell, any part
 or component intended for use with, or as part of, any motor vehicle or
 motor vehicle engine, where a principal use of such part or component is
 to bypass, defeat, or render inoperative any device or element of design
 installed on or in a motor vehicle or motor vehicle engine in compliance
 with regulations under this title, and where such part or component is
 being offered for sale for such use or put to such use within the specific
 knowledge of such person; or'.
 (2) Section 205 of the Clean Air Act is amended to read as follows:
 `SEC. 205. (a) Any person who violates paragraph (1), (2), or (4) of
 section 203(a) or any manufacturer or dealer who violates paragraph (3)(A)
 of section 203(a) shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than
 $10,000. Any other person who violates paragraph (3)(A) of section 203(a)
 or any person who violates paragraph (3)(B) of section 203(a) shall be
 subject to a civil penalty of not more than $2,500. Any such violation with
 respect to paragraph (1), (3), or (4) of section 203(a) shall constitute a
 separate offense with respect to each motor vehicle or motor vehicle engine.
 `(b) A civil penalty for a violation of section 203 shall be assessed by
 the Administrator by an order made on the record after opportunity for a
 hearing. In connection with any proceeding under this section the presiding
 officer may issue subpoenas for the attendance and testimony of witnesses
 and the production of papers, books, and documents.
 `(c) In determining the amount of a civil penalty, the Administrator shall
 take into account the gravity of the violation, the size of the violator's
 business, the violator's history of compliance, action taken to remedy
 the violation, and the effect of the penalty on the violator's ability to
 continue in business.
 `(d) If any person fails to pay a civil penalty assessed under this section--
 `(1) after the order making the assessment has become a final order and
 if such person does not file a petition for judicial review of the order
 in accordance with section 307, or
 `(2) after a court in any action brought for judicial review has entered a
 final judgment in favor of the Administrator or the action has otherwise been
 terminated if such person has filed a petition for review under section 307,
the Attorney General shall recover the amount assessed (plus interest
from the date of the expiration of sixty days from the date of the order,
or from the date of such final judgment, as the case may be) in an action
brought in any appropriate district court for the United States. In such an
action, the validity, amount, and appropriateness of such penalty shall not
be subject to review.'.
 (3) Section 203(c) of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking `from
 section 203(a)(3)' the second time it appears.
 (g)(1)(A) Section 207(a)(3) of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking
 the last sentence and inserting in lieu thereof the following: `The term
 `designed for emission control' as used in the preceding sentence means
 a catalytic converter, thermal reactor, trap oxidizer, oxygen sensor,
 air pump, air flow sensor, electronic control unit and other elements
 of a fuel metering system, exhaust gas recirculation system, evaporative
 emission control system, and altitude compensation system, or any other
 component that is first installed on or in a vehicle in mass production
 after the date of enactment of the Clean Air Standards Attainment Act of
 1987 and that is installed for the primary purpose of reducing vehicle
 emissions. Such term shall not include those vehicle components which were
 in general use prior to model year 1968.'.
 (B) The penultimate sentence of section 207(b)(2) of the Clean Air Act
 is amended by striking all after `catalytic converter, thermal reactor,'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `trap oxidizer, oxygen sensor, air pump,
 air flow sensor, electronic control unit and other elements of a fuel
 metering system, exhaust gas recirculation system, evaporative emission
 control system, and altitude compensation system, or any other component
 that is first installed on or in a vehicle in mass production after the
 date of enactment of the Clean Air Standards Attainment Act of 1987 and
 that is installed for the primary purpose of reducing vehicle emissions.'.
 (2) Section 207(c) of the Clean Air Act is further amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(7) The Administrator shall promulgate regulations requiring each State
 which is required to implement a vehicle inspection and maintenance program
 to adopt quality control audits to assure that such inspections detect and
 report to the Administrator any patterns of defects in any manufacturer's
 emission control systems. The Administrator shall annually report to the
 Congress, with respect to each manufacturer, any significant finding of
 repeated or common emission system defects and the actions taken to remedy
 such nonconformity through ordered or voluntary recalls or other actions
 authorized by this Act.'.
 (3)(A) Section 207(c)(3)(B) of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking all
 after `no commercial relationship' and inserting in lieu thereof a period.
 (B) Section 203(a)(4)(C) of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking
 `except as provided in subsection (c)(3) of section 207,'.
 (C) Section 203(a) of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding at the end
 thereof the following: `Paragraph (4)(C) shall not apply to the provision
 of any communication regarding any part, component, or system, or service
 provided without charge under the terms of the purchase agreement.'.
 (4) Section 207(e) of the Clean Air Act is amended by inserting `(1)'
 after `(e)' and by adding the following new paragraph:
 `(2)(A) Each manufacturer of a new motor vehicle shall affix, and each dealer
 shall maintain, on each motor vehicle manufactured during and after model
 year 1991, a label indicating the full cost of applying the warranty under
 subsections (a) and (b) to such new motor vehicle. The form and content
 of such label, and the manner in which such label shall be affixed, shall
 be prescribed by the Administrator by rule, except that each such label
 shall contain, in bold face type, the following statement: `The vehicle
 manufacturer or dealer may offer to sell warranties extending beyond those
 required by sections 207 (a) and (b) of the Clean Air Act and covering the
 emission system or other components or parts of the vehicle. The purchaser of
 the vehicle does not have any obligation to purchase the extended warranty
 from the manufacturer or the dealer. The vehicle purchaser may elect to
 buy an extended warranty from any other vendor of such warranties.'.
 `(B) The Administrator may permit a manufacturer to comply with the
 provisions of subparagraph (A) by permitting such manufacturer to disclose
 the information required under this paragraph on the label required under
 section 3 of the Automobile Information Disclosure Act (15 U.S.C. 1232).
 `(C) A violation of subparagraph (A) shall be treated as a violation of
 section 3 of the Automobile Disclosure Act (15 U.S.C. 1232).
 `(D) The Administrator shall utilize the authorities of section 208 of this
 Act to verify the costs disclosed by each manufacturer under subparagraph
 (A).'.
 (5) Section 207(g) of the Clean Air Act is amended to read as follows:
 `(g) For the purposes of this section, the owner of any motor vehicle or
 motor vehicle engine warranted under this section is responsible in the
 proper maintenance of such vehicle or engine to replace and to maintain,
 at his expense and at any service establishment or facility of his choosing,
 such items as spark plugs, points, condensers, and any other part, item, or
 device related to emission control (but not designed for emission control
 under the last two sentences of subsection (a)(3)), unless such part,
 item, or device is covered by any warranty not required by this Act.'.
REGULATION OF FUELS
 SEC. 303. (a) Section 211 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the
 following new subsections:
 `(h)(1) After July 1, 1991, the sale or introduction into commerce of
 diesel fuel for use in motor vehicles, which fuel has a sulfur content in
 excess of 0.05 per centum by weight, shall be prohibited.
 `(2) The fuel required to be used in certification of heavy-duty diesel
 vehicles and engines manufactured during and after model year 1992 shall
 have a sulfur content that does not exceed 0.05 per centum by weight.
 `(3)(A) Paragraph (1) of this subsection and any regulations promulgated by
 the Administrator thereunder shall not require a small refinery to reduce
 the sulfur content of diesel fuel to 0.05 per centum by weight prior to
 July 1, 1994.
 `(B) For the purpose of this subsection, the term `small refinery' means
 a refinery--
 `(i) the diesel fuel producing capacity of which was in operation or under
 construction at any time during the one-year period immediately preceeding
 October 1, 1988,
 `(ii) which has a crude oil or bona fide feed stock capacity (as determined
 by the Administrator) of one hundred and seventy-five thousand barrels
 per day or less, and
 `(iii) which is owned or controlled by a refiner with a total combined crude
 oil or bona fide feed stock capacity (as determined by the Administrator)
 of three hundred and fifty thousand barrels per day or less.
 `(4) The Administrator shall report to the Congress not later than the
 date six months after the enactment of this subsection, on whether a
 sulfur content in diesel fuel of 0.05 per centum by weight is necessary
 to assure that heavy-duty diesel vehicles and engines can achieve the
 particulate emission standards specified in section 202(a)(3)(F) or in
 regulations under section 202 for model year 1992 and model year 1995,
 or is otherwise warranted for the protection of public health.
 `(i) Not later than two years after the date of enactment of this subsection,
 the Administrator shall promulgate regulations under this subsection
 requiring that the Reid vapor pressure of gasoline sold, offered for
 sale, or introduced into commerce during warm weather months (as defined
 by the Administrator), shall not exceed nine pounds per square inch,
 or with respect to any region established under section 178, any lower
 level requested by the regional commission for such region established
 under section 178(b). After April 1, 1991, no manufacturer or importer
 of gasoline may sell, offer for sale, or introduce into commerce any
 fuel which does not comply with such regulations. For ethanol/gasoline
 blends containing 10 per centum denatured anhydrous ethanol, the Reid
 vapor pressure limitations promulgated pursuant to this subsection shall
 be 1.0 pound per square inch greater than the applicable Reid vapor
 pressure limitations which apply to gasoline: Provided, however, That
 a refiner, distributor, blender, marketer, reseller, carrier, retailer,
 or wholesale purchaser-consumer shall be deemed to be in full compliance
 with the provisions of this subsection and the regulations promulgated
 thereunder if it can demonstrate (by showing receipt of a certification
 or other evidence acceptable to the Administrator) that (I) the gasoline
 portion of the blend complies with the Reid vapor pressure limitations
 promulgated pursuant to this subsection, and (II) the ethanol portion of
 the blend does not exceed its waiver condition under subsection (f)(4).
 `(j)(1) After October 1, 1990, the sale or introduction into commerce of
 gasoline for use in motor vehicles, in any area that is a nonattainment
 area as defined in section 171(2) for carbon monoxide, during the period
 from October 1 to April 1 of each year, which fuel has an oxygen content
 less than 2 per centum oxygen by weight, shall be prohibited.
 `(2) After October 1, 1991, the sale or introduction into commerce of
 gasoline for use in motor vehicles, in any area that is a nonattainment
 area as defined in section 171(2) for carbon monoxide during the period
 from October 1 to April 1 of each year, which fuel has an oxygen content
 less than 3.7 per centum oxygen by weight, shall be prohibited.
 `(3) The Administrator may waive the requirements of paragraph (1) or
 (2) in whole or in part with respect to the level of oxygen content,
 the timing of available oxygenated gasoline, or the use of oxygenated
 fuels, in a specific area, where full implementation of such provision may
 reasonably be anticipated to result in an unacceptable increase in levels
 of other air pollutants.
 `(4) Not later than two years after the enactment of this subsection,
 the Administrator shall submit a report to the Environment and Public
 Works Committee of the United States Senate and the Energy and Commerce
 Committee of the House of Representatives concerning the increased use of
 oxygenated fuels nationwide; and the use of oxygenated fuels with an oxygen
 content by weight greater than 3.7 per centum. Such report shall include
 an analysis of emissions, drivability, fuel volatility and availability
 of gasoline with increased oxygen levels.'.
 (b)(1) Section 211(d) of the Clean Air Act is amended to read as follows:
 `(d)(1) Any person who violates subsection (a), (f), (h), or (j) or the
 regulations prescribed under subsection (c), (h), or (i) or who fails to
 furnish any information required by the Administrator under subsection
 (b) shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $10,000 for each
 and every day of such violation. Such civil penalty shall be assessed by
 the Administrator by an order made on the record after opportunity for a
 hearing. In connection with any proceeding under this section the presiding
 officer may issue subpoenas for the attendance and testimony of witnesses
 and the production of papers, books, and documents.
 `(2) In determining the amount of a civil penalty, the Administration
 shall take into account the gravity of the violation, the size of the
 violator's business, the violator's history of compliance, action taken
 to remedy the violation, and the effect of the penalty on the violator's
 ability to continue in business.
 `(3) If a person fails to pay a civil penalty assessed under this
 subsection--
 `(A) after the order making the assessment has become a final order and
 if such person does not file a petition for judicial review of the order
 in accordance with section 307, or
 `(B) after a court in any action brought for judicial review has entered a
 final judgment in favor of the Administrator or the action has otherwise been
 terminated if such person has filed a petition for review under section 307,
the Attorney General shall recover the amount assessed (plus interest
from the date of the expiration of sixty days from the date of the order,
or from the date of such final judgment, as the case may be) in an action
brought in any appropriate district court for the United States. In such an
action, the validity, amount, and appropriateness of such penalty shall not
be subject to review.'.
 (2) Section 211(c) of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding a new paragraph
 as follows:
 `(5) Regulations under this subsection shall prohibit any person from
 introducing, or causing or allowing the introduction, of a regulated fuel
 or fuel additive into a motor vehicle not designed for such fuel or fuel
 additive.'.
 (b)(1) Effective January 1, 1993 each State shall implement a vehicle
 emission control inspection and maintenance program.
 (2) The term `vehicle emission control inspection and maintenance program'
 as used in section 172(d) means a program to reduce in-use emissions of
 hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide, oxides of nitrogen, and diesel particulates
 from motor vehicles that--
 (A) covers all vehicles regularly operating in the program area;
 (B) includes at a minimum (i) each Metropolitan Statistical Area (as
 defined by the Director of the Bureau of the Census) with a population of
 one hundred thousand or more according to the 1985 Census, containing a
 nonattainment area, and (ii) each area identified under section 178(c)(1);
 (C) requires annual emission testing and necessary adjustment, repair,
 or maintenance;
 (D) requires direct inspection of components of vehicle emission control
 systems (including evidence of misfueling) and, where such components have
 been rendered inoperative, the repair or replacement of such components;
 (E) requires inspection of heavy-duty vehicle exhaust or compliance with
 existing standards for the opacity of such exhaust;
 (F) is operated on a centralized or, with respect to emission testing,
 computerized basis; and
 (G) has a repair cost waiver in the case of failure of at least $200,
 or provides that any repair cost waiver limit shall apply only to costs
 that are not covered by a warranty under section 207.'.
PART D--METHANE
SEC. 123. SHORT TITLE.
 This part may be cited as the `Methane Emissions Elimination Act'.
SEC. 124. METHANE SOURCE IDENTIFICATION AND ASSESSMENT.
 (a) Not later than January 1, 1992, the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency, in consultation with the Administrators of the National
 Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the National Aeronautics and
 Space Administration, shall submit to the Congress a report on the following:
 (1) the contribution of methane to global climate change;
 (2) the sources and sinks of methane;
 (3) the methods of controlling emissions of methane; and,
 (4) the relationship between emissions of methane and concentrations of
 other trace gases, including the hydroxyl radical.
 (b) The Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by--
 (1) inserting in section 4001 immediately before `are environmentally'
 the following: `minimize emissions and other releases to the environment
 and which are otherwise'.
 (2) in section 4002(c)(1) striking the words `reasonable protection of
 ambient air quality' and substituting `and the minimization of emissions
 and other releases to the environment of pollutants including, but not
 limited to, methane or other harmful gases or materials.'
 (3) in section 4003(a) adding a new subsection (7) as follows:
 `(7) The plan shall provide for methods (including prohibitions on the
 nature of materials which are disposed), practices, or technologies which
 minimize emissions of methane and other gases, both during operation and
 after closure.'
 (4) in section 4007(a) inserting immediately before the period at the end
 of the second sentence the following:
`, provided that the Administrator determines that such plan satisfies the
requirements of paragraph (7) of section 4003. Plans which fail to satisfy
such requirements shall be disapproved'.
 (c) Not later than January 1, 1992, the Administrator shall promulgate
 regulations implementing the requirements of this section and requiring
 State plans developed under subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act to
 be amended and either approved or disapproved by July 1, 1993. Any plan
 not affirmatively approved by such date shall be deemed disapproved for
 purposes of the Solid Waste Disposal Act. Amended plans shall require all
 facilities constructed after January 1, 1994 subject to subtitle D to be
 designed, constructed and operated so as to minimize emissions of methane
 and shall require all existing facilities to be modified prior to January
 1, 1994 and thereafter operated so as to minimize emissions of methane
 and other pollutants.
 (c) Effective January 1, 1995 mass releases of methane, whether through
 intentional venting of wells or otherwise, and flaring of methane are
 prohibited.
PART E--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SEC. 125. FEDERAL ENFORCEMENT.
 (a) COMPLIANCE ORDERS- (1) Whenever on the basis of any information the
 Administrator determines that any person has violated or is in violation
 of any requirement of this title, the Administrator may issue an order
 assessing a civil penalty for any past or current violation, requiring
 compliance immediately or within a specified time period, or both, or the
 Administrator may commence a civil action in the United States district
 court in the district in which the violation occurred for appropriate
 relief, including a temporary or permanent injunction.
 (2) Any order issued pursuant to this subsection may include a suspension or
 revocation of any permit issued by the Administrator and shall state with
 reasonable specificity the nature of the violation. Any penalty assessed
 in the order shall not exceed $25,000 per day of noncompliance for each
 violation of a requirement of this Act. In assessing such a penalty, the
 Administrator shall take into account the seriousness of the violation
 and any good faith efforts to comply with applicable requirements.
 (b) PUBLIC HEARING- Any order issued under this section shall become final
 unless, no later than thirty days after the order is served, the person
 or persons named therein request a public hearing. Upon such request the
 Administrator shall promptly conduct a public hearing. In connection with any
 proceeding under this section the Administrator may issue subpenas for the
 attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant papers,
 books, and documents, and may promulgate rules for discovery procedures.
 (c) VIOLATION OF COMPLIANCE ORDERS- If a violator fails to take corrective
 action within the time specified in a compliance order, the Administrator may
 assess a civil penalty of not more than $25,000 for each day of continued
 noncompliance with the order and the Administrator may suspend or revoke
 any permit issued to the violator.
 (d) CRIMINAL PENALTIES- Any person who--
 (1) knowingly exceeds the production limits under section 107 (production
 phase-out for initial list) or section 109 (limitation on ozone depletion
 potential);
 (2) knowingly introduces into interstate commerce a substance that was
 produced in violation of section 107 or section 109;
 (3) knowingly imports a substance listed under section 105, a product
 containing such substance, or a product manufactured with a process
 that uses such substance, in violation of section 111 (certification of
 equivalent programs);
 (4) knowingly introduces into interstate commerce a substance or product
 in violation of section 108 (limitation on use) or section 112 (labeling);
 (5) knowingly omits material information or makes any false material
 statement or representation in any application, record, report, permit,
 or other document filed, maintained, or used for purposes of compliance
 with this title; or
 (6) knowingly produces, transports, distributes, or uses any substance
 listed under section 105, a product containing such substance, or a product
 manufactured with a process that uses such substance, and who knowingly
 destroys, alters, conceals, or fails to file any record, application,
 report, or other document required to be maintained or filed for purposes
 of compliance with this title
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine in accordance with title 18
of the United States Code for each day of violation, or imprisonment not
to exceed two years, or both. If conviction is for a violation committed
after a first conviction of such person under this paragraph, the maximum
punishment under the respective paragraph shall be doubled with respect to
both fine and imprisonment.
 (e) CIVIL PENALTY- Any person who violates any requirement of this title
 shall be liable to the United States for a civil penalty in an amount not
 to exceed $25,000 for each such violation.
 (f) VIOLATIONS- Each day of violation of any requirement of this title
 shall, for purposes of this section, constitute a separate violation. In
 addition, for purposes of section 107 (production phase-out for initial
 list), section 108 (limitation on use), section 109 (limitation on ozone
 depletion potential), and paragraphs (1), (2), (3), and (4) of subsection (d)
 of this section, the production, introduction into commerce, or importation
 of each one hundred pounds of a substance listed under section 105 that
 is in excess of the production limits under section 107 or section 109
 shall constitute a separate violation.
SEC. 126. JUDICIAL REVIEW OF FINAL REGULATIONS AND CERTAIN PETITIONS.
 Any judicial review of any fiscal action of the Administrator pursuant to
 this title shall be in accordance with sections 701 through 706 of title
 5 of the United States Code, except that--
 (1) a petition for review of any final action of the Administrator may be
 filed by any interested person in the Circuit Court of Appeals of the United
 States for the Federal judicial district in which such person resides or
 transacts business, and such petition shall be filed within ninety days from
 the date of such promulgation or denial or after such date if such petition
 is for review based solely on grounds arising after such ninetieth day;
 action of the Administrator with respect to which review could have been
 obtained under this subsection shall not be subject to judicial review in
 civil or criminal proceedings for enforcement; and
 (2) if a party seeking review under this Act applies to the court for
 leave to adduce additional evidence, and shows to the satisfaction of
 the court that the information is material and that there were reasonable
 grounds for the failure to adduce such evidence in the proceeding before
 the Administrator, the court may order such additional evidence (and
 evidence in rebuttal thereof) to be taken before the Administrator, and
 to be adduced upon the hearing in such manner and upon such terms and
 conditions as the court may deem proper; the Administrator may modify
 administrative findings as to the facts, or make new findings, by reason
 of the additional evidence so taken, and shall file with the court such
 modified or new findings and the Administrator's recommendation, if any,
 for the modification or setting aside of the original administrative order,
 with the return of such additional evidence.
SEC. 127. CITIZEN SUITS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b) or (c) of this section,
 any person may commence a civil action on his own behalf--
 (1) against any person (including (a) the United States, and (b) any
 other governmental instrumentality or agency, to the extent permitted
 by the eleventh amendment to the Constitution) who is alleged to be in
 violation of any permit, regulation, condition, requirement, prohibition,
 or order which has become effective pursuant to this title; or
 (2) against the Administrator where there is alleged a failure of the
 Administrator to perform any act or duty under this title which is not
 discretionary with the Administrator.
Any action under paragraph (a)(1) of this subsection shall be brought in the
district court for the district in which the alleged violation occurred. Any
action brought under paragraph (a)(2) of this subsection may be brought in
the district court for the district in which the alleged violation occurred or
the District Court of the District of Columbia. The district court shall have
jurisdiction, without regard to the amount in controversy or the citizenship
of the parties, to enforce the permit, regulation, condition, requirement,
prohibition, or order, referred to in paragraph (1), to order such person
to take such other action as may be necessary, or both, or to order the
Administrator to perform the act or duty referred to in paragraph (2),
as the case may be, and to apply any appropriate civil penalties.
 (b) ACTIONS PROHIBITED- No action may be commenced under subsection (a)(1)
 of this section--
 (1) prior to sixty days after the plaintiff has given notice of the
 violation to--
 (A) the Administrator; and
 (B) to any alleged violator of such permit, regulation, condition,
 requirement, prohibition, or order; or
 (2) if the Administrator has commenced and is diligently prosecuting a civil
 or criminal action in a court of the United States to require compliance
 with such permit, regulation, condition, requirement, prohibition, or order.
In any action under subsection (a)(1), any person may intervene as a matter
of right. Any action respecting a violation under this Act may be brought
under this section only in the judicial district in which such alleged
violation occurs.
 (c) NOTICE- No action may be commenced under paragraph (a)(2) of this section
 prior to sixty days after the plaintiff has given notice to the Administrator
 that he will commence such action. Notice under this subsection shall be
 given in such manner as the Administrator shall prescribe by regulation.
 (d) INTERVENTION- In any action under this section the Administrator,
 if not a party, may intervene as a matter of right.
 (e) COSTS- The court, in issuing any final order in any action brought
 pursuant to this section or section 125, may award costs of litigation
 (including reasonable attorney and expert witness fees) to the prevailing
 or substantially prevailing party, whenever the court determines such an
 award is appropriate. The court may, if a temporary restraining order or
 preliminary injunction is sought, require the filing of a bond or equivalent
 security in accordance with the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
 (f) OTHER RIGHTS PRESERVED- Nothing in this section, or this title, shall
 restrict any right which any person (or class of persons) may have under
 any statute or common law to seek enforcement of any standard or requirement
 or to seek any other relief (including relief against the Administrator).
SEC. 128. SEPARABILITY.
 If any provision of this title, or the application of any provision of
 this title to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the application
 of such provision to other persons or circumstances, and the remainder of
 this title, shall not be affected thereby.
SEC. 129. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS.
 (a) Nothing in this title shall be construed to diminish the authority of
 the Administrator under the Clean Air Act, the Resource Conservation and
 Recovery Act, or the Toxic Substances Control Act, or any other law, or to
 affect the authority of any other department, agency, or instrumentality of
 the United States under any provision of law to promulgate or enforce any
 requirement respecting the control of any substance, practice, process,
 or activity for purposes of protecting the stratosphere or ozone in the
 stratosphere, or the global environment.
 (b) Nothing in this Act shall preclude or deny any State or political
 subdivision thereof from adopting or enforcing any requirement respecting
 the control of any substances, practice, process, or activity for purposes
 of protecting the stratosphere or ozone in the stratosphere or the global
 environment.
SEC. 130. AUTHORITY OF ADMINISTRATOR.
 The Administrator is authorized to prescribe such regulations as are
 necessary to carry out this Act.
TITLE II--GLOBAL CHANGE ADJUSTMENT AND MITIGATION
SEC. 201. SHORT TITLE.
 This title may be cited as the `Environmental Adjustment Act of 1989'.
SEC. 202. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (a) there has been an observed increase in global average temperatures of
 0.7 degrees Centigrade in the last century;
 (b) regardless of any action taken by humanity, there will be further
 global average temperature increases of up to one degree Centigrade;
 (c) such temperature increases will manifest themselves in widespread
 alterations of the current environment;
 (d) such changes may include, but will almost certainly not be limited to,
 the following:
 (1) a rise in the level of oceans, bays, sounds, and other bodies of water,
 with ensuing destruction of natural and manmade structures;
 (2) shifts in patterns of rainfall and soil moisture, resulting in marked
 changes in agricultural productivity;
 (3) changes in the distribution and seasonal availability of fresh water
 resources, including the exhaustion of surface and ground water supplies;
 (4) increased political instability, with the potential for international
 conflict; and,
 (5) accelerated extinction of plant and animal species, including many
 now classified as endangered;
 (e) the adverse effects of some such changes can be mitigated through
 proper long range planning, analysis and, most importantly, action; and
 (f) substantial resources can be saved through the adoption of a program
 to systematically identify the impacts of proposed actions on global
 environmental change and the effects of such changes on the natural
 environment and engineered structures and systems.
SEC. 203. AMENDMENT TO THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT.
 The National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 is amended by adding at the
 end thereof a new title as follows:
`TITLE III--GLOBAL PROTECTION
`Subtitle A--Atmospheric Protection
`SEC. 301. SHORT TITLE.
 `This subtitle may be cited as the `Atmosphere Protection Act of 1989'.
`SEC. 302. FINDINGS.
 `The Congress, recognizing the profound and irreversible and potentially
 catastrophic impacts of humanity's activities on the global atmosphere
 and the world's environment, and the inability of science to predict
 with certainty the consequences for humanity of any such changes, hereby
 declares that each person has a responsibility and obligation to avoid
 contamination of the atmosphere.
`SEC. 303. AUTHORIZATION.
 `The Congress authorizes and directs that, to the fullest extent possible:
 (1) the policies, regulations, and public laws of the United States shall
 be interpreted and administered in accordance with the policies set forth
 in this chapter, and (2) all agencies of the Federal Government shall,
 with respect to pollutants, substances, products, or practices which
 may contribute to global climate change, stratospheric ozone depletion,
 or trace gas modification of the atmosphere--
 `(A) utilize a systematic, interdisciplinary approach which will insure
 the integrated use of the natural and social sciences and the environmental
 design arts in planning and in decisionmaking which may have an impact on
 man's environment;
 `(B) identify and develop methods and procedures, in consultation with
 the Council on Environmental Quality established by subchapter II of this
 chapter, which will assure that environmental contamination is minimized;
 `(C) include in every recommendation on report or proposals for legislation
 and other major actions significantly affecting the quality of the human
 environment, a detailed statement by the responsible official on--
 `(i) the environmental impact of the proposed action,
 `(ii) any adverse environmental effects which cannot be avoided should
 the proposal be implemented,
 `(iii) alternatives to the proposed action,
 `(iv) the relationship between local short-term uses of man's environment
 and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term productivity, and
 `(v) any irreversible and irretrievable commitments of resources which
 would be involved in the proposed action should it be implemented.
Such pollutants and substances shall include, at a minimum, the following:
carbon dioxide, oxides of nitrogen, chlorofluorocarbons, halons, methyl
chloroform, carbon tetrachloride and methane. Prior to making any detailed
statement, the responsible Federal official shall consult with and obtain
the comments of any Federal agency which has jurisdiction by law or special
expertise with respect to any environmental impact involved. Copies of
such statement and the comments and views of the appropriate Federal,
State, and local agencies, which are authorized to develop and enforce
environmental standards, shall be made available to the President, the
Council on Environmental Quality and to the public as provided by section
552 of title 5, and shall accompany the proposal through the existing agency
review processes;
 `(D) study, develop, describe and select appropriate alternatives which
 recognize and minimize the environmental impacts of such proposed action.
 `(E) make available to States, counties, municipalities, institutions,
 and individuals, advice and information useful in restoring, maintaining,
 and enhancing the quality of the environment;
 `(F) initiate and utilize ecological information in the planning and
 development of resource-oriented projects; and
 `(G) assist the Council on Environmental Quality established by subchapter
 II of this chapter.'.
SEC. 204. INVENTORY AND REVIEW OF FEDERAL FACILITIES, HOLDINGS AND ACTIVITIES.
 (a)(1) Not later than January 1, 1991, the President shall direct each agency
 and instrumentality of the executive branch to undertake a systematic and
 comprehensive survey of all Federal lands and structures to ascertain
 their vulnerability to changes associated with changes in the global
 environment. To the maximum extent practicable, such survey shall include
 the lands and structures of State and local government and Indian tribes
 as well. Such survey shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
 (A) public highways, bridges, tunnels, and other transportation structures;
 (B) ports, waterways, locks and dams;
 (C) public buildings and monuments;
 (D) publicly owned treatment works;
 (E) national parks, forests, wilderness areas, wildlife refuges, marine
 sanctuaries, and all other comparable facilities; and,
 (F) national defense facilities, including but not limited to military
 bases and reservations, whether located in the United States or elsewhere.
 (2) Not later than January 1, 1993, the President shall submit a report to
 the Congress containing the results of the survey required by this section
 and recommending both generic and site-specific actions and policies to--
 (A) preclude further public or private investment in areas susceptible to
 loss or damage due to global environmental change;
 (B) minimize and mitigate the loss or damage due to the global environmental
 change which is likely to occur.
SEC. 205. GROUND WATER PROTECTION AND RECHARGE.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) a consequence of global climate change may be the exhaustion of ground
 water resources essential to the maintenance of agricultural productivity,
 the loss of which could jeopardize the national economy and security;
 (2) existing knowledge and technology of artificial recharge of ground
 water is inadequate to meet existing and anticipated future water resource
 problems and to take advantage of possible water resource opportunities;
 (3) a program to support and assure the study and development of artificial
 ground water recharge techniques is essential.
 (b) The Secretary of the Army (hereinafter in this section referred to as
 the `Secretary') acting through the Chief of Engineers, is authorized to
 undertake a program of research, development, and demonstration of artificial
 ground water recharge techniques. The purpose of such program shall be to--
 (A) demonstrate the usefulness of artificial ground water recharge as a
 method for improving ground water quantity and for preventing degradation
 of, or improving ground water quality;
 (B) determine the economic viability of artificial ground water recharge
 as a method of augmenting existing water supplies and improving ground
 water quality on a local or regional basis; and
 (C) develop new and more efficient techniques for the transfer of surface
 water to existing or potential water bearing underground strata.
 (3) In order to advance the purpose of this subsection, the Secretary shall,
 at different locations throughout the United States, design, construct, and
 operate and maintain projects to demonstrate different artificial ground
 water recharge techniques. To the maximum extent feasible, such locations
 shall be chosen to reflect a variety of geological, physical, and chemical
 conditions affecting ground water quality and quantity. In selecting such
 locations, and carrying out such work, the Secretary shall consult and
 coordinate with appropriate State and local governmental agencies.
 (c) COORDINATION- In order to prevent any unnecessary duplication of
 effort, and in order to fully utilize the available expertise of other
 agencies and departments of the United States, the Secretary, in carrying
 out subsection (b) of this section, shall consult and coordinate with the
 United States Geological Survey, the Environmental Protection Agency, the
 Bureau of Reclamation, and other appropriate agencies and departments of
 the United States.
 (d) UTILIZATION OF CURRENT RESOURCES- To the extent possible, activities
 undertaken pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall utilize
 existing or authorized Corps of Engineers water resources projects,
 programs, facilities, and personnel.
 (e) REPORT- Not later than May 30, 1994, the Secretary shall transmit to the
 Committee on Public Works and Transportation of the House of Representatives
 and the Committee on Environment and Public Works in the Senate, a final
 report describing the results of activities undertaken pursuant to this
 section. Not later than 30 months after the date of enactment of this Act,
 the Secretary shall transmit to such Committees of Congress a brief report
 describing the progress of such activities.
 (f) DEFINITIONS- For the purposes of this section, the term--
 (1) `artificial ground water recharge' shall include but not be limited
 to techniques to supplement or otherwise affect ground water supplies such
 as wells, pits, ponds, spreading basins, or gravel chains; and
 (2) `non-Federal sponsor' shall mean a State, city, county, or any other
 entity which derives its powers from a State constitution, or was created
 pursuant to an Act of a State legislature.
 (g) SHORT TITLE- This section shall be known as the `Ground Water Recharge
 Research and Demonstration Act'.
TITLE III--INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
SEC. 301. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (a) complete elimination of chlorofluorocarbons and related chemicals which
 are destroying the Earth's protective ozone layer and adding to global
 temperature increases requires concerted international agreement and action;
 (b) the most effective controls on emissions of carbon dioxide, hydrocarbons,
 oxides of nitrogen, methane and other trace gases which are increasing global
 temperatures will require concerted international agreement and action;
 (c) international agreements to address some aspects of these global
 threats are already underway and include--
 (1) an international protocol to reduce production and use of
 chlorofluorocarbons;
 (2) an international agreement to reduce emissions and transboundary
 transport of oxides of sulfur;
 (3) an international agreement to reduce emissions and transboundary
 transport of oxides of nitrogen.
 (d) in the absence of such international cooperation and agreement,
 the interests of the United States will be directly and substantially
 threatened due to--
 (1) damage to the domestic environment;
 (2) damage to the national economy;
 (3) increased international tension; and
 (4) increased danger of international armed conflict.
SEC. 302. INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION.
 (a) the President is hereby directed to request that the United Nations
 promptly establish a temporary new agency to be headed by the director of
 the United Nations Environmental Program, to--
 (1) coordinate international efforts to minimize and mitigate the effects
 of unavoidable environmental alterations; and,
 (2) provide financial, technical and other assistance to developing
 nations to facilitate improvements in their domestic standards of living
 while minimizing or eliminating contributions to global, continental and
 subcontinental scale environmental damages.
 (b) The President is hereby directed to request that the United Nations
 establish a temporary program of forestation to--
 (1) assist and encourage nations in halting activities which are resulting
 in destruction of the world's forests; and
 (2) undertake a global program of reforestation.
 (c) The President is hereby directed to instruct United States
 representatives to bilateral and multilateral organizations other than the
 United Nations to review the activities of such organizations to assure that
 their actions and programs are consistent with the goals and objectives
 of this Act and, where necessary, to persuade such organizations to adopt
 programs to implement the goals and objectives of this Act.
TITLE IV--DEVELOPMENT OF NON-POLLUTING ENERGY SOURCES
SEC. 401. NATIONAL COMMISSION ON INHERENTLY SAFE NUCLEAR ENERGY.
 (a) There is established a commission to be known as the National Commission
 on Inherently Safe Nuclear Energy (hereinafter in this section referred
 to as the `Commission').
 (b) The duties of the Commission are to--
 (1) assess generally the safety and reliability of the current generation
 of nuclear power plants in the United States;
 (2) review the nuclear industries of other nations which rely heavily
 on nuclear power for the generation of their electricity and report on
 the comparative safety and reliability of the programs of those nations,
 which shall included but not be limited to France, West Germany, Canada,
 Japan, Sweden, and Finland;
 (3) review each incident in the United States related to the operation
 of a nuclear power plant in which there has been personal injury, or a
 significant threat thereof, and report on the causes of consequences of
 such incident, including ways in which it could have been avoided;
 (4) review and assess the nature and magnitude of public opposition and
 concern with the safety of nuclear power and the reasons for such concern
 and opposition;
 (5) evaluate options for responding to the concerns and fears of the public
 in a fashion which allays fears by responding substantively;
 (6) evaluate the suitability of the current structure of the domestic utility
 industry with respect to the safe and efficient operation of nuclear units,
 and alternatives to such current structure;
 (7) identify and evaluate each inherently safe passive control technology
 which might reasonably become available by the year 2010 and examine
 explicitly whether each such technology has the potential to minimize or
 eliminate the risks, whether real or perceived, associated with nuclear
 power by the American public;
 (8) review the difference in operating records of each utility operating
 nuclear generating plants and make specific recommendations for changes
 in technologies, policies, practices, and organizational structure of the
 industry designed to assure that the best of those safety records become
 the standard for the United States industry; and
 (9) conclude and state specifically whether it is possible to develop in
 the United States a nuclear industry capable of supplying not less than
 50 per centum of the Nation's electricity needs through the year 2100 in
 a way which enjoys the trust, confidence and support of the public.
 (c)(1) The Commission shall be composed of nineteen members as follows:
 (A) six appointed by the Speaker of the United States House of
 Representatives from among the Members of the House of Representatives;
 (B) four appointed by the majority leader of the United States Senate from
 among the Members of the United States Senate;
 (C) eight appointed by the President as follows:
 (i) four from among a list of nominations submitted to the President by
 the National Governors Association;
 (ii) one from among a list of nominations submitted to the President by
 the National League of Cities and the United States Conference of Mayors;
 (iii) three from among a list of nominations submitted to the President from
 groups, organizations, or associations of citizens which are representative
 of persons concerned with pollution and environmental issues and which have
 participated, at the State or Federal level, in studies, administration
 proceedings, or litigation (or any combination thereof) relating to nuclear
 energy; and
 (D) the Chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the
original appointment was made. Appointments may be made under this subsection
without regard to section 5311(b) of title 5, United States Code. Not more
than four of the six members appointed under subparagraph (A) and not more
than three of the four members appointed under subparagraph (B) may be of
the same political party. No member appointed under paragraph (C) may be an
officer or employee of the Federal Government.
 (2) If any member of the Commission who was appointed to the Commission
 as a Member of the Congress leaves that office, or if any member of the
 Commission who was appointed from persons who are not officers or employees
 of any government becomes an officer or employee of a government, he may
 continue as a member of the Commission for not longer than the ninety-day
 period beginning on the date he leaves that office or becomes such an
 officer or employee, as the case may be.
 (3) Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
 (4)(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), members of the Commission
 shall each be entitled (subject to appropriations provided in advance)
 to receive the daily equivalent of the maximum annual rate of basic pay
 in effect for grade GS-18 of the General Schedule for each day (including
 travel time) during which they are engaged in the actual performance of
 duties vested in the Commission. While away from their homes or regular
 places of business in the performance of services for the Commission,
 members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including
 per diem in lieu of subsistence, in the same manner as persons employed
 intermittently in Government service are allowed expenses under section
 5703 of title 5 of the United States Code.
 (B) Members of the Commission who are Members of the Congress shall receive
 no additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on
 the Commission.
 (5) Five members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum but two may
 hold hearings.
 (6) The Chairman of the Commission shall be appointed by the Speaker of the
 House of Representatives from among members appointed under paragraph (1)(A)
 of this subsection and the Vice Chairman of the Commission shall be appointed
 by the majority leader of the Senate from among members appointed under
 paragraph (1)(B) of this subsection. The Chairman and the Vice Chairman of
 the Commission shall serve for the life of the Commission unless they cease
 to be members of the Commission before the termination of the Commission.
 (7) The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairman or a majority
 of its members.
 (d)(1) The Commission shall have a Director who shall be appointed by the
 Chairman, without regard to section 5311(b) of title 5, United States Code.
 (2) The Chairman may appoint and fix the pay of such additional personnel
 as the Chairman considers appropriate.
 (3) With the approval of the Commission, the Chairman may procure temporary
 and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5 of the United
 States Code.
 (4) The Commission shall request, and the head of any Executive Branch
 Agency is authorized to detail on a reimbursable nonreimbursable basis,
 any of the personnel of their respective agencies to the Commission to
 assist it in carrying out its duties under this section.
 (e)(1) The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this section, hold
 such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony,
 and receive such evidence, as the Commission considers appropriate.
 (2) Any member or agent of the Commission may, if so authorized by the
 Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by
 this section.
 (3) The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner
 and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the
 United States.
 (4) The Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission on
 a reimbursable basis such administrative support services as the Commission
 may request.
 (5) The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of
 the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this
 section. Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of such
 department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
 (f)(1) The Commission shall transmit to the President and each House of
 the Congress a report not later than October 30, 1995. The report shall
 contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the
 Commission with respect to each item listed in subsection (b), together
 with its recommendations for such legislation; and administrative actions,
 as it considers appropriate.
 (g) The Commission shall cease to exist on January 1, 1996.
 (h) There is authorized to be appropriated for the fiscal year 1990 through
 1996 not to exceed $50,000,000 to carry out this section.
SEC. 402. NATIONAL GOAL.
 It is hereby established as a national goal of the United States to derive
 50 per centum of the national supply of energy from nonpolluting technologies
 and practices by the year 2000 and 100 per centum by the year 2050.