S 2964 IS
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2964
To provide television broadcast time without charge to candidates for Federal
elective office and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
August 2 (legislative day, JULY 10), 1990
Mr. ROTH introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
A BILL
To provide television broadcast time without charge to candidates for Federal
elective office and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That section 315(a) of the
 Communications Act of 1934 is amended to read as follows:
 `SEC. 315. (a) ALLOWANCE OF TELEVISION BROADCAST TIME FOR CERTAIN
 CANDIDATES; CENSORSHIP PROHIBITION- Each licensee operating a television
 broadcasting station shall make available without charge to any legally
 qualified candidate in the general election for the office of President,
 Vice President, Senator or Representative an amount of broadcast time,
 determined by the Commission under subsection (d), for use in his or
 her campaign for election, subject to the conditions and limitations of
 subsection (e). With respect to the Office of President and Vice President,
 each such licensee affiliated with a national broadcasting network, shall
 coordinate with such network in making broadcast time available to candidates
 for such offices, as determined by the Commission under subsection (d). No
 licensee shall have power of censorship over the material broadcast under
 the provisions of this section.
 `(b) EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES REQUIREMENT; CENSORSHIP PROHIBITION; ALLOWANCE OF
 STATION USE- Except in those circumstances to which subsection (a) applies,
 if any licensee shall permit any person who is a legally qualified candidate
 for any public office to use a broadcasting station, he or she shall afford
 equal opportunities to all other such candidates for that office in the
 use of such broadcasting station: Provided, That such licensee shall have
 no power of censorship over the material broadcast under the provisions
 of this section. No obligation is imposed under this subsection upon any
 licensee to allow the use of its station by any such candidate.
 `(c) NEWS APPEARANCES EXCEPTION; PUBLIC INTEREST; PUBLIC ISSUES DISCUSSION
 OPPORTUNITIES- Appearance by a legally qualified candidate on any--
 `(1) bona fide newscast;
 `(2) bona fide news interviews;
 `(3) bona fide news documentary (if the appearance of the candidate is
 incidental to the presentation of the subject or subjects covered by the
 news documentary); or
 `(4) on-the-spot coverage of bona fide events (including but not limited
 to political conventions and activities incidental thereto);
shall not be deemed to be use of a broadcasting station within the meaning of
subsection (a) or (b). Nothing in the foregoing sentence shall be construed
as relieving broadcasters, in connection with the presentation of newscasts,
news interviews, new documentaries, and on-the-spot coverage of news events,
from the obligation imposed upon them under this chapter to operate in the
public interest and to afford reasonable opportunity for the discussion of
conflicting views on issues of public importance.
 `(d) RULES AND REGULATIONS REGARDING ALLOWANCE OF TELEVISION BROADCAST
 TIME FOR CERTAIN CANDIDATES- The Commission shall determine the amount of
 television broadcast time that a legally qualified candidate may receive
 under subsection (a) on the basis of both the voting age population residing
 in the jurisdiction represented by the office that is the object of the
 candidacy and the amount of television broadcast time that an incumbent
 or a challenger may need to make a complete presentation of views to the
 electorate. The broadcast time made available under subsection (a) shall
 be made available during the 45-day period preceding the general election
 for such office. The Commission shall ensure that the television broadcast
 time made available under subsection (a) shall be made available fairly,
 equitably, and at hours of the day which reflect television viewing habits
 and current campaign practices. A legally qualified candidate of a party
 other than a party which obtained 5 percent or more of the popular vote
 in the last presidential election may, by regulation of the Commission,
 be granted such lesser allocation of broadcast time in proportion to
 the amount of contributions under $250 such a candidate has received
 when compared to such contributions received by candidates of the major
 parties. The Commission shall require licensees operating television
 broadcasting stations to enter into a pooling agreement to ameliorate any
 disparate impact on particular licensees.
 `(e) CONDITIONS AND LIMITATIONS- The entitlement of any legally qualified
 candidate to television broadcast time under subsection (a) is conditional
 upon (1) foregoing the purchase or acceptance of any additional amount
 of television broadcast time during the period that such time is made
 available with respect to such candidacy pursuant to subsection (a) and
 (2) agreeing to limit the use of the television broadcast time provided
 to the personal presentation of his or her views in speeches, interviews,
 debates or similar formats.'.
 SEC. 2. Section 315 of the Communications Act of 1934 is further amended
 as follows: (1) in subsection (b) by striking the phrase `The charges'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `Except to the extent that the provisions
 of subsection (a) apply, the charges'; (2) by redesignating subsections
 (b), (c), and (d) as (f), (g), and (h) respectively; and (3) by adding
 `generally' after `Rules and regulations' in redesignated subsection (h).
 SEC. 3. Subsection (a)(7) of section 312 of the Communications Act of 1934,
 as amended, is amended to read as follows: `(7) for willful or repeated
 failure to comply with the provisions of section 315 of this title.'
 SEC. 4. Subsection (8) of section 301 of the Federal Election Campaign
 Act of 1971, as amended, relating to exclusions from the definition
 of contributions, is amended as follows: (1) at the end of paragraph
 (B)(xiii) by striking the semicolon; (2) at the end of paragraph (B)(xiv)
 by striking the period and inserting `; and' in lieu thereof; and (3) at
 the end of paragraph (B) by adding the following: `(xv) the value of any
 television broadcast time provided without charge by a licensee pursuant
 to section 315(a) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended.'
 SEC. 5. Subsection (9) of section 301 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of
 1971, as amended, relating to exclusions from the definition of expenditures,
 is amended as follows: (1) by inserting after paragraph (B)(i) the following:
 `(ii) the provision without charge of any television broadcast time by
 a licensee pursuant to section 315(a) of the Communications Act of 1934,
 as amended;' and (2) by redesignating subsequent subparagraphs accordingly.
 SEC. 6. The Federal Communications Commission shall study the application
 of section 315(a) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by this
 Act, to the first general election campaign conducted under the provisions
 of that section and shall report the results of that study, together with
 recommendations, including recommendations for legislation, not later than
 the first day of March following such general election. The study shall
 also evaluate the desirability and feasibility of extending the provisions
 of section 315(a) of the Communications Act of 1934 to primary and other
 election campaigns.
 SEC. 7. The Federal Communications Commission shall promulgate rules and
 regulations to implement this Act no later than 180 days after the date of
 enactment of this Act. Sections 1 and 2 of this Act shall not take effect
 until such rules and regulations are promulgated.