HR 6119 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 6119
To amend the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 to waive the
preemption requirements of that Act to allow States to provide for State
universal health plans, State risk pools for the medically uninsurable,
or prospective payment systems and to impose State provider taxes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
October 3, 1992
Mr. MAZZOLI introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Education and Labor
A BILL
To amend the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 to waive the
preemption requirements of that Act to allow States to provide for State
universal health plans, State risk pools for the medically uninsurable,
or prospective payment systems and to impose State provider taxes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `State Health Care Financing Equity Act
 of 1992'.
SEC. 2. WAIVER OF ERISA PREEMPTION FOR STATE UNIVERSAL HEALTH PLANS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 514(b) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act
 of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1144(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new paragraph:
 `(9)(A) Upon application by a State, subsection (a) shall not apply
 to any State program that the Secretary finds to be a qualified State
 health financing program. The Secretary shall make the finding under this
 subparagraph within 60 days of receipt of the written determination of
 the Secretary of Health and Human Services under subparagraph (C).
 `(B) For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `qualified State health
 financing program' means a State program which--
 `(i) imposes a tax or premium surcharge on, or requires participation
 in a risk pool for the medically uninsurable by, health plans (including
 self-insured health plans) doing business within the State,
 `(ii) provides that--
 `(I) the tax, surcharge, or participation described in clause (i) is
 imposed in a manner that does not discriminate between health plans on
 the basis of their types or sizes, regardless of whether such plans are
 subject to this Act,
 `(II) in the case of a State plan to provide a State risk pool for the
 medically uninsurable, deductions, credits, or exclusions are applied to
 adjust the taxes, surcharge, or participation described in clause (i) for
 any health plan to account for the extent to which limitations in coverage
 or benefits under such plan place individuals who are, or could become,
 covered under the plan at risk for becoming medically uninsurable, and
 `(III) no deductions, credits, or exclusions (other than those required
 under subclause (II)) are allowed which would directly or indirectly vary
 the level of tax, surcharge, or participation described in clause (i)
 among different types and sizes of health plans, and
 `(iii) uses the proceeds from the tax, surcharge, or participation described
 in clause (i) to finance a State risk pool for the medically uninsurable,
 or to finance a State plan the purpose of which is to significantly improve
 and expand access of State residents to efficient and cost effective health
 care services.
 `(C)(i) The Secretary shall not make a finding under subparagraph (A)
 with respect to any State program unless the Secretary of Health and
 Human Services, after conducting a review of such program, issues a written
 determination that the State plan--
 `(I) has sufficient resources and capacity to accomplish the goals of the
 plan applicable under subparagraph (B)(iii), and
 `(II) meets such other related standards as the Secretary of Health and
 Human Services may prescribe.
 `(ii) The Secretary of Health and Human Services may conduct studies,
 and collect, analyze, and publish data and information, relating to the
 implementation and effectiveness of State plans referred to the Secretary
 for review under clause (i).
 `(iii) Not later than 3 years after the third State plan is approved under
 this paragraph, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall publish
 a report on the impact and effectiveness of the first 3 plans so approved
 in achieving plan goals, including recommendations as to how such plans,
 or administrative procedures thereunder, may be improved.
 `(D) If a plan approved under this paragraph is substantially modified,
 such modifications must be approved under this paragraph in the same manner
 as the plan in order for the approval of the plan to remain in effect.'
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by this section shall apply to
 applications filed on and after the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 3. STATE PROVIDER TAXES AND PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT SYSTEMS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 514(b) of the Employee Retirement Income Security
 Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1144(b)), as amended by section 2, is amended by
 adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
 `(10)(A) Nothing in subsection (a) or any other provision of this Act
 shall be treated as prohibiting a State from imposing a nondiscriminatory
 broad-based health care tax.
 `(B) For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `nondiscriminatory
 broad-based health care tax' means any tax that--
 `(i) either--
 `(I) is related to health care items or services (or to the provision of,
 the authority to provide, or payment for, such items or services), or
 `(II) is not limited to such items or services but provides for the treatment
 of persons providing or paying for such items or services that is different
 from the treatment provided to other persons,
 `(ii) with respect to any class of health care items or services, is imposed
 at least with respect to all items or services in the class furnished by
 all non-Federal, nonpublic providers in the State (or, in the case of a
 tax imposed by a unit of local government, the area over which the unit
 has jurisdiction) or is imposed with respect to all non-Federal, nonpublic
 providers in the class or such area; and
 `(iii) is imposed uniformly (as determined under subparagraph (C)).
 `(C) For purposes of subparagraph (B)(iii), a tax shall be treated as
 imposed uniformly if--
 `(i) in the case of a tax consisting of a licensing fee or similar tax on
 a class of health care items or services (or providers of such items or
 services), the amount of the tax imposed is the same for every provider
 providing items or services within the class;
 `(ii) in the case of a tax consisting of a licensing fee or similar tax
 imposed on a class of health care items or services (or providers of
 such services) on the basis of the number of beds (licensed or otherwise)
 of the provider, the amount of the tax is the same for each bed of each
 provider of such items or services in the class; and
 `(iii) in the case of a tax based on revenues or receipts with respect
 to a class of health care items or services (or of providers of items or
 services), the tax is imposed at a uniform rate for all items and services
 (or providers of such items or services) in the class on all the gross
 revenues or receipts, or net operating revenues, relating to the provision
 of all such items or services (or of all such providers) in the State (or,
 in the case of a tax imposed by a unit of local government within the State,
 in the area over which the unit has jurisdiction).
A tax imposed with respect to a class of health care items and services
shall not be treated as being imposed uniformly if the tax provides for any
credits, exclusions, deductions, or discounts for different types of plans,
including discounts for plans that are not subject to this Act or discounts
for plans based on the size of their plan.
 `(D) For purposes of subparagraph (B)(i)(I), a tax shall be treated as
 related to health care items or services if at least 80 percent of the
 burden of the tax falls on health care providers.
 `(E) For purposes of this paragraph, the term `tax' includes any licensing
 fee, assessment, or other mandatory payment.
 `(11)(A) Nothing in subsection (a) or any other provision of this Act shall
 be treated as prohibiting a State from setting hospital rates prospectively,
 or from using a Diagnosis Related Group payment methodology that either--
 `(i) includes a charge for uncompensated care, or
 `(ii) includes adjustments to account for costs incurred by statutes and
 regulations that affect the delivery of health care.
 `(B) For purposes of subparagraph (A)(i), the term `uncompensated care'
 includes, but is not limited to, care for the indigent and expenses that
 result from bad debts.
 `(C) For purposes of subparagraph (A)(ii), the term `statutes and regulations
 that affect the delivery of health care' includes titles XVIII and XIX of
 the Social Security Act, and regulations thereunder.'
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by this section shall apply to
 taxes imposed, and rates and methodologies established, after the date of
 the enactment of this Act.