S 1081 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1081
To amend and reauthorize the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
May 15 (legislative day, APRIL 25), 1991
Mr. BAUCUS (for himself, Mr. CHAFEE, Mr. MITCHELL, Mr. LAUTENBERG,
Mr. LIEBERMAN, and Mr. DURENBERGER) introduced the following bill; which
was read twice and referred to the Committee on Environment, and Public Works
A BILL
To amend and reauthorize the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS
 SECTION 1. (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Water Pollution
 Prevention and Control Act of 1991'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS-
Sec. 1. Short title and table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings and purposes.
Sec. 3. Water quality research.
Sec. 4. Technology demonstration program.
Sec. 5. State grant assistance.
Sec. 6. Wastewater training and certification.
Sec. 7. Effluent guidelines.
Sec. 8. Water quality standards.
Sec. 9. Priority waters.
Sec. 10. Water quality monitoring.
Sec. 11. Toxic pollution control.
Sec. 12. Pretreatment program.
Sec. 13. Enforcement.
Sec. 14. Toxic reduction action program.
Sec. 15. Nonpoint source pollution.
Sec. 16. National river assessment and protection program.
Sec. 17. Permit program modifications.
Sec. 18. Biological discharge criteria.
Sec. 19. Interstate dispute resolution.
Sec. 20. Combined sewer overflows.
Sec. 21. Permit fees.
Sec. 22. Employee protection.
Sec. 23. Reports to Congress.
Sec. 24. Indian water quality programs.
Sec. 25. Environmental audits.
Sec. 26. United States-Mexico border water quality.
Sec. 27. Authorizations.
Sec. 28. State revolving loan funds.
FINDINGS AND PURPOSES
 SEC. 2. (a) PURPOSES- The purposes of this Act are:
 (1) To expand and strengthen existing programs for control of serious and
 continuing water pollution problems throughout the Nation.
 (2) To establish new initiatives for the control and elimination of water
 pollution, with special emphasis on the prevention of water pollution.
 (3) To provide for the more effective control of municipal and industrial
 point sources of pollution, including the improved implementation of
 effluent guidelines, water quality standards, and discharge permit programs.
 (4) To provide for the more effective control of significant and widespread
 water quality degradation resulting from nonpoint sources of pollution in
 cooperation with other Federal agencies, States, and local governments.
 (5) To assure that water pollution control programs more comprehensively
 protect the ecological integrity of waterbodies, including the maintenance
 and restoration of aquatic habitat, through enhanced protection of the
 physical and biological components of waterbodies.
 (6) To authorize adequate funding for construction of water pollution
 control facilities and for effective administration of water pollution
 control programs.
 (b) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) Despite significant progress in water pollution control over the past
 twenty years, serious water quality problems persist throughout the Nation.
 (2) The United States Environmental Protection Agency reports that, of the
 45 per centum of waters assessed throughout the Nation, 30 per centum do
 not meet water quality standards or designated uses.
 (3) The United States Environmental Protection Agency reports that 25 per
 centum of the Nation's freshwater lakes are impaired and another 20 per
 centum are threatened with impairment.
 (4) The Office of Technology Assessment reports that the overall health
 of coastal waters is `declining or threatened' and that `in the absence
 of additional measures to protect our marine waters, the next few decades
 will witness new or continued degradation in many estuaries and coastal
 waters around the country'.
 (5) Scientists report that the greatest threat to the biological
 integrity of aquatic ecosystems is the physical alteration and loss of
 habitats caused by pollutant inputs of sediments, nutrients, and toxic
 substances. Destruction of these areas degrades spawning habitats, limits
 fish and wildlife diversity, and harms human health through bioaccumulation
 of persistent contaminants in aquatic food chains.
 (6) More than 10 per centum of municipalities continue to discharge untreated
 or undertreated sewage to receiving waters and over one thousand communities
 discharge overflows of untreated sewage from combined sewers during storms.
 (7) Industries discharge large amounts of conventional and toxic pollutants
 to waters throughout the Nation, including an estimated three hundred
 and sixty million pounds of toxic pollutants directly to receiving waters
 and five hundred and seventy million pounds of toxic pollutants to public
 sewage systems per year.
 (8) Pollution from diffuse or nonpoint sources, such as runoff from city
 streets, construction sites, and agricultural lands, is the source of 55
 per centum of the water quality impairments throughout the Nation.
 (9) Restoration of water quality and prevention of future water pollution
 problems will require improving the scientific basis for water protection
 programs, expanding and strengthening existing efforts, and implementing
 new programs to address emerging problems.
 (10) Strengthened research of water quality and pollution prevention and
 control problems and increased development of more effective and efficient
 pollution control technology are required to meet remaining water pollution
 challenges.
 (11) Expanded and better coordinated water quality monitoring activities
 by States and the Federal Government are needed to improve the quality of
 information on water quality trends and conditions.
 (12) The Federal Government should expand the number and type of pollutant
 criteria and standards, including development of criteria and standards
 for lakes, coastal waters, and aquatic sediment.
 (13) Effluent guidelines should be developed for additional industrial
 categories and existing guidelines should be revised to reflect greater
 understanding of the sources of water pollution and improved pollution
 control technologies.
 (14) Discharges of toxic pollutants from industrial and other sources
 to publicly owned treatment works are inadequately regulated, monitored,
 and enforced, causing permit violations by and damage to municipal waste
 treatment plants, and controls on these sources must be strengthened.
 (15) Discharge permits must assure that industrial and municipal dischargers
 implement reasonable measures to prevent pollution and reduce use of toxic
 pollutants within these facilities.
 (16) Increased efforts are required to control nonpoint sources of
 pollution, including development of minimum best management practices,
 improved coordination with existing agriculture programs, control of
 nonpoint pollution on Federal lands and substantial expansion of grant
 assistance to States.
 (17) The enforcement authorities of the Act should be strengthened to
 improve compliance with discharge permits and other requirements of the
 law and to enhance the ability of Federal and State governments and private
 citizens to undertake appropriate enforcement actions.
 (18) The level of funding available to the Environmental Protection Agency
 and States for the administration of the National Pollutant Discharge
 Elimination System is inadequate and additional financial resources must
 be provided.
 (19) Support for State revolving loans funds at the level authorized in
 the 1987 amendments to the Clean Water Act should be assured to assist
 financing of sewage treatment and related water quality projects.
WATER QUALITY RESEARCH
 SEC. 3. (a) GENERAL AUTHORITY- (1) Section 104(a) of the Federal Water
 Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1254) is amended to read as follows:
 `(a)(1) The Administrator, in cooperation with Federal, State, and
 local agencies and public or private institutions, organizations, or
 individuals, shall conduct and promote a comprehensive program of research,
 investigations, experiments, surveys, and studies relating to the causes,
 sources, effects, extent, prevention, detection, and correction of water
 pollution.
 `(2) In carrying out the provisions of this section, the Administrator is
 authorized to--
 `(A) collect and make available, through publications and other appropriate
 means, the results of research pursuant to this section;
 `(B) encourage, cooperate with, and render technical services to pollution
 control agencies and other appropriate public or private institutions,
 organizations, and individuals;
 `(C) conduct investigations concerning the pollution of any navigable
 waters and report on the results of such investigations;
 `(D) conduct research and make surveys concerning the nationwide extent
 and seriousness of a pollutant or class of pollutants in water;
 `(E) develop, assess, collect and disseminate basic data on chemical,
 physical, and biological effects of varying water quality and other
 information pertaining to water pollution and the prevention, reduction,
 and elimination thereof;
 `(F) develop effective and practical processes, methods, and prototype
 devices for the prevention, reduction, and elimination of pollution;
 `(G) make grants to State water pollution control agencies, interstate
 agencies, other public or nonprofit private agencies, institutions,
 organizations, and individuals to conduct research pursuant to this section;
 `(H) contract with public or private agencies, institutions, organizations,
 and individuals, without regard to sections 3648 and 3709 of the Revised
 Statutes (31 U.S.C. 529; 41 U.S.C. 5) to conduct research pursuant to
 this section;
 `(I) utilize, on a reimbursable basis, facilities and personnel of Federal
 scientific laboratories and research centers;
 `(J) convene conferences concerning water quality and water pollution
 control research issues, giving opportunity for interested persons to be
 heard and to present papers at such conferences; and
 `(K) acquire secret processes, technical data, inventions, patent
 applications, patents, licenses, and an interest in lands, plants, equipment
 and facilities, and other property rights by purchase, license, lease,
 or donation.'.
 (b) WATER RESEARCH ADVISORY COMMITTEE- Section 104(b) of the Federal Water
 Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1254) is amended to read as follows:
 `(b)(1) There is hereby established a National Water Quality Research
 Committee to advise the Administrator in the implementation of the
 authorities of this section and other related research activities of the
 Federal Government and State governments.
 `(2) The Research Committee shall--
 `(A) identify major research needs and scientific uncertainties regarding
 the causes, effects, extent, prevention, reduction, and elimination of
 water pollution;
 `(B) assure, to the extent practicable, that research conducted pursuant
 to this section meets the needs of State and local governments; and
 `(C) facilitate, to the extent practicable, the coordination of research
 programs pursuant to this section and related research programs of other
 Federal agencies and State and local government.
 `(3) The Research Committee shall consist of--
 `(A) a representative of the Administrator, who shall chair the Committee;
 `(B) a representative of the Secretary of the Department of Agriculture;
 `(C) a representative of the Secretary of the Department in which the
 Coast Guard is operating;
 `(D) a representative of the Secretary of the Department of Health and
 Human Services;
 `(E) five representatives of State environmental agencies, as determined
 by the Administrator; and
 `(F) five representatives of the academic community, as determined by
 the Administrator.
 `(4) Members appointed pursuant to subparagraphs (3) (E) and (F) shall
 serve terms of not to exceed three years, except that the Administrator
 may stipulate an alternate term of not less than two years and not more
 than four years at the time of appointment.
 `(5) Members appointed pursuant to paragraph (3)(F) shall, while attending
 meetings of the Committee, be compensated at a rate to be fixed by the
 Administrator.
 `(6) The Research Committee shall submit to the Congress on January 1 of each
 year after the date of enactment of this subsection a report which shall--
 `(A) describe the research conducted pursuant to this section in the
 preceding year and the results of such research;
 `(B) identify the highest priority research needs for the following five-year
 period, identify the approximate cost of such research, and the relationship
 of such research to the goals and objectives of this Act;
 `(C) describe research activities pursuant to this section and related
 research authorities planned for the coming year and the extent to which
 such research will address the priority research needs identified in
 subparagraph (B);
 `(D) identify opportunities to improve coordination of research among
 Federal agencies and the States.'.
 (c) POLLUTANT EFFECT ON SHELLFISH, FISH AND WILDLIFE- Section 104(c) of
 the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1254(c)) is amended by
 inserting `(1)' after `(c)' and adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(2) The Administrator, in cooperation with the Director of the United
 States Fish and Wildlife Service, the Administrator of the National Oceanic
 and Atmospheric Administration, and officials of other appropriate Federal
 agencies, shall conduct research and investigations of, and survey the
 results of other scientific studies on, the harmful effects on the health
 of fish, shellfish, and wildlife caused by pollutants in water.'.
 (d) AUTHORIZATION- Section 104(u) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1254(u)) is amended by inserting `(1)' after `(u)' and adding
 at the end thereof the following new paragraphs:
 `(2) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Administrator for carrying
 out the provisions of this section such sums as may be necessary for fiscal
 year 1991 and $80,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1992 through 1998.
 `(3) Of sums appropriated pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection in
 each fiscal year, the Administrator shall reserve not less than $500,000
 for the operation of the small flows clearinghouse established pursuant
 to subsection (q)(3) of this section.
 `(4) Of sums appropriated pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection in
 each fiscal year, the Administrator shall reserve not less than $500,000
 for the support and operation of the Research Committee established pursuant
 to subsection (b) of this section.'.
 (e) TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS- (1) Section 104(c) of the Federal Water Pollution
 Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1254(c)) is amended by striking `Health, Education,
 and Welfare' and inserting in lieu thereof `Health and Human Services'.
 (2) Section 104(j) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1254(j)) is amended by striking `The Secretary of the Department
 in which the Coast Guard is operating' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `The Administrator, in cooperation with the Secretary of the Department
 in which the Coast Guard is operating,'.
 (3) Section 104(p) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1254(p)) is amended by striking all after `pollution from' and
 inserting in lieu thereof `nonpoint sources of pollution, including
 agriculture, urban runoff, construction activities, hydromodification,
 forest harvesting activities, mine runoff, and salt-water intrusion.' and
 amending the title appropriately.
 (4) Section 104(q) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1254(q)) is amended by striking `subsection (e)(2) of'.
 (5) Section 104(r) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1254(r)) is amended by striking `is authorized to make grants to
 colleges and universities to'; inserting in lieu thereof the following:
 `shall conduct a comprehensive program of'; and amending the title
 appropriately.
 (6) Section 104(s) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1254(s)) is amended by--
 (A) striking: `The Administrator is authorized to make grants to one or more
 institutions of higher education (regionally located and to be designated as
 `River Studies Centers') for the purpose of conducting and reporting on' and
 inserting in lieu thereof the following: `The Administrator, in cooperation
 with the Director of the United States Geological Survey, other Federal
 agencies, and the States, shall conduct research, investigation, and';
 (B) striking the last sentence; and
 (C) amending the title appropriately.
 (7) Section 104(t) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1254(t)) is amended by striking `, but not later than 270 days
 after the date of enactment of this subsection,'.
TECHNOLOGY DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM
 SEC. 4. Section 105 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act is amended
 to read as follows:
`TECHNOLOGY DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM
 `SEC. 105. (a) IN GENERAL- The Administrator shall establish a program
 to develop and demonstrate practices, methods, technologies, or processes
 which may be effective in prevention and control of industrial and municipal
 sources or potential sources of water pollution.
 `(b) GRANT ASSISTANCE- (1) The Administrator may provide grants to public
 agencies and authorities, nonprofit organizations and institutions and enter
 into cooperative agreements or contracts with other persons to develop
 or demonstrate water pollution control practices, methods, technologies,
 or processes.
 `(2) The Administrator may assist demonstration activities only if--
 `(A) such demonstration activity will serve to demonstrate a new or
 significantly improved practice, method, technology, or process or the
 feasibility and cost effectiveness of an existing, but unproven, practice,
 method, technology, or process and will not duplicate other Federal,
 State, local or commercial efforts to demonstrate such practice, method,
 technology, or process;
 `(B) such demonstration activity meets the requirements of this section
 and serves the purposes of this Act;
 `(C) the demonstration of such practice, technology, or process will comply
 with all other laws and regulations for the protection of human health,
 welfare, and the environment; and
 `(D) in the case of a contract or cooperative agreement, such practice,
 method, technology, or process would not be adequately demonstrated by State,
 local, or private persons or in the case of an application for financial
 assistance by a grant, such practice, method, technology, or process is
 not likely to receive adequate financial assistance from other sources.
 `(3) The demonstration program established by this subsection shall
 include solicitations for demonstration projects, selection of suitable
 demonstration projects from among those proposed, supervision of such
 demonstration projects, evaluation of the results of demonstration projects,
 and dissemination of information on the effectiveness and feasibility of
 the practices, methods, technologies and processes which are proven to
 be effective.
 `(4) Within one hundred and eighty days after the date of enactment of
 the Water Pollution Prevention and Control Act of 1991, and no less often
 than every twelve months thereafter, the Administrator shall publish a
 solicitation for proposals to demonstrate, by prototype or at full-scale,
 practices, methods, technologies, and processes which are (or may be)
 effective in controlling sources or potential sources of water pollution. The
 solicitation notice shall prescribe the information to be included in the
 proposal, including technical and economic information derived from the
 applicant's own research and development efforts, and other information
 sufficient to permit the Administrator to assess the potential effectiveness
 and feasibility of the practice, method, technology, or process proposed
 to be demonstrated.
 `(5) Any person and any public or private nonprofit entity may submit an
 application to the Administrator in response to the solicitations required
 by paragraph (4) of this section. The application shall contain a proposed
 demonstration plan setting forth how and when the project is to be carried
 out and such other information as the Administrator may require.
 `(6) In selecting practices, methods, technologies or processes to be
 demonstrated, the Administrator shall fully review the applications submitted
 and shall evaluate each project according to the following criteria--
 `(A) the potential for the proposed practice, method, technology, or
 process to effectively control sources or potential sources of pollutants
 which present risks to human health;
 `(B) the potential for the practice, technology, method or process to
 contribute to the advancement of pollution control for an industry for
 which an effluent guideline is published pursuant to section 304;
 `(C) the potential for the practice, technology, method, or practice to
 effectively prevent the discharge of pollutants which present risks to
 human health and the environment;
 `(D) the potential for the practice, technology, method or process to
 contribute to the advancement of treatment of sewage or the management of
 sewage sludge;
 `(E) the potential for the practice, technology, method or process to
 contribute to reductions of pollution associated with nonpoint sources
 of pollution;
 `(F) the capability of the person or persons proposing the project to
 successfully complete the demonstration as described in the application;
 `(G) the likelihood that the demonstrated practice, method, technique, or
 process could be applied in other locations and circumstances to control
 sources or potential sources of pollutants, including considerations of
 cost, effectiveness, and technological feasibility;
 `(H) the extent of financial support from the persons to accomplish the
 demonstration as described in the application; and
 `(I) the capability of the person or persons proposing the project to
 disseminate the results of the demonstration or otherwise make the benefits
 of the practice, method, or technology widely available to the public in
 a timely manner.
 `(7) The Administrator shall select or refuse to select a project for
 demonstration under this subsection in an expeditious manner. In the case of
 a refusal to select a project, the Administrator shall notify the applicant
 of the reasons for the refusal.
 `(8) Each demonstrated project under this section shall be performed
 by the applicant, or by a person satisfactory to the applicant, under
 the oversight of the Administrator. The Administrator shall enter into
 a written agreement with each applicant granting the Administrator the
 responsibility and authority for testing procedures, quality control,
 monitoring, and other measurements necessary to determine and evaluate
 the results of the demonstration project.
 `(9) The Administrator shall enter into arrangements, wherever practicable
 and desirable, to provide for monitoring testing procedures, quality
 control, and such other measurements necessary to evaluate the results
 of demonstration projects or facilities intended to control sources or
 potential sources of contaminants.
 `(10) Total Federal funds for any demonstration project under this section
 shall not exceed 75 per centum of the total cost of such project. In cases
 where the Administrator determines that research under this section is of
 a basic nature which would not otherwise be undertaken, the Administrator
 may approve grants under this section with a matching requirement other
 than that specified in this subsection, including full Federal funding.
 `(c) REPORTS- The Administrator shall, within two years of the date of
 enactment of this section and biennially thereafter, publish general reports
 describing the findings of demonstration projects conducted pursuant to
 this section.
 `(d) AUTHORIZATION- There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out
 this section $20,000,000 for each fiscal year 1992 through 1998.'.
STATE GRANT ASSISTANCE
 SEC. 5. (a) AUTHORIZATION- (1) Section 106(a)(2) of the Federal Water
 Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1256(a)(2)) is amended by adding after
 `1990' the following `; and'.
 (2) Section 106(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1256(a)) is amended by deleting all after `1990; and' and inserting
 in lieu thereof the following--
 `(3) such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 1991 and 1992.'.
 (3) Section 106(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1256(a)) is amended by adding after `(a)' the following
 `AUTHORIZATION- '
 (b) STATE PROGRAM- Section 106(b) of the Federal Water Pollution Control
 Act (33 U.S.C. 1256(b)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(b)(1) From the sums available pursuant to subsection (a) and section
 517(b), the Administrator shall make grants to the States to support the
 administration of comprehensive programs for the prevention, reduction,
 and elimination of water pollution.
 `(2) State water pollution control programs shall, at a minimum, support
 State development and administration of--
 `(A) a continuing water quality planning process pursuant to section 303(e);
 `(B) water quality standards pursuant to section 303;
 `(C) water quality monitoring programs pursuant to section 305(b);
 `(D) nonpoint source pollution control programs pursuant to section 319;
 `(E) clean lakes programs pursuant to section 314;
 `(F) authority to respond to pollution sources which may pose an imminent
 and substantial threat to human health and the environment comparable to
 the authority in section 504; and
 (G) any other water pollution control responsibilities delegated to States
 pusuant to this Act.'.
 (c) ALLOTMENTS- Section 106(c) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1256) is amended to read as follows:
 `(c) ALLOTMENTS- (1) Of the sums appropriated pursuant to subsection (a)
 in any fiscal year, 75 per centum shall be allotted to the States on the
 basis of the extent of the water pollution problem in the respective States.
 `(2) In determining the extent of the water pollution problem in each State,
 the Administrator shall consider--
 `(A) information developed by water monitoring programs pursuant to section
 305 and 308;
 `(B) the extent and seriousness of water pollution associated with point
 and nonpoint sources; and
 `(C) the extent and seriousness of ground water pollution within the State.
 `(3) In making allocations pursuant to paragraph (1), the Administrator
 shall, to the extent practicable, assure that the allocation of funds to
 a State in a fiscal year is not less than the allocation of funds to that
 State pursuant to this section in fiscal year 1991.
 `(4) Of the sums appropriated pursuant to subsection (a) in any fiscal year,
 25 per centum shall be available to the Administrator for making grants to
 States for the support of innovative programs for the control and prevention
 of water pollution which have potential application to other States.'.
 (d) STATE SHARE- Section 106(d) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1256(d)) is amended by inserting `STATE SHARE- (1)' after `(d)'
 and by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph--
 `(2) Grants made pursuant to this section shall be made on the condition
 that each State provide from non-Federal funds an amount equal to 50 per
 centum of the amount allotted to such State pursuant to subsection (c)
 in each fiscal year.'.
 (e) OTHER AGENCIES- Section 106(e) of the Federal Water Pollution Control
 Act (33 U.S.C. 1256(e)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(e) OTHER AGENCIES- (1) A State receiving a grant pursuant to this section
 may reserve not to exceed 20 per centum of the grant amount to support
 the administrative and related costs of any interstate water pollution
 control agency serving an area of that State.
 `(2) A State receiving a grant pursuant to this section may reserve not
 to exceed 20 per centum of the grant amount to support participation
 by substate regional comprehensive planning agencies in water quality
 planning activities, including participation in the development and
 periodic revision of a continuing water quality planning process pursuant
 to subsection 303(e).'.
 (f) ADMINISTRATION- Section 106(f) of the Federal Water Pollution Control
 Act (33 U.S.C. 1256(f)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(f) ADMINISTRATION- Grants shall be made under this section on condition
 that--
 `(1) the Administrator has approved the plan submitted by the State pursuant
 to subsection (g)(1);
 `(2) the Administrator determines, based on an evaluation of the State
 water quality program, that such program is consistent with the goals and
 requirements of this Act; and
 `(3) the State assures allocation of adequate funds to support administration
 of nonpoint pollution control programs, monitoring programs, and ground
 water quality programs.'.
 (g) REPORTING- Section 106(g) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1256(g)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(g) REPORTING- (1) Each State shall, before July 1 of each year, submit to
 the Administrator its plan for the prevention, reduction, and elimination
 of pollution in such form and content as the Administrator may require. The
 Administrator shall approve such plan if he determines it is consistent
 with the goals and requirements of this Act.
 `(2) Each State shall, within ninety days of the end of each fiscal year,
 submit to the Administrator a report describing--
 `(A) the water pollution control activities supported by funds pursuant
 to this section;
 `(B) State implementation of section 402 of this Act; and
 `(C) such additional information and data as the Administrator may require.'.
WASTEWATER OPERATOR TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION
 SEC. 6. (a) OPERATOR TRAINING- Section 109 of the Federal Water Pollution
 Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1259) is amended to read as follows:
`OPERATOR TRAINING
 `SEC. 109. (a) NATIONAL PROGRAM- (1) The Administrator shall develop
 and implement a national program to train persons in the operation of
 municipal and industrial wastewater treatment works and other facilities
 whose purpose is water quality control.
 `(2) The training program implemented pursuant to this section shall
 include--
 `(A) preparation of undergraduate students to enter an occupation which
 involves design, operation, and maintenance of wastewater treatment works;
 `(B) in-service training to improve and advance the knowledge and skills
 of persons presently employed in fields related to the design, operation
 and maintenance of wastewater treatment works; and
 `(C) pre-service training to be provided to high school graduates not
 presently employed in wastewater treatment works operation and maintenance.
 `(b) TRAINING PROGRAM GRANTS- (1) The Administrator shall make grants or
 contracts with institutions of higher education, or combinations of such
 institutions, to support development and implementation of wastewater
 training programs pursuant to this section.
 `(2) Within one year from the date of enactment of the Water Pollution
 Prevention and Control Act of 1991, the Administrator shall publish guidance
 specifying the minimum elements of wastewater training programs. Such
 guidance shall, at a minimum--
 `(A) indicate relative emphasis to be given to design, operation, and
 maintenance;
 `(B) indicate relative emphasis to be given to undergraduate, in-service,
 and pre-service training; and
 `(C) indicate relative emphasis to be given to training for industrial
 and municipal facilities.
 `(3) Within eighteen months of the date of enactment of the Water Pollution
 Prevention and Control Act of 1991, the Administrator shall request proposals
 from institutions of higher education, or combinations of such institutions,
 to provide training services.
 `(4) The Administrator shall, to the extent adequate funds are available,
 award training grants to not less than ten institutions of higher education,
 or combinations of such institutions, in each fiscal year.
 `(5) In awarding training grants, the Administrator shall consider--
 `(A) the demonstrated capability of the applicant to provide training
 services;
 `(B) the degree to which the proposed program is consistent with the
 guidance issued pursuant to paragraph (2);
 `(C) the results of any evaluation conducted pursuant to paragraph (7)
 of this subsection; and
 `(D) the degree to which the geographic area to be served by the program
 will, in combination with other programs funded pursuant to this section,
 assure the reasonable availability of training programs throughout the
 Nation.
 `(6) In allocating available grant funds among training programs, the
 Administrator shall consider the need for training in the area served as
 reflected in the report to Congress pursuant to subsection 104(g)(3).
 `(7) The Administrator shall provide for the triennial review and evaluation
 of each training program funded pursuant to this section.'.
 (b) OPERATOR CERTIFICATION- (1) Section 110 of the Federal Water Pollution
 Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1260) is amended to read as follows:
`OPERATOR CERTIFICATION
 `SEC. 110. (a) IN GENERAL- The Administrator shall develop and implement a
 program to certify the proficiency of operators of publicly owned wastewater
 treatment works.
 `(b) REQUIREMENT- (1) Each publicly owned treatment works shall assure that
 the chief operator of such treatment works and such additional personnel
 as may be designated by the Administrator, are certified as proficient by
 the Administrator.
 `(2) The requirement of this subsection shall be effective three years
 from the date of enactment of the Water Pollution Prevention and Control
 Act of 1991, unless extended by the Administrator pursuant to paragraph (3).
 `(3) The Administrator may extend the effective date of the requirement
 of this subsection for a period of not to exceed two years on a
 facility--specific basis based on a determination that adequate opportunity
 to seek certification did not exist.
 `(c) GUIDELINES- (1) Within one year of the date of enactment of the
 Water Pollution Prevention and Control Act of 1991, the Administrator
 shall publish guidelines specifying minimum standards for certification
 pursuant to this section.
 `(2) Guidelines shall specify minimum standards for a Chief Operator of
 a publicly owned treatment works and for such additional personnel as
 are judged by the Administrator as appropriate to operator proficiency
 certification. Guidelines shall also establish such additional standards as
 are, in the judgment of the Administrator, necessary to assure proficiency in
 the operation of large, complex treatment systems. Guidelines may provide for
 on-site assessment in cases where this is necessary to determine proficiency.
 `(3) Within one year of the date of enactment of the Water Pollution
 Prevention and Control Act of 1991, the Administrator shall publish a
 Treatment Works Operator's Manual describing essential knowledge and skills
 of a Chief Operator and essential knowledge and skills of such additional
 personnel as are judged by the Administrator as appropriate to operator
 proficiency certification.
 `(d) CERTIFICATION PROGRAM- (1) Within one year of the date of enactment of
 the Water Pollution Prevention and Control Act of 1991, the Administrator
 shall implement a program to certify operators pursuant to this section.
 `(2) The Administrator may establish priorities for operator certification
 giving priority to--
 `(A) facilities with a history of noncompliance with a discharge permit
 pursuant to section 402; and
 `(B) facilities implementing a local pretreatment program pursuant to
 section 307(f).
 `(3) The Administrator shall charge a fee for certification sufficient to
 cover the cost of the certification program.
 `(4) The Administrator may delegate implementation of the certification
 program to a State based on a determination that the State is fully qualified
 to operate the program and will provide the Administrator with such data
 and information concerning the program as the Administrator may request.
 `(5) Certification of proficiency pursuant to this section shall be granted
 to the individual certified, not to the treatment works. Certification of
 the individual is transferable from one treatment works to another. States
 may provide for the transfer of certification from one State to another.
 `(6) Certification of proficiency pursuant to this section applies to the
 five-year period following certification. The Administrator may re-certify
 an individual for additional five-year periods: Provided, That--
 `(A) the individual complies with such in-service training and related
 education as the Administrator may specify; and
 `(B) the individual has remained in the position of Chief Operator, or other
 applicable position, for four years of the five-year certification period.'.
 `(7) Any State may establish a certification requirement in addition to
 those established pursuant to this section.'.
 (2) Section 309(g)(1) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1319 (g)(1)) is amended by adding after `violated section' the
 following `110(b),'.
 (c) SCHOLARSHIPS- (1) Section 111(3) of the Federal Water Pollution
 Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1261(3)) is amended by deleting subparagraph (C)
 and inserting in lieu thereof the following--
 `(C) that the institution is currently participating or has participated
 in the training grant program pursuant to section 109(b); and'.
 (2) Section 111(3)(D) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1261(3)(D)) is amended by deleting `and' after `treatment works';
 deleting the period at the end thereof; and inserting in lieu thereof the
 following: `, and (iii) the institution will make reasonable efforts to
 assure representation of minorities and women in the program.'.
 (d) AUTHORIZATIONS- Section 112(c) of the Federal Water Pollution Control
 Act (33 U.S.C. 1262(c)) is amended by inserting `(1)' after `(c)' and
 adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraphs:
 `(2) There are authorized to be appropriated $15,000,000 per fiscal year
 for each of the fiscal years 1991 and 1992 to carry out sections 109 and
 111 of this Act: Provided, That not less than one-third of such sums as
 are appropriated in a fiscal year shall be reserved to carry out section 111.
 `(3) Of such sums as may be appropriated pursuant to section 517(b),
 one-third shall be reserved to carry out section 111.'.
 (e) RESEARCH- (1) Section 104 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1254) is amended by deleting subsection (g) and inserting in
 lieu thereof the following--
 `(g)(1) The Administrator is authorized to provide, or make grants to
 public or private agencies and institutions to provide training in technical
 matters relating to the causes, prevention, reduction, and elimination of
 pollution for personnel of public agencies and other persons with suitable
 qualifications.
 `(2) The Administrator shall establish and maintain research fellowships with
 such stipends and allowances, including travel and subsistence expenses,
 as the Administrator may deem necessary to procure the assistance of the
 most promising research fellows.
 `(3) The Administrator shall develop and maintain a system for forecasting
 the supply of, and demand for, various professional and other occupational
 categories needed for the prevention, reduction, and elimination of pollution
 in each region, state or area of the United States. The Administrator
 shall report to the Congress on the results of forecasts pursuant to this
 paragraph not less often than biennially.'.
EFFLUENT GUIDELINES
 SEC. 7. (a) AUTHORITY- Section 304(b) of the Federal Water Pollution
 Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1314(b)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(b) Effluent Guidelines-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Administrator shall, after notice and opportunity for
 public comment, promulgate regulations establishing effluent guidelines
 applicable to point sources (other than publicly owned treatment works)
 which discharge conventional, nonconventional, toxic or other pollutants to
 the navigable waters. Such regulations shall achieve, in terms of amounts
 of constituents and chemical, physical, and biological characteristics of
 pollutants, the maximum reduction of each pollutant in the discharge of
 any source in the category or class of sources to which the regulations
 apply and shall--
 `(A) reflect applications of the best available control technology
 economically achievable for the category or class of sources to which the
 standard applies;
 `(B) in determining the best available technology economically achievable
 under subparagraph (A), rely upon and require, to the maximum extent
 practicable, toxic use and waste reduction measures and practices including
 changes in production processes, products or raw materials that reduce, avoid
 or eliminate the use of toxic or hazardous substances and the generation of
 toxic or hazardous byproducts so as to reduce the overall risk of adverse
 effects to the health of workers and the public and to the environment;
 `(C) eliminate the discharge of pollutants to navigable waters if
 the Administrator finds that such elimination is technologically and
 economically achievable for the category or class or sources to which the
 standard applies; and
 `(D)(i) prohibit or limit the release of such pollutants to other
 environmental media (including ground water) to the extent such prohibition
 or limitation is technologically or economically achievable for the category
 or class of sources to which the standard applies,
 `(ii) prohibit specific control measures or practices which, in the judgment
 of the Administrator, are likely to have a significant adverse impact on
 any environmental media.
Factors which the Administrator may take into account in determining whether
any prohibition, limitation or requirement is technologically or economically
achievable for a category or class of sources include age of equipment and
facilities involved, the process employed, the engineering aspects of the
application of various types of control techniques, process changes (including
in-plant toxic use and waste reduction measures, in addition to end-of-pipe
controls), the cost of achieving such limitation, prohibition or requirements,
and non-water quality environmental impacts (including energy requirements).'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- (1) Section 301(b)(2)(A) of the Federal Water
 Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1311(b)(2)(A)) is amended by striking
 `302(b)(2)' wherever it occurs and inserting in lieu thereof `302(b)'.
 (2) Section 301(b)(2)(A) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1311(b)(2)(A)) is amended by striking `(including information
 developed pursuant to section 315)'.
 (3) Section 301(b)(2)(E) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1311(b)(2)(E) is amended by striking `conventional' and inserting
 in lieu thereof `available'; and by striking `304(b)(4)' and inserting in
 lieu thereof `304(b)'.
 (4) Section 301(c) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C
 1311(c)) is repealed.
 (5) Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1342)
 is amended by inserting `304(b),' after `302,' in the first sentence thereof.
 (6) Section 402(b)(1)(A) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1342(b)(1)(A)) is amended by inserting `304(b),' after `302'.
 (c) REVISION OF GUIDELINES AND STANDARDS- Section 301(d) of the Federal Water
 Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1311(d)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(d) REVISION OF GUIDELINES-
 `(1) Any effluent guideline required pursuant to subsection (b)(2)
 or promulgated under section 304(b) shall be reviewed and revised,
 pursuant to the provisions of such section, not less frequently than
 every seven years according to the schedule established under section
 304(m). Notwithstanding the schedule for review included in the previous
 sentence, the Administrator shall revise an effluent guideline on a date
 earlier than otherwise required by the previous sentence whenever evidence
 is available to the Administrator indicates that advances in pollution
 control technology or practice, including toxic use and waste reduction
 measures, would achieve a significant reduction in the quantity of toxicity
 of pollutants discharged to navigable waters by sources in the category
 and such advances are technologically and economically achievable for a
 category or class of sources.
 `(2) Not later than three years after the date of enactment of the Water
 Pollution Prevention and Control Act of 1991, the Administrator shall,
 after notice and opportunity for public comment, promulgate a standard of
 performance for new sources in every category and subcategory for which an
 effluent guideline has been promulgated prior to such date of enactment. Each
 guideline in effect on the date of enactment of this paragraph, including
 each guideline applicable to any subcategory of sources under a guideline,
 shall be reviewed and revised, according to the provisions of paragraph (1)
 and sections 304(b) and 304(m), not later than seven years after such date
 of enactment. Any effluent guideline, performance standard or pretreatment
 standard in effect on the date of enactment of this paragraph shall remain
 in effect until a revised guideline or standard applicable to the same
 category or class of sources has been promulgated by the Administrator. If
 a timely petition for review of any guideline or standard under section
 509 is pending on such date of enactment, the guideline or standard shall
 be upheld if it complies with the requirements of this Act as in effect
 before that date. If any such guideline or standard is remanded to the
 Administrator, the Administrator may in the Administrator's discretion
 apply either (i) the requirements of this Act, or (ii) the requirements
 of this Act in effect immediately prior to the date of enactment of this
 paragraph when repromulgating the guideline or standard.'.
 (d) NEW SOURCE PERFORMANCE STANDARDS- (1) Section 306(a)(1) of the Federal
 Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1316(a)(1)) is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(1) The term `standard performance' means a standard for the control
 of the discharge of pollutants which reflects the greatest degree of
 effluent reduction which the Administrator determines to be achievable
 through application of the best available demonstrated control technology,
 processes, operating methods, or other alternatives. In determining the
 best available demonstrated control technology, the Administrator shall--
 `(i) rely upon and require, to the maximum extent practicable, toxic use
 and waste reduction measures and practices including changes in production
 processes, products of raw materials that reduce, avoid or eliminate
 the use of toxic or hazardous substances and the generation of toxic or
 hazardous byproducts so as to reduce the overall risk of adverse effects
 to the health of workers and the public and to the environment;
 `(ii) eliminate the discharge of pollutants to navigable waters if
 the Administrator finds that such elimination is technologically and
 economically achievable for the category or class of sources to which the
 standard applies;
 `(iii) prohibit or limit the release of such pollutants to other
 environmental media (including ground water) to the extent such prohibition
 or limitation is technologically or economically achievable for the category
 or class of sources to which the standard applies; and
 `(iv) prohibit specific control measures or practices which, in the judgment
 of the Administrator, are likely to have a significant adverse impact on
 any environmental media.'.
 (2) Section 306(b)(1)(B) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1316(b)(1)(B)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(B) As soon as practicable, but in no case more than one year after a
 category of sources is included on the list under subparagraph (A), the
 Administrator shall, after notice and opportunity for comment, promulgate
 regulations establishing standards of performance for new sources in
 such category. The Administrator shall promulgate or revise regulations
 establishing standards of performance for new sources in a category whenever
 the Administrator promulgates or revises effluent guidelines under section
 301(b) or 304(b) for such category. The Administrator shall from time to
 time, but not less often than every seven years, review and revise such
 standards. Standards of performance, or revisions thereof, shall become
 effective upon promulgation.'.
 (e) PLAN FOR GUIDELINE AND STANDARDS DEVELOPMENT-
 (1) Section 304(m) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1314(m)) is amended by:
 [Struck out->][ RESERVED ][