[Congressional Bills 107th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 2563 Placed on Calendar Senate (PCS)]

 Calendar No. 150
107th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 2563

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 September 5, 2001

 Received and read the first time

 September 6, 2001

 Read the second time and placed on the calendar

_______________________________________________________________________

 AN ACT

To amend the Public Health Service Act, the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974, and the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to protect 
 consumers in managed care plans and other health coverage.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Bipartisan Patient 
Protection Act''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
 TITLE I--IMPROVING MANAGED CARE

 Subtitle A--Utilization Review; Claims; and Internal and External 
 Appeals

Sec. 101. Utilization review activities.
Sec. 102. Procedures for initial claims for benefits and prior 
 authorization determinations.
Sec. 103. Internal appeals of claims denials.
Sec. 104. Independent external appeals procedures.
Sec. 105. Health care consumer assistance fund.
 Subtitle B--Access to Care

Sec. 111. Consumer choice option.
Sec. 112. Choice of health care professional.
Sec. 113. Access to emergency care.
Sec. 114. Timely access to specialists.
Sec. 115. Patient access to obstetrical and gynecological care.
Sec. 116. Access to pediatric care.
Sec. 117. Continuity of care.
Sec. 118. Access to needed prescription drugs.
Sec. 119. Coverage for individuals participating in approved clinical 
 trials.
Sec. 120. Required coverage for minimum hospital stay for mastectomies 
 and lymph node dissections for the 
 treatment of breast cancer and coverage for 
 secondary consultations.
 Subtitle C--Access to Information

Sec. 121. Patient access to information.
 Subtitle D--Protecting the Doctor-Patient Relationship

Sec. 131. Prohibition of interference with certain medical 
 communications.
Sec. 132. Prohibition of discrimination against providers based on 
 licensure.
Sec. 133. Prohibition against improper incentive arrangements.
Sec. 134. Payment of claims.
Sec. 135. Protection for patient advocacy.
 Subtitle E--Definitions

Sec. 151. Definitions.
Sec. 152. Preemption; State flexibility; construction.
Sec. 153. Exclusions.
Sec. 154. Treatment of excepted benefits.
Sec. 155. Regulations.
Sec. 156. Incorporation into plan or coverage documents.
Sec. 157. Preservation of protections.
 TITLE II--APPLICATION OF QUALITY CARE STANDARDS TO GROUP HEALTH PLANS 
 AND HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE UNDER THE PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT

Sec. 201. Application to group health plans and group health insurance 
 coverage.
Sec. 202. Application to individual health insurance coverage.
Sec. 203. Cooperation between Federal and State authorities.
 TITLE III--APPLICATION OF PATIENT PROTECTION STANDARDS TO FEDERAL 
 HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAMS

Sec. 301. Application of patient protection standards to Federal health 
 insurance programs.
TITLE IV--AMENDMENTS TO THE EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT INCOME SECURITY ACT OF 
 1974

 Subtitle A--General Provisions

Sec. 401. Application of patient protection standards to group health 
 plans and group health insurance coverage 
 under the Employee Retirement Income 
 Security Act of 1974.
Sec. 402. Availability of civil remedies.
Sec. 403. Limitation on certain class action litigation.
Sec. 404. Limitations on actions.
Sec. 405. Cooperation between Federal and State authorities.
Sec. 406. Sense of the Senate concerning the importance of certain 
 unpaid services.
 Subtitle B--Association Health Plans

Sec. 421. Rules governing association health plans.
Sec. 422. Clarification of treatment of single employer arrangements.
Sec. 423. Clarification of treatment of certain collectively bargained 
 arrangements.
Sec. 424. Enforcement provisions relating to association health plans.
Sec. 425. Cooperation between Federal and State authorities.
Sec. 426. Effective date and transitional and other rules.
 TITLE V--AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1986

 Subtitle A--Application of Patient Protection Provisions

Sec. 501. Application to group health plans under the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986.
Sec. 502. Conforming enforcement for women's health and cancer rights.
 Subtitle B--Health Care Coverage Access Tax Incentives

Sec. 511. Expansion of availability of Archer medical savings accounts.
Sec. 512. Deduction for 100 percent of health insurance costs of self-
 employed individuals.
Sec. 513. Credit for health insurance expenses of small businesses.
Sec. 514. Certain grants by private foundations to qualified health 
 benefit purchasing coalitions.
Sec. 515. State grant program for market innovation.
 TITLE VI--EFFECTIVE DATES; COORDINATION IN IMPLEMENTATION

Sec. 601. Effective dates.
Sec. 602. Coordination in implementation.
Sec. 603. Severability.
 TITLE VII--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Sec. 701. No impact on social security trust funds.
Sec. 702. Customs user fees.
Sec. 703. Fiscal year 2002 medicare payments.
Sec. 704. Sense of the Senate with respect to participation in clinical 
 trials and access to specialty care.
Sec. 705. Sense of the Senate regarding fair review process.
Sec. 706. Annual review.
Sec. 707. Definition of born-alive infant.

 TITLE I--IMPROVING MANAGED CARE

 Subtitle A--Utilization Review; Claims; and Internal and External 
 Appeals

SEC. 101. UTILIZATION REVIEW ACTIVITIES.

 (a) Compliance With Requirements.--
 (1) In general.--A group health plan, and a health 
 insurance issuer that provides health insurance coverage, shall 
 conduct utilization review activities in connection with the 
 provision of benefits under such plan or coverage only in 
 accordance with a utilization review program that meets the 
 requirements of this section and section 503A of the Employee 
 Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.
 (2) Use of outside agents.--Nothing in this section shall 
 be construed as preventing a group health plan or health 
 insurance issuer from arranging through a contract or otherwise 
 for persons or entities to conduct utilization review 
 activities on behalf of the plan or issuer, so long as such 
 activities are conducted in accordance with a utilization 
 review program that meets the requirements of this section.
 (3) Utilization review defined.--For purposes of this 
 section, the terms ``utilization review'' and ``utilization 
 review activities'' mean procedures used to monitor or evaluate 
 the use or coverage, clinical necessity, appropriateness, 
 efficacy, or efficiency of health care services, procedures or 
 settings, and includes prospective review, concurrent review, 
 second opinions, case management, discharge planning, or 
 retrospective review.
 (b) Written Policies and Criteria.--
 (1) Written policies.--A utilization review program shall 
 be conducted consistent with written policies and procedures 
 that govern all aspects of the program.
 (2) Use of written criteria.--
 (A) In general.--Such a program shall utilize 
 written clinical review criteria developed with input 
 from a range of appropriate actively practicing health 
 care professionals, as determined by the plan, pursuant 
 to the program. Such criteria shall include written 
 clinical review criteria that are based on valid 
 clinical evidence where available and that are directed 
 specifically at meeting the needs of at-risk 
 populations and covered individuals with chronic 
 conditions or severe illnesses, including gender-
 specific criteria and pediatric-specific criteria where 
 available and appropriate.
 (B) Continuing use of standards in retrospective 
 review.--If a health care service has been specifically 
 pre-authorized or approved for a participant, 
 beneficiary, or enrollee under such a program, the 
 program shall not, pursuant to retrospective review, 
 revise or modify the specific standards, criteria, or 
 procedures used for the utilization review for 
 procedures, treatment, and services delivered to the 
 enrollee during the same course of treatment.
 (C) Review of sample of claims denials.--Such a 
 program shall provide for a periodic evaluation of the 
 clinical appropriateness of at least a sample of 
 denials of claims for benefits.
 (c) Conduct of Program Activities.--
 (1) Administration by health care professionals.--A 
 utilization review program shall be administered by qualified 
 health care professionals who shall oversee review decisions.
 (2) Use of qualified, independent personnel.--
 (A) In general.--A utilization review program shall 
 provide for the conduct of utilization review 
 activities only through personnel who are qualified and 
 have received appropriate training in the conduct of 
 such activities under the program.
 (B) Prohibition of contingent compensation 
 arrangements.--Such a program shall not, with respect 
 to utilization review activities, permit or provide 
 compensation or anything of value to its employees, 
 agents, or contractors in a manner that encourages 
 denials of claims for benefits.
 (C) Prohibition of conflicts.--Such a program shall 
 not permit a health care professional who is providing 
 health care services to an individual to perform 
 utilization review activities in connection with the 
 health care services being provided to the individual.
 (3) Accessibility of review.--Such a program shall provide 
 that appropriate personnel performing utilization review 
 activities under the program, including the utilization review 
 administrator, are reasonably accessible by toll-free telephone 
 during normal business hours to discuss patient care and allow 
 response to telephone requests, and that appropriate provision 
 is made to receive and respond promptly to calls received 
 during other hours.
 (4) Limits on frequency.--Such a program shall not provide 
 for the performance of utilization review activities with 
 respect to a class of services furnished to an individual more 
 frequently than is reasonably required to assess whether the 
 services under review are medically necessary and appropriate.

SEC. 102. PROCEDURES FOR INITIAL CLAIMS FOR BENEFITS AND PRIOR 
 AUTHORIZATION DETERMINATIONS.

 Part 5 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974 is amended by inserting after section 503 (29 
U.S.C. 1133) the following:

``SEC. 503A. PROCEDURES FOR INITIAL CLAIMS FOR BENEFITS AND PRIOR 
 AUTHORIZATION DETERMINATIONS.

 ``(a) Procedures of Initial Claims for Benefits.--
 ``(1) In general.--A group health plan, and a health 
 insurance issuer offering health insurance coverage in 
 connection with the group health plan, shall--
 ``(A) make a determination on an initial claim for 
 benefits by a participant or beneficiary (or authorized 
 representative) regarding payment or coverage for items 
 or services under the terms and conditions of the plan 
 or coverage involved, including any cost-sharing amount 
 that the participant or beneficiary is required to pay 
 with respect to such claim for benefits; and
 ``(B) notify a participant or beneficiary (or 
 authorized representative) and the treating health care 
 professional involved regarding a determination on an 
 initial claim for benefits made under the terms and 
 conditions of the plan or coverage, including any cost-
 sharing amounts that the participant or beneficiary may 
 be required to make with respect to such claim for 
 benefits, and of the right of the participant or 
 beneficiary to an internal appeal under section 503B.
 ``(2) Access to information.--
 ``(A) Timely provision of necessary information.--
 With respect to an initial claim for benefits, the 
 participant or beneficiary (or authorized 
 representative) and the treating health care 
 professional (if any) shall provide the plan or issuer 
 with access to information requested by the plan or 
 issuer that is necessary to make a determination 
 relating to the claim. Such access shall be provided 
 not later than 5 days after the date on which the 
 request for information is received, or, in a case 
 described in subparagraph (B) or (C) of subsection 
 (b)(1), by such earlier time as may be necessary to 
 comply with the applicable timeline under such 
 subparagraph.
 ``(B) Limited effect of failure on plan or issuer's 
 obligations.--Failure of the participant or beneficiary 
 to comply with the requirements of subparagraph (A) 
 shall not remove the obligation of the plan or issuer 
 to make a decision in accordance with the medical 
 exigencies of the case and as soon as possible, based 
 on the available information, and failure to comply 
 with the time limit established by this paragraph shall 
 not remove the obligation of the plan or issuer to 
 comply with the requirements of this section.
 ``(3) Oral requests.--In the case of a claim for benefits 
 involving an expedited or concurrent determination, a 
 participant or beneficiary (or authorized representative) may 
 make an initial claim for benefits orally, but a group health 
 plan, or health insurance issuer offering health insurance 
 coverage in connection with the group health plan, may require 
 that the participant or beneficiary (or authorized 
 representative) provide written confirmation of such request in 
 a timely manner on a form provided by the plan or issuer. In 
 the case of such an oral request for benefits, the making of 
 the request (and the timing of such request) shall be treated 
 as the making at that time of a claim for such benefits without 
 regard to whether and when a written confirmation of such 
 request is made.
 ``(b) Timeline for Making Determinations.--
 ``(1) Prior authorization determination.--
 ``(A) In general.--A group health plan, and a 
 health insurance issuer offering health insurance 
 coverage in connection with the group health plan, 
 shall make a prior authorization determination on a 
 claim for benefits (whether oral or written) in 
 accordance with the medical exigencies of the case and 
 as soon as possible, but in no case later than 14 days 
 from the date on which the plan or issuer receives 
 information that is reasonably necessary to enable the 
 plan or issuer to make a determination on the request 
 for prior authorization and in no case later than 28 
 days after the date of the claim for benefits is 
 received.
 ``(B) Expedited determination.--Notwithstanding 
 subparagraph (A), a group health plan, and a health 
 insurance issuer offering health insurance coverage in 
 connection with the group health plan, shall expedite a 
 prior authorization determination on a claim for 
 benefits described in such subparagraph when a request 
 for such an expedited determination is made by a 
 participant or beneficiary (or authorized 
 representative) at any time during the process for 
 making a determination and a health care professional 
 certifies, with the request, that a determination under 
 the procedures described in subparagraph (A) would 
 seriously jeopardize the life or health of the 
 participant or beneficiary or the ability of the 
 participant or beneficiary to maintain or regain 
 maximum function. Such determination shall be made in 
 accordance with the medical exigencies of the case and 
 as soon as possible, but in no case later than 72 hours 
 after the time the request is received by the plan or 
 issuer under this subparagraph.
 ``(C) Ongoing care.--
 ``(i) Concurrent review.--
 ``(I) In general.--Subject to 
 clause (ii), in the case of a 
 concurrent review of ongoing care 
 (including hospitalization), which 
 results in a termination or reduction 
 of such care, the plan or issuer must 
 provide by telephone and in printed 
 form notice of the concurrent review 
 determination to the individual or the 
 individual's designee and the 
 individual's health care provider in 
 accordance with the medical exigencies 
 of the case and as soon as possible, 
 with sufficient time prior to the 
 termination or reduction to allow for 
 an appeal under section 503B(b)(3) to 
 be completed before the termination or 
 reduction takes effect.
 ``(II) Contents of notice.--Such 
 notice shall include, with respect to 
 ongoing health care items and services, 
 the number of ongoing services 
 approved, the new total of approved 
 services, the date of onset of 
 services, and the next review date, if 
 any, as well as a statement of the 
 individual's rights to further appeal.
 ``(ii) Rule of construction.--Clause (i) 
 shall not be construed as requiring plans or 
 issuers to provide coverage of care that would 
 exceed the coverage limitations for such care.
 ``(2) Retrospective determination.--A group health plan, 
 and a health insurance issuer offering health insurance 
 coverage in connection with the group health plan, shall make a 
 retrospective determination on a claim for benefits in 
 accordance with the medical exigencies of the case and as soon 
 as possible, but not later than 30 days after the date on which 
 the plan or issuer receives information that is reasonably 
 necessary to enable the plan or issuer to make a determination 
 on the claim, or, if earlier, 60 days after the date of receipt 
 of the claim for benefits.
 ``(c) Notice of a Denial of a Claim for Benefits.--Written notice 
of a denial made under an initial claim for benefits shall be issued to 
the participant or beneficiary (or authorized representative) and the 
treating health care professional in accordance with the medical 
exigencies of the case and as soon as possible, but in no case later 
than 2 days after the date of the determination (or, in the case 
described in subparagraph (B) or (C) of subsection (b)(1), within the 
72-hour or applicable period referred to in such subparagraph).
 ``(d) Requirements of Notice of Determinations.--The written notice 
of a denial of a claim for benefits determination under subsection (c) 
shall be provided in printed form and written in a manner calculated to 
be understood by the participant or beneficiary and shall include--
 ``(1) the specific reasons for the determination (including 
 a summary of the clinical or scientific evidence used in making 
 the determination);
 ``(2) the procedures for obtaining additional information 
 concerning the determination; and
 ``(3) notification of the right to appeal the determination 
 and instructions on how to initiate an appeal in accordance 
 with section 503B.
 ``(e) Definitions.--For purposes of this section and sections 503B 
and 503C:
 ``(1) Authorized representative.--The term `authorized 
 representative' means, with respect to an individual who is a 
 participant or beneficiary, any health care professional or 
 other person acting on behalf of the individual with the 
 individual's consent or without such consent if the individual 
 is medically unable to provide such consent.
 ``(2) Claim for benefits.--The term `claim for benefits' 
 means any request for coverage (including authorization of 
 coverage), for eligibility, or for payment in whole or in part, 
 for an item or service under a group health plan or health 
 insurance coverage in connection with the group health plan.
 ``(3) Denial of claim for benefits.--The term `denial' 
 means, with respect to a claim for benefits, a denial (in whole 
 or in part) of, or a failure to act in accordance with the 
 applicable deadlines established under this section and section 
 503B upon, the claim for benefits and includes a failure to 
 provide benefits (including items and services) required to be 
 provided under title I of the Bipartisan Patient Protection 
 Act.
 ``(4) Treating health care professional.--The term 
 `treating health care professional' means, with respect to 
 services to be provided to a participant or beneficiary, a 
 health care professional who is primarily responsible for 
 delivering those services to the participant or beneficiary.
 ``(5) Other definitions.--Section 151 of the Bipartisan 
 Patient Protection Act shall apply.''.

SEC. 103. INTERNAL APPEALS OF CLAIMS DENIALS.

 Part 5 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974 (as amended by section 503A) is amended further by 
inserting after section 503A (29 U.S.C. 1133A) the following:

``SEC. 503B. INTERNAL APPEALS OF CLAIMS DENIALS.

 ``(a) Right to Internal Appeal.--
 ``(1) In general.--A participant or beneficiary (or 
 authorized representative) may appeal any denial of a claim for 
 benefits under section 503A under the procedures described in 
 this section.
 ``(2) Time for appeal.--
 ``(A) In general.--A group health plan, and a 
 health insurance issuer offering health insurance 
 coverage in connection with the group health plan, 
 shall ensure that a participant or beneficiary (or 
 authorized representative) has a period of not less 
 than 180 days beginning on the date of a denial of a 
 claim for benefits under section 503A in which to 
 appeal such denial under this section.
 ``(B) Date of denial.--For purposes of subparagraph 
 (A), the date of the denial shall be deemed to be the 
 date as of which the participant or beneficiary knew of 
 the denial of the claim for benefits.
 ``(3) Failure to act.--The failure of a plan or issuer to 
 issue a determination on a claim for benefits under section 
 503A within the applicable timeline established for such a 
 determination under such section is a denial of a claim for 
 benefits for purposes this section and sections 503B and 503C 
 as of the date of the applicable deadline.
 ``(4) Plan waiver of internal review.--A group health plan, 
 or health insurance issuer offering health insurance coverage 
 in connection with the group health plan, may waive the 
 internal review process under this section. In such case the 
 plan or issuer shall provide notice to the participant or 
 beneficiary (or authorized representative) involved, the 
 participant or beneficiary (or authorized representative) 
 involved shall be relieved of any obligation to complete the 
 internal review involved, and may, at the option of such 
 participant, beneficiary, or representative proceed directly to 
 seek further appeal through external review under section 503C 
 or otherwise.
 ``(b) Timelines for Making Determinations.--
 ``(1) Oral requests.--In the case of an appeal of a denial 
 of a claim for benefits under this section that involves an 
 expedited or concurrent determination, a participant or 
 beneficiary (or authorized representative) may request such 
 appeal orally. A group health plan, or health insurance issuer 
 offering health insurance coverage in connection with the group 
 health plan, may require that the participant or beneficiary 
 (or authorized representative) provide written confirmation of 
 such request in a timely manner on a form provided by the plan 
 or issuer. In the case of such an oral request for an appeal of 
 a denial, the making of the request (and the timing of such 
 request) shall be treated as the making at that time of a 
 request for an appeal without regard to whether and when a 
 written confirmation of such request is made.
 ``(2) Access to information.--
 ``(A) Timely provision of necessary information.--
 With respect to an appeal of a denial of a claim for 
 benefits, the participant or beneficiary (or authorized 
 representative) and the treating health care 
 professional (if any) shall provide the plan or issuer 
 with access to information requested by the plan or 
 issuer that is necessary to make a determination 
 relating to the appeal. Such access shall be provided 
 not later than 5 days after the date on which the 
 request for information is received, or, in a case 
 described in subparagraph (B) or (C) of paragraph (3), 
 by such earlier time as may be necessary to comply with 
 the applicable timeline under such subparagraph.
 ``(B) Limited effect of failure on plan or issuer's 
 obligations.--Failure of the participant or beneficiary 
 to comply with the requirements of subparagraph (A) 
 shall not remove the obligation of the plan or issuer 
 to make a decision in accordance with the medical 
 exigencies of the case and as soon as possible, based 
 on the available information, and failure to comply 
 with the time limit established by this paragraph shall 
 not remove the obligation of the plan or issuer to 
 comply with the requirements of this section.
 ``(3) Prior authorization determinations.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in this 
 paragraph or paragraph (4), a group health plan, and a 
 health insurance issuer offering health insurance 
 coverage in connection with the group health plan, 
 shall make a determination on an appeal of a denial of 
 a claim for benefits under this subsection in 
 accordance with the medical exigencies of the case and 
 as soon as possible, but in no case later than 14 days 
 from the date on which the plan or issuer receives 
 information that is reasonably necessary to enable the 
 plan or issuer to make a determination on the appeal 
 and in no case later than 28 days after the date the 
 request for the appeal is received.
 ``(B) Expedited determination.--Notwithstanding 
 subparagraph (A), a group health plan, and a health 
 insurance issuer offering health insurance coverage in 
 connection with the group health plan, shall expedite a 
 prior authorization determination on an appeal of a 
 denial of a claim for benefits described in 
 subparagraph (A), when a request for such an expedited 
 determination is made by a participant or beneficiary 
 (or authorized representative) at any time during the 
 process for making a determination and a health care 
 professional certifies, with the request, that a 
 determination under the procedures described in 
 subparagraph (A) would seriously jeopardize the life or 
 health of the participant or beneficiary or the ability 
 of the participant or beneficiary to maintain or regain 
 maximum function. Such determination shall be made in 
 accordance with the medical exigencies of the case and 
 as soon as possible, but in no case later than 72 hours 
 after the time the request for such appeal is received 
 by the plan or issuer under this subparagraph.
 ``(C) Ongoing care determinations.--
 ``(i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), 
 in the case of a concurrent review 
 determination described in section 
 503A(b)(1)(C)(i)(I), which results in a 
 termination or reduction of such care, the plan 
 or issuer must provide notice of the 
 determination on the appeal under this section 
 by telephone and in printed form to the 
 individual or the individual's designee and the 
 individual's health care provider in accordance 
 with the medical exigencies of the case and as 
 soon as possible, with sufficient time prior to 
 the termination or reduction to allow for an 
 external appeal under section 503C to be 
 completed before the termination or reduction 
 takes effect.
 ``(ii) Rule of construction.--Clause (i) 
 shall not be construed as requiring plans or 
 issuers to provide coverage of care that would 
 exceed the coverage limitations for such care.
 ``(4) Retrospective determination.--A group health plan, 
 and a health insurance issuer offering health insurance 
 coverage in connection with the group health plan, shall make a 
 retrospective determination on an appeal of a denial of a claim 
 for benefits in no case later than 30 days after the date on 
 which the plan or issuer receives necessary information that is 
 reasonably necessary to enable the plan or issuer to make a 
 determination on the appeal and in no case later than 60 days 
 after the date the request for the appeal is received.
 ``(c) Conduct of Review.--
 ``(1) In general.--A review of a denial of a claim for 
 benefits under this section shall be conducted by an individual 
 with appropriate expertise who was not involved in the initial 
 determination.
 ``(2) Peer review of medical decisions by health care 
 professionals.--A review of an appeal of a denial of a claim 
 for benefits that is based on a lack of medical necessity and 
 appropriateness, or based on an experimental or investigational 
 treatment, or requires an evaluation of medical facts--
 ``(A) shall be made by a physician (allopathic or 
 osteopathic); or
 ``(B) in a claim for benefits provided by a non-
 physician health professional, shall be made by a 
 review panel including at least one practicing non-
 physician health professional of the same or similar 
 specialty,
 with appropriate expertise (including, in the case of a child, 
 appropriate pediatric expertise) and acting within the 
 appropriate scope of practice within the State in which the 
 service is provided or rendered, who was not involved in the 
 initial determination.
 ``(d) Notice of Determination.--
 ``(1) In general.--Written notice of a determination made 
 under an internal appeal of a denial of a claim for benefits 
 shall be issued to the participant or beneficiary (or 
 authorized representative) and the treating health care 
 professional in accordance with the medical exigencies of the 
 case and as soon as possible, but in no case later than 2 days 
 after the date of completion of the review (or, in the case 
 described in subparagraph (B) or (C) of subsection (b)(3), 
 within the 72-hour or applicable period referred to in such 
 subparagraph).
 ``(2) Final determination.--The decision by a plan or 
 issuer under this section shall be treated as the final 
 determination of the plan or issuer on a denial of a claim for 
 benefits. The failure of a plan or issuer to issue a 
 determination on an appeal of a denial of a claim for benefits 
 under this section within the applicable timeline established 
 for such a determination shall be treated as a final 
 determination on an appeal of a denial of a claim for benefits 
 for purposes of proceeding to external review under section 
 503C.
 ``(3) Requirements of notice.--With respect to a 
 determination made under this section, the notice described in 
 paragraph (1) shall be provided in printed form and written in 
 a manner calculated to be understood by the participant or 
 beneficiary and shall include--
 ``(A) the specific reasons for the determination 
 (including a summary of the clinical or scientific 
 evidence used in making the determination);
 ``(B) the procedures for obtaining additional 
 information concerning the determination; and
 ``(C) notification of the right to an independent 
 external review under section 503C and instructions on 
 how to initiate such a review.''.

SEC. 104. INDEPENDENT EXTERNAL APPEALS PROCEDURES.

 (a) In General.--Part 5 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (as amended by sections 503A and 
503B) is amended further by inserting after section 503B (29 U.S.C. 
1133B) the following:

``SEC. 503C. INDEPENDENT EXTERNAL APPEALS PROCEDURES.

 ``(a) Right to External Appeal.--A group health plan, and a health 
insurance issuer offering health insurance coverage in connection with 
the group health plan, shall provide in accordance with this section 
participants and beneficiaries (or authorized representatives) with 
access to an independent external review for any denial of a claim for 
benefits.
 ``(b) Initiation of the Independent External Review Process.--
 ``(1) Time to file.--A request for an independent external 
 review under this section shall be filed with the plan or 
 issuer not later than 180 days after the date on which the 
 participant or beneficiary receives notice of the denial under 
 section 503B(d) or notice of waiver of internal review under 
 section 503B(a)(4) or the date on which the plan or issuer has 
 failed to make a timely decision under section 503B(d)(2) and 
 notifies the participant or beneficiary that it has failed to 
 make a timely decision and that the beneficiary must file an 
 appeal with an external review entity within 180 days if the 
 participant or beneficiary desires to file such an appeal.
 ``(2) Filing of request.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to the succeeding 
 provisions of this subsection, a group health plan, or 
 health insurance issuer offering health insurance 
 coverage in connection with the group health plan, 
 may--
 ``(i) except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B)(i), require that a request for review be in 
 writing;
 ``(ii) limit the filing of such a request 
 to the participant or beneficiary involved (or 
 an authorized representative);
 ``(iii) except if waived by the plan or 
 issuer under section 503B(a)(4), condition 
 access to an independent external review under 
 this section upon a final determination of a 
 denial of a claim for benefits under the 
 internal review procedure under section 503B;
 ``(iv) except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B)(ii), require payment of a filing fee to the 
 plan or issuer of a sum that does not exceed 
 $25; and
 ``(v) require that a request for review 
 include the consent of the participant or 
 beneficiary (or authorized representative) for 
 the release of necessary medical information or 
 records of the participant or beneficiary to 
 the qualified external review entity only for 
 purposes of conducting external review 
 activities.
 ``(B) Requirements and exception relating to 
 general rule.--
 ``(i) Oral requests permitted in expedited 
 or concurrent cases.--In the case of an 
 expedited or concurrent external review as 
 provided for under subsection (e), the request 
 for such review may be made orally. A group 
 health plan, or health insurance issuer 
 offering health insurance coverage in 
 connection with the group health plan, may 
 require that the participant or beneficiary (or 
 authorized representative) provide written 
 confirmation of such request in a timely manner 
 on a form provided by the plan or issuer. Such 
 written confirmation shall be treated as a 
 consent for purposes of subparagraph (A)(v). In 
 the case of such an oral request for such a 
 review, the making of the request (and the 
 timing of such request) shall be treated as the 
 making at that time of a request for such a 
 review without regard to whether and when a 
 written confirmation of such request is made.
 ``(ii) Exception to filing fee 
 requirement.--
 ``(I) Indigency.--Payment of a 
 filing fee shall not be required under 
 subparagraph (A)(iv) where there is a 
 certification (in a form and manner 
 specified in guidelines established by 
 the appropriate Secretary) that the 
 participant or beneficiary is indigent 
 (as defined in such guidelines).
 ``(II) Fee not required.--Payment 
 of a filing fee shall not be required 
 under subparagraph (A)(iv) if the plan 
 or issuer waives the internal appeals 
 process under section 503B(a)(4).
 ``(III) Refunding of fee.--The 
 filing fee paid under subparagraph 
 (A)(iv) shall be refunded if the 
 determination under the independent 
 external review is to reverse the 
 denial which is the subject of the 
 review.
 ``(IV) Collection of filing fee.--
 The failure to pay such a filing fee 
 shall not prevent the consideration of 
 a request for review but, subject to 
 the preceding provisions of this 
 clause, shall constitute a legal 
 liability to pay.
 ``(c) Referral to Qualified External Review Entity Upon Request.--
 ``(1) In general.--Upon the filing of a request for 
 independent external review with the group health plan, or 
 health insurance issuer offering health insurance coverage in 
 connection with the group health plan, the plan or issuer shall 
 immediately refer such request, and forward the plan or 
 issuer's initial decision (including the information described 
 in section 503B(d)(3)(A)), to a qualified external review 
 entity selected in accordance with this section.
 ``(2) Access to plan or issuer and health professional 
 information.--With respect to an independent external review 
 conducted under this section, the participant or beneficiary 
 (or authorized representative), the plan or issuer, and the 
 treating health care professional (if any) shall provide the 
 external review entity with information that is necessary to 
 conduct a review under this section, as determined and 
 requested by the entity. Such information shall be provided not 
 later than 5 days after the date on which the request for 
 information is received, or, in a case described in clause (ii) 
 or (iii) of subsection (e)(1)(A), by such earlier time as may 
 be necessary to comply with the applicable timeline under such 
 clause.
 ``(3) Screening of requests by qualified external review 
 entities.--
 ``(A) In general.--With respect to a request 
 referred to a qualified external review entity under 
 paragraph (1) relating to a denial of a claim for 
 benefits, the entity shall refer such request for the 
 conduct of an independent medical review unless the 
 entity determines that--
 ``(i) any of the conditions described in 
 clauses (ii) or (iii) of subsection (b)(2)(A) 
 have not been met;
 ``(ii) the denial of the claim for benefits 
 does not involve a medically reviewable 
 decision under subsection (d)(2);
 ``(iii) the denial of the claim for 
 benefits relates to a decision regarding 
 whether an individual is a participant or 
 beneficiary who is enrolled under the terms and 
 conditions of the plan or coverage (including 
 the applicability of any waiting period under 
 the plan or coverage); or
 ``(iv) the denial of the claim for benefits 
 is a decision as to the application of cost-
 sharing requirements or the application of a 
 specific exclusion or express limitation on the 
 amount, duration, or scope of coverage of items 
 or services under the terms and conditions of 
 the plan or coverage unless the decision is a 
 denial described in subsection (d)(2).
 Upon making a determination that any of clauses (i) 
 through (iv) applies with respect to the request, the 
 entity shall determine that the denial of a claim for 
 benefits involved is not eligible for independent 
 medical review under subsection (d), and shall provide 
 notice in accordance with subparagraph (C).
 ``(B) Process for making determinations.--
 ``(i) No deference to prior 
 determinations.--In making determinations under 
 subparagraph (A), there shall be no deference 
 given to determinations made by the plan or 
 issuer or the recommendation of a treating 
 health care professional (if any).
 ``(ii) Use of appropriate personnel.--A 
 qualified external review entity shall use 
 appropriately qualified personnel to make 
 determinations under this section.
 ``(C) Notices and general timelines for 
 determination.--
 ``(i) Notice in case of denial of 
 referral.--If the entity under this paragraph 
 does not make a referral to an independent 
 medical review panel, the entity shall provide 
 notice to the plan or issuer, the participant 
 or beneficiary (or authorized representative) 
 filing the request, and the treating health 
 care professional (if any) that the denial is 
 not subject to independent medical review. Such 
 notice--
 ``(I) shall be written (and, in 
 addition, may be provided orally) in a 
 manner calculated to be understood by a 
 participant;
 ``(II) shall include the reasons 
 for the determination;
 ``(III) include any relevant terms 
 and conditions of the plan or coverage; 
 and
 ``(IV) include a description of any 
 further recourse available to the 
 individual.
 ``(ii) General timeline for 
 determinations.--Upon receipt of information 
 under paragraph (2), the qualified external 
 review entity, and if required the independent 
 medical review panel, shall make a 
 determination within the overall timeline that 
 is applicable to the case under review as 
 described in subsection (e), except that if the 
 entity determines that a referral to an 
 independent medical review panel is not 
 required, the entity shall provide notice of 
 such determination to the participant or 
 beneficiary (or authorized representative) 
 within such timeline and within 2 days of the 
 date of such determination.
 ``(d) Independent Medical Review.--
 ``(1) In general.--If a qualified external review entity 
 determines under subsection (c) that a denial of a claim for 
 benefits is eligible for independent medical review, the entity 
 shall refer the denial involved to an independent medical 
 review panel composed of 3 independent medical reviewers for 
 the conduct of an independent medical review under this 
 subsection.
 ``(2) Medically reviewable decisions.--A denial of a claim 
 for benefits is eligible for independent medical review if the 
 benefit for the item or service for which the claim is made 
 would be a covered benefit under the terms and conditions of 
 the plan or coverage but for one (or more) of the following 
 determinations:
 ``(A) Denials based on medical necessity and 
 appropriateness.--A determination that the item or 
 service is not covered because it is not medically 
 necessary and appropriate or based on the application 
 of substantially equivalent terms.
 ``(B) Denials based on experimental or 
 investigational treatment.--A determination that the 
 item or service is not covered because it is 
 experimental or investigational or based on the 
 application of substantially equivalent terms.
 ``(C) Denials otherwise based on an evaluation of 
 medical facts.--A determination that the item or 
 service or condition is not covered based on grounds 
 that require an evaluation of the medical facts by a 
 health care professional in the specific case involved 
 to determine the coverage and extent of coverage of the 
 item or service or condition.
 ``(3) Independent medical review determination.--
 ``(A) In general.--An independent medical review 
 panel under this section shall make a new independent 
 determination with respect to whether or not the denial 
 of a claim for a benefit that is the subject of the 
 review should be upheld or reversed.
 ``(B) Standard for determination.--The independent 
 medical review panel's determination relating to the 
 medical necessity and appropriateness, or the 
 experimental or investigational nature, or the 
 evaluation of the medical facts, of the item, service, 
 or condition involved shall be based on the medical 
 condition of the participant or beneficiary (including 
 the medical records of the participant or beneficiary) 
 and valid, relevant scientific evidence and clinical 
 evidence, including peer-reviewed medical literature or 
 findings and including expert opinion.
 ``(C) No coverage for excluded benefits.--Nothing 
 in this subsection shall be construed to permit an 
 independent medical review panel to require that a 
 group health plan, or health insurance issuer offering 
 health insurance coverage in connection with the group 
 health plan, provide coverage for items or services for 
 which benefits are specifically excluded or expressly 
 limited under the plan or coverage in the plain 
 language of the plan document (and which are disclosed 
 under section 121(b)(1)(C) of the Bipartisan Patient 
 Protection Act). Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 this Act, any exclusion of an exact medical procedure, 
 any exact time limit on the duration or frequency of 
 coverage, and any exact dollar limit on the amount of 
 coverage that is specifically enumerated and defined 
 (in the plain language of the plan or coverage 
 documents) under the plan or coverage offered by a 
 group health plan or health insurance issuer offering 
 health insurance coverage in connection with the group 
 health plan and that is disclosed under section 
 121(b)(1) of the Bipartisan Patient Protection Act) 
 shall be considered to govern the scope of the benefits 
 that may be required: Provided, That the terms and 
 conditions of the plan or coverage relating to such an 
 exclusion or limit are in compliance with the 
 requirements of law.
 ``(D) Evidence and information to be used in 
 medical reviews.--In making a determination under this 
 subsection, the independent medical review panel shall 
 also consider appropriate and available evidence and 
 information, including the following:
 ``(i) The determination made by the plan or 
 issuer with respect to the claim upon internal 
 review and the evidence, guidelines, or 
 rationale used by the plan or issuer in 
 reaching such determination.
 ``(ii) The recommendation of the treating 
 health care professional and the evidence, 
 guidelines, and rationale used by the treating 
 health care professional in reaching such 
 recommendation.
 ``(iii) Additional relevant evidence or 
 information obtained by the review panel or 
 submitted by the plan, issuer, participant, or 
 beneficiary (or an authorized representative), 
 or treating health care professional.
 ``(iv) The plan or coverage document.
 ``(E) Independent determination.--In making 
 determinations under this section, a qualified external 
 review entity and an independent medical review panel 
 shall--
 ``(i) consider the claim under review 
 without deference to the determinations made by 
 the plan or issuer or the recommendation of the 
 treating health care professional (if any); and
 ``(ii) consider, but not be bound by, the 
 definition used by the plan or issuer of 
 `medically necessary and appropriate', or 
 `experimental or investigational', or other 
 substantially equivalent terms that are used by 
 the plan or issuer to describe medical 
 necessity and appropriateness or experimental 
 or investigational nature of the treatment.
 ``(F) Determination of independent medical review 
 panel.--An independent medical review panel shall, in 
 accordance with the deadlines described in subsection 
 (e), prepare a written determination to uphold or 
 reverse the denial under review. Such written 
 determination shall include--
 ``(i) the determination of the review 
 panel;
 ``(ii) the specific reasons of the review 
 panel for such determination, including a 
 summary of the clinical or scientific evidence 
 used in making the determination; and
 ``(iii) with respect to a determination to 
 reverse the denial under review, a timeframe 
 within which the plan or issuer must comply 
 with such determination.
 ``(G) Nonbinding nature of additional 
 recommendations.--In addition to the determination 
 under subparagraph (F), the review panel may provide 
 the plan or issuer and the treating health care 
 professional with additional recommendations in 
 connection with such a determination, but any such 
 recommendations shall not affect (or be treated as part 
 of) the determination and shall not be binding on the 
 plan or issuer.
 ``(e) Timelines and Notifications.--
 ``(1) Timelines for independent medical review.--
 ``(A) Prior authorization determination.--
 ``(i) In general.--The independent medical 
 review panel shall make a determination on a 
 denial of a claim for benefits that is referred 
 to the review panel under subsection (c)(3) in 
 accordance with the medical exigencies of the 
 case and as soon as possible, but in no case 
 later than 14 days after the date of receipt of 
 information under subsection (c)(2) if the 
 review involves a prior authorization of items 
 or services and in no case later than 21 days 
 after the date the request for external review 
 is received.
 ``(ii) Expedited determination.--
 Notwithstanding clause (i) and subject to 
 clause (iii), the independent medical review 
 panel shall make an expedited determination on 
 a denial of a claim for benefits described in 
 clause (i), when a request for such an 
 expedited determination is made by a 
 participant or beneficiary (or authorized 
 representative) at any time during the process 
 for making a determination, and a health care 
 professional certifies, with the request, that 
 a determination under the timeline described in 
 clause (i) would seriously jeopardize the life 
 or health of the participant or beneficiary or 
 the ability of the participant or beneficiary 
 to maintain or regain maximum function. Such 
 determination shall be made in accordance with 
 the medical exigencies of the case and as soon 
 as possible, but in no case later than 72 hours 
 after the time the request for external review 
 is received by the qualified external review 
 entity.
 ``(iii) Ongoing care determination.--
 Notwithstanding clause (i), in the case of a 
 review described in such clause that involves a 
 termination or reduction of care, the notice of 
 the determination shall be completed not later 
 than 24 hours after the time the request for 
 external review is received by the qualified 
 external review entity and before the end of 
 the approved period of care.
 ``(B) Retrospective determination.--The independent 
 medical review panel shall complete a review in the 
 case of a retrospective determination on an appeal of a 
 denial of a claim for benefits that is referred to the 
 review panel under subsection (c)(3) in no case later 
 than 30 days after the date of receipt of information 
 under subsection (c)(2) and in no case later than 60 
 days after the date the request for external review is 
 received by the qualified external review entity.
 ``(2) Notification of determination.--The external review 
 entity shall ensure that the plan or issuer, the participant, 
 or beneficiary (or authorized representative) and the treating 
 health care professional (if any) receives a copy of the 
 written determination of the independent medical review panel 
 prepared under subsection (d)(3)(F). Nothing in this paragraph 
 shall be construed as preventing an entity or review panel from 
 providing an initial oral notice of the review panel's 
 determination.
 ``(3) Form of notices.--Determinations and notices under 
 this subsection shall be written in a manner calculated to be 
 understood by a participant.
 ``(f) Compliance.--
 ``(1) Application of determinations.--
 ``(A) External review determinations binding on 
 plan.--The determinations of an external review entity 
 and an independent medical review panel under this 
 section shall be binding upon the plan or issuer 
 involved.
 ``(B) Compliance with determination.--If the 
 determination of an independent medical review panel is 
 to reverse the denial, the plan or issuer, upon the 
 receipt of such determination, shall authorize coverage 
 to comply with the medical review panel's determination 
 in accordance with the timeframe established by the 
 medical review panel.
 ``(2) Failure to comply.--
 ``(A) In general.--If a plan or issuer fails to 
 comply with the timeframe established under paragraph 
 (1)(B) with respect to a participant or beneficiary, 
 where such failure to comply is caused by the plan or 
 issuer, the participant, or beneficiary may obtain the 
 items or services involved (in a manner consistent with 
 the determination of the independent medical review 
 panel) from any provider regardless of whether such 
 provider is a participating provider under the plan or 
 coverage.
 ``(B) Reimbursement.--
 ``(i) In general.--Where a participant or 
 beneficiary obtains items or services in 
 accordance with subparagraph (A), the plan or 
 issuer involved shall provide for reimbursement 
 of the costs of such items or services. Such 
 reimbursement shall be made to the treating 
 health care professional or to the participant 
 or beneficiary (in the case of a participant or 
 beneficiary who pays for the costs of such 
 items or services).
 ``(ii) Amount.--The plan or issuer shall 
 fully reimburse a professional, participant or 
 beneficiary under clause (i) for the total 
 costs of the items or services provided 
 (regardless of any plan limitations that may 
 apply to the coverage of such items or 
 services) so long as the items or services were 
 provided in a manner consistent with the 
 determination of the independent medical review 
 panel.
 ``(C) Failure to reimburse.--Where a plan or issuer 
 fails to provide reimbursement to a professional, 
 participant, or beneficiary in accordance with this 
 paragraph, the professional, participant, or 
 beneficiary may commence a civil action (or utilize 
 other remedies available under law) to recover only the 
 amount of any such reimbursement that is owed by the 
 plan or issuer and any necessary legal costs or 
 expenses (including attorney's fees) incurred in 
 recovering such reimbursement.
 ``(D) Available remedies.--The remedies provided 
 under this paragraph are in addition to any other 
 available remedies.
 ``(3) Penalties against authorized officials for refusing 
 to authorize the determination of an external review entity.--
 ``(A) Monetary penalties.--
 ``(i) In general.--In any case in which the 
 determination of an external review entity is 
 not followed by a group health plan, or by a 
 health insurance issuer offering health 
 insurance coverage in connection with the group 
 health plan, any person who, acting in the 
 capacity of authorizing the benefit, causes 
 such refusal may, in the discretion of a court 
 of competent jurisdiction, be liable to an 
 aggrieved participant or beneficiary for a 
 civil penalty in an amount of up to $1,000 a 
 day from the date on which the determination 
 was transmitted to the plan or issuer by the 
 external review entity until the date the 
 refusal to provide the benefit is corrected.
 ``(ii) Additional penalty for failing to 
 follow timeline.--In any case in which 
 treatment was not commenced by the plan in 
 accordance with the determination of an 
 independent medical review panel, the Secretary 
 shall assess a civil penalty of $10,000 against 
 the plan and the plan shall pay such penalty to 
 the participant or beneficiary involved.
 ``(B) Cease and desist order and order of 
 attorney's fees.--In any action described in 
 subparagraph (A) brought by a participant or 
 beneficiary with respect to a group health plan, or a 
 health insurance issuer offering health insurance 
 coverage in connection with the group health plan, in 
 which a plaintiff alleges that a person referred to in 
 such subparagraph has taken an action resulting in a 
 refusal of a benefit determined by an external review 
 entity to be covered, or has failed to take an action 
 for which such person is responsible under the terms 
 and conditions of the plan or coverage and which is 
 necessary under the plan or coverage for authorizing a 
 benefit, the court shall cause to be served on the 
 defendant an order requiring the defendant--
 ``(i) to cease and desist from the alleged 
 action or failure to act; and
 ``(ii) to pay to the plaintiff a reasonable 
 attorney's fee and other reasonable costs 
 relating to the prosecution of the action on 
 the charges on which the plaintiff prevails.
 ``(C) Additional civil penalties.--
 ``(i) In general.--In addition to any 
 penalty imposed under subparagraph (A) or (B), 
 the appropriate Secretary may assess a civil 
 penalty against a person acting in the capacity 
 of authorizing a benefit determined by an 
 external review entity for one or more group 
 health plans, or health insurance issuers 
 offering health insurance coverage in 
 connection with the group health plan, for--
 ``(I) any pattern or practice of 
 repeated refusal to authorize a benefit 
 determined by an external review entity 
 to be covered; or
 ``(II) any pattern or practice of 
 repeated violations of the requirements 
 of this section with respect to such 
 plan or coverage.
 ``(ii) Standard of proof and amount of 
 penalty.--Such penalty shall be payable only 
 upon proof by clear and convincing evidence of 
 such pattern or practice and shall be in an 
 amount not to exceed the lesser of--
 ``(I) 25 percent of the aggregate 
 value of benefits shown by the 
 appropriate Secretary to have not been 
 provided, or unlawfully delayed, in 
 violation of this section under such 
 pattern or practice; or
 ``(II) $500,000.
 ``(D) Removal and disqualification.--Any person 
 acting in the capacity of authorizing benefits who has 
 engaged in any such pattern or practice described in 
 subparagraph (C)(i) with respect to a plan or coverage, 
 upon the petition of the appropriate Secretary, may be 
 removed by the court from such position, and from any 
 other involvement, with respect to such a plan or 
 coverage, and may be precluded from returning to any 
 such position or involvement for a period determined by 
 the court.
 ``(4) Protection of legal rights.--Nothing in this section 
 or section 503A or 503B shall be construed as altering or 
 eliminating any cause of action or legal rights or remedies of 
 participants or beneficiaries, and others under State or 
 Federal law (including sections 502 and 503 of the Employee 
 Retirement Income Security Act of 1974), including the right to 
 file judicial actions to enforce rights.
 ``(g) Qualifications of Independent Medical Reviewers.--
 ``(1) In general.--In referring a denial to an independent 
 medical review panel to conduct independent medical review 
 under subsection (c), the qualified external review entity 
 shall ensure that--
 ``(A) each independent medical reviewer meets the 
 qualifications described in paragraphs (2) and (3);
 ``(B) with respect to each review, the review panel 
 meets the requirements of paragraph (4) and at least 1 
 reviewer on the panel meets the requirements described 
 in paragraph (5); and
 ``(C) compensation provided by the entity to each 
 reviewer is consistent with paragraph (6).
 ``(2) Licensure and expertise.--Each independent medical 
 reviewer shall be a physician (allopathic or osteopathic) or 
 health care professional who--
 ``(A) is appropriately credentialed or licensed in 
 1 or more States to deliver health care services; and
 ``(B) typically treats the condition, makes the 
 diagnosis, or provides the type of treatment under 
 review.
 ``(3) Independence.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), 
 each independent medical reviewer in a case shall--
 ``(i) not be a related party (as defined in 
 paragraph (7));
 ``(ii) not have a material familial, 
 financial, or professional relationship with 
 such a party; and
 ``(iii) not otherwise have a conflict of 
 interest with such a party (as determined under 
 regulations).
 ``(B) Exception.--Nothing in subparagraph (A) shall 
 be construed to--
 ``(i) prohibit an individual, solely on the 
 basis of affiliation with the plan or issuer, 
 from serving as an independent medical reviewer 
 if--
 ``(I) a non-affiliated individual 
 is not reasonably available;
 ``(II) the affiliated individual is 
 not involved in the provision of items 
 or services in the case under review;
 ``(III) the fact of such an 
 affiliation is disclosed to the plan or 
 issuer and the participant or 
 beneficiary (or authorized 
 representative) and neither party 
 objects; and
 ``(IV) the affiliated individual is 
 not an employee of the plan or issuer 
 and does not provide services 
 exclusively or primarily to or on 
 behalf of the plan or issuer;
 ``(ii) prohibit an individual who has staff 
 privileges at the institution where the 
 treatment involved takes place from serving as 
 an independent medical reviewer merely on the 
 basis of such affiliation if the affiliation is 
 disclosed to the plan or issuer and the 
 participant or beneficiary (or authorized 
 representative), and neither party objects; or
 ``(iii) prohibit receipt of compensation by 
 an independent medical reviewer from an entity 
 if the compensation is provided consistent with 
 paragraph (6).
 ``(4) Practicing health care professional in same field.--
 ``(A) In general.--In a case involving treatment, 
 or the provision of items or services--
 ``(i) by a physician, each reviewer shall 
 be a practicing physician (allopathic or 
 osteopathic) of the same or similar specialty, 
 as a physician who, acting within the 
 appropriate scope of practice within the State 
 in which the service is provided or rendered, 
 typically treats the condition, makes the 
 diagnosis, or provides the type of treatment 
 under review; or
 ``(ii) by a non-physician health care 
 professional, the independent medical review 
 panel shall include at least one practicing 
 non-physician health care professional of the 
 same or similar specialty as the non-physician 
 health care professional who, acting within the 
 appropriate scope of practice within the State 
 in which the service is provided or rendered, 
 typically treats the condition, makes the 
 diagnosis, or provides the type of treatment 
 under review.
 ``(B) Practicing defined.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the term `practicing' means, with respect to 
 an individual who is a physician or other health care 
 professional that the individual provides health care 
 services to individual patients on average at least 2 
 days per week.
 ``(5) Pediatric expertise.--In the case of an external 
 review relating to a child, a reviewer shall have expertise 
 under paragraph (2) in pediatrics.
 ``(6) Limitations on reviewer compensation.--Compensation 
 provided by a qualified external review entity to an 
 independent medical reviewer in connection with a review under 
 this section shall--
 ``(A) not exceed a reasonable level; and
 ``(B) not be contingent on the decision rendered by 
 the reviewer.
 ``(7) Related party defined.--For purposes of this section, 
 the term `related party' means, with respect to a denial of a 
 claim under a plan or coverage relating to a participant or 
 beneficiary, any of the following:
 ``(A) The plan, plan sponsor, or issuer involved, 
 or any fiduciary, officer, director, or employee of 
 such plan, plan sponsor, or issuer.
 ``(B) The participant or beneficiary (or authorized 
 representative).
 ``(C) The health care professional that provides 
 the items or services involved in the denial.
 ``(D) The institution at which the items or 
 services (or treatment) involved in the denial are 
 provided.
 ``(E) The manufacturer of any drug or other item 
 that is included in the items or services involved in 
 the denial.
 ``(F) Any other party determined under any 
 regulations to have a substantial interest in the 
 denial involved.
 ``(h) Qualified External Review Entities.--
 ``(1) Selection of qualified external review entities.--
 ``(A) Limitation on plan or issuer selection.--The 
 appropriate Secretary shall implement procedures--
 ``(i) to assure that the selection process 
 among qualified external review entities will 
 not create any incentives for external review 
 entities to make a decision in a biased manner; 
 and
 ``(ii) for auditing a sample of decisions 
 by such entities to assure that no such 
 decisions are made in a biased manner.
 No such selection process under the procedures 
 implemented by the appropriate Secretary may give 
 either the patient or the plan or issuer any ability to 
 determine or influence the selection of a qualified 
 external review entity to review the case of any 
 participant or beneficiary.
 ``(B) State authority with respect to qualified 
 external review entities for health insurance 
 issuers.--With respect to health insurance issuers 
 offering health insurance coverage in connection with 
 the group health plan in a State, the State may provide 
 for external review activities to be conducted by a 
 qualified external review entity that is designated by 
 the State or that is selected by the State in a manner 
 determined by the State to assure an unbiased 
 determination.
 ``(2) Contract with qualified external review entity.--
 Except as provided in paragraph (1)(B), the external review 
 process of a plan or issuer under this section shall be 
 conducted under a contract between the plan or issuer and 1 or 
 more qualified external review entities (as defined in 
 paragraph (4)(A)).
 ``(3) Terms and conditions of contract.--The terms and 
 conditions of a contract under paragraph (2) shall--
 ``(A) be consistent with the standards the 
 appropriate Secretary shall establish to assure there 
 is no real or apparent conflict of interest in the 
 conduct of external review activities; and
 ``(B) provide that the costs of the external review 
 process shall be borne by the plan or issuer.
 Subparagraph (B) shall not be construed as applying to the 
 imposition of a filing fee under subsection (b)(2)(A)(iv) or 
 costs incurred by the participant or beneficiary (or authorized 
 representative) or treating health care professional (if any) 
 in support of the review, including the provision of additional 
 evidence or information.
 ``(4) Qualifications.--
 ``(A) In general.--In this section, the term 
 `qualified external review entity' means, in relation 
 to a plan or issuer, an entity that is initially 
 certified (and periodically recertified) under 
 subparagraph (C) as meeting the following requirements:
 ``(i) The entity has (directly or through 
 contracts or other arrangements) sufficient 
 medical, legal, and other expertise and 
 sufficient staffing to carry out duties of a 
 qualified external review entity under this 
 section on a timely basis, including making 
 determinations under subsection (b)(2)(A) and 
 providing for independent medical reviews under 
 subsection (d).
 ``(ii) The entity is not a plan or issuer 
 or an affiliate or a subsidiary of a plan or 
 issuer, and is not an affiliate or subsidiary 
 of a professional or trade association of plans 
 or issuers or of health care providers.
 ``(iii) The entity has provided assurances 
 that it will conduct external review activities 
 consistent with the applicable requirements of 
 this section and standards specified in 
 subparagraph (C), including that it will not 
 conduct any external review activities in a 
 case unless the independence requirements of 
 subparagraph (B) are met with respect to the 
 case.
 ``(iv) The entity has provided assurances 
 that it will provide information in a timely 
 manner under subparagraph (D).
 ``(v) The entity meets such other 
 requirements as the appropriate Secretary 
 provides by regulation.
 ``(B) Independence requirements.--
 ``(i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), 
 an entity meets the independence requirements 
 of this subparagraph with respect to any case 
 if the entity--
 ``(I) is not a related party (as 
 defined in subsection (g)(7));
 ``(II) does not have a material 
 familial, financial, or professional 
 relationship with such a party; and
 ``(III) does not otherwise have a 
 conflict of interest with such a party 
 (as determined under regulations).
 ``(ii) Exception for reasonable 
 compensation.--Nothing in clause (i) shall be 
 construed to prohibit receipt by a qualified 
 external review entity of compensation from a 
 plan or issuer for the conduct of external 
 review activities under this section if the 
 compensation is provided consistent with clause 
 (iii).
 ``(iii) Limitations on entity 
 compensation.--Compensation provided by a plan 
 or issuer to a qualified external review entity 
 in connection with reviews under this section 
 shall--
 ``(I) not exceed a reasonable 
 level; and
 ``(II) not be contingent on any 
 decision rendered by the entity or by 
 any independent medical review panel.
 ``(C) Certification and recertification process.--
 ``(i) In general.--The initial 
 certification and recertification of a 
 qualified external review entity shall be 
 made--
 ``(I) under a process that is 
 recognized or approved by the 
 appropriate Secretary; or
 ``(II) by a qualified private 
 standard-setting organization that is 
 approved by the appropriate Secretary 
 under clause (iii).
 In taking action under subclause (I), the 
 appropriate Secretary shall give deference to 
 entities that are under contract with the 
 Federal Government or with an applicable State 
 authority to perform functions of the type 
 performed by qualified external review 
 entities.
 ``(ii) Process.--The appropriate Secretary 
 shall not recognize or approve a process under 
 clause (i)(I) unless the process applies 
 standards (as promulgated in regulations) that 
 ensure that a qualified external review 
 entity--
 ``(I) will carry out (and has 
 carried out, in the case of 
 recertification) the responsibilities 
 of such an entity in accordance with 
 this section, including meeting 
 applicable deadlines;
 ``(II) will meet (and has met, in 
 the case of recertification) 
 appropriate indicators of fiscal 
 integrity;
 ``(III) will maintain (and has 
 maintained, in the case of 
 recertification) appropriate 
 confidentiality with respect to 
 individually identifiable health 
 information obtained in the course of 
 conducting external review activities; 
 and
 ``(IV) in the case of 
 recertification, shall review the 
 matters described in clause (iv).
 ``(iii) Approval of qualified private 
 standard-setting organizations.--For purposes 
 of clause (i)(II), the appropriate Secretary 
 may approve a qualified private standard-
 setting organization if such Secretary finds 
 that the organization only certifies (or 
 recertifies) external review entities that meet 
 at least the standards required for the 
 certification (or recertification) of external 
 review entities under clause (ii).
 ``(iv) Considerations in 
 recertifications.--In conducting 
 recertifications of a qualified external review 
 entity under this paragraph, the appropriate 
 Secretary or organization conducting the 
 recertification shall review compliance of the 
 entity with the requirements for conducting 
 external review activities under this section, 
 including the following:
 ``(I) Provision of information 
 under subparagraph (D).
 ``(II) Adherence to applicable 
 deadlines (both by the entity and by 
 independent medical review panels it 
 refers cases to).
 ``(III) Compliance with limitations 
 on compensation (with respect to both 
 the entity and independent medical 
 review panels it refers cases to).
 ``(IV) Compliance with applicable 
 independence requirements.
 ``(V) Compliance with the 
 requirement of subsection (d)(1) that 
 only medically reviewable decisions 
 shall be the subject of independent 
 medical review and with the requirement 
 of subsection (d)(3) that independent 
 medical review panels may not require 
 coverage for specifically excluded 
 benefits.
 ``(v) Period of certification or 
 recertification.--A certification or 
 recertification provided under this paragraph 
 shall extend for a period not to exceed 2 
 years.
 ``(vi) Revocation.--A certification or 
 recertification under this paragraph may be 
 revoked by the appropriate Secretary or by the 
 organization providing such certification upon 
 a showing of cause. The Secretary, or 
 organization, shall revoke a certification or 
 deny a recertification with respect to an 
 entity if there is a showing that the entity 
 has a pattern or practice of ordering coverage 
 for benefits that are specifically excluded 
 under the plan or coverage.
 ``(vii) Petition for denial or 
 withdrawal.--An individual may petition the 
 Secretary, or an organization providing the 
 certification involves, for a denial of 
 recertification or a withdrawal of a 
 certification with respect to an entity under 
 this subparagraph if there is a pattern or 
 practice of such entity failing to meet a 
 requirement of this section.
 ``(viii) Sufficient number of entities.--
 The appropriate Secretary shall certify and 
 recertify a number of external review entities 
 which is sufficient to ensure the timely and 
 efficient provision of review services.
 ``(D) Provision of information.--
 ``(i) In general.--A qualified external 
 review entity shall provide to the appropriate 
 Secretary, in such manner and at such times as 
 such Secretary may require, such information 
 (relating to the denials which have been 
 referred to the entity for the conduct of 
 external review under this section) as such 
 Secretary determines appropriate to assure 
 compliance with the independence and other 
 requirements of this section to monitor and 
 assess the quality of its external review 
 activities and lack of bias in making 
 determinations. Such information shall include 
 information described in clause (ii) but shall 
 not include individually identifiable medical 
 information.
 ``(ii) Information to be included.--The 
 information described in this subclause with 
 respect to an entity is as follows:
 ``(I) The number and types of 
 denials for which a request for review 
 has been received by the entity.
 ``(II) The disposition by the 
 entity of such denials, including the 
 number referred to a independent 
 medical review panel and the reasons 
 for such dispositions (including the 
 application of exclusions), on a plan 
 or issuer-specific basis and on a 
 health care specialty-specific basis.
 ``(III) The length of time in 
 making determinations with respect to 
 such denials.
 ``(IV) Updated information on the 
 information required to be submitted as 
 a condition of certification with 
 respect to the entity's performance of 
 external review activities.
 ``(iii) Information to be provided to 
 certifying organization.--
 ``(I) In general.--In the case of a 
 qualified external review entity which 
 is certified (or recertified) under 
 this subsection by a qualifiedprivate 
 standard-setting organization, at the 
 request of the organization, the entity 
 shall provide the organization with the 
 information provided to the appropriate 
 Secretary under clause (i).
 ``(II) Additional information.--
 Nothing in this subparagraph shall be 
 construed as preventing such an 
 organization from requiring additional 
 information as a condition of 
 certification or recertification of an 
 entity.
 ``(iv) Use of information.--Information 
 provided under this subparagraph may be used by 
 the appropriate Secretary and qualified private 
 standard-setting organizations to conduct 
 oversight of qualified external review 
 entities, including recertification of such 
 entities, and shall be made available to the 
 public in an appropriate manner.
 ``(E) Limitation on liability.--No qualified 
 external review entity having a contract with a plan or 
 issuer, and no person who is employed by any such 
 entity or who furnishes professional services to such 
 entity (including as an independent medical review 
 panel), shall be held by reason of the performance of 
 any duty, function, or activity required or authorized 
 pursuant to this section, to be civilly liable under 
 any law of the United States or of any State (or 
 political subdivision thereof) if there was no actual 
 malice or gross misconduct in the performance of such 
 duty, function, or activity.
 ``(5) Report.--Not later than 12 months after the general 
 effective date referred to in section 601 of the Bipartisan 
 Patient Protection Act, the General Accounting Office shall 
 prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a 
 report concerning--
 ``(A) the information that is provided under 
 paragraph (3)(D);
 ``(B) the number of denials that have been upheld 
 by independent medical review panels and the number of 
 denials that have been reversed by such panels; and
 ``(C) the extent to which independent medical 
 review panels are requiring coverage for benefits that 
 are specifically excluded under the plans or 
 coverage.''.

SEC. 105. HEALTH CARE CONSUMER ASSISTANCE FUND.

 (a) Grants.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 (referred to in this section as the ``Secretary'') shall 
 establish a fund, to be known as the ``Health Care Consumer 
 Assistance Fund'', to be used to award grants to eligible 
 States to carry out consumer assistance activities (including 
 programs established by States prior to the enactment of this 
 Act) designed to provide information, assistance, and referrals 
 to consumers of health insurance products.
 (2) State eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant 
 under this subsection a State shall prepare and submit to the 
 Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and 
 containing such information as the Secretary may require, 
 including a State plan that describes--
 (A) the manner in which the State will ensure that 
 the health care consumer assistance office (established 
 under paragraph (4)) will educate and assist health 
 care consumers in accessing needed care;
 (B) the manner in which the State will coordinate 
 and distinguish the services provided by the health 
 care consumer assistance office with the services 
 provided by Federal, State and local health-related 
 ombudsman, information, protection and advocacy, 
 insurance, and fraud and abuse programs;
 (C) the manner in which the State will provide 
 information, outreach, and services to underserved, 
 minority populations with limited English proficiency 
 and populations residing in rural areas;
 (D) the manner in which the State will oversee the 
 health care consumer assistance office, its activities, 
 product materials and evaluate program effectiveness;
 (E) the manner in which the State will ensure that 
 funds made available under this section will be used to 
 supplement, and not supplant, any other Federal, State, 
 or local funds expended to provide services for 
 programs described under this section and those 
 described in subparagraphs (C) and (D);
 (F) the manner in which the State will ensure that 
 health care consumer office personnel have the 
 professional background and training to carry out the 
 activities of the office; and
 (G) the manner in which the State will ensure that 
 consumers have direct access to consumer assistance 
 personnel during regular business hours.
 (3) Amount of grant.--
 (A) In general.--From amounts appropriated under 
 subsection (b) for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall 
 award a grant to a State in an amount that bears the 
 same ratio to such amounts as the number of individuals 
 within the State covered under a group health plan or 
 under health insurance coverage in connection with the 
 group health plan offered by a health insurance issuer 
 bears to the total number of individuals so covered in 
 all States (as determined by the Secretary). Any 
 amounts provided to a State under this subsection that 
 are not used by the State shall be remitted to the 
 Secretary and reallocated in accordance with this 
 subparagraph.
 (B) Minimum amount.--In no case shall the amount 
 provided to a State under a grant under this subsection 
 for a fiscal year be less than an amount equal to 0.5 
 percent of the amount appropriated for such fiscal year 
 to carry out this section.
 (C) Non-federal contributions.--A State will 
 provide for the collection of non-Federal contributions 
 for the operation of the office in an amount that is 
 not less than 25 percent of the amount of Federal funds 
 provided to the State under this section.
 (4) Provision of funds for establishment of office.--
 (A) In general.--From amounts provided under a 
 grant under this subsection, a State shall, directly or 
 through a contract with an independent, nonprofit 
 entity with demonstrated experience in serving the 
 needs of health care consumers, provide for the 
 establishment and operation of a State health care 
 consumer assistance office.
 (B) Eligibility of entity.--To be eligible to enter 
 into a contract under subparagraph (A), an entity shall 
 demonstrate that it has the technical, organizational, 
 and professional capacity to deliver the services 
 described in subsection (b) to all public and private 
 health insurance participants or beneficiaries.
 (C) Existing state entity.--Nothing in this section 
 shall prevent the funding of an existing health care 
 consumer assistance program that otherwise meets the 
 requirements of this section.
 (b) Use of Funds.--
 (1) By state.--A State shall use amounts provided under a 
 grant awarded under this section to carry out consumer 
 assistance activities directly or by contract with an 
 independent, non-profit organization. An eligible entity may 
 use some reasonable amount of such grant to ensure the adequate 
 training of personnel carrying out such activities. To receive 
 amounts under this subsection, an eligible entity shall provide 
 consumer assistance services, including--
 (A) the operation of a toll-free telephone hotline 
 to respond to consumer requests;
 (B) the dissemination of appropriate educational 
 materials on available health insurance products and on 
 how best to access health care and the rights and 
 responsibilities of health care consumers;
 (C) the provision of education on effective methods 
 to promptly and efficiently resolve questions, 
 problems, and grievances;
 (D) the coordination of educational and outreach 
 efforts with health plans, health care providers, 
 payers, and governmental agencies;
 (E) referrals to appropriate private and public 
 entities to resolve questions, problems and grievances; 
 and
 (F) the provision of information and assistance, 
 including acting as an authorized representative, 
 regarding internal, external, or administrative 
 grievances or appeals procedures in nonlitigative 
 settings to appeal the denial, termination, or 
 reduction of health care services, or the refusal to 
 pay for such services, under a group health plan or 
 health insurance coverage in connection with the group 
 health plan offered by a health insurance issuer.
 (2) Confidentiality and access to information.--
 (A) State entity.--With respect to a State that 
 directly establishes a health care consumer assistance 
 office, such office shall establish and implement 
 procedures and protocols in accordance with applicable 
 Federal and State laws.
 (B) Contract entity.--With respect to a State that, 
 through contract, establishes a health care consumer 
 assistance office, such office shall establish and 
 implement procedures and protocols, consistent with 
 applicable Federal and State laws, to ensure the 
 confidentiality of all information shared by a 
 participant, beneficiary, or their personal 
 representative and their health care providers, group 
 health plans, or health insurance insurers with the 
 office and to ensure that no such information is used 
 by the office, or released or disclosed to State 
 agencies or outside persons or entities without the 
 prior written authorization (in accordance with section 
 164.508 of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations) of 
 the individual or personal representative. The office 
 may, consistent with applicable Federal and State 
 confidentiality laws, collect, use or disclose 
 aggregate information that is not individually 
 identifiable (as defined in section 164.501 of title 
 45, Code of Federal Regulations). The office shall 
 provide a written description of the policies and 
 procedures of the office with respect to the manner in 
 which health information may be used or disclosed to 
 carry out consumer assistance activities. The office 
 shall provide health care providers, group health 
 plans, or health insurance issuers with a written 
 authorization (in accordance with section 164.508 of 
 title 45, Code of Federal Regulations) to allow the 
 office to obtain medical information relevant to the 
 matter before the office.
 (3) Availability of services.--The health care consumer 
 assistance office of a State shall not discriminate in the 
 provision of information, referrals, and services regardless of 
 the source of the individual's health insurance coverage in 
 connection with the group health plan or prospective coverage, 
 including individuals covered under a group health plan or 
 health insurance coverage in connection with the group health 
 plan offered by a health insurance issuer, the medicare or 
 medicaid programs under title XVIII or XIX of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 and 1396 et seq.), or under any 
 other Federal or State health care program.
 (4) Designation of responsibilities.--
 (A) Within existing state entity.--If the health 
 care consumer assistance office of a State is located 
 within an existing State regulatory agency or office of 
 an elected State official, the State shall ensure 
 that--
 (i) there is a separate delineation of the 
 funding, activities, and responsibilities of 
 the office as compared to the other funding, 
 activities, and responsibilities of the agency; 
 and
 (ii) the office establishes and implements 
 procedures and protocols to ensure the 
 confidentiality of all information shared by a 
 participant, beneficiary, or their personal 
 representative and their health care providers, 
 group health plans, or health insurance issuers 
 with the office and to ensure that no 
 information is disclosed to the State agency or 
 office without the written authorization of the 
 individual or their personal representative in 
 accordance with paragraph (2).
 (B) Contract entity.--In the case of an entity that 
 enters into a contract with a State under subsection 
 (a)(3), the entity shall provide assurances that the 
 entity has no conflict of interest in carrying out the 
 activities of the office and that the entity is 
 independent of group health plans, health insurance 
 issuers, providers, payers, and regulators of health 
 care.
 (5) Subcontracts.--The health care consumer assistance 
 office of a State may carry out activities and provide services 
 through contracts entered into with 1 or more nonprofit 
 entities so long as the office can demonstrate that all of the 
 requirements of this section are complied with by the office.
 (6) Term.--A contract entered into under this subsection 
 shall be for a term of 3 years.
 (c) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the Secretary first awards 
grants under this section, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall 
prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report 
concerning the activities funded under this section and the 
effectiveness of such activities in resolving health care-related 
problems and grievances.
 (d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.

 Subtitle B--Access to Care

SEC. 111. CONSUMER CHOICE OPTION.

 (a) In General.--If--
 (1) a health insurance issuer providing health insurance 
 coverage in connection with a group health plan offers to 
 enrollees health insurance coverage which provides for coverage 
 of services (including physician pathology services) only if 
 such services are furnished through health care professionals 
 and providers who are members of a network of health care 
 professionals and providers who have entered into a contract 
 with the issuer to provide such services, or
 (2) a group health plan offers to participants or 
 beneficiaries health benefits which provide for coverage of 
 services only if such services are furnished through health 
 care professionals and providers who are members of a network 
 of health care professionals and providers who have entered 
 into a contract with the plan to provide such services,
then the issuer or plan shall also offer or arrange to be offered to 
such enrollees, participants, or beneficiaries (at the time of 
enrollment and during an annual open season as provided under 
subsection (c)) the option of health insurance coverage or health 
benefits which provide for coverage of such services which are not 
furnished through health care professionals and providers who are 
members of such a network unless such enrollees, participants, or 
beneficiaries are offered such non-network coverage through another 
group health plan or through another health insurance issuer in the 
group market.
 (b) Additional Costs.--The amount of any additional premium charged 
by the health insurance issuer or group health plan for the additional 
cost of the creation and maintenance of the option described in 
subsection (a) and the amount of any additional cost sharing imposed 
under such option shall be borne by the enrollee, participant, or 
beneficiary unless it is paid by the health plan sponsor or group 
health plan through agreement with the health insurance issuer.
 (c) Open Season.--An enrollee, participant, or beneficiary, may 
change to the offering provided under this section only during a time 
period determined by the health insurance issuer or group health plan. 
Such time period shall occur at least annually.

SEC. 112. CHOICE OF HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL.

 (a) Primary Care.--If a group health plan, or a health insurance 
issuer that offers health insurance coverage, requires or provides for 
designation by a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee of a 
participating primary care provider, then the plan or issuer shall 
permit each participant, beneficiary, and enrollee to designate any 
participating primary care provider who is available to accept such 
individual.
 (b) Specialists.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), a group health 
 plan and a health insurance issuer that offers health insurance 
 coverage shall permit each participant, beneficiary, or 
 enrollee to receive medically necessary and appropriate 
 specialty care, pursuant to appropriate referral procedures, 
 from any qualified participating health care professional who 
 is available to accept such individual for such care.
 (2) Limitation.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to specialty 
 care if the plan or issuer clearly informs participants, 
 beneficiaries, and enrollees of the limitations on choice of 
 participating health care professionals with respect to such 
 care.
 (3) Construction.--Nothing in this subsection shall be 
 construed as affecting the application of section 114 (relating 
 to timely access to specialists).

SEC. 113. ACCESS TO EMERGENCY CARE.

 (a) Coverage of Emergency Services.--
 (1) In general.--If a group health plan, or health 
 insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer, 
 provides or covers any benefits with respect to services in an 
 emergency department of a hospital, the plan or issuer shall 
 cover emergency services (as defined in paragraph (2)(B))--
 (A) without the need for any prior authorization 
 determination;
 (B) whether the health care provider furnishing 
 such services is a participating provider with respect 
 to such services;
 (C) in a manner so that, if such services are 
 provided to a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee--
 (i) by a nonparticipating health care 
 provider with or without prior authorization, 
 or
 (ii) by a participating health care 
 provider without prior authorization,
 the participant, beneficiary, or enrollee is not liable 
 for amounts that exceed the amounts of liability that 
 would be incurred if the services were provided by a 
 participating health care provider with prior 
 authorization; and
 (D) without regard to any other term or condition 
 of such coverage (other than exclusion or coordination 
 of benefits, or an affiliation or waiting period, 
 permitted under section 2701 of the Public Health 
 Service Act, section 701 of the Employee Retirement 
 Income Security Act of 1974, or section 9801 of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986, and other than 
 applicable cost-sharing).
 (2) Definitions.--In this section:
 (A) Emergency medical condition.--The term 
 ``emergency medical condition'' means a medical 
 condition manifesting itself by acute symptoms of 
 sufficient severity (including severe pain) such that a 
 prudent layperson, who possesses an average knowledge 
 of health and medicine, could reasonably expect the 
 absence of immediate medical attention to result in a 
 condition described in clause (i), (ii), or (iii) of 
 section 1867(e)(1)(A) of the Social Security Act.
 (B) Emergency services.--The term ``emergency 
 services'' means, with respect to an emergency medical 
 condition--
 (i) a medical screening examination (as 
 required under section 1867 of the Social 
 Security Act) that is within the capability of 
 the emergency department of a hospital, 
 including ancillary services routinely 
 available to the emergency department to 
 evaluate such emergency medical condition, and
 (ii) within the capabilities of the staff 
 and facilities available at the hospital, such 
 further medical examination and treatment as 
 are required under section 1867 of such Act to 
 stabilize the patient.
 (C) Stabilize.--The term ``to stabilize'', with 
 respect to an emergency medical condition (as defined 
 in subparagraph (A)), has the meaning given in section 
 1867(e)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395dd(e)(3)).
 (b) Reimbursement for Maintenance Care and Post-Stabilization 
Care.--A group health plan, and health insurance coverage offered by a 
health insurance issuer, must provide reimbursement for maintenance 
care and post-stabilization care in accordance with the requirements of 
section 1852(d)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-
22(d)(2)). Such reimbursement shall be provided in a manner consistent 
with subsection (a)(1)(C).
 (c) Coverage of Emergency Ambulance Services.--
 (1) In general.--If a group health plan, or health 
 insurance coverage provided by a health insurance issuer, 
 provides any benefits with respect to ambulance services and 
 emergency services, the plan or issuer shall cover emergency 
 ambulance services (as defined in paragraph (2)) furnished 
 under the plan or coverage under the same terms and conditions 
 under subparagraphs (A) through (D) of subsection (a)(1) under 
 which coverage is provided for emergency services.
 (2) Emergency ambulance services.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term ``emergency ambulance services'' means 
 ambulance services (as defined for purposes of section 
 1861(s)(7) of the Social Security Act) furnished to transport 
 an individual who has an emergency medical condition (as 
 defined in subsection (a)(2)(A)) to a hospital for the receipt 
 of emergency services (as defined in subsection (a)(2)(B)) in a 
 case in which the emergency services are covered under the plan 
 or coverage pursuant to subsection (a)(1) and a prudent 
 layperson, with an average knowledge of health and medicine, 
 could reasonably expect that the absence of such transport 
 would result in placing the health of the individual in serious 
 jeopardy, serious impairment of bodily function, or serious 
 dysfunction of any bodily organ or part.

SEC. 114. TIMELY ACCESS TO SPECIALISTS.

 (a) Timely Access.--
 (1) In general.--A group health plan and a health insurance 
 issuer offering health insurance coverage shall ensure that 
 participants, beneficiaries, and enrollees receive timely 
 access to specialists who are appropriate to the condition of, 
 and accessible to, the participant, beneficiary, or enrollee, 
 when such specialty care is a covered benefit under the plan or 
 coverage.
 (2) Rule of construction.--Nothing in paragraph (1) shall 
 be construed--
 (A) to require the coverage under a group health 
 plan or health insurance coverage of benefits or 
 services;
 (B) to prohibit a plan or issuer from including 
 providers in the network only to the extent necessary 
 to meet the needs of the plan's or issuer's 
 participants, beneficiaries, or enrollees; or
 (C) to override any State licensure or scope-of-
 practice law.
 (3) Access to certain providers.--
 (A) In general.--With respect to specialty care 
 under this section, if a participating specialist is 
 not available and qualified to provide such care to the 
 participant, beneficiary, or enrollee, the plan or 
 issuer shall provide for coverage of such care by a 
 nonparticipating specialist.
 (B) Treatment of nonparticipating providers.--If a 
 participant, beneficiary, or enrollee receives care 
 from a nonparticipating specialist pursuant to 
 subparagraph (A), such specialty care shall be provided 
 at no additional cost to the participant, beneficiary, 
 or enrollee beyond what the participant, beneficiary, 
 or enrollee would otherwise pay for such specialty care 
 if provided by a participating specialist.
 (b) Referrals.--
 (1) Authorization.--Subject to subsection (a)(1), a group 
 health plan or health insurance issuer may require an 
 authorization in order to obtain coverage for specialty 
 services under this section. Any such authorization--
 (A) shall be for an appropriate duration of time or 
 number of referrals, including an authorization for a 
 standing referral where appropriate; and
 (B) may not be refused solely because the 
 authorization involves services of a nonparticipating 
 specialist (described in subsection (a)(3)).
 (2) Referrals for ongoing special conditions.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subsection (a)(1), a 
 group health plan and a health insurance issuer shall 
 permit a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee who has 
 an ongoing special condition (as defined in 
 subparagraph (B)) to receive a referral to a specialist 
 for the treatment of such condition and such specialist 
 may authorize such referrals, procedures, tests, and 
 other medical services with respect to such condition, 
 or coordinate the care for such condition, subject to 
 the terms of a treatment plan (if any) referred to in 
 subsection (c) with respect to the condition.
 (B) Ongoing special condition defined.--In this 
 subsection, the term ``ongoing special condition'' 
 means a condition or disease that--
 (i) is life-threatening, degenerative, 
 potentially disabling, or congenital; and
 (ii) requires specialized medical care over 
 a prolonged period of time.
 (c) Treatment Plans.--
 (1) In general.--A group health plan or health insurance 
 issuer may require that the specialty care be provided--
 (A) pursuant to a treatment plan, but only if the 
 treatment plan--
 (i) is developed by the specialist, in 
 consultation with the case manager or primary 
 care provider, and the participant, 
 beneficiary, or enrollee, and
 (ii) is approved by the plan or issuer in a 
 timely manner, if the plan or issuer requires 
 such approval; and
 (B) in accordance with applicable quality assurance 
 and utilization review standards of the plan or issuer.
 (2) Notification.--Nothing in paragraph (1) shall be 
 construed as prohibiting a plan or issuer from requiring the 
 specialist to provide the plan or issuer with regular updates 
 on the specialty care provided, as well as all other reasonably 
 necessary medical information.
 (d) Specialist Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term 
``specialist'' means, with respect to the condition of the participant, 
beneficiary, or enrollee, a health care professional, facility, or 
center that has adequate expertise through appropriate training and 
experience (including, in the case of a child, appropriate pediatric 
expertise) to provide high quality care in treating the condition.

SEC. 115. PATIENT ACCESS TO OBSTETRICAL AND GYNECOLOGICAL CARE.

 (a) General Rights.--
 (1) Direct access.--A group health plan, and a health 
 insurance issuer offering health insurance coverage, described 
 in subsection (b) may not require authorization or referral by 
 the plan, issuer, or any person (including a primary care 
 provider described in subsection (b)(2)) in the case of a 
 female participant, beneficiary, or enrollee who seeks coverage 
 for obstetrical or gynecological care provided by a 
 participating health care professional who specializes in 
 obstetrics or gynecology.
 (2) Obstetrical and gynecological care.--A group health 
 plan and a health insurance issuer described in subsection (b) 
 shall treat the provision of obstetrical and gynecological 
 care, and the ordering of related obstetrical and gynecological 
 items and services, pursuant to the direct access described 
 under paragraph (1), by a participating health care 
 professional who specializes in obstetrics or gynecology as the 
 authorization of the primary care provider.
 (b) Application of Section.--A group health plan, or health 
insurance issuer offering health insurance coverage, described in this 
subsection is a group health plan or coverage that--
 (1) provides coverage for obstetric or gynecologic care; 
 and
 (2) requires the designation by a participant, beneficiary, 
 or enrollee of a participating primary care provider.
 (c) Construction.--Nothing in subsection (a) shall be construed 
to--
 (1) waive any exclusions of coverage under the terms and 
 conditions of the plan or health insurance coverage with 
 respect to coverage of obstetrical or gynecological care; or
 (2) preclude the group health plan or health insurance 
 issuer involved from requiring that the obstetrical or 
 gynecological provider notify the primary care health care 
 professional or the plan or issuer of treatment decisions.

SEC. 116. ACCESS TO PEDIATRIC CARE.

 (a) Pediatric Care.--In the case of a person who has a child who is 
a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee under a group health plan, or 
health insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer, if the 
plan or issuer requires or provides for the designation of a 
participating primary care provider for the child, the plan or issuer 
shall permit such person to designate a physician (allopathic or 
osteopathic) who specializes in pediatrics as the child's primary care 
provider if such provider participates in the network of the plan or 
issuer.
 (b) Construction.--Nothing in subsection (a) shall be construed to 
waive any exclusions of coverage under the terms and conditions of the 
plan or health insurance coverage with respect to coverage of pediatric 
care.

SEC. 117. CONTINUITY OF CARE.

 (a) Termination of Provider.--
 (1) In general.--If--
 (A) a contract between a group health plan, or a 
 health insurance issuer offering health insurance 
 coverage, and a treating health care provider is 
 terminated (as defined in paragraph (e)(4)); or
 (B) benefits or coverage provided by a health care 
 provider are terminated because of a change in the 
 terms of provider participation in such plan or 
 coverage,
 the plan or issuer shall meet the requirements of paragraph (3) 
 with respect to each continuing care patient.
 (2) Treatment of termination of contract with health 
 insurance issuer.--If a contract for the provision of health 
 insurance coverage between a group health plan and a health 
 insurance issuer is terminated and, as a result of such 
 termination, coverage of services of a health care provider is 
 terminated with respect to an individual, the provisions of 
 paragraph (1) (and the succeeding provisions of this section) 
 shall apply under the plan in the same manner as if there had 
 been a contract between the plan and the provider that had been 
 terminated, but only with respect to benefits that are covered 
 under the plan after the contract termination.
 (3) Requirements.--The requirements of this paragraph are 
 that the plan or issuer--
 (A) notify the continuing care patient involved, or 
 arrange to have the patient notified pursuant to 
 subsection (d)(2), on a timely basis of the termination 
 described in paragraph (1) (or paragraph (2), if 
 applicable) and the right to elect continued 
 transitional care from the provider under this section;
 (B) provide the patient with an opportunity to 
 notify the plan or issuer of the patient's need for 
 transitional care; and
 (C) subject to subsection (c), permit the patient 
 to elect to continue to be covered with respect to the 
 course of treatment by such provider with the 
 provider's consent during a transitional period (as 
 provided for under subsection (b)).
 (4) Continuing care patient.--For purposes of this section, 
 the term ``continuing care patient'' means a participant, 
 beneficiary, or enrollee who--
 (A) is undergoing a course of treatment for a 
 serious and complex condition from the provider at the 
 time the plan or issuer receives or provides notice of 
 provider, benefit, or coverage termination described in 
 paragraph (1) (or paragraph (2), if applicable);
 (B) is undergoing a course of institutional or 
 inpatient care from the provider at the time of such 
 notice;
 (C) is scheduled to undergo non-elective surgery 
 from the provider at the time of such notice;
 (D) is pregnant and undergoing a course of 
 treatment for the pregnancy from the provider at the 
 time of such notice; or
 (E) is or was determined to be terminally ill (as 
 determined under section 1861(dd)(3)(A) of the Social 
 Security Act) at the time of such notice, but only with 
 respect to a provider that was treating the terminal 
 illness before the date of such notice.
 (b) Transitional Periods.--
 (1) Serious and complex conditions.--The transitional 
 period under this subsection with respect to a continuing care 
 patient described in subsection (a)(4)(A) shall extend for up 
 to 90 days (as determined by the treating health care 
 professional) from the date of the notice described in 
 subsection (a)(3)(A).
 (2) Institutional or inpatient care.--The transitional 
 period under this subsection for a continuing care patient 
 described in subsection (a)(4)(B) shall extend until the 
 earlier of--
 (A) the expiration of the 90-day period beginning 
 on the date on which the notice under subsection 
 (a)(3)(A) is provided; or
 (B) the date of discharge of the patient from such 
 care or the termination of the period of 
 institutionalization, or, if later, the date of 
 completion of reasonable follow-up care.
 (3) Scheduled non-elective surgery.--The transitional 
 period under this subsection for a continuing care patient 
 described in subsection (a)(4)(C) shall extend until the 
 completion of the surgery involved and post-surgical follow-up 
 care relating to the surgery and occurring within 90 days after 
 the date of the surgery.
 (4) Pregnancy.--The transitional period under this 
 subsection for a continuing care patient described in 
 subsection (a)(4)(D) shall extend through the provision of 
 post-partum care directly related to the delivery.
 (5) Terminal illness.--The transitional period under this 
 subsection for a continuing care patient described in 
 subsection (a)(4)(E) shall extend for the remainder of the 
 patient's life for care that is directly related to the 
 treatment of the terminal illness or its medical 
 manifestations.
 (c) Permissible Terms and Conditions.--A group health plan or 
health insurance issuer may condition coverage of continued treatment 
by a provider under this section upon the provider agreeing to the 
following terms and conditions:
 (1) The treating health care provider agrees to accept 
 reimbursement from the plan or issuer and continuing care 
 patient involved (with respect to cost-sharing) at the rates 
 applicable prior to the start of the transitional period as 
 payment in full (or, in the case described in subsection 
 (a)(2), at the rates applicable under the replacement plan or 
 coverage after the date of the termination of the contract with 
 the group health plan or health insurance issuer) and not to 
 impose cost-sharing with respect to the patient in an amount 
 that would exceed the cost-sharing that could have been imposed 
 if the contract referred to in subsection (a)(1) had not been 
 terminated.
 (2) The treating health care provider agrees to adhere to 
 the quality assurance standards of the plan or issuer 
 responsible for payment under paragraph (1) and to provide to 
 such plan or issuer necessary medical information related to 
 the care provided.
 (3) The treating health care provider agrees otherwise to 
 adhere to such plan's or issuer's policies and procedures, 
 including procedures regarding referrals and obtaining prior 
 authorization and providing services pursuant to a treatment 
 plan (if any) approved by the plan or issuer.
 (d) Rules of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed--
 (1) to require the coverage of benefits which would not 
 have been covered if the provider involved remained a 
 participating provider; or
 (2) with respect to the termination of a contract under 
 subsection (a) to prevent a group health plan or health 
 insurance issuer from requiring that the health care provider--
 (A) notify participants, beneficiaries, or 
 enrollees of their rights under this section; or
 (B) provide the plan or issuer with the name of 
 each participant, beneficiary, or enrollee who the 
 provider believes is a continuing care patient.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Contract.--The term ``contract'' includes, with respect 
 to a plan or issuer and a treating health care provider, a 
 contract between such plan or issuer and an organized network 
 of providers that includes the treating health care provider, 
 and (in the case of such a contract) the contract between the 
 treating health care provider and the organized network.
 (2) Health care provider.--The term ``health care 
 provider'' or ``provider'' means--
 (A) any individual who is engaged in the delivery 
 of health care services in a State and who is required 
 by State law or regulation to be licensed or certified 
 by the State to engage in the delivery of such services 
 in the State; and
 (B) any entity that is engaged in the delivery of 
 health care services in a State and that, if it is 
 required by State law or regulation to be licensed or 
 certified by the State to engage in the delivery of 
 such services in the State, is so licensed.
 (3) Serious and complex condition.--The term ``serious and 
 complex condition'' means, with respect to a participant, 
 beneficiary, or enrollee under the plan or coverage--
 (A) in the case of an acute illness, a condition 
 that is serious enough to require specialized medical 
 treatment to avoid the reasonable possibility of death 
 or permanent harm; or
 (B) in the case of a chronic illness or condition, 
 is an ongoing special condition (as defined in section 
 114(b)(2)(B)).
 (4) Terminated.--The term ``terminated'' includes, with 
 respect to a contract, the expiration or nonrenewal of the 
 contract, but does not include a termination of the contract 
 for failure to meet applicable quality standards or for fraud.

SEC. 118. ACCESS TO NEEDED PRESCRIPTION DRUGS.

 (a) In General.--To the extent that a group health plan, or health 
insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer, provides 
coverage for benefits with respect to prescription drugs, and limits 
such coverage to drugs included in a formulary, the plan or issuer 
shall--
 (1) ensure the participation of physicians and pharmacists 
 in developing and reviewing such formulary;
 (2) provide for disclosure of the formulary to providers; 
 and
 (3) in accordance with the applicable quality assurance and 
 utilization review standards of the plan or issuer, provide for 
 exceptions from the formulary limitation when a non-formulary 
 alternative is medically necessary and appropriate and, in the 
 case of such an exception, apply the same cost-sharing 
 requirements that would have applied in the case of a drug 
 covered under the formulary.
 (b) Coverage of Approved Drugs and Medical Devices.--
 (1) In general.--A group health plan (and health insurance 
 coverage offered in connection with such a plan) that provides 
 any coverage of prescription drugs or medical devices shall not 
 deny coverage of such a drug or device on the basis that the 
 use is investigational, if the use--
 (A) in the case of a prescription drug--
 (i) is included in the labeling authorized 
 by the application in effect for the drug 
 pursuant to subsection (b) or (j) of section 
 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
 Act, without regard to any postmarketing 
 requirements that may apply under such Act; or
 (ii) is included in the labeling authorized 
 by the application in effect for the drug under 
 section 351 of the Public Health Service Act, 
 without regard to any postmarketing 
 requirements that may apply pursuant to such 
 section; or
 (B) in the case of a medical device, is included in 
 the labeling authorized by a regulation under 
 subsection (d) or (e) of section 513 of the Federal 
 Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, an order under subsection 
 (f) of such section, or an application approved under 
 section 515 of such Act, without regard to any 
 postmarketing requirements that may apply under such 
 Act.
 (2) Construction.--Nothing in this subsection shall be 
 construed as requiring a group health plan (or health insurance 
 coverage offered in connection with such a plan) to provide any 
 coverage of prescription drugs or medical devices.

SEC. 119. COVERAGE FOR INDIVIDUALS PARTICIPATING IN APPROVED CLINICAL 
 TRIALS.

 (a) Coverage.--
 (1) In general.--If a group health plan, or health 
 insurance issuer that is providing health insurance coverage, 
 provides coverage to a qualified individual (as defined in 
 subsection (b)), the plan or issuer--
 (A) may not deny the individual participation in 
 the clinical trial referred to in subsection (b)(2);
 (B) subject to subsection (c), may not deny (or 
 limit or impose additional conditions on) the coverage 
 of routine patient costs for items and services 
 furnished in connection with participation in the 
 trial; and
 (C) may not discriminate against the individual on 
 the basis of the enrollee's participation in such 
 trial.
 (2) Exclusion of certain costs.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (1)(B), routine patient costs do not include the cost of the 
 tests or measurements conducted primarily for the purpose of 
 the clinical trial involved.
 (3) Use of in-network providers.--If one or more 
 participating providers is participating in a clinical trial, 
 nothing in paragraph (1) shall be construed as preventing a 
 plan or issuer from requiring that a qualified individual 
 participate in the trial through such a participating provider 
 if the provider will accept the individual as a participant in 
 the trial.
 (b) Qualified Individual Defined.--For purposes of subsection (a), 
the term ``qualified individual'' means an individual who is a 
participant or beneficiary in a group health plan, or who is an 
enrollee under health insurance coverage, and who meets the following 
conditions:
 (1)(A) The individual has a life-threatening or serious 
 illness for which no standard treatment is effective.
 (B) The individual is eligible to participate in an 
 approved clinical trial according to the trial protocol with 
 respect to treatment of such illness.
 (C) The individual's participation in the trial offers 
 meaningful potential for significant clinical benefit for the 
 individual.
 (2) Either--
 (A) the referring physician is a participating 
 health care professional and has concluded that the 
 individual's participation in such trial would be 
 appropriate based upon the individual meeting the 
 conditions described in paragraph (1); or
 (B) the participant, beneficiary, or enrollee 
 provides medical and scientific information 
 establishing that the individual's participation in 
 such trial would be appropriate based upon the 
 individual meeting the conditions described in 
 paragraph (1).
 (c) Payment.--
 (1) In general.--Under this section a group health plan and 
 a health insurance issuer shall provide for payment for routine 
 patient costs described in subsection (a)(2) but is not 
 required to pay for costs of items and services that are 
 reasonably expected (as determined by the appropriate 
 Secretary) to be paid for by the sponsors of an approved 
 clinical trial.
 (2) Payment rate.--In the case of covered items and 
 services provided by--
 (A) a participating provider, the payment rate 
 shall be at the agreed upon rate; or
 (B) a nonparticipating provider, the payment rate 
 shall be at the rate the plan or issuer would normally 
 pay for comparable services under subparagraph (A).
 (d) Approved Clinical Trial Defined.--
 (1) In general.--In this section, the term ``approved 
 clinical trial'' means a clinical research study or clinical 
 investigation--
 (A) approved and funded (which may include funding 
 through in-kind contributions) by one or more of the 
 following:
 (i) the National Institutes of Health;
 (ii) a cooperative group or center of the 
 National Institutes of Health, including a 
 qualified nongovernmental research entity to 
 which the National Cancer Institute has awarded 
 a center support grant;
 (iii) either of the following if the 
 conditions described in paragraph (2) are met--
 (I) the Department of Veterans 
 Affairs;
 (II) the Department of Defense; or
 (B) approved by the Food and Drug Administration.
 (2) Conditions for departments.--The conditions described 
 in this paragraph, for a study or investigation conducted by a 
 Department, are that the study or investigation has been 
 reviewed and approved through a system of peer review that the 
 appropriate Secretary determines--
 (A) to be comparable to the system of peer review 
 of studies and investigations used by the National 
 Institutes of Health; and
 (B) assures unbiased review of the highest ethical 
 standards by qualified individuals who have no interest 
 in the outcome of the review.
 (e) Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to 
limit a plan's or issuer's coverage with respect to clinical trials.

SEC. 120. REQUIRED COVERAGE FOR MINIMUM HOSPITAL STAY FOR MASTECTOMIES 
 AND LYMPH NODE DISSECTIONS FOR THE TREATMENT OF BREAST 
 CANCER AND COVERAGE FOR SECONDARY CONSULTATIONS.

 (a) Inpatient Care.--
 (1) In general.--A group health plan, and a health 
 insurance issuer providing health insurance coverage, that 
 provides medical and surgical benefits shall ensure that 
 inpatient coverage with respect to the treatment of breast 
 cancer is provided for a period of time as is determined by the 
 attending physician, in consultation with the patient, to be 
 medically necessary and appropriate following--
 (A) a mastectomy;
 (B) a lumpectomy; or
 (C) a lymph node dissection for the treatment of 
 breast cancer.
 (2) Exception.--Nothing in this section shall be construed 
 as requiring the provision of inpatient coverage if the 
 attending physician and patient determine that a shorter period 
 of hospital stay is medically appropriate.
 (b) Prohibition on Certain Modifications.--In implementing the 
requirements of this section, a group health plan, and a health 
insurance issuer providing health insurance coverage, may not modify 
the terms and conditions of coverage based on the determination by a 
participant, beneficiary, or enrollee to request less than the minimum 
coverage required under subsection (a).
 (c) Secondary Consultations.--
 (1) In general.--A group health plan, and a health 
 insurance issuer providing health insurance coverage, that 
 provides coverage with respect to medical and surgical services 
 provided in relation to the diagnosis and treatment of cancer 
 shall ensure that full coverage is provided for secondary 
 consultations by specialists in the appropriate medical fields 
 (including pathology, radiology, and oncology) to confirm or 
 refute such diagnosis. Such plan or issuer shall ensure that 
 full coverage is provided for such secondary consultation 
 whether such consultation is based on a positive or negative 
 initial diagnosis. In any case in which the attending physician 
 certifies in writing that services necessary for such a 
 secondary consultation are not sufficiently available from 
 specialists operating under the plan or coverage with respect 
 to whose services coverage is otherwise provided under such 
 plan or by such issuer, such plan or issuer shall ensure that 
 coverage is provided with respect to the services necessary for 
 the secondary consultation with any other specialist selected 
 by the attending physician for such purpose at no additional 
 cost to the individual beyond that which the individual would 
 have paid if the specialist was participating in the network of 
 the plan or issuer.
 (2) Exception.--Nothing in paragraph (1) shall be construed 
 as requiring the provision of secondary consultations where the 
 patient determines not to seek such a consultation.
 (d) Prohibition on Penalties or Incentives.--A group health plan, 
and a health insurance issuer providing health insurance coverage, may 
not--
 (1) penalize or otherwise reduce or limit the reimbursement 
 of a provider or specialist because the provider or specialist 
 provided care to a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee in 
 accordance with this section;
 (2) provide financial or other incentives to a physician or 
 specialist to induce the physician or specialist to keep the 
 length of inpatient stays of patients following a mastectomy, 
 lumpectomy, or a lymph node dissection for the treatment of 
 breast cancer below certain limits or to limit referrals for 
 secondary consultations; or
 (3) provide financial or other incentives to a physician or 
 specialist to induce the physician or specialist to refrain 
 from referring a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee for a 
 secondary consultation that would otherwise be covered by the 
 plan or coverage involved under subsection (c).

 Subtitle C--Access to Information

SEC. 121. PATIENT ACCESS TO INFORMATION.

 (a) Requirement.--
 (1) Disclosure.--
 (A) In general.--A group health plan, and a health 
 insurance issuer that provides coverage in connection 
 with health insurance coverage, shall provide for the 
 disclosure to participants, beneficiaries, and 
 enrollees--
 (i) of the information described in 
 subsection (b) at the time of the initial 
 enrollment of the participant, beneficiary, or 
 enrollee under the plan or coverage;
 (ii) of such information on an annual 
 basis--
 (I) in conjunction with the 
 election period of the plan or coverage 
 if the plan or coverage has such an 
 election period; or
 (II) in the case of a plan or 
 coverage that does not have an election 
 period, in conjunction with the 
 beginning of the plan or coverage year; 
 and
 (iii) of information relating to any 
 material reduction to the benefits or 
 information described in such subsection or 
 subsection (c), in the form of a notice 
 provided not later than 30 days before the date 
 on which the reduction takes effect.
 (B) Participants, beneficiaries, and enrollees.--
 The disclosure required under subparagraph (A) shall be 
 provided--
 (i) jointly to each participant, 
 beneficiary, and enrollee who reside at the 
 same address; or
 (ii) in the case of a beneficiary or 
 enrollee who does not reside at the same 
 address as the participant or another enrollee, 
 separately to the participant or other 
 enrollees and such beneficiary or enrollee.
 (2) Provision of information.--Information shall be 
 provided to participants, beneficiaries, and enrollees under 
 this section at the last known address maintained by the plan 
 or issuer with respect to such participants, beneficiaries, or 
 enrollees, to the extent that such information is provided to 
 participants, beneficiaries, or enrollees via the United States 
 Postal Service or other private delivery service.
 (b) Required Information.--The informational materials to be 
distributed under this section shall include for each option available 
under the group health plan or health insurance coverage the following:
 (1) Benefits.--A description of the covered benefits, 
 including--
 (A) any in- and out-of-network benefits;
 (B) specific preventive services covered under the 
 plan or coverage if such services are covered;
 (C) any specific exclusions or express limitations 
 of benefits described in section 503C(d)(3)(C) of the 
 Bipartisan Patient Protection Act;
 (D) any other benefit limitations, including any 
 annual or lifetime benefit limits and any monetary 
 limits or limits on the number of visits, days, or 
 services, and any specific coverage exclusions; and
 (E) any definition of medical necessity used in 
 making coverage determinations by the plan, issuer, or 
 claims administrator.
 (2) Cost sharing.--A description of any cost-sharing 
 requirements, including--
 (A) any premiums, deductibles, coinsurance, 
 copayment amounts, and liability for balance billing, 
 for which the participant, beneficiary, or enrollee 
 will be responsible under each option available under 
 the plan;
 (B) any maximum out-of-pocket expense for which the 
 participant, beneficiary, or enrollee may be liable;
 (C) any cost-sharing requirements for out-of-
 network benefits or services received from 
 nonparticipating providers; and
 (D) any additional cost-sharing or charges for 
 benefits and services that are furnished without 
 meeting applicable plan or coverage requirements, such 
 as prior authorization or precertification.
 (3) Disenrollment.--Information relating to the 
 disenrollment of a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee.
 (4) Service area.--A description of the plan or issuer's 
 service area, including the provision of any out-of-area 
 coverage.
 (5) Participating providers.--A directory of participating 
 providers (to the extent a plan or issuer provides coverage 
 through a network of providers) that includes, at a minimum, 
 the name, address, and telephone number of each participating 
 provider, and information about how to inquire whether a 
 participating provider is currently accepting new patients.
 (6) Choice of primary care provider.--A description of any 
 requirements and procedures to be used by participants, 
 beneficiaries, and enrollees in selecting, accessing, or 
 changing their primary care provider, including providers both 
 within and outside of the network (if the plan or issuer 
 permits out-of-network services), and the right to select a 
 pediatrician as a primary care provider under section 116 for a 
 participant, beneficiary, or enrollee who is a child if such 
 section applies.
 (7) Preauthorization requirements.--A description of the 
 requirements and procedures to be used to obtain 
 preauthorization for health services, if such preauthorization 
 is required.
 (8) Experimental and investigational treatments.--A 
 description of the process for determining whether a particular 
 item, service, or treatment is considered experimental or 
 investigational, and the circumstances under which such 
 treatments are covered by the plan or issuer.
 (9) Specialty care.--A description of the requirements and 
 procedures to be used by participants, beneficiaries, and 
 enrollees in accessing specialty care and obtaining referrals 
 to participating and nonparticipating specialists, including 
 any limitations on choice of health care professionals referred 
 to in section 112(b)(2) and the right to timely access to 
 specialists care under section 114 if such section applies.
 (10) Clinical trials.--A description of the circumstances 
 and conditions under which participation in clinical trials is 
 covered under the terms and conditions of the plan or coverage, 
 and the right to obtain coverage for approved clinical trials 
 under section 119 if such section applies.
 (11) Prescription drugs.--To the extent the plan or issuer 
 provides coverage for prescription drugs, a statement of 
 whether such coverage is limited to drugs included in a 
 formulary, a description of any provisions and cost-sharing 
 required for obtaining on- and off-formulary medications, and a 
 description of the rights of participants, beneficiaries, and 
 enrollees in obtaining access to access to prescription drugs 
 under section 118 if such section applies.
 (12) Emergency services.--A summary of the rules and 
 procedures for accessing emergency services, including the 
 right of a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee to obtain 
 emergency services under the prudent layperson standard under 
 section 113, if such section applies, and any educational 
 information that the plan or issuer may provide regarding the 
 appropriate use of emergency services.
 (13) Claims and appeals.--A description of the plan or 
 issuer's rules and procedures pertaining to claims and appeals, 
 a description of the rights (including deadlines for exercising 
 rights) of participants, beneficiaries, and enrollees under 
 subtitle A in obtaining covered benefits, filing a claim for 
 benefits, and appealing coverage decisions internally and 
 externally (including telephone numbers and mailing addresses 
 of the appropriate authority), and a description of any 
 additional legal rights and remedies available under section 
 502 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 and 
 applicable State law.
 (14) Advance directives and organ donation.--A description 
 of procedures for advance directives and organ donation 
 decisions if the plan or issuer maintains such procedures.
 (15) Information on plans and issuers.--The name, mailing 
 address, and telephone number or numbers of the plan 
 administrator and the issuer to be used by participants, 
 beneficiaries, and enrollees seeking information about plan or 
 coverage benefits and services, payment of a claim, or 
 authorization for services and treatment. Notice of whether the 
 benefits under the plan or coverage are provided under a 
 contract or policy of insurance issued by an issuer, or whether 
 benefits are provided directly by the plan sponsor who bears 
 the insurance risk.
 (16) Translation services.--A summary description of any 
 translation or interpretation services (including the 
 availability of printed information in languages other than 
 English, audio tapes, or information in Braille) that are 
 available for non-English speakers and participants, 
 beneficiaries, and enrollees with communication disabilities 
 and a description of how to access these items or services.
 (17) Accreditation information.--Any information that is 
 made public by accrediting organizations in the process of 
 accreditation if the plan or issuer is accredited, or any 
 additional quality indicators (such as the results of enrollee 
 satisfaction surveys) that the plan or issuer makes public or 
 makes available to participants, beneficiaries, and enrollees.
 (18) Notice of requirements.--A description of any rights 
 of participants, beneficiaries, and enrollees that are 
 established by the provisions of this Act (excluding those 
 described in paragraphs (1) through (17)) and of the amendments 
 made thereby if such provisions apply. The description required 
 under this paragraph may be combined with the notices of the 
 type described in sections 711(d), 713(b), or 606(a)(1) of the 
 Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 and with any 
 other notice provision that the appropriate Secretary 
 determines may be combined, so long as such combination does 
 not result in any reduction in the information that would 
 otherwise be provided to the recipient.
 (19) Availability of additional information.--A statement 
 that the information described in subsection (c), and 
 instructions on obtaining such information (including telephone 
 numbers and, if available, Internet websites), shall be made 
 available upon request.
 (20) Designated decisionmakers.--The name and address of 
 the designated decisionmaker (or decisionmakers) appointed 
 under paragraph (2) of section 502(n) of the Employee 
 Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 for purposes of such 
 section and a description of the participants and beneficiaries 
 with respect to whom each designated decisionmaker under the 
 plan has assumed liability under section 502(n) of such Act.
 (c) Additional Information.--The informational materials to be 
provided upon the request of a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee 
shall include for each option available under a group health plan or 
health insurance coverage the following:
 (1) Status of providers.--The State licensure status of the 
 plan or issuer's participating health care professionals and 
 participating health care facilities, and, if available, the 
 education, training, specialty qualifications or certifications 
 of such professionals.
 (2) Compensation methods.--A summary description by 
 category of the applicable methods (such as capitation, fee-
 for-service, salary, bundled payments, per diem, or a 
 combination thereof) used for compensating prospective or 
 treating health care professionals (including primary care 
 providers and specialists) and facilities in connection with 
 the provision of health care under the plan or coverage.
 (3) Prescription drugs.--Information about whether a 
 specific prescription medication is included in the formulary 
 of the plan or issuer, if the plan or issuer uses a defined 
 formulary.
 (4) Utilization review activities.--A description of 
 procedures used and requirements (including circumstances, 
 timeframes, and appeals rights) under any utilization review 
 program under section 101 and section 503A of the Employee 
 Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, including any drug 
 formulary program under section 118.
 (5) External appeals information.--Aggregate information on 
 the number and outcomes of external medical reviews, relative 
 to the sample size (such as the number of covered lives) under 
 the plan or under the coverage of the issuer.
 (d) Manner of Disclosure.--The information described in this 
section shall be disclosed in an accessible medium and format that is 
calculated to be understood by a participant or enrollee.
 (e) Rules of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to prohibit a group health plan, or a health insurance issuer 
in connection with health insurance coverage, from--
 (1) distributing any other additional information 
 determined by the plan or issuer to be important or necessary 
 in assisting participants, beneficiaries, and enrollees in the 
 selection of a health plan or health insurance coverage; and
 (2) complying with the provisions of this section by 
 providing information in brochures, through the Internet or 
 other electronic media, or through other similar means, so long 
 as--
 (A) the disclosure of such information in such form 
 is in accordance with requirements as the appropriate 
 Secretary may impose; and
 (B) in connection with any such disclosure of 
 information through the Internet or other electronic 
 media--
 (i) the recipient has affirmatively 
 consented to the disclosure of such information 
 in such form;
 (ii) the recipient is capable of accessing 
 the information so disclosed on the recipient's 
 individual workstation or at the recipient's 
 home;
 (iii) the recipient retains an ongoing 
 right to receive paper disclosure of such 
 information and receives, in advance of any 
 attempt at disclosure of such information to 
 him or her through the Internet or other 
 electronic media, notice in printed form of 
 such ongoing right and of the proper software 
 required to view information so disclosed; and
 (iv) the plan administrator appropriately 
 ensures that the intended recipient is 
 receiving the information so disclosed and 
 provides the information in printed form if the 
 information is not received.

 Subtitle D--Protecting the Doctor-Patient Relationship

SEC. 131. PROHIBITION OF INTERFERENCE WITH CERTAIN MEDICAL 
 COMMUNICATIONS.

 (a) General Rule.--The provisions of any contract or agreement, or 
the operation of any contract or agreement, between a group health plan 
or health insurance issuer in relation to health insurance coverage 
(including any partnership, association, or other organization that 
enters into or administers such a contract or agreement) and a health 
care provider (or group of health care providers) shall not prohibit or 
otherwise restrict a health care professional from advising such a 
participant, beneficiary, or enrollee who is a patient of the 
professional about the health status of the individual or medical care 
or treatment for the individual's condition or disease, regardless of 
whether benefits for such care or treatment are provided under the plan 
or coverage, if the professional is acting within the lawful scope of 
practice.
 (b) Nullification.--Any contract provision or agreement that 
restricts or prohibits medical communications in violation of 
subsection (a) shall be null and void.

SEC. 132. PROHIBITION OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST PROVIDERS BASED ON 
 LICENSURE.

 (a) In General.--A group health plan, and a health insurance issuer 
with respect to health insurance coverage, shall not discriminate with 
respect to participation or indemnification as to any provider who is 
acting within the scope of the provider's license or certification 
under applicable State law, solely on the basis of such license or 
certification.
 (b) Construction.--Subsection (a) shall not be construed--
 (1) as requiring the coverage under a group health plan or 
 health insurance coverage of a particular benefit or service or 
 to prohibit a plan or issuer from including providers only to 
 the extent necessary to meet the needs of the plan's or 
 issuer's participants, beneficiaries, or enrollees or from 
 establishing any measure designed to maintain quality and 
 control costs consistent with the responsibilities of the plan 
 or issuer;
 (2) to override any State licensure or scope-of-practice 
 law; or
 (3) as requiring a plan or issuer that offers network 
 coverage to include for participation every willing provider 
 who meets the terms and conditions of the plan or issuer.

SEC. 133. PROHIBITION AGAINST IMPROPER INCENTIVE ARRANGEMENTS.

 (a) In General.--A group health plan and a health insurance issuer 
offering health insurance coverage may not operate any physician 
incentive plan (as defined in subparagraph (B) of section 1852(j)(4) of 
the Social Security Act) unless the requirements described in clauses 
(i), (ii)(I), and (iii) of subparagraph (A) of such section are met 
with respect to such a plan.
 (b) Application.--For purposes of carrying out paragraph (1), any 
reference in section 1852(j)(4) of the Social Security Act to the 
Secretary, a Medicare+Choice organization, or an individual enrolled 
with the organization shall be treated as a reference to the applicable 
authority, a group health plan or health insurance issuer, 
respectively, and a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee with the plan 
or organization, respectively.
 (c) Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as 
prohibiting all capitation and similar arrangements or all provider 
discount arrangements.

SEC. 134. PAYMENT OF CLAIMS.

 A group health plan, and a health insurance issuer offering health 
insurance coverage, shall provide for prompt payment of claims 
submitted for health care services or supplies furnished to a 
participant, beneficiary, or enrollee with respect to benefits covered 
by the plan or issuer, in a manner that is no less protective than the 
provisions of section 1842(c)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395u(c)(2)).

SEC. 135. PROTECTION FOR PATIENT ADVOCACY.

 (a) Protection for Use of Utilization Review and Grievance 
Process.--A group health plan, and a health insurance issuer with 
respect to the provision of health insurance coverage, may not 
retaliate against a participant, beneficiary, enrollee, or health care 
provider based on the participant's, beneficiary's, enrollee's or 
provider's use of, or participation in, a utilization review process or 
a grievance process of the plan or issuer (including an internal or 
external review or appeal process) under this title or under sections 
503A, 503B, and 503C of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
1974.
 (b) Protection for Quality Advocacy by Health Care Professionals.--
 (1) In general.--A group health plan and a health insurance 
 issuer may not retaliate or discriminate against a protected 
 health care professional because the professional in good 
 faith--
 (A) discloses information relating to the care, 
 services, or conditions affecting one or more 
 participants, beneficiaries, or enrollees of the plan 
 or issuer to an appropriate public regulatory agency, 
 an appropriate private accreditation body, or 
 appropriate management personnel of the plan or issuer; 
 or
 (B) initiates, cooperates, or otherwise 
 participates in an investigation or proceeding by such 
 an agency with respect to such care, services, or 
 conditions.
 If an institutional health care provider is a participating 
 provider with such a plan or issuer or otherwise receives 
 payments for benefits provided by such a plan or issuer, the 
 provisions of the previous sentence shall apply to the provider 
 in relation to care, services, or conditions affecting one or 
 more patients within an institutional health care provider in 
 the same manner as they apply to the plan or issuer in relation 
 to care, services, or conditions provided to one or more 
 participants, beneficiaries, or enrollees; and for purposes of 
 applying this sentence, any reference to a plan or issuer is 
 deemed a reference to the institutional health care provider.
 (2) Good faith action.--For purposes of paragraph (1), a 
 protected health care professional is considered to be acting 
 in good faith with respect to disclosure of information or 
 participation if, with respect to the information disclosed as 
 part of the action--
 (A) the disclosure is made on the basis of personal 
 knowledge and is consistent with that degree of 
 learning and skill ordinarily possessed by health care 
 professionals with the same licensure or certification 
 and the same experience;
 (B) the professional reasonably believes the 
 information to be true;
 (C) the information evidences either a violation of 
 a law, rule, or regulation, of an applicable 
 accreditation standard, or of a generally recognized 
 professional or clinical standard or that a patient is 
 in imminent hazard of loss of life or serious injury; 
 and
 (D) subject to subparagraphs (B) and (C) of 
 paragraph (3), the professional has followed reasonable 
 internal procedures of the plan, issuer, or 
 institutional health care provider established for the 
 purpose of addressing quality concerns before making 
 the disclosure.
 (3) Exception and special rule.--
 (A) General exception.--Paragraph (1) does not 
 protect disclosures that would violate Federal or State 
 law or diminish or impair the rights of any person to 
 the continued protection of confidentiality of 
 communications provided by such law.
 (B) Notice of internal procedures.--Subparagraph 
 (D) of paragraph (2) shall not apply unless the 
 internal procedures involved are reasonably expected to 
 be known to the health care professional involved. For 
 purposes of this subparagraph, a health care 
 professional is reasonably expected to know of internal 
 procedures if those procedures have been made available 
 to the professional through distribution or posting.
 (C) Internal procedure exception.--Subparagraph (D) 
 of paragraph (2) also shall not apply if--
 (i) the disclosure relates to an imminent 
 hazard of loss of life or serious injury to a 
 patient;
 (ii) the disclosure is made to an 
 appropriate private accreditation body pursuant 
 to disclosure procedures established by the 
 body; or
 (iii) the disclosure is in response to an 
 inquiry made in an investigation or proceeding 
 of an appropriate public regulatory agency and 
 the information disclosed is limited to the 
 scope of the investigation or proceeding.
 (4) Additional considerations.--It shall not be a violation 
 of paragraph (1) to take an adverse action against a protected 
 health care professional if the plan, issuer, or provider 
 taking the adverse action involved demonstrates that it would 
 have taken the same adverse action even in the absence of the 
 activities protected under such paragraph.
 (5) Notice.--A group health plan, health insurance issuer, 
 and institutional health care provider shall post a notice, to 
 be provided or approved by the Secretary of Labor, setting 
 forth excerpts from, or summaries of, the pertinent provisions 
 of this subsection and information pertaining to enforcement of 
 such provisions.
 (6) Constructions.--
 (A) Determinations of coverage.--Nothing in this 
 subsection shall be construed to prohibit a plan or 
 issuer from making a determination not to pay for a 
 particular medical treatment or service or the services 
 of a type of health care professional.
 (B) Enforcement of peer review protocols and 
 internal procedures.--Nothing in this subsection shall 
 be construed to prohibit a plan, issuer, or provider 
 from establishing and enforcing reasonable peer review 
 or utilization review protocols or determining whether 
 a protected health care professional has complied with 
 those protocols or from establishing and enforcing 
 internal procedures for the purpose of addressing 
 quality concerns.
 (C) Relation to other rights.--Nothing in this 
 subsection shall be construed to abridge rights of 
 participants, beneficiaries, enrollees, and protected 
 health care professionals under other applicable 
 Federal or State laws.
 (7) Protected health care professional defined.--For 
 purposes of this subsection, the term ``protected health care 
 professional'' means an individual who is a licensed or 
 certified health care professional and who--
 (A) with respect to a group health plan or health 
 insurance issuer, is an employee of the plan or issuer 
 or has a contract with the plan or issuer for provision 
 of services for which benefits are available under the 
 plan or issuer; or
 (B) with respect to an institutional health care 
 provider, is an employee of the provider or has a 
 contract or other arrangement with the provider 
 respecting the provision of health care services.

 Subtitle E--Definitions

SEC. 151. DEFINITIONS.

 (a) Incorporation of General Definitions.--Except as otherwise 
provided, the provisions of section 2791 of the Public Health Service 
Act shall apply for purposes of this title in the same manner as they 
apply for purposes of title XXVII of such Act.
 (b) Secretary.--Except as otherwise provided, the term 
``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services, in 
consultation with the Secretary of Labor and the term ``appropriate 
Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services in 
relation to carrying out this title under sections 2706 and 2751 of the 
Public Health Service Act and the Secretary of Labor in relation to 
carrying out this title under section 714 of the Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act of 1974.
 (c) Additional Definitions.--For purposes of this title:
 (1) Applicable authority.--The term ``applicable 
 authority'' means--
 (A) in the case of a group health plan, the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services and the 
 Secretary of Labor; and
 (B) in the case of a health insurance issuer with 
 respect to a specific provision of this title, the 
 applicable State authority (as defined in section 
 2791(d) of the Public Health Service Act), or the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, if such 
 Secretary is enforcing such provision under section 
 2722(a)(2) or 2761(a)(2) of the Public Health Service 
 Act.
 (2) Enrollee.--The term ``enrollee'' means, with respect to 
 health insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer, 
 an individual enrolled with the issuer to receive such 
 coverage.
 (3) Group health plan.--The term ``group health plan'' has 
 the meaning given such term in section 733(a) of the Employee 
 Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, except that such term 
 includes a employee welfare benefit plan treated as a group 
 health plan under section 732(d) of such Act or defined as such 
 a plan under section 607(1) of such Act.
 (4) Health care professional.--The term ``health care 
 professional'' means an individual who is licensed, accredited, 
 or certified under State law to provide specified health care 
 services and who is operating within the scope of such 
 licensure, accreditation, or certification.
 (5) Health care provider.--The term ``health care 
 provider'' includes a physician or other health care 
 professional, as well as an institutional or other facility or 
 agency that provides health care services and that is licensed, 
 accredited, or certified to provide health care items and 
 services under applicable State law.
 (6) Network.--The term ``network'' means, with respect to a 
 group health plan or health insurance issuer offering health 
 insurance coverage, the participating health care professionals 
 and providers through whom the plan or issuer provides health 
 care items and services to participants, beneficiaries, or 
 enrollees.
 (7) Nonparticipating.--The term ``nonparticipating'' means, 
 with respect to a health care provider that provides health 
 care items and services to a participant, beneficiary, or 
 enrollee under group health plan or health insurance coverage, 
 a health care provider that is not a participating health care 
 provider with respect to such items and services.
 (8) Participating.--The term ``participating'' means, with 
 respect to a health care provider that provides health care 
 items and services to a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee 
 under group health plan or health insurance coverage offered by 
 a health insurance issuer, a health care provider that 
 furnishes such items and services under a contract or other 
 arrangement with the plan or issuer.
 (9) Prior authorization.--The term ``prior authorization'' 
 means the process of obtaining prior approval from a health 
 insurance issuer or group health plan for the provision or 
 coverage of medical services.
 (10) Terms and conditions.--The term ``terms and 
 conditions'' includes, with respect to a group health plan or 
 health insurance coverage, requirements imposed under this 
 title and sections 503A, 503B, and 503C of the Employee 
 Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 with respect to the plan 
 or coverage.
 (11) References to provisions governing consideration of 
 claims and appeals of claims decisions.--Any reference in this 
 title to section 503A, 503B, or 503C of the Employee Retirement 
 Income Security Act of 1974 shall be deemed, for purposes of 
 the Public Health Service Act and the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986, a reference to the provisions of such section as made 
 applicable under section 2707 or 2753 of the Public Health 
 Service Act or section 9813 of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986, as applicable.

SEC. 152. PREEMPTION; STATE FLEXIBILITY; CONSTRUCTION.

 (a) Continued Applicability of State Law With Respect to Health 
Insurance Issuers.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), this title (and 
 the amendments made thereby) shall not be construed to 
 supersede any provision of State law which establishes, 
 implements, or continues in effect any standard or requirement 
 solely relating to health insurance issuers (in connection with 
 group health insurance coverage or otherwise) except to the 
 extent that such standard or requirement prevents the 
 application of a requirement of this title (or such 
 amendments).
 (2) Continued preemption with respect to group health 
 plans.--Nothing in this title (or the amendments made thereby) 
 shall be construed to affect or modify the provisions of 
 section 514 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
 1974 with respect to group health plans.
 (3) Construction.--In applying this section, a State law 
 that provides for equal access to, and availability of, all 
 categories of licensed health care providers and services shall 
 not be treated as preventing the application of any requirement 
 of this title (or the amendments made thereby).
 (b) Application of Substantially Compliant State Laws.--
 (1) In general.--In the case of a State law that imposes, 
 with respect to health insurance coverage offered by a health 
 insurance issuer and with respect to a group health plan that 
 is a non-Federal governmental plan, a requirement that 
 substantially complies (within the meaning of subsection (c)) 
 with a patient protection requirement (as defined in paragraph 
 (3)) and does not prevent the application of other requirements 
 under this Act or the amendments made thereby (except in the 
 case of other substantially compliant requirements), in 
 applying the requirements of this title under section 2707 and 
 2753 (as applicable) of the Public Health Service Act (as added 
 by title II), subject to subsection (a)(2)--
 (A) the State law shall not be treated as being 
 superseded under subsection (a); and
 (B) the State law shall apply instead of the 
 patient protection requirement otherwise applicable 
 with respect to health insurance coverage and non-
 Federal governmental plans.
 (2) Limitation.--In the case of a group health plan covered 
 under title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
 1974, paragraph (1) shall be construed to apply only with 
 respect to the health insurance coverage (if any) offered in 
 connection with the plan and only with respect to patient 
 protection requirements under section 101 and subtitles B, C, 
 and D and this subtitle.
 (3) Definitions.--In this section:
 (A) Patient protection requirement.--The term 
 ``patient protection requirement'' means a requirement 
 under this title (or the amendments made thereby), and 
 includes (as a single requirement) a group or related 
 set of requirements under a section or similar unit 
 under this title (or such amendments).
 (B) Substantially compliant.--The terms 
 ``substantially compliant'', substantially complies'', 
 or ``substantial compliance'' with respect to a State 
 law, mean that the State law has the same or similar 
 features as the patient protection requirements and has 
 a similar effect.
 (c) Determinations of Substantial Compliance.--
 (1) Certification by states.--A State may submit to the 
 Secretary a certification that a State law provides for patient 
 protections that are at least substantially compliant with one 
 or more patient protection requirements. Such certification 
 shall be accompanied by such information as may be required to 
 permit the Secretary to make the determination described in 
 paragraph (2)(A).
 (2) Review.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary shall promptly 
 review a certification submitted under paragraph (1) 
 with respect to a State law to determine if the State 
 law substantially complies with the patient protection 
 requirement (or requirements) to which the law relates.
 (B) Approval deadlines.--
 (i) Initial review.--Such a certification 
 is considered approved unless the Secretary 
 notifies the State in writing, within 90 days 
 after the date of receipt of the certification, 
 that the certification is disapproved (and the 
 reasons for disapproval) or that specified 
 additional information is needed to make the 
 determination described in subparagraph (A).
 (ii) Additional information.--With respect 
 to a State that has been notified by the 
 Secretary under clause (i) that specified 
 additional information is needed to make the 
 determination described in subparagraph (A), 
 the Secretary shall make the determination 
 within 60 days after the date on which such 
 specified additional information is received by 
 the Secretary.
 (3) Approval.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary shall approve a 
 certification under paragraph (1) unless--
 (i) the State fails to provide sufficient 
 information to enable the Secretary to make a 
 determination under paragraph (2)(A); or
 (ii) the Secretary determines that the 
 State law involved does not provide for patient 
 protections that substantially comply with the 
 patient protection requirement (or 
 requirements) to which the law relates.
 (B) State challenge.--A State that has a 
 certification disapproved by the Secretary under 
 subparagraph (A) may challenge such disapproval in the 
 appropriate United States district court.
 (C) Deference to states.--With respect to a 
 certification submitted under paragraph (1), the 
 Secretary shall give deference to the State's 
 interpretation of the State law involved with respect 
 to the patient protection involved.
 (D) Public notification.--The Secretary shall--
 (i) provide a State with a notice of the 
 determination to approve or disapprove a 
 certification under this paragraph;
 (ii) promptly publish in the Federal 
 Register a notice that a State has submitted a 
 certification under paragraph (1);
 (iii) promptly publish in the Federal 
 Register the notice described in clause (i) 
 with respect to the State; and
 (iv) annually publish the status of all 
 States with respect to certifications.
 (4) Construction.--Nothing in this subsection shall be 
 construed as preventing the certification (and approval of 
 certification) of a State law under this subsection solely 
 because it provides for greater protections for patients than 
 those protections otherwise required to establish substantial 
 compliance.
 (5) Petitions.--
 (A) Petition process.--Effective on the date on 
 which the provisions of this Act become effective, as 
 provided for in section 601, a group health plan, 
 health insurance issuer, participant, beneficiary, or 
 enrollee may submit a petition to the Secretary for an 
 advisory opinion as to whether or not a standard or 
 requirement under a State law applicable to the plan, 
 issuer, participant, beneficiary, or enrollee that is 
 not the subject of a certification under this 
 subsection, is superseded under subsection (a)(1) 
 because such standard or requirement prevents the 
 application of a requirement of this title (or the 
 amendments made thereby).
 (B) Opinion.--The Secretary shall issue an advisory 
 opinion with respect to a petition submitted under 
 subparagraph (A) within the 60-day period beginning on 
 the date on which such petition is submitted.
 (d) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
 (1) State law.--The term ``State law'' includes all laws, 
 decisions, rules, regulations, or other State action having the 
 effect of law, of any State. A law of the United States 
 applicable only to the District of Columbia shall be treated as 
 a State law rather than a law of the United States.
 (2) State.--The term ``State'' includes a State, the 
 District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, 
 American Samoa, the Northern Mariana Islands, any political 
 subdivisions of such, or any agency or instrumentality of such.

SEC. 153. EXCLUSIONS.

 (a) No Benefit Requirements.--Nothing in this title or the 
amendments made thereby shall be construed to require a group health 
plan or a health insurance issuer offering health insurance coverage to 
include specific items and services under the terms of such a plan or 
coverage, other than those provided under the terms and conditions of 
such plan or coverage.
 (b) Exclusion From Access to Care Managed Care Provisions for Fee-
for-Service Coverage.--
 (1) In general.--The provisions of sections 111 through 117 
 shall not apply to a group health plan or health insurance 
 coverage if the only coverage offered under the plan or 
 coverage is fee-for-service coverage (as defined in paragraph 
 (2)).
 (2) Fee-for-service coverage defined.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term ``fee-for-service coverage'' means 
 coverage under a group health plan or health insurance coverage 
 that--
 (A) reimburses hospitals, health professionals, and 
 other providers on a fee-for-service basis without 
 placing the provider at financial risk;
 (B) does not vary reimbursement for such a provider 
 based on an agreement to contract terms and conditions 
 or the utilization of health care items or services 
 relating to such provider;
 (C) allows access to any provider that is lawfully 
 authorized to provide the covered services and that 
 agrees to accept the terms and conditions of payment 
 established under the plan or by the issuer; and
 (D) for which the plan or issuer does not require 
 prior authorization before providing for any health 
 care services.

SEC. 154. TREATMENT OF EXCEPTED BENEFITS.

 (a) In General.--The requirements of this title and the amendments 
made thereby shall not apply to excepted benefits (as defined in 
section 733(c) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974), 
other than benefits described in section 733(c)(2)(A) of such Act, in 
the same manner as the provisions of part 7 of subtitle B of title I of 
such Act do not apply to such benefits under subsections (b) and (c) of 
section 732 of such Act.
 (b) Coverage of Certain Limited Scope Plans.--Only for purposes of 
applying the requirements of this title and sections 503A, 503B, and 
503C of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 under 
sections 2707 and 2753 of the Public Health Service Act, sections 
503(b) and 714 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, 
and section 9813 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, the following 
sections shall be deemed not to apply:
 (1) Section 2791(c)(2)(A) of the Public Health Service Act.
 (2) Section 733(c)(2)(A) of the Employee Retirement Income 
 Security Act of 1974.
 (3) Section 9832(c)(2)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986.

SEC. 155. REGULATIONS.

 The Secretaries of Health and Human Services, Labor, and the 
Treasury shall issue such regulations as may be necessary or 
appropriate to carry out this title and the amendments made thereby. 
Such regulations shall be issued consistent with section 104 of Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996. Such Secretaries 
may promulgate any interim final rules as the Secretaries determine are 
appropriate to carry out this title and the amendments made thereby.

SEC. 156. INCORPORATION INTO PLAN OR COVERAGE DOCUMENTS.

 The requirements of this title and the amendments made thereby with 
respect to a group health plan or health insurance coverage are, 
subject to section 154, deemed to be incorporated into, and made a part 
of, such plan or the policy, certificate, or contract providing such 
coverage and are enforceable under law as if directly included in the 
documentation of such plan or such policy, certificate, or contract.

SEC. 157. PRESERVATION OF PROTECTIONS.

 (a) In General.--The rights under this Act (including the right to 
maintain a civil action and any other rights under the amendments made 
by this Act) may not be waived, deferred, or lost pursuant to any 
agreement not authorized under this Act (or such amendments).
 (b) Exception.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to an agreement 
providing for arbitration or participation in any other nonjudicial 
procedure to resolve a dispute if the agreement is entered into 
knowingly and voluntarily by the parties involved after the dispute has 
arisen or is pursuant to the terms of a collective bargaining 
agreement. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to permit the 
waiver of the requirements of sections 503B and 503C of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (relating to internal and 
external review).

 TITLE II--APPLICATION OF QUALITY CARE STANDARDS TO GROUP HEALTH PLANS 
 AND HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE UNDER THE PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT

SEC. 201. APPLICATION TO GROUP HEALTH PLANS AND GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE 
 COVERAGE.

 (a) In General.--Subpart 2 of part A of title XXVII of the Public 
Health Service Act is amended by adding at the end the following new 
section:

``SEC. 2707. PATIENT PROTECTION STANDARDS.

 ``Each group health plan shall comply with the patient protection 
requirements under title I of the Bipartisan Patient Protection Act and 
sections 503A through 503C of the Employee Retirement Income Security 
Act of 1974, and each health insurance issuer shall comply with such 
patient protection requirements with respect to group health insurance 
coverage it offers, and such requirements shall be deemed to be 
incorporated into this subsection.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 2721(b)(2)(A) of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 300gg-21(b)(2)(A)) is amended by inserting ``(other than section 
2707)'' after ``requirements of such subparts''.

SEC. 202. APPLICATION TO INDIVIDUAL HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE.

 Part B of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act is amended 
by inserting after section 2752 the following new section:

``SEC. 2753. PATIENT PROTECTION STANDARDS.

 ``Each health insurance issuer shall comply with the patient 
protection requirements under title I of the Bipartisan Patient 
Protection Act and sections 503A through 503C of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (with respect to enrollees under 
individual health insurance coverage in the same manner as they apply 
to participants and beneficiaries under group health insurance 
coverage) with respect to individual health insurance coverage it 
offers, and such requirements shall be deemed to be incorporated into 
this subsection.''.

SEC. 203. COOPERATION BETWEEN FEDERAL AND STATE AUTHORITIES.

 Part C of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
300gg-91 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 2793. COOPERATION BETWEEN FEDERAL AND STATE AUTHORITIES.

 ``(a) Agreement with States.--A State may enter into an agreement 
with the Secretary for the delegation to the State of some or all of 
the Secretary's authority under this title to enforce the requirements 
applicable under sections 2707 and 2753 with respect to health 
insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer and with 
respect to a group health plan that is a non-Federal governmental plan.
 ``(b) Delegations.--Any department, agency, or instrumentality of a 
State to which authority is delegated pursuant to an agreement entered 
into under this section may, if authorized under State law and to the 
extent consistent with such agreement, exercise the powers of the 
Secretary under this title which relate to such authority.''.

 TITLE III--APPLICATION OF PATIENT PROTECTION STANDARDS TO FEDERAL 
 HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAMS

SEC. 301. APPLICATION OF PATIENT PROTECTION STANDARDS TO FEDERAL HEALTH 
 INSURANCE PROGRAMS.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that enrollees 
in Federal health insurance programs should have the same rights and 
privileges as those afforded under title I, under the amendments made 
by such title, and under the amendments made by subtitle A of title IV 
to participants and beneficiaries under group health plans.
 (b) Conforming Federal Health Insurance Programs.--It is the sense 
of Congress that the President should require, by executive order, the 
Federal official with authority over each Federal health insurance 
program, to the extent feasible, to take such steps as are necessary to 
implement the rights and privileges described in subsection (a) with 
respect to such program.
 (c) GAO Report on Additional Steps Required.--Not later than 1 year 
after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of 
the United States shall submit to Congress a report on statutory 
changes that are required to implement such rights and privileges in a 
manner that is consistent with the missions of the Federal health 
insurance programs and that avoids unnecessary duplication or 
disruption of such programs.
 (d) Federal Health Insurance Program.--In this section, the term 
``Federal health insurance program'' means a Federal program that 
provides creditable coverage (as defined in section 2701(c)(1) of the 
Public Health Service Act) and includes a health program of the 
Department of Veterans Affairs.

TITLE IV--AMENDMENTS TO THE EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT INCOME SECURITY ACT OF 
 1974

 Subtitle A--General Provisions

SEC. 401. APPLICATION OF PATIENT PROTECTION STANDARDS TO GROUP HEALTH 
 PLANS AND GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE UNDER THE 
 EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT INCOME SECURITY ACT OF 1974.

 Subpart B of part 7 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end 
the following new section:

``SEC. 714. PATIENT PROTECTION STANDARDS.

 ``(a) In General.--Subject to subsection (b), a group health plan 
(and a health insurance issuer offering group health insurance coverage 
in connection with such a plan) shall comply with the requirements of 
section 101 and subtitles B, C, D, and E of title I of the Bipartisan 
Patient Protection Act (as in effect as of the date of the enactment of 
such Act), and such requirements shall be deemed to be incorporated 
into this subsection.
 ``(b) Plan Satisfaction of Certain Requirements.--
 ``(1) Satisfaction of certain requirements through 
 insurance.--For purposes of subsection (a), insofar as a group 
 health plan provides benefits in the form of health insurance 
 coverage through a health insurance issuer, the plan shall be 
 treated as meeting the following requirements of title I of the 
 Bipartisan Patient Protection Act with respect to such benefits 
 and not be considered as failing to meet such requirements 
 because of a failure of the issuer to meet such requirements so 
 long as the plan sponsor or its representatives did not cause 
 such failure by the issuer:
 ``(A) Section 111 (relating to consumer choice 
 option).
 ``(B) Section 112 (relating to choice of health 
 care professional).
 ``(C) Section 113 (relating to access to emergency 
 care).
 ``(D) Section 114 (relating to timely access to 
 specialists).
 ``(E) Section 115 (relating to patient access to 
 obstetrical and gynecological care).
 ``(F) Section 116 (relating to access to pediatric 
 care).
 ``(G) Section 117 (relating to continuity of care), 
 but only insofar as a replacement issuer assumes the 
 obligation for continuity of care.
 ``(H) Section 118 (relating to access to needed 
 prescription drugs).
 ``(I) Section 119 (relating to coverage for 
 individuals participating in approved clinical trials).
 ``(J) Section 120 (relating to required coverage 
 for minimum hospital stay for mastectomies and lymph 
 node dissections for the treatment of breast cancer and 
 coverage for secondary consultations).
 ``(K) Section 134 (relating to payment of claims).
 ``(2) Information.--With respect to information required to 
 be provided or made available under section 121 of the 
 Bipartisan Patient Protection Act, in the case of a group 
 health plan that provides benefits in the form of health 
 insurance coverage through a health insurance issuer, the 
 Secretary shall determine the circumstances under which the 
 plan is not required to provide or make available the 
 information (and is not liable for the issuer's failure to 
 provide or make available the information), if the issuer is 
 obligated to provide and make available (or provides and makes 
 available) such information.
 ``(3) Application to prohibitions.--Pursuant to rules of 
 the Secretary, if a health insurance issuer offers health 
 insurance coverage in connection with a group health plan and 
 takes an action in violation of any of the following sections 
 of the Bipartisan Patient Protection Act, the group health plan 
 shall not be liable for such violation unless the plan caused 
 such violation:
 ``(A) Section 131 (relating to prohibition of 
 interference with certain medical communications).
 ``(B) Section 132 (relating to prohibition of 
 discrimination against providers based on licensure).
 ``(C) Section 133 (relating to prohibition against 
 improper incentive arrangements).
 ``(D) Section 135 (relating to protection for 
 patient advocacy).
 ``(4) Construction.--Nothing in this subsection shall be 
 construed to affect or modify the responsibilities of the 
 fiduciaries of a group health plan under part 4 of subtitle B.
 ``(5) Treatment of substantially compliant state laws.--For 
 purposes of applying this subsection in connection with health 
 insurance coverage, any reference in this subsection to a 
 requirement in a section or other provision in the Bipartisan 
 Patient Protection Act with respect to a health insurance 
 issuer is deemed to include a reference to a requirement under 
 a State law that substantially complies (as determined under 
 section 152(c) of such Act) with the requirement in such 
 section or other provisions.
 ``(6) Application to certain prohibitions against 
 retaliation.--With respect to compliance with the requirements 
 of section 135(b)(1) of the Bipartisan Patient Protection Act, 
 for purposes of this subtitle the term `group health plan' is 
 deemed to include a reference to an institutional health care 
 provider.
 ``(c) Enforcement of Certain Requirements.--
 ``(1) Complaints.--Any protected health care professional 
 who believes that the professional has been retaliated or 
 discriminated against in violation of section 135(b)(1) of the 
 Bipartisan Patient Protection Act may file with the Secretary a 
 complaint within 180 days of the date of the alleged 
 retaliation or discrimination.
 ``(2) Investigation.--The Secretary shall investigate such 
 complaints and shall determine if a violation of such section 
 has occurred and, if so, shall issue an order to ensure that 
 the protected health care professional does not suffer any loss 
 of position, pay, or benefits in relation to the plan, issuer, 
 or provider involved, as a result of the violation found by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(d) Conforming Regulations.--The Secretary shall issue 
regulations to coordinate the requirements on group health plans and 
health insurance issuers under this section with the requirements 
imposed under the other provisions of this title. In order to reduce 
duplication and clarify the rights of participants and beneficiaries 
with respect to information that is required to be provided, such 
regulations shall coordinate the information disclosure requirements 
under section 121 of the Bipartisan Patient Protection Act with the 
reporting and disclosure requirements imposed under part 1, so long as 
such coordination does not result in any reduction in the information 
that would otherwise be provided to participants and beneficiaries.''.
 (b) Satisfaction of ERISA Claims Procedure Requirement.--Section 
503 of such Act (29 U.S.C. 1133) is amended by inserting ``(a)'' after 
``Sec. 503.'' and by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(b)(1)(A) Subject to subparagraphs (B) and (C), a group health 
plan (and a health insurance issuer offering group health insurance 
coverage in connection with such a plan) shall comply with the 
requirements of sections 503A, 503B, and 503C, and such requirements 
shall be deemed to be incorporated into this subsection.
 ``(B) With respect to the internal appeals process required to be 
established under section 503B, in the case of a group health plan that 
provides benefits in the form of health insurance coverage through a 
health insurance issuer, the Secretary shall determine the 
circumstances under which the plan is not required to provide for such 
process and system (and is not liable for the issuer's failure to 
provide for such process and system), if the issuer is obligated to 
provide for (and provides for) such process and system.
 ``(C) Pursuant to rules of the Secretary, insofar as a group health 
plan enters into a contract with a qualified external review entity for 
the conduct of external appeal activities in accordance with section 
503C, the plan shall be treated as meeting the requirement of such 
section and is not liable for the entity's failure to meet any 
requirements under such section.
 ``(2) In the case of a group health plan, compliance with the 
requirements of sections 503A, 503B, and 503C, and compliance with 
regulations promulgated by the Secretary, in connection with a denial 
of a claim under a group health plan shall be deemed compliance with 
subsection (a) with respect to such claim denial.
 ``(3) Terms used in this subsection which are defined in section 
733 shall have the meanings provided such terms in such section.''.
 (c) Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 732(a) of such Act (29 
U.S.C. 1185(a)) is amended by striking ``section 711'' and inserting 
``sections 711 and 714''.
 (2) The table of contents in section 1 of such Act is amended by 
inserting after the item relating to section 713 the following new 
item:

``Sec. 714. Patient protection standards.''.
 (3) Section 502(b)(3) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 1132(b)(3)) is amended 
by inserting ``(other than section 135(b) of the Bipartisan Patient 
Protection Act, as enforcible under section 714(c))'' after ``part 7''.

SEC. 402. AVAILABILITY OF CIVIL REMEDIES.

 (a) In General.--Section 502 of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1132) is amended by adding at the end 
the following:
 ``(n) Cause of Action Relating to Claims for Health Benefits.--
 ``(1) Cause of action.--
 ``(A) In general.--With respect to an action 
 commenced by a participant or beneficiary (or the 
 estate of the participant or beneficiary) in connection 
 with a claim for benefits under a group health plan, 
 if--
 ``(i) a designated decisionmaker described 
 in paragraph (2) fails to exercise ordinary 
 care--
 ``(I) in making a determination 
 denying the claim for benefits under 
 section 503A (relating to an initial 
 claim for benefits),
 ``(II) in making a determination 
 denying the claim for benefits under 
 section 503B (relating to an internal 
 appeal), or
 ``(III) in failing to authorize 
 coverage in compliance with the written 
 determination of an independent medical 
 reviewer under section 503C(d)(3)(F) 
 that reverses a determination denying 
 the claim for benefits, and
 ``(ii) the delay in receiving, or failure 
 to receive, benefits attributable to the 
 failure described in clause (i) is the 
 proximate cause of personal injury to, or death 
 of, the participant or beneficiary,
 such designated decisionmaker shall be liable to the 
 participant or beneficiary (or the estate) for economic 
 and noneconomic damages in connection with such failure 
 and such injury or death (subject to paragraph (4)).
 ``(B) Rebuttable presumption.--In the case of a 
 cause of action under subparagraph (A)(i)(I) or 
 (A)(i)(II), if an independent medical reviewer under 
 section 503C(d) or 503C(e)(4)(B) upholds the 
 determination denying the claim for benefits involved, 
 there shall be a presumption (rebuttable by clear and 
 convincing evidence) that the designated decisionmaker 
 exercised ordinary care in making such determination.
 ``(2) Designated decisionmaker.--
 ``(A) Appointment.--
 ``(i) In general.--The plan sponsor or 
 named fiduciary of a group health plan shall, 
 in accordance with this paragraph with respect 
 to a participant or beneficiary, designate a 
 person that meets the requirements of 
 subparagraph (B) to serve as a designated 
 decisionmaker with respect to the cause of 
 action described in paragraph (1), except 
 that--
 ``(I) with respect to health 
 insurance coverage offered in 
 connection with a group health plan, 
 the health insurance issuer shall be 
 the designated decisionmaker unless the 
 plan sponsor and the issuer 
 specifically agree in writing (on a 
 form to be prescribed by the Secretary) 
 to substitute another person as the 
 designated decisionmaker; or
 ``(II) with respect to the 
 designation of a person other than a 
 plan sponsor or health insurance 
 issuer, such person shall satisfy the 
 requirements of subparagraph (D).
 ``(ii) Plan documents.--The designated 
 decisionmaker shall be specifically designated 
 as such in the written instruments of the plan 
 (under section 402(a)) and be identified as 
 required under section 121(b)(20) of the 
 Bipartisan Patient Protection Act.
 ``(B) Requirements.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, a designated decisionmaker meets the 
 requirements of this subparagraph with respect to any 
 participant or beneficiary if--
 ``(i) such designation is in such form as 
 may be specified in regulations prescribed by 
 the Secretary,
 ``(ii) the designated decisionmaker--
 ``(I) meets the requirements of 
 subparagraph (C),
 ``(II) assumes unconditionally all 
 liability arising under this subsection 
 in connection with actions and failures 
 to act described in subparagraph (A) 
 (whether undertaken by the designated 
 decisionmaker or the employer, plan, 
 plan sponsor, or employee or agent 
 thereof) during the period in which the 
 designation under this paragraph is in 
 effect relating to such participant or 
 beneficiary, and
 ``(III) where subparagraph (C)(ii) 
 applies, assumes unconditionally the 
 exclusive authority under the group 
 health plan to make determinations on 
 claims for benefits (irrespective of 
 whether they constitute medically 
 reviewable determinations) under the 
 plan with respect to such participant 
 or beneficiary, and
 ``(iii) the designated decisionmaker and 
 the participants and beneficiaries for whom the 
 decisionmaker has assumed liability are 
 identified in the written instrument required 
 under section 402(a) and as required under 
 section 121(b)(15) of the Bipartisan Patient 
 Protection Act.
 Any liability assumed by a designated decisionmaker 
 pursuant to this paragraph shall be in addition to any 
 liability that it may otherwise have under applicable 
 law.
 ``(C) Qualifications for designated 
 decisionmakers.--
 ``(i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), 
 an entity is qualified under this subparagraph 
 to serve as a designated decisionmaker with 
 respect to a group health plan if the entity 
 has the ability to assume the liability 
 described in subparagraph (A) with respect to 
 participants and beneficiaries under such plan, 
 including requirements relating to the 
 financial obligation for timely satisfying the 
 assumed liability, and maintains with the plan 
 sponsor certification of such ability. Such 
 certification shall be provided to the plan 
 sponsor or named fiduciary upon designation 
 under this paragraph and not less frequently 
 than annually thereafter, or if such 
 designation constitutes a multiyear 
 arrangement, in conjunction with the renewal of 
 the arrangement.
 ``(ii) Special qualification in the case of 
 certain reviewable decisions.--In the case of a 
 group health plan that provides benefits 
 consisting of medical care to a participant or 
 beneficiary only through health insurance 
 coverage offered by a health insurance issuer, 
 such issuer is the only entity that may be 
 qualified under this subparagraph to serve as a 
 designated decisionmaker with respect to such 
 participant or beneficiary, and shall serve as 
 the designated decisionmaker unless the 
 employer or other plan sponsor acts 
 affirmatively to prevent such service.
 ``(D) Requirements relating to financial 
 obligations.--For purposes of subparagraphs (A)(i)(II) 
 and (C)(i), the requirements relating to the financial 
 obligation of an entity for liability shall include--
 ``(i) coverage of such entity under an 
 insurance policy or other arrangement, secured 
 and maintained by such entity, to effectively 
 insure such entity against losses arising from 
 professional liability claims, including those 
 arising from its service as a designated 
 decisionmaker under this subsection; or
 ``(ii) evidence of minimum capital and 
 surplus levels that are maintained by such 
 entity to cover any losses as a result of 
 liability arising from its service as a 
 designated decisionmaker under this subsection.
 The appropriate amounts of liability insurance and 
 minimum capital and surplus levels for purposes of 
 clauses (i) and (ii) shall be determined by an actuary 
 using sound actuarial principles and accounting 
 practices pursuant to established guidelines of the 
 American Academy of Actuaries and in accordance with 
 such regulations as the Secretary may prescribe and 
 shall be maintained throughout the term for which the 
 designation is in effect. The provisions of this 
 subparagraph shall not apply in the case of a 
 designated decisionmaker that is a group health plan, 
 plan sponsor, or health insurance issuer and that is 
 regulated under Federal law or a State financial 
 solvency law.
 ``(E) Limitation on appointment of treating 
 physicians.--A treating physician who directly 
 delivered the care or treatment or provided services 
 which is the subject of a cause of action by a 
 participant or beneficiary under paragraph (1) may not 
 be appointed (or deemed to be appointed) as a 
 designated decisionmaker under this paragraph with 
 respect to such participant or beneficiary.
 ``(F) Failure to appoint.--With respect to any 
 cause of action under paragraph (1) relating to a 
 denial of a claim for benefits where a designated 
 decisionmaker has not been appointed in accordance with 
 this paragraph, the plan sponsor or named fiduciary 
 responsible for determinations under section 503 shall 
 be deemed to be the designated decisionmaker.
 ``(G) Effect of appointment.--The appointment of a 
 designated decisionmaker in accordance with this 
 paragraph shall not affect the liability of the 
 appointing plan sponsor or named fiduciary for the 
 failure of the plan sponsor or named fiduciary to 
 comply with any other requirement of this title.
 ``(H) Treatment of certain trust funds.--For 
 purposes of this subsection, the terms `employer' and 
 `plan sponsor', in connection with the assumption by a 
 designated decisionmaker of the liability of employer 
 or other plan sponsor pursuant to this paragraph, shall 
 be construed to include a trust fund maintained 
 pursuant to section 302 of the Labor Management 
 Relations Act, 1947 (29 U.S.C. 186) or the Railway 
 Labor Act (45 U.S.C. 151 et seq.).
 ``(3) Requirement of exhaustion of independent medical 
 review.--
 ``(A) In general.--Paragraph (1) shall apply only 
 if--
 ``(i) a final determination denying a claim 
 for benefits under section 503B has been 
 referred for independent medical review under 
 section 503C(d) and a written determination by 
 an independent medical reviewer has been issued 
 with respect to such review, or
 ``(ii) the qualified external review entity 
 has determined under section 503C(c)(3) that a 
 referral to an independent medical reviewer is 
 not required.
 ``(B) Injunctive relief for irreparable harm.--A 
 participant or beneficiary may seek relief under 
 subsection (a)(1)(B) prior to the exhaustion of 
 administrative remedies under section 503B or 503C (as 
 required under subparagraph (A)) if it is demonstrated 
 to the court, by a preponderance of the evidence, that 
 the exhaustion of such remedies would cause irreparable 
 harm to the health of the participant or beneficiary. 
 Any determinations that already have been made under 
 section 503A, 503B, or 503C in such case, or that are 
 made in such case while an action under this 
 subparagraph is pending, shall be given due 
 consideration by the court in any action under 
 subsection (a)(1)(B) in such case. Notwithstanding the 
 awarding of such relief under subsection (a)(1)(B) 
 pursuant to this subparagraph, no relief shall be 
 available under paragraph (1), with respect to a 
 participant or beneficiary, unless the requirements of 
 subparagraph (A) are met.
 ``(C) Receipt of benefits during appeals process.--
 Receipt by the participant or beneficiary of the 
 benefits involved in the claim for benefits during the 
 pendency of any administrative processes referred to in 
 subparagraph (A) or of any action commenced under this 
 subsection--
 ``(i) shall not preclude continuation of 
 all such administrative processes to their 
 conclusion if so moved by any party, and
 ``(ii) shall not preclude any liability 
 under subsection (a)(1)(C) and this subsection 
 in connection with such claim.
 The court in any action commenced under this subsection 
 shall take into account any receipt of benefits during 
 such administrative processes or such action in 
 determining the amount of the damages awarded.
 ``(4) Limitations on recovery of damages.--
 ``(A) Maximum award of noneconomic damages.--The 
 aggregate amount of liability for noneconomic loss in 
 an action under paragraph (1) may not exceed 
 $1,500,000.
 ``(B) Limitation on award of punitive damages.--In 
 the case of any action commenced pursuant to paragraph 
 (1), the court may not award any punitive, exemplary, 
 or similar damages against a defendant, except that the 
 court may award punitive, exemplary, or similar damages 
 (in addition to damages described in subparagraph (A)), 
 in an aggregate amount not to exceed $1,500,000, if--
 ``(i) the denial of a claim for benefits 
 involved in the case was reversed by a written 
 determination by an independent medical 
 reviewer under section 503C(d)(3)(F); and
 ``(ii) there has been a failure to 
 authorize coverage in compliance with such 
 written determination.
 ``(C) Permitting application of lower state damage 
 limits.--A State may limit damages for noneconomic loss 
 or punitive, exemplary, or similar damages in an action 
 under paragraph (1) to amounts less than the amounts 
 permitted under this paragraph.
 ``(5) Admissibility.--In an action described in subclause 
 (I) or (II) of paragraph (1)(A) relating to a denial of a claim 
 for benefits, any determination by an independent medical 
 reviewer under section 503C(d) or 503C(e)(4)(B) relating to 
 such denial is admissible.
 ``(6) Waiver of internal review.--In the case of any cause 
 of action under paragraph (1), the waiver or nonwaiver of 
 internal review under section 503B(a)(4) by the group health 
 plan, or health insurance issuer that offers health insurance 
 coverage in connection with a group health plan, shall not be 
 used in determining liability.
 ``(7) Limitations on actions.--Paragraph (1) shall not 
 apply in connection with any action that is commenced more than 
 5 years after the date on which the failure described in such 
 paragraph occurred or, if earlier, not later than 2 years after 
 the first date the participant or beneficiary became aware of 
 the personal injury or death referred to in such paragraph.
 ``(8) Exclusion of directed recordkeepers.--
 ``(A) In general.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply 
 with respect to a directed record keeper in connection 
 with a group health plan.
 ``(B) Directed recordkeeper.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the term `directed record keeper' means, in 
 connection with a group health plan, a person engaged 
 in directed recordkeeping activities pursuant to the 
 specific instructions of the plan, the employer, or 
 another plan sponsor, including the distribution of 
 enrollment information and distribution of disclosure 
 materials under this Act or title I of the Bipartisan 
 Patient Protection Act and whose duties do not include 
 making determinations on claims for benefits.
 ``(C) Limitation.--Subparagraph (A) does not apply 
 in connection with any directed recordkeeper to the 
 extent that the directed recordkeeper fails to follow 
 the specific instruction of the plan or the employer or 
 other plan sponsor.
 ``(9) Protection of the regulation of quality of medical 
 care under state law.--Nothing in this subsection shall be 
 construed to preclude any action under State law against a 
 person or entity for liability or vicarious liability with 
 respect to the delivery of medical care. A cause of action that 
 is based on or otherwise relates to a group health plan's 
 determination on a claim for benefits shall not be deemed to be 
 the delivery of medical care under any State law for purposes 
 of this paragraph. Any such cause of action shall be maintained 
 exclusively under this section. Nothing in this paragraph shall 
 be construed to alter, amend, modify, invalidate, impair, or 
 supersede section 514.
 ``(10) Coordination with fiduciary requirements.--A 
 fiduciary shall not be treated as failing to meet any 
 requirement of part 4 solely by reason of any action taken by a 
 fiduciary which consists of full compliance with the reversal 
 under section 503C (relating to independent external appeals 
 procedures for group health plans) of a denial of claim for 
 benefits (within the meaning of section 503C(i)(2)).
 ``(11) Construction.--Nothing in this subsection shall be 
 construed as authorizing a cause of action under paragraph (1) 
 for the failure of a group health plan or health insurance 
 issuer to provide an item or service that is specifically 
 excluded under the plan or coverage.
 ``(12) Limitation on class action litigation.--A claim or 
 cause of action under this subsection may not be maintained as 
 a class action, as a derivative action, or as an action on 
 behalf of any group of 2 or more claimants.
 ``(13) Purchase of insurance to cover liability.--Nothing 
 in section 410 shall be construed to preclude the purchase by a 
 group health plan of insurance to cover any liability or losses 
 arising under a cause of action under subsection (a)(1)(C) and 
 this subsection.
 ``(14) Retrospective claims for benefits.--A cause of 
 action shall not arise under paragraph (1) where the claim for 
 benefits relates to an item or service that has already been 
 provided to the participant or beneficiary under the plan or 
 coverage and the claim relates solely to the subsequent denial 
 of payment for the provision of such item or service.
 ``(15) Exemption from personal liability for individual 
 members of boards of directors, joint boards of trustees, 
 etc.--Any individual who is--
 ``(A) a member of a board of directors of an 
 employer or plan sponsor; or
 ``(B) a member of an association, committee, 
 employee organization, joint board of trustees, or 
 other similar group of representatives of the entities 
 that are the plan sponsor of plan maintained by two or 
 more employers and one or more employee organizations;
 shall not be personally liable under this subsection for 
 conduct that is within the scope of employment or of plan-
 related duties of the individuals unless the individual acts in 
 a fraudulent manner for personal enrichment.
 ``(16) Definitions and related rules.--For purposes of this 
 subsection:
 ``(A) Claim for benefits.--The term `claim for 
 benefits' shall have the meaning given such term in 
 section 503A(e).
 ``(B) Group health plan.--The term `group health 
 plan' shall have the meaning given such term in section 
 733(a).
 ``(C) Health insurance coverage.--The term `health 
 insurance coverage' has the meaning given such term in 
 section 733(b)(1).
 ``(D) Health insurance issuer.--The term `health 
 insurance issuer' has the meaning given such term in 
 section 733(b)(2).
 ``(E) Ordinary care.--The term `ordinary care' 
 means, with respect to a determination on a claim for 
 benefits, that degree of care, skill, and diligence 
 that a reasonable and prudent individual would exercise 
 in making a fair determination on a claim for benefits 
 of like kind to the claims involved.
 ``(F) Personal injury.--The term `personal injury' 
 means a physical injury and includes an injury arising 
 out of the treatment (or failure to treat) a mental 
 illness or disease.
 ``(G) Treatment of excepted benefits.--The 
 provisions of this subsection (and subsection 
 (a)(1)(C)) shall not apply to excepted benefits (as 
 defined in section 733(c)), other than benefits 
 described in section 733(c)(2)(A), in the same manner 
 as the provisions of part 7 do not apply to such 
 benefits under subsections (b) and (c) of section 732.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Section 502(a)(1) of such Act 
 (29 U.S.C. 1132(a)(1)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph 
 (A);
 (B) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``plan;'' and 
 inserting ``plan, or''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(C) for the relief provided for in subsection (n) 
 of this section.''.
 (b) Availability of Actions in State Court.--
 (1) Jurisdiction of state courts.--Section 502(e)(1) of 
 such Act (29 U.S.C. 1132(e)) is amended--
 (A) in the first sentence, by striking ``subsection 
 (a)(1)(B)'' and inserting ``paragraphs (1)(B), (1)(C), 
 and (7) of subsection (a)'';
 (B) in the second sentence, by striking 
 ``paragraphs (1)(B) and (7)'' and inserting 
 ``paragraphs (1)(B), (1)(C), and (7)''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 sentence: ``State courts of competent jurisdiction in 
 the State in which the plaintiff resides and district 
 courts of the United States shall have concurrent 
 jurisdiction over actions under subsections (a)(1)(C) 
 and (n).''.
 (2) Limitation on removability of certain actions in state 
 court.--Section 1445 of title 28, United States Code, is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(e)(1) A civil action brought in any State court under 
subsections (a)(1)(C) and (n) of section 502 of the Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act of 1974 against any party (other than the employer, 
plan, plan sponsor, or other entity treated under section 502(n) of 
such Act as such) arising from a medically reviewable determination may 
not be removed to any district court of the United States.
 ``(2) For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `medically reviewable 
decision' means a denial of a claim for benefits under the plan which 
is described in section 503C(d)(2) of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to acts and omissions, from which a cause of action arises, 
occurring on or after the applicable effective date under section 601.

SEC. 403. LIMITATION ON CERTAIN CLASS ACTION LITIGATION.

 (a) In General.--Section 502 of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1132), as amended by section 402, is 
further amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(o) Limitation on Class Action Litigation.--Any claim or cause of 
action that is maintained under this section (other than under 
subsection (n)) or under section 1962 or 1964(c) of title 18, United 
States Code, in connection with a group health plan, or health 
insurance coverage issued in connection with a group health plan, as a 
class action, derivative action, or as an action on behalf of any group 
of 2 or more claimants, may be maintained only if the class, the 
derivative claimant, or the group of claimants is limited to the 
participants or beneficiaries of a group health plan established by 
only 1 plan sponsor. No action maintained by such class, such 
derivative claimant, or such group of claimants may be joined in the 
same proceeding with any action maintained by another class, derivative 
claimant, or group of claimants or consolidated for any purpose with 
any other proceeding. In this paragraph, the terms `group health plan' 
and `health insurance coverage' have the meanings given such terms in 
section 733.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply with respect to actions commenced on or after August 2, 2001. 
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, with respect to class actions, 
the amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to civil 
actions which are pending on such date in which a class action has not 
been certified as of such date.

SEC. 404. LIMITATIONS ON ACTIONS.

 Section 502 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
(29 U.S.C. 1132) (as amended by sections 402 and 403) is amended 
further by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(p) Limitations on Actions Relating to Group Health Plans.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), no 
 action may be brought under subsection (a)(1)(B), (a)(2), or 
 (a)(3) by a participant or beneficiary seeking relief based on 
 the application of any provision in section 101, subtitle B, or 
 subtitle D of title I of the Bipartisan Patient Protection Act 
 (as incorporated under section 714).
 ``(2) Certain actions allowable.--An action may be brought 
 under subsection (a)(1)(B), (a)(2), or (a)(3) by a participant 
 or beneficiary seeking relief based on the application of 
 section 101, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118(a)(3), 119, or 120 of 
 the Bipartisan Patient Protection Act (as incorporated under 
 section 714) to the individual circumstances of that 
 participant or beneficiary, except that--
 ``(A) such an action may not be brought or 
 maintained as a class action; and
 ``(B) in such an action, relief may only provide 
 for the provision of (or payment of) benefits, items, 
 or services denied to the individual participant or 
 beneficiary involved (and for attorney's fees and the 
 costs of the action, at the discretion of the court) 
 and shall not provide for any other relief to the 
 participant or beneficiary or for any relief to any 
 other person.
 ``(3) Other provisions unaffected.--Nothing in this 
 subsection shall be construed as affecting subsections 
 (a)(1)(C) and (n).
 ``(4) Enforcement by secretary unaffected.--Nothing in this 
 subsection shall be construed as affecting any action brought 
 by the Secretary.''.

SEC. 405. COOPERATION BETWEEN FEDERAL AND STATE AUTHORITIES.

 (a) In General.--Subpart C of part 7 of subtitle B of title I of 
the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1191 et 
seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 735. COOPERATION BETWEEN FEDERAL AND STATE AUTHORITIES.

 ``(a) Agreement with States.--A State may enter into an agreement 
with the Secretary for the delegation to the State of some or all of 
the Secretary's authority under this title to enforce the requirements 
applicable under sections 503A, 503B, 503C, and 714 with respect to 
health insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer and with 
respect to a group health plan that is a non-Federal governmental plan.
 ``(b) Delegations.--Any department, agency, or instrumentality of a 
State to which authority is delegated pursuant to an agreement entered 
into under this section may, if authorized under State law and to the 
extent consistent with such agreement, exercise the powers of the 
Secretary under this title which relate to such authority.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendments.--The table of contents in section 1 of 
such Act is amended--
 (1) by inserting after the item relating to section 503 the 
 following new items:

``Sec. 503A. Procedures for initial claims for benefits and prior 
 authorization determinations.
``Sec. 503B. Internal appeals of claims denials.
``Sec. 503C. Independent external appeals procedures.'';
 (2) by inserting after the item relating to section 713 the 
 following new item:

``Sec. 714. Patient protection standards.''; and
 (3) by inserting after the item relating to section 734 the 
 following new item:

``Sec. 735. Cooperation between Federal and State authorities.''.

SEC. 406. SENSE OF THE SENATE CONCERNING THE IMPORTANCE OF CERTAIN 
 UNPAID SERVICES.

 It is the sense of the Senate that the court should consider the 
loss of a nonwage earning spouse or parent as an economic loss for the 
purposes of this section. Furthermore, the court should define the 
compensation for the loss not as minimum services, but, rather, in 
terms that fully compensate for the true and whole replacement cost to 
the family.

 Subtitle B--Association Health Plans

SEC. 421. RULES GOVERNING ASSOCIATION HEALTH PLANS.

 (a) In General.--Subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by adding after part 7 the 
following new part:

 ``Part 8--Rules Governing Association Health Plans

``SEC. 801. ASSOCIATION HEALTH PLANS.

 ``(a) In General.--For purposes of this part, the term `association 
health plan' means a group health plan whose sponsor is (or is deemed 
under this part to be) described in subsection (b).
 ``(b) Sponsorship.--The sponsor of a group health plan is described 
in this subsection if such sponsor--
 ``(1) is organized and maintained in good faith, with a 
 constitution and bylaws specifically stating its purpose and 
 providing for periodic meetings on at least an annual basis, as 
 a bona fide trade association, a bona fide industry association 
 (including a rural electric cooperative association or a rural 
 telephone cooperative association), a bona fide professional 
 association, or a bona fide chamber of commerce (or similar 
 bona fide business association, including a corporation or 
 similar organization that operates on a cooperative basis 
 (within the meaning of section 1381 of the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986)), for substantial purposes other than that of 
 obtaining or providing medical care;
 ``(2) is established as a permanent entity which receives 
 the active support of its members and requires for membership 
 payment on a periodic basis of dues or payments necessary to 
 maintain eligibility for membership in the sponsor; and
 ``(3) does not condition membership, such dues or payments, 
 or coverage under the plan on the basis of health status-
 related factors with respect to the employees of its members 
 (or affiliated members), or the dependents of such employees, 
 and does not condition such dues or payments on the basis of 
 group health plan participation.
Any sponsor consisting of an association of entities which meet the 
requirements of paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) shall be deemed to be a 
sponsor described in this subsection.

``SEC. 802. CERTIFICATION OF ASSOCIATION HEALTH PLANS.

 ``(a) In General.--The applicable authority shall prescribe by 
regulation, through negotiated rulemaking, a procedure under which, 
subject to subsection (b), the applicable authority shall certify 
association health plans which apply for certification as meeting the 
requirements of this part.
 ``(b) Standards.--Under the procedure prescribed pursuant to 
subsection (a), in the case of an association health plan that provides 
at least one benefit option which does not consist of health insurance 
coverage, the applicable authority shall certify such plan as meeting 
the requirements of this part only if the applicable authority is 
satisfied that the applicable requirements of this part are met (or, 
upon the date on which the plan is to commence operations, will be met) 
with respect to the plan.
 ``(c) Requirements Applicable to Certified Plans.--An association 
health plan with respect to which certification under this part is in 
effect shall meet the applicable requirements of this part, effective 
on the date of certification (or, if later, on the date on which the 
plan is to commence operations).
 ``(d) Requirements for Continued Certification.--The applicable 
authority may provide by regulation, through negotiated rulemaking, for 
continued certification of association health plans under this part.
 ``(e) Class Certification for Fully Insured Plans.--The applicable 
authority shall establish a class certification procedure for 
association health plans under which all benefits consist of health 
insurance coverage. Under such procedure, the applicable authority 
shall provide for the granting of certification under this part to the 
plans in each class of such association health plans upon appropriate 
filing under such procedure in connection with plans in such class and 
payment of the prescribed fee under section 807(a).
 ``(f) Certification of Self-Insured Association Health Plans.--An 
association health plan which offers one or more benefit options which 
do not consist of health insurance coverage may be certified under this 
part only if such plan consists of any of the following:
 ``(1) a plan which offered such coverage on the date of the 
 enactment of the Bipartisan Patient Protection Act,
 ``(2) a plan under which the sponsor does not restrict 
 membership to one or more trades and businesses or industries 
 and whose eligible participating employers represent a broad 
 cross-section of trades and businesses or industries, or
 ``(3) a plan whose eligible participating employers 
 represent one or more trades or businesses, or one or more 
 industries, consisting of any of the following: agriculture; 
 equipment and automobile dealerships; barbering and 
 cosmetology; certified public accounting practices; child care; 
 construction; dance, theatrical and orchestra productions; 
 disinfecting and pest control; financial services; fishing; 
 foodservice establishments; hospitals; labor organizations; 
 logging; manufacturing (metals); mining; medical and dental 
 practices; medical laboratories; professional consulting 
 services; sanitary services; transportation (local and 
 freight); warehousing; wholesaling/distributing; or any other 
 trade or business or industry which has been indicated as 
 having average or above-average risk or health claims 
 experience by reason of State rate filings, denials of 
 coverage, proposed premium rate levels, or other means 
 demonstrated by such plan in accordance with regulations which 
 the Secretary shall prescribe through negotiated rulemaking.

``SEC. 803. REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO SPONSORS AND BOARDS OF TRUSTEES.

 ``(a) Sponsor.--The requirements of this subsection are met with 
respect to an association health plan if the sponsor has met (or is 
deemed under this part to have met) the requirements of section 801(b) 
for a continuous period of not less than 3 years ending with the date 
of the application for certification under this part.
 ``(b) Board of Trustees.--The requirements of this subsection are 
met with respect to an association health plan if the following 
requirements are met:
 ``(1) Fiscal control.--The plan is operated, pursuant to a 
 trust agreement, by a board of trustees which has complete 
 fiscal control over the plan and which is responsible for all 
 operations of the plan.
 ``(2) Rules of operation and financial controls.--The board 
 of trustees has in effect rules of operation and financial 
 controls, based on a 3-year plan of operation, adequate to 
 carry out the terms of the plan and to meet all requirements of 
 this title applicable to the plan.
 ``(3) Rules governing relationship to participating 
 employers and to contractors.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraphs (B) and (C), the members of the board of 
 trustees are individuals selected from individuals who 
 are the owners, officers, directors, or employees of 
 the participating employers or who are partners in the 
 participating employers and actively participate in the 
 business.
 ``(B) Limitation.--
 ``(i) General rule.--Except as provided in 
 clauses (ii) and (iii), no such member is an 
 owner, officer, director, or employee of, or 
 partner in, a contract administrator or other 
 service provider to the plan.
 ``(ii) Limited exception for providers of 
 services solely on behalf of the sponsor.--
 Officers or employees of a sponsor which is a 
 service provider (other than a contract 
 administrator) to the plan may be members of 
 the board if they constitute not more than 25 
 percent of the membership of the board and they 
 do not provide services to the plan other than 
 on behalf of the sponsor.
 ``(iii) Treatment of providers of medical 
 care.--In the case of a sponsor which is an 
 association whose membership consists primarily 
 of providers of medical care, clause (i) shall 
 not apply in the case of any service provider 
 described in subparagraph (A) who is a provider 
 of medical care under the plan.
 ``(C) Certain plans excluded.--Subparagraph (A) 
 shall not apply to an association health plan which is 
 in existence on the date of the enactment of the 
 Bipartisan Patient Protection Act.
 ``(D) Sole authority.--The board has sole authority 
 under the plan to approve applications for 
 participation in the plan and to contract with a 
 service provider to administer the day-to-day affairs 
 of the plan.
 ``(c) Treatment of Franchise Networks.--In the case of a group 
health plan which is established and maintained by a franchiser for a 
franchise network consisting of its franchisees--
 ``(1) the requirements of subsection (a) and section 
 801(a)(1) shall be deemed met if such requirements would 
 otherwise be met if the franchiser were deemed to be the 
 sponsor referred to in section 801(b), such network were deemed 
 to be an association described in section 801(b), and each 
 franchisee were deemed to be a member (of the association and 
 the sponsor) referred to in section 801(b); and
 ``(2) the requirements of section 804(a)(1) shall be deemed 
 met.
The Secretary may by regulation, through negotiated rulemaking, define 
for purposes of this subsection the terms `franchiser', `franchise 
network', and `franchisee'.
 ``(d) Certain Collectively Bargained Plans.--
 ``(1) In general.--In the case of a group health plan 
 described in paragraph (2)--
 ``(A) the requirements of subsection (a) and 
 section 801(a)(1) shall be deemed met;
 ``(B) the joint board of trustees shall be deemed a 
 board of trustees with respect to which the 
 requirements of subsection (b) are met; and
 ``(C) the requirements of section 804 shall be 
 deemed met.
 ``(2) Requirements.--A group health plan is described in 
 this paragraph if--
 ``(A) the plan is a multiemployer plan; or
 ``(B) the plan is in existence on April 1, 2001, 
 and would be described in section 3(40)(A)(i) but 
 solely for the failure to meet the requirements of 
 section 3(40)(C)(ii).
 ``(3) Construction.--A group health plan described in 
 paragraph (2) shall only be treated as an association health 
 plan under this part if the sponsor of the plan applies for, 
 and obtains, certification of the plan as an association health 
 plan under this part.

``SEC. 804. PARTICIPATION AND COVERAGE REQUIREMENTS.

 ``(a) Covered Employers and Individuals.--The requirements of this 
subsection are met with respect to an association health plan if, under 
the terms of the plan--
 ``(1) each participating employer must be--
 ``(A) a member of the sponsor,
 ``(B) the sponsor, or
 ``(C) an affiliated member of the sponsor with 
 respect to which the requirements of subsection (b) are 
 met,
 except that, in the case of a sponsor which is a professional 
 association or other individual-based association, if at least 
 one of the officers, directors, or employees of an employer, or 
 at least one of the individuals who are partners in an employer 
 and who actively participates in the business, is a member or 
 such an affiliated member of the sponsor, participating 
 employers may also include such employer; and
 ``(2) all individuals commencing coverage under the plan 
 after certification under this part must be--
 ``(A) active or retired owners (including self-
 employed individuals), officers, directors, or 
 employees of, or partners in, participating employers; 
 or
 ``(B) the beneficiaries of individuals described in 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(b) Coverage of Previously Uninsured Employees.--In the case of 
an association health plan in existence on the date of the enactment of 
the Bipartisan Patient Protection Act, an affiliated member of the 
sponsor of the plan may be offered coverage under the plan as a 
participating employer only if--
 ``(1) the affiliated member was an affiliated member on the 
 date of certification under this part; or
 ``(2) during the 12-month period preceding the date of the 
 offering of such coverage, the affiliated member has not 
 maintained or contributed to a group health plan with respect 
 to any of its employees who would otherwise be eligible to 
 participate in such association health plan.
 ``(c) Individual Market Unaffected.--The requirements of this 
subsection are met with respect to an association health plan if, under 
the terms of the plan, no participating employer may provide health 
insurance coverage in the individual market for any employee not 
covered under the plan which is similar to the coverage 
contemporaneously provided to employees of the employer under the plan, 
if such exclusion of the employee from coverage under the plan is based 
on a health status-related factor with respect to the employee and such 
employee would, but for such exclusion on such basis, be eligible for 
coverage under the plan.
 ``(d) Prohibition of Discrimination Against Employers and Employees 
Eligible To Participate.--The requirements of this subsection are met 
with respect to an association health plan if--
 ``(1) under the terms of the plan, all employers meeting 
 the preceding requirements of this section are eligible to 
 qualify as participating employers for all geographically 
 available coverage options, unless, in the case of any such 
 employer, participation or contribution requirements of the 
 type referred to in section 2711 of the Public Health Service 
 Act are not met;
 ``(2) upon request, any employer eligible to participate is 
 furnished information regarding all coverage options available 
 under the plan; and
 ``(3) the applicable requirements of sections 701, 702, and 
 703 are met with respect to the plan.

``SEC. 805. OTHER REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO PLAN DOCUMENTS, CONTRIBUTION 
 RATES, AND BENEFIT OPTIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--The requirements of this section are met with 
respect to an association health plan if the following requirements are 
met:
 ``(1) Contents of governing instruments.--The instruments 
 governing the plan include a written instrument, meeting the 
 requirements of an instrument required under section 402(a)(1), 
 which--
 ``(A) provides that the board of trustees serves as 
 the named fiduciary required for plans under section 
 402(a)(1) and serves in the capacity of a plan 
 administrator (referred to in section 3(16)(A));
 ``(B) provides that the sponsor of the plan is to 
 serve as plan sponsor (referred to in section 
 3(16)(B)); and
 ``(C) incorporates the requirements of section 806.
 ``(2) Contribution rates must be nondiscriminatory.--
 ``(A) The contribution rates for any participating 
 small employer do not vary on the basis of the claims 
 experience of such employer and do not vary on the 
 basis of the type of business or industry in which such 
 employer is engaged.
 ``(B) Nothing in this title or any other provision 
 of law shall be construed to preclude an association 
 health plan, or a health insurance issuer offering 
 health insurance coverage in connection with an 
 association health plan, from--
 ``(i) setting contribution rates based on 
 the claims experience of the plan; or
 ``(ii) varying contribution rates for small 
 employers in a State to the extent that such 
 rates could vary using the same methodology 
 employed in such State for regulating premium 
 rates in the small group market with respect to 
 health insurance coverage offered in connection 
 with bona fide associations (within the meaning 
 of section 2791(d)(3) of the Public Health 
 Service Act),
 subject to the requirements of section 702(b) relating 
 to contribution rates.
 ``(3) Floor for number of covered individuals with respect 
 to certain plans.--If any benefit option under the plan does 
 not consist of health insurance coverage, the plan has as of 
 the beginning of the plan year not fewer than 1,000 
 participants and beneficiaries.
 ``(4) Marketing requirements.--
 ``(A) In general.--If a benefit option which 
 consists of health insurance coverage is offered under 
 the plan, State-licensed insurance agents shall be used 
 to distribute to small employers coverage which does 
 not consist of health insurance coverage in a manner 
 comparable to the manner in which such agents are used 
 to distribute health insurance coverage.
 ``(B) State-licensed insurance agents.--For 
 purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `State-licensed 
 insurance agents' means one or more agents who are 
 licensed in a State and are subject to the laws of such 
 State relating to licensure, qualification, testing, 
 examination, and continuing education of persons 
 authorized to offer, sell, or solicit health insurance 
 coverage in such State.
 ``(5) Regulatory requirements.--Such other requirements as 
 the applicable authority determines are necessary to carry out 
 the purposes of this part, which shall be prescribed by the 
 applicable authority by regulation through negotiated 
 rulemaking.
 ``(b) Ability of Association Health Plans To Design Benefit 
Options.--Subject to section 514(d), nothing in this part or any 
provision of State law (as defined in section 514(c)(1)) shall be 
construed to preclude an association health plan, or a health insurance 
issuer offering health insurance coverage in connection with an 
association health plan, from exercising its sole discretion in 
selecting the specific items and services consisting of medical care to 
be included as benefits under such plan or coverage, except (subject to 
section 514) in the case of any law to the extent that it (1) prohibits 
an exclusion of a specific disease from such coverage, or (2) is not 
preempted under section 731(a)(1) with respect to matters governed by 
section 711 or 712.

``SEC. 806. MAINTENANCE OF RESERVES AND PROVISIONS FOR SOLVENCY FOR 
 PLANS PROVIDING HEALTH BENEFITS IN ADDITION TO HEALTH 
 INSURANCE COVERAGE.

 ``(a) In General.--The requirements of this section are met with 
respect to an association health plan if--
 ``(1) the benefits under the plan consist solely of health 
 insurance coverage; or
 ``(2) if the plan provides any additional benefit options 
 which do not consist of health insurance coverage, the plan--
 ``(A) establishes and maintains reserves with 
 respect to such additional benefit options, in amounts 
 recommended by the qualified actuary, consisting of--
 ``(i) a reserve sufficient for unearned 
 contributions;
 ``(ii) a reserve sufficient for benefit 
 liabilities which have been incurred, which 
 have not been satisfied, and for which risk of 
 loss has not yet been transferred, and for 
 expected administrative costs with respect to 
 such benefit liabilities;
 ``(iii) a reserve sufficient for any other 
 obligations of the plan; and
 ``(iv) a reserve sufficient for a margin of 
 error and other fluctuations, taking into 
 account the specific circumstances of the plan; 
 and
 ``(B) establishes and maintains aggregate and 
 specific excess/stop loss insurance and solvency 
 indemnification, with respect to such additional 
 benefit options for which risk of loss has not yet been 
 transferred, as follows:
 ``(i) The plan shall secure aggregate 
 excess/stop loss insurance for the plan with an 
 attachment point which is not greater than 125 
 percent of expected gross annual claims. The 
 applicable authority may by regulation, through 
 negotiated rulemaking, provide for upward 
 adjustments in the amount of such percentage in 
 specified circumstances in which the plan 
 specifically provides for and maintains 
 reserves in excess of the amounts required 
 under subparagraph (A).
 ``(ii) The plan shall secure specific 
 excess/stop loss insurance for the plan with an 
 attachment point which is at least equal to an 
 amount recommended by the plan's qualified 
 actuary. The applicable authority may by 
 regulation, through negotiated rulemaking, 
 provide for adjustments in the amount of such 
 insurance in specified circumstances in which 
 the plan specifically provides for and 
 maintains reserves in excess of the amounts 
 required under subparagraph (A).
 ``(iii) The plan shall secure 
 indemnification insurance for any claims which 
 the plan is unable to satisfy by reason of a 
 plan termination.
Any regulations prescribed by the applicable authority pursuant to 
clause (i) or (ii) of subparagraph (B) may allow for such adjustments 
in the required levels of excess/stop loss insurance as the qualified 
actuary may recommend, taking into account the specific circumstances 
of the plan.
 ``(b) Minimum Surplus in Addition to Claims Reserves.--In the case 
of any association health plan described in subsection (a)(2), the 
requirements of this subsection are met if the plan establishes and 
maintains surplus in an amount at least equal to--
 ``(1) $500,000, or
 ``(2) such greater amount (but not greater than $2,000,000) 
 as may be set forth in regulations prescribed by the applicable 
 authority through negotiated rulemaking, based on the level of 
 aggregate and specific excess/stop loss insurance provided with 
 respect to such plan.
 ``(c) Additional Requirements.--In the case of any association 
health plan described in subsection (a)(2), the applicable authority 
may provide such additional requirements relating to reserves and 
excess/stop loss insurance as the applicable authority considers 
appropriate. Such requirements may be provided by regulation, through 
negotiated rulemaking, with respect to any such plan or any class of 
such plans.
 ``(d) Adjustments for Excess/Stop Loss Insurance.--The applicable 
authority may provide for adjustments to the levels of reserves 
otherwise required under subsections (a) and (b) with respect to any 
plan or class of plans to take into account excess/stop loss insurance 
provided with respect to such plan or plans.
 ``(e) Alternative Means of Compliance.--The applicable authority 
may permit an association health plan described in subsection (a)(2) to 
substitute, for all or part of the requirements of this section (except 
subsection (a)(2)(B)(iii)), such security, guarantee, hold-harmless 
arrangement, or other financial arrangement as the applicable authority 
determines to be adequate to enable the plan to fully meet all its 
financial obligations on a timely basis and is otherwise no less 
protective of the interests of participants and beneficiaries than the 
requirements for which it is substituted. The applicable authority may 
take into account, for purposes of this subsection, evidence provided 
by the plan or sponsor which demonstrates an assumption of liability 
with respect to the plan. Such evidence may be in the form of a 
contract of indemnification, lien, bonding, insurance, letter of 
credit, recourse under applicable terms of the plan in the form of 
assessments of participating employers, security, or other financial 
arrangement.
 ``(f) Measures To Ensure Continued Payment of Benefits by Certain 
Plans in Distress.--
 ``(1) Payments by certain plans to association health plan 
 fund.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of an association 
 health plan described in subsection (a)(2), the 
 requirements of this subsection are met if the plan 
 makes payments into the Association Health Plan Fund 
 under this subparagraph when they are due. Such 
 payments shall consist of annual payments in the amount 
 of $5,000, and, in addition to such annual payments, 
 such supplemental payments as the Secretary may 
 determine to be necessary under paragraph (2). Payments 
 under this paragraph are payable to the Fund at the 
 time determined by the Secretary. Initial payments are 
 due in advance of certification under this part. 
 Payments shall continue to accrue until a plan's assets 
 are distributed pursuant to a termination procedure.
 ``(B) Penalties for failure to make payments.--If 
 any payment is not made by a plan when it is due, a 
 late payment charge of not more than 100 percent of the 
 payment which was not timely paid shall be payable by 
 the plan to the Fund.
 ``(C) Continued duty of the secretary.--The 
 Secretary shall not cease to carry out the provisions 
 of paragraph (2) on account of the failure of a plan to 
 pay any payment when due.
 ``(2) Payments by secretary to continue excess/stop loss 
 insurance coverage and indemnification insurance coverage for 
 certain plans.--In any case in which the applicable authority 
 determines that there is, or that there is reason to believe 
 that there will be: (A) a failure to take necessary corrective 
 actions under section 809(a) with respect to an association 
 health plan described in subsection (a)(2); or (B) a 
 termination of such a plan under section 809(b) or 810(b)(8) 
 (and, if the applicable authority is not the Secretary, 
 certifies such determination to the Secretary), the Secretary 
 shall determine the amounts necessary to make payments to an 
 insurer (designated by the Secretary) to maintain in force 
 excess/stop loss insurance coverage or indemnification 
 insurance coverage for such plan, if the Secretary determines 
 that there is a reasonable expectation that, without such 
 payments, claims would not be satisfied by reason of 
 termination of such coverage. The Secretary shall, to the 
 extent provided in advance in appropriation Acts, pay such 
 amounts so determined to the insurer designated by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(3) Association health plan fund.--
 ``(A) In general.--There is established on the 
 books of the Treasury a fund to be known as the 
 `Association Health Plan Fund'. The Fund shall be 
 available for making payments pursuant to paragraph 
 (2). The Fund shall be credited with payments received 
 pursuant to paragraph (1)(A), penalties received 
 pursuant to paragraph (1)(B); and earnings on 
 investments of amounts of the Fund under subparagraph 
 (B).
 ``(B) Investment.--Whenever the Secretary 
 determines that the moneys of the fund are in excess of 
 current needs, the Secretary may request the investment 
 of such amounts as the Secretary determines advisable 
 by the Secretary of the Treasury in obligations issued 
 or guaranteed by the United States.
 ``(g) Excess/Stop Loss Insurance.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Aggregate excess/stop loss insurance.--The term 
 `aggregate excess/stop loss insurance' means, in connection 
 with an association health plan, a contract--
 ``(A) under which an insurer (meeting such minimum 
 standards as the applicable authority may prescribe by 
 regulation through negotiated rulemaking) provides for 
 payment to the plan with respect to aggregate claims 
 under the plan in excess of an amount or amounts 
 specified in such contract;
 ``(B) which is guaranteed renewable; and
 ``(C) which allows for payment of premiums by any 
 third party on behalf of the insured plan.
 ``(2) Specific excess/stop loss insurance.--The term 
 `specific excess/stop loss insurance' means, in connection with 
 an association health plan, a contract--
 ``(A) under which an insurer (meeting such minimum 
 standards as the applicable authority may prescribe by 
 regulation through negotiated rulemaking) provides for 
 payment to the plan with respect to claims under the 
 plan in connection with a covered individual in excess 
 of an amount or amounts specified in such contract in 
 connection with such covered individual;
 ``(B) which is guaranteed renewable; and
 ``(C) which allows for payment of premiums by any 
 third party on behalf of the insured plan.
 ``(h) Indemnification Insurance.--For purposes of this section, the 
term `indemnification insurance' means, in connection with an 
association health plan, a contract--
 ``(1) under which an insurer (meeting such minimum 
 standards as the applicable authority may prescribe through 
 negotiated rulemaking) provides for payment to the plan with 
 respect to claims under the plan which the plan is unable to 
 satisfy by reason of a termination pursuant to section 809(b) 
 (relating to mandatory termination);
 ``(2) which is guaranteed renewable and noncancellable for 
 any reason (except as the applicable authority may prescribe by 
 regulation through negotiated rulemaking); and
 ``(3) which allows for payment of premiums by any third 
 party on behalf of the insured plan.
 ``(i) Reserves.--For purposes of this section, the term `reserves' 
means, in connection with an association health plan, plan assets which 
meet the fiduciary standards under part 4 and such additional 
requirements regarding liquidity as the applicable authority may 
prescribe through negotiated rulemaking.
 ``(j) Solvency Standards Working Group.--
 ``(1) In general.--Within 90 days after the date of the 
 enactment of the Bipartisan Patient Protection Act, the 
 applicable authority shall establish a Solvency Standards 
 Working Group. In prescribing the initial regulations under 
 this section, the applicable authority shall take into account 
 the recommendations of such Working Group.
 ``(2) Membership.--The Working Group shall consist of not 
 more than 15 members appointed by the applicable authority. The 
 applicable authority shall include among persons invited to 
 membership on the Working Group at least one of each of the 
 following:
 ``(A) a representative of the National Association 
 of Insurance Commissioners;
 ``(B) a representative of the American Academy of 
 Actuaries;
 ``(C) a representative of the State governments, or 
 their interests;
 ``(D) a representative of existing self-insured 
 arrangements, or their interests;
 ``(E) a representative of associations of the type 
 referred to in section 801(b)(1), or their interests; 
 and
 ``(F) a representative of multiemployer plans that 
 are group health plans, or their interests.

``SEC. 807. REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATION AND RELATED REQUIREMENTS.

 ``(a) Filing Fee.--Under the procedure prescribed pursuant to 
section 802(a), an association health plan shall pay to the applicable 
authority at the time of filing an application for certification under 
this part a filing fee in the amount of $5,000, which shall be 
available in the case of the Secretary, to the extent provided in 
appropriation Acts, for the sole purpose of administering the 
certification procedures applicable with respect to association health 
plans.
 ``(b) Information To Be Included in Application for 
Certification.--An application for certification under this part meets 
the requirements of this section only if it includes, in a manner and 
form which shall be prescribed by the applicable authority through 
negotiated rulemaking, at least the following information:
 ``(1) Identifying information.--The names and addresses 
 of--
 ``(A) the sponsor; and
 ``(B) the members of the board of trustees of the 
 plan.
 ``(2) States in which plan intends to do business.--The 
 States in which participants and beneficiaries under the plan 
 are to be located and the number of them expected to be located 
 in each such State.
 ``(3) Bonding requirements.--Evidence provided by the board 
 of trustees that the bonding requirements of section 412 will 
 be met as of the date of the application or (if later) 
 commencement of operations.
 ``(4) Plan documents.--A copy of the documents governing 
 the plan (including any bylaws and trust agreements), the 
 summary plan description, and other material describing the 
 benefits that will be provided to participants and 
 beneficiaries under the plan.
 ``(5) Agreements with service providers.--A copy of any 
 agreements between the plan and contract administrators and 
 other service providers.
 ``(6) Funding report.--In the case of association health 
 plans providing benefits options in addition to health 
 insurance coverage, a report setting forth information with 
 respect to such additional benefit options determined as of a 
 date within the 120-day period ending with the date of the 
 application, including the following:
 ``(A) Reserves.--A statement, certified by the 
 board of trustees of the plan, and a statement of 
 actuarial opinion, signed by a qualified actuary, that 
 all applicable requirements of section 806 are or will 
 be met in accordance with regulations which the 
 applicable authority shall prescribe through negotiated 
 rulemaking.
 ``(B) Adequacy of contribution rates.--A statement 
 of actuarial opinion, signed by a qualified actuary, 
 which sets forth a description of the extent to which 
 contribution rates are adequate to provide for the 
 payment of all obligations and the maintenance of 
 required reserves under the plan for the 12-month 
 period beginning with such date within such 120-day 
 period, taking into account the expected coverage and 
 experience of the plan. If the contribution rates are 
 not fully adequate, the statement of actuarial opinion 
 shall indicate the extent to which the rates are 
 inadequate and the changes needed to ensure adequacy.
 ``(C) Current and projected value of assets and 
 liabilities.--A statement of actuarial opinion signed 
 by a qualified actuary, which sets forth the current 
 value of the assets and liabilities accumulated under 
 the plan and a projection of the assets, liabilities, 
 income, and expenses of the plan for the 12-month 
 period referred to in subparagraph (B). The income 
 statement shall identify separately the plan's 
 administrative expenses and claims.
 ``(D) Costs of coverage to be charged and other 
 expenses.--A statement of the costs of coverage to be 
 charged, including an itemization of amounts for 
 administration, reserves, and other expenses associated 
 with the operation of the plan.
 ``(E) Other information.--Any other information as 
 may be determined by the applicable authority, by 
 regulation through negotiated rulemaking, as necessary 
 to carry out the purposes of this part.
 ``(c) Filing Notice of Certification With States.--A certification 
granted under this part to an association health plan shall not be 
effective unless written notice of such certification is filed with the 
applicable State authority of each State in which at least 25 percent 
of the participants and beneficiaries under the plan are located. For 
purposes of this subsection, an individual shall be considered to be 
located in the State in which a known address of such individual is 
located or in which such individual is employed.
 ``(d) Notice of Material Changes.--In the case of any association 
health plan certified under this part, descriptions of material changes 
in any information which was required to be submitted with the 
application for the certification under this part shall be filed in 
such form and manner as shall be prescribed by the applicable authority 
by regulation through negotiated rulemaking. The applicable authority 
may require by regulation, through negotiated rulemaking, prior notice 
of material changes with respect to specified matters which might serve 
as the basis for suspension or revocation of the certification.
 ``(e) Reporting Requirements for Certain Association Health 
Plans.--An association health plan certified under this part which 
provides benefit options in addition to health insurance coverage for 
such plan year shall meet the requirements of section 503B by filing an 
annual report under such section which shall include information 
described in subsection (b)(6) with respect to the plan year and, 
notwithstanding section 503C(a)(1)(A), shall be filed with the 
applicable authority not later than 90 days after the close of the plan 
year (or on such later date as may be prescribed by the applicable 
authority). The applicable authority may require by regulation through 
negotiated rulemaking such interim reports as it considers appropriate.
 ``(f) Engagement of Qualified Actuary.--The board of trustees of 
each association health plan which provides benefits options in 
addition to health insurance coverage and which is applying for 
certification under this part or is certified under this part shall 
engage, on behalf of all participants and beneficiaries, a qualified 
actuary who shall be responsible for the preparation of the materials 
comprising information necessary to be submitted by a qualified actuary 
under this part. The qualified actuary shall utilize such assumptions 
and techniques as are necessary to enable such actuary to form an 
opinion as to whether the contents of the matters reported under this 
part--
 ``(1) are in the aggregate reasonably related to the 
 experience of the plan and to reasonable expectations; and
 ``(2) represent such actuary's best estimate of anticipated 
 experience under the plan.
The opinion by the qualified actuary shall be made with respect to, and 
shall be made a part of, the annual report.

``SEC. 808. NOTICE REQUIREMENTS FOR VOLUNTARY TERMINATION.

 ``Except as provided in section 809(b), an association health plan 
which is or has been certified under this part may terminate (upon or 
at any time after cessation of accruals in benefit liabilities) only if 
the board of trustees--
 ``(1) not less than 60 days before the proposed termination 
 date, provides to the participants and beneficiaries a written 
 notice of intent to terminate stating that such termination is 
 intended and the proposed termination date;
 ``(2) develops a plan for winding up the affairs of the 
 plan in connection with such termination in a manner which will 
 result in timely payment of all benefits for which the plan is 
 obligated; and
 ``(3) submits such plan in writing to the applicable 
 authority.
Actions required under this section shall be taken in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed by the applicable authority by regulation 
through negotiated rulemaking.

``SEC. 809. CORRECTIVE ACTIONS AND MANDATORY TERMINATION.

 ``(a) Actions To Avoid Depletion of Reserves.--An association 
health plan which is certified under this part and which provides 
benefits other than health insurance coverage shall continue to meet 
the requirements of section 806, irrespective of whether such 
certification continues in effect. The board of trustees of such plan 
shall determine quarterly whether the requirements of section 806 are 
met. In any case in which the board determines that there is reason to 
believe that there is or will be a failure to meet such requirements, 
or the applicable authority makes such a determination and so notifies 
the board, the board shall immediately notify the qualified actuary 
engaged by the plan, and such actuary shall, not later than the end of 
the next following month, make such recommendations to the board for 
corrective action as the actuary determines necessary to ensure 
compliance with section 806. Not later than 30 days after receiving 
from the actuary recommendations for corrective actions, the board 
shall notify the applicable authority (in such form and manner as the 
applicable authority may prescribe by regulation through negotiated 
rulemaking) of such recommendations of the actuary for corrective 
action, together with a description of the actions (if any) that the 
board has taken or plans to take in response to such recommendations. 
The board shall thereafter report to the applicable authority, in such 
form and frequency as the applicable authority may specify to the 
board, regarding corrective action taken by the board until the 
requirements of section 806 are met.
 ``(b) Mandatory Termination.--In any case in which--
 ``(1) the applicable authority has been notified under 
 subsection (a) of a failure of an association health plan which 
 is or has been certified under this part and is described in 
 section 806(a)(2) to meet the requirements of section 806 and 
 has not been notified by the board of trustees of the plan that 
 corrective action has restored compliance with such 
 requirements; and
 ``(2) the applicable authority determines that there is a 
 reasonable expectation that the plan will continue to fail to 
 meet the requirements of section 806,
the board of trustees of the plan shall, at the direction of the 
applicable authority, terminate the plan and, in the course of the 
termination, take such actions as the applicable authority may require, 
including satisfying any claims referred to in section 
806(a)(2)(B)(iii) and recovering for the plan any liability under 
subsection (a)(2)(B)(iii) or (e) of section 806, as necessary to ensure 
that the affairs of the plan will be, to the maximum extent possible, 
wound up in a manner which will result in timely provision of all 
benefits for which the plan is obligated.

``SEC. 810. TRUSTEESHIP BY THE SECRETARY OF INSOLVENT ASSOCIATION 
 HEALTH PLANS PROVIDING HEALTH BENEFITS IN ADDITION TO 
 HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE.

 ``(a) Appointment of Secretary as Trustee for Insolvent Plans.--
Whenever the Secretary determines that an association health plan which 
is or has been certified under this part and which is described in 
section 806(a)(2) will be unable to provide benefits when due or is 
otherwise in a financially hazardous condition, as shall be defined by 
the Secretary by regulation through negotiated rulemaking, the 
Secretary shall, upon notice to the plan, apply to the appropriate 
United States district court for appointment of the Secretary as 
trustee to administer the plan for the duration of the insolvency. The 
plan may appear as a party and other interested persons may intervene 
in the proceedings at the discretion of the court. The court shall 
appoint such Secretary trustee if the court determines that the 
trusteeship is necessary to protect the interests of the participants 
and beneficiaries or providers of medical care or to avoid any 
unreasonable deterioration of the financial condition of the plan. The 
trusteeship of such Secretary shall continue until the conditions 
described in the first sentence of this subsection are remedied or the 
plan is terminated.
 ``(b) Powers as Trustee.--The Secretary, upon appointment as 
trustee under subsection (a), shall have the power--
 ``(1) to do any act authorized by the plan, this title, or 
 other applicable provisions of law to be done by the plan 
 administrator or any trustee of the plan;
 ``(2) to require the transfer of all (or any part) of the 
 assets and records of the plan to the Secretary as trustee;
 ``(3) to invest any assets of the plan which the Secretary 
 holds in accordance with the provisions of the plan, 
 regulations prescribed by the Secretary through negotiated 
 rulemaking, and applicable provisions of law;
 ``(4) to require the sponsor, the plan administrator, any 
 participating employer, and any employee organization 
 representing plan participants to furnish any information with 
 respect to the plan which the Secretary as trustee may 
 reasonably need in order to administer the plan;
 ``(5) to collect for the plan any amounts due the plan and 
 to recover reasonable expenses of the trusteeship;
 ``(6) to commence, prosecute, or defend on behalf of the 
 plan any suit or proceeding involving the plan;
 ``(7) to issue, publish, or file such notices, statements, 
 and reports as may be required by the Secretary by regulation 
 through negotiated rulemaking or required by any order of the 
 court;
 ``(8) to terminate the plan (or provide for its termination 
 in accordance with section 809(b)) and liquidate the plan 
 assets, to restore the plan to the responsibility of the 
 sponsor, or to continue the trusteeship;
 ``(9) to provide for the enrollment of plan participants 
 and beneficiaries under appropriate coverage options; and
 ``(10) to do such other acts as may be necessary to comply 
 with this title or any order of the court and to protect the 
 interests of plan participants and beneficiaries and providers 
 of medical care.
 ``(c) Notice of Appointment.--As soon as practicable after the 
Secretary's appointment as trustee, the Secretary shall give notice of 
such appointment to--
 ``(1) the sponsor and plan administrator;
 ``(2) each participant;
 ``(3) each participating employer; and
 ``(4) if applicable, each employee organization which, for 
 purposes of collective bargaining, represents plan 
 participants.
 ``(d) Additional Duties.--Except to the extent inconsistent with 
the provisions of this title, or as may be otherwise ordered by the 
court, the Secretary, upon appointment as trustee under this section, 
shall be subject to the same duties as those of a trustee under section 
704 of title 11, United States Code, and shall have the duties of a 
fiduciary for purposes of this title.
 ``(e) Other Proceedings.--An application by the Secretary under 
this subsection may be filed notwithstanding the pendency in the same 
or any other court of any bankruptcy, mortgage foreclosure, or equity 
receivership proceeding, or any proceeding to reorganize, conserve, or 
liquidate such plan or its property, or any proceeding to enforce a 
lien against property of the plan.
 ``(f) Jurisdiction of Court.--
 ``(1) In general.--Upon the filing of an application for 
 the appointment as trustee or the issuance of a decree under 
 this section, the court to which the application is made shall 
 have exclusive jurisdiction of the plan involved and its 
 property wherever located with the powers, to the extent 
 consistent with the purposes of this section, of a court of the 
 United States having jurisdiction over cases under chapter 11 
 of title 11, United States Code. Pending an adjudication under 
 this section such court shall stay, and upon appointment by it 
 of the Secretary as trustee, such court shall continue the stay 
 of, any pending mortgage foreclosure, equity receivership, or 
 other proceeding to reorganize, conserve, or liquidate the 
 plan, the sponsor, or property of such plan or sponsor, and any 
 other suit against any receiver, conservator, or trustee of the 
 plan, the sponsor, or property of the plan or sponsor. Pending 
 such adjudication and upon the appointment by it of the 
 Secretary as trustee, the court may stay any proceeding to 
 enforce a lien against property of the plan or the sponsor or 
 any other suit against the plan or the sponsor.
 ``(2) Venue.--An action under this section may be brought 
 in the judicial district where the sponsor or the plan 
 administrator resides or does business or where any asset of 
 the plan is situated. A district court in which such action is 
 brought may issue process with respect to such action in any 
 other judicial district.
 ``(g) Personnel.--In accordance with regulations which shall be 
prescribed by the Secretary through negotiated rulemaking, the 
Secretary shall appoint, retain, and compensate accountants, actuaries, 
and other professional service personnel as may be necessary in 
connection with the Secretary's service as trustee under this section.

``SEC. 811. STATE ASSESSMENT AUTHORITY.

 ``(a) In General.--Notwithstanding section 514, a State may impose 
by law a contribution tax on an association health plan described in 
section 806(a)(2), if the plan commenced operations in such State after 
the date of the enactment of the Bipartisan Patient Protection Act.
 ``(b) Contribution Tax.--For purposes of this section, the term 
`contribution tax' imposed by a State on an association health plan 
means any tax imposed by such State if--
 ``(1) such tax is computed by applying a rate to the amount 
 of premiums or contributions, with respect to individuals 
 covered under the plan who are residents of such State, which 
 are received by the plan from participating employers located 
 in such State or from such individuals;
 ``(2) the rate of such tax does not exceed the rate of any 
 tax imposed by such State on premiums or contributions received 
 by insurers or health maintenance organizations for health 
 insurance coverage offered in such State in connection with a 
 group health plan;
 ``(3) such tax is otherwise nondiscriminatory; and
 ``(4) the amount of any such tax assessed on the plan is 
 reduced by the amount of any tax or assessment otherwise 
 imposed by the State on premiums, contributions, or both 
 received by insurers or health maintenance organizations for 
 health insurance coverage, aggregate excess/stop loss insurance 
 (as defined in section 806(g)(1)), specific excess/stop loss 
 insurance (as defined in section 806(g)(2)), other insurance 
 related to the provision of medical care under the plan, or any 
 combination thereof provided by such insurers or health 
 maintenance organizations in such State in connection with such 
 plan.

``SEC. 812. DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.

 ``(a) Definitions.--For purposes of this part--
 ``(1) Group health plan.--The term `group health plan' has 
 the meaning provided in section 733(a)(1) (after applying 
 subsection (b) of this section).
 ``(2) Medical care.--The term `medical care' has the 
 meaning provided in section 733(a)(2).
 ``(3) Health insurance coverage.--The term `health 
 insurance coverage' has the meaning provided in section 
 733(b)(1).
 ``(4) Health insurance issuer.--The term `health insurance 
 issuer' has the meaning provided in section 733(b)(2).
 ``(5) Applicable authority.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B), the term `applicable authority' 
 means, in connection with an association health plan--
 ``(i) the State recognized pursuant to 
 subsection (c) of section 506 as the State to 
 which authority has been delegated in 
 connection with such plan; or
 ``(ii) if there if no State referred to in 
 clause (i), the Secretary.
 ``(B) Exceptions.--
 ``(i) Joint authorities.--Where such term 
 appears in section 808(3), section 807(e) (in 
 the first instance), section 809(a) (in the 
 second instance), section 809(a) (in the fourth 
 instance), and section 809(b)(1), such term 
 means, in connection with an association health 
 plan, the Secretary and the State referred to 
 in subparagraph (A)(i) (if any) in connection 
 with such plan.
 ``(ii) Regulatory authorities.--Where such 
 term appears in section 802(a) (in the first 
 instance), section 802(d), section 802(e), 
 section 803(d), section 805(a)(5), section 
 806(a)(2), section 806(b), section 806(c), 
 section 806(d), paragraphs (1)(A) and (2)(A) of 
 section 806(g), section 806(h), section 806(i), 
 section 806(j), section 807(a) (in the second 
 instance), section 807(b), section 807(d), 
 section 807(e) (in the second instance), 
 section 808 (in the matter after paragraph 
 (3)), and section 809(a) (in the third 
 instance), such term means, in connection with 
 an association health plan, the Secretary.
 ``(6) Health status-related factor.--The term `health 
 status-related factor' has the meaning provided in section 
 733(d)(2).
 ``(7) Individual market.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `individual market' 
 means the market for health insurance coverage offered 
 to individuals other than in connection with a group 
 health plan.
 ``(B) Treatment of very small groups.--
 ``(i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), 
 such term includes coverage offered in 
 connection with a group health plan that has 
 fewer than 2 participants as current employees 
 or participants described in section 732(d)(3) 
 on the first day of the plan year.
 ``(ii) State exception.--Clause (i) shall 
 not apply in the case of health insurance 
 coverage offered in a State if such State 
 regulates the coverage described in such clause 
 in the same manner and to the same extent as 
 coverage in the small group market (as defined 
 in section 2791(e)(5) of the Public Health 
 Service Act) is regulated by such State.
 ``(8) Participating employer.--The term `participating 
 employer' means, in connection with an association health plan, 
 any employer, if any individual who is an employee of such 
 employer, a partner in such employer, or a self-employed 
 individual who is such employer (or any dependent, as defined 
 under the terms of the plan, of such individual) is or was 
 covered under such plan in connection with the status of such 
 individual as such an employee, partner, or self-employed 
 individual in relation to the plan.
 ``(9) Applicable state authority.--The term `applicable 
 State authority' means, with respect to a health insurance 
 issuer in a State, the State insurance commissioner or official 
 or officials designated by the State to enforce the 
 requirements of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act 
 for the State involved with respect to such issuer.
 ``(10) Qualified actuary.--The term `qualified actuary' 
 means an individual who is a member of the American Academy of 
 Actuaries or meets such reasonable standards and qualifications 
 as the Secretary may provide by regulation through negotiated 
 rulemaking.
 ``(11) Affiliated member.--The term `affiliated member' 
 means, in connection with a sponsor--
 ``(A) a person who is otherwise eligible to be a 
 member of the sponsor but who elects an affiliated 
 status with the sponsor,
 ``(B) in the case of a sponsor with members which 
 consist of associations, a person who is a member of 
 any such association and elects an affiliated status 
 with the sponsor, or
 ``(C) in the case of an association health plan in 
 existence on the date of the enactment of the 
 Bipartisan Patient Protection Act, a person eligible to 
 be a member of the sponsor or one of its member 
 associations.
 ``(12) Large employer.--The term `large employer' means, in 
 connection with a group health plan with respect to a plan 
 year, an employer who employed an average of at least 51 
 employees on business days during the preceding calendar year 
 and who employs at least 2 employees on the first day of the 
 plan year.
 ``(13) Small employer.--The term `small employer' means, in 
 connection with a group health plan with respect to a plan 
 year, an employer who is not a large employer.
 ``(b) Rules of Construction.--
 ``(1) Employers and employees.--For purposes of determining 
 whether a plan, fund, or program is an employee welfare benefit 
 plan which is an association health plan, and for purposes of 
 applying this title in connection with such plan, fund, or 
 program so determined to be such an employee welfare benefit 
 plan--
 ``(A) in the case of a partnership, the term 
 `employer' (as defined in section 3(5)) includes the 
 partnership in relation to the partners, and the term 
 `employee' (as defined in section 3(6)) includes any 
 partner in relation to the partnership; and
 ``(B) in the case of a self-employed individual, 
 the term `employer' (as defined in section 3(5)) and 
 the term `employee' (as defined in section 3(6)) shall 
 include such individual.
 ``(2) Plans, funds, and programs treated as employee 
 welfare benefit plans.--In the case of any plan, fund, or 
 program which was established or is maintained for the purpose 
 of providing medical care (through the purchase of insurance or 
 otherwise) for employees (or their dependents) covered 
 thereunder and which demonstrates to the Secretary that all 
 requirements for certification under this part would be met 
 with respect to such plan, fund, or program if such plan, fund, 
 or program were a group health plan, such plan, fund, or 
 program shall be treated for purposes of this title as an 
 employee welfare benefit plan on and after the date of such 
 demonstration.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments to Preemption Rules.--
 (1) Section 514(b)(6) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 1144(b)(6)) is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(E) The preceding subparagraphs of this paragraph do not apply 
with respect to any State law in the case of an association health plan 
which is certified under part 8.''.
 (2) Section 514 of such Act (29 U.S.C. 1144) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (b)(4), by striking ``Subsection 
 (a)'' and inserting ``Subsections (a) and (e)'';
 (B) in subsection (b)(5), by striking ``subsection 
 (a)'' in subparagraph (A) and inserting ``subsection 
 (a) of this section and subsections (a)(2)(B) and (b) 
 of section 805'', and by striking ``subsection (a)'' in 
 subparagraph (B) and inserting ``subsection (a) of this 
 section or subsection (a)(2)(B) or (b) of section 
 805'';
 (C) by redesignating subsection (d) as subsection 
 (e); and
 (D) by inserting after subsection (c) the following 
 new subsection:
 ``(d)(1) Except as provided in subsection (b)(4), the provisions of 
this title shall supersede any and all State laws insofar as they may 
now or hereafter preclude, or have the effect of precluding, a health 
insurance issuer from offering health insurance coverage in connection 
with an association health plan which is certified under part 8.
 ``(2) Except as provided in paragraphs (4) and (5) of subsection 
(b) of this section--
 ``(A) In any case in which health insurance coverage of any 
 policy type is offered under an association health plan 
 certified under part 8 to a participating employer operating in 
 such State, the provisions of this title shall supersede any 
 and all laws of such State insofar as they may preclude a 
 health insurance issuer from offering health insurance coverage 
 of the same policy type to other employers operating in the 
 State which are eligible for coverage under such association 
 health plan, whether or not such other employers are 
 participating employers in such plan.
 ``(B) In any case in which health insurance coverage of any 
 policy type is offered under an association health plan in a 
 State and the filing, with the applicable State authority, of 
 the policy form in connection with such policy type is approved 
 by such State authority, the provisions of this title shall 
 supersede any and all laws of any other State in which health 
 insurance coverage of such type is offered, insofar as they may 
 preclude, upon the filing in the same form and manner of such 
 policy form with the applicable State authority in such other 
 State, the approval of the filing in such other State.
 ``(3) For additional provisions relating to association health 
plans, see subsections (a)(2)(B) and (b) of section 805.
 ``(4) For purposes of this subsection, the term `association health 
plan' has the meaning provided in section 801(a), and the terms `health 
insurance coverage', `participating employer', and `health insurance 
issuer' have the meanings provided such terms in section 811, 
respectively.''.
 (3) Section 514(b)(6)(A) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 
 1144(b)(6)(A)) is amended--
 (A) in clause (i)(II), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in clause (ii), by inserting ``and which does 
 not provide medical care (within the meaning of section 
 733(a)(2)),'' after ``arrangement,'', and by striking 
 ``title.'' and inserting ``title, and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 ``(iii) subject to subparagraph (E), in the case of any 
 other employee welfare benefit plan which is a multiple 
 employer welfare arrangement and which provides medical care 
 (within the meaning of section 733(a)(2)), any law of any State 
 which regulates insurance may apply.''.
 (4) Section 514(e) of such Act (as redesignated by 
 paragraph (2)(C)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``Nothing'' and inserting ``(1) 
 Except as provided in paragraph (2), nothing''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(2) Nothing in any other provision of law enacted on or after the 
date of the enactment of the Bipartisan Patient Protection Act shall be 
construed to alter, amend, modify, invalidate, impair, or supersede any 
provision of this title, except by specific cross-reference to the 
affected section.''.
 (c) Plan Sponsor.--Section 3(16)(B) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 
102(16)(B)) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: 
``Such term also includes a person serving as the sponsor of an 
association health plan under part 8.''.
 (d) Disclosure of Solvency Protections Related to Self-Insured and 
Fully Insured Options Under Association Health Plans.--Section 102(b) 
of such Act (29 U.S.C. 102(b)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following: ``An association health plan shall include in its summary 
plan description, in connection with each benefit option, a description 
of the form of solvency or guarantee fund protection secured pursuant 
to this Act or applicable State law, if any.''.
 (e) Savings Clause.--Section 731(c) of such Act is amended by 
inserting ``or part 8'' after ``this part''.
 (f) Report to the Congress Regarding Certification of Self-Insured 
Association Health Plans.--Not later than January 1, 2006, the 
Secretary of Labor shall report to the Committee on Education and the 
Workforce of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Health, 
Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate the effect association 
health plans have had, if any, on reducing the number of uninsured 
individuals.
 (g) Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1 of the 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by inserting 
after the item relating to section 734 the following new items:

 ``Part 8--Rules Governing Association Health Plans

``Sec. 801. Association health plans.
``Sec. 802. Certification of association health plans.
``Sec. 803. Requirements relating to sponsors and boards of trustees.
``Sec. 804. Participation and coverage requirements.
``Sec. 805. Other requirements relating to plan documents, contribution 
 rates, and benefit options.
``Sec. 806. Maintenance of reserves and provisions for solvency for 
 plans providing health benefits in addition 
 to health insurance coverage.
``Sec. 807. Requirements for application and related requirements.
``Sec. 808. Notice requirements for voluntary termination.
``Sec. 809. Corrective actions and mandatory termination.
``Sec. 810. Trusteeship by the Secretary of insolvent association 
 health plans providing health benefits in 
 addition to health insurance coverage.
``Sec. 811. State assessment authority.
``Sec. 812. Definitions and rules of construction.''.

SEC. 422. CLARIFICATION OF TREATMENT OF SINGLE EMPLOYER ARRANGEMENTS.

 Section 3(40)(B) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(40)(B)) is amended--
 (1) in clause (i), by inserting ``for any plan year of any 
 such plan, or any fiscal year of any such other arrangement;'' 
 after ``single employer'', and by inserting ``during such year 
 or at any time during the preceding 1-year period'' after 
 ``control group'';
 (2) in clause (iii)--
 (A) by striking ``common control shall not be based 
 on an interest of less than 25 percent'' and inserting 
 ``an interest of greater than 25 percent may not be 
 required as the minimum interest necessary for common 
 control''; and
 (B) by striking ``similar to'' and inserting 
 ``consistent and coextensive with'';
 (3) by redesignating clauses (iv) and (v) as clauses (v) 
 and (vi), respectively; and
 (4) by inserting after clause (iii) the following new 
 clause:
 ``(iv) in determining, after the application of clause (i), 
 whether benefits are provided to employees of two or more 
 employers, the arrangement shall be treated as having only one 
 participating employer if, after the application of clause (i), 
 the number of individuals who are employees and former 
 employees of any one participating employer and who are covered 
 under the arrangement is greater than 75 percent of the 
 aggregate number of all individuals who are employees or former 
 employees of participating employers and who are covered under 
 the arrangement;''.

SEC. 423. CLARIFICATION OF TREATMENT OF CERTAIN COLLECTIVELY BARGAINED 
 ARRANGEMENTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 3(40)(A)(i) of the Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(40)(A)(i)) is amended to 
read as follows:
 ``(i)(I) under or pursuant to one or more collective 
 bargaining agreements which are reached pursuant to collective 
 bargaining described in section 8(d) of the National Labor 
 Relations Act (29 U.S.C. 158(d)) or paragraph Fourth of section 
 2 of the Railway Labor Act (45 U.S.C. 152, paragraph Fourth) or 
 which are reached pursuant to labor-management negotiations 
 under similar provisions of State public employee relations 
 laws, and (II) in accordance with subparagraphs (C), (D), and 
 (E);''.
 (b) Limitations.--Section 3(40) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 1002(40)) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraphs:
 ``(C) For purposes of subparagraph (A)(i)(II), a plan or other 
arrangement shall be treated as established or maintained in accordance 
with this subparagraph only if the following requirements are met:
 ``(i) The plan or other arrangement, and the employee 
 organization or any other entity sponsoring the plan or other 
 arrangement, do not--
 ``(I) utilize the services of any licensed 
 insurance agent or broker for soliciting or enrolling 
 employers or individuals as participating employers or 
 covered individuals under the plan or other 
 arrangement; or
 ``(II) pay any type of compensation to a person, 
 other than a full time employee of the employee 
 organization (or a member of the organization to the 
 extent provided in regulations prescribed by the 
 Secretary through negotiated rulemaking), that is 
 related either to the volume or number of employers or 
 individuals solicited or enrolled as participating 
 employers or covered individuals under the plan or 
 other arrangement, or to the dollar amount or size of 
 the contributions made by participating employers or 
 covered individuals to the plan or other arrangement;
 except to the extent that the services used by the plan, 
 arrangement, organization, or other entity consist solely of 
 preparation of documents necessary for compliance with the 
 reporting and disclosure requirements of part 1 or 
 administrative, investment, or consulting services unrelated to 
 solicitation or enrollment of covered individuals.
 ``(ii) As of the end of the preceding plan year, the number 
 of covered individuals under the plan or other arrangement who 
 are neither--
 ``(I) employed within a bargaining unit covered by 
 any of the collective bargaining agreements with a 
 participating employer (nor covered on the basis of an 
 individual's employment in such a bargaining unit); nor
 ``(II) present employees (or former employees who 
 were covered while employed) of the sponsoring employee 
 organization, of an employer who is or was a party to 
 any of the collective bargaining agreements, or of the 
 plan or other arrangement or a related plan or 
 arrangement (nor covered on the basis of such present 
 or former employment),
 does not exceed 15 percent of the total number of individuals 
 who are covered under the plan or arrangement and who are 
 present or former employees who are or were covered under the 
 plan or arrangement pursuant to a collective bargaining 
 agreement with a participating employer. The requirements of 
 the preceding provisions of this clause shall be treated as 
 satisfied if, as of the end of the preceding plan year, such 
 covered individuals are comprised solely of individuals who 
 were covered individuals under the plan or other arrangement as 
 of the date of the enactment of the Bipartisan Patient 
 Protection Act and, as of the end of the preceding plan year, 
 the number of such covered individuals does not exceed 25 
 percent of the total number of present and former employees 
 enrolled under the plan or other arrangement.
 ``(iii) The employee organization or other entity 
 sponsoring the plan or other arrangement certifies to the 
 Secretary each year, in a form and manner which shall be 
 prescribed by the Secretary through negotiated rulemaking that 
 the plan or other arrangement meets the requirements of clauses 
 (i) and (ii).
 ``(D) For purposes of subparagraph (A)(i)(II), a plan or 
arrangement shall be treated as established or maintained in accordance 
with this subparagraph only if--
 ``(i) all of the benefits provided under the plan or 
 arrangement consist of health insurance coverage; or
 ``(ii)(I) the plan or arrangement is a multiemployer plan; 
 and
 ``(II) the requirements of clause (B) of the proviso to 
 clause (5) of section 302(c) of the Labor Management Relations 
 Act, 1947 (29 U.S.C. 186(c)) are met with respect to such plan 
 or other arrangement.
 ``(E) For purposes of subparagraph (A)(i)(II), a plan or 
arrangement shall be treated as established or maintained in accordance 
with this subparagraph only if--
 ``(i) the plan or arrangement is in effect as of the date 
 of the enactment of the Bipartisan Patient Protection Act; or
 ``(ii) the employee organization or other entity sponsoring 
 the plan or arrangement--
 ``(I) has been in existence for at least 3 years; 
 or
 ``(II) demonstrates to the satisfaction of the 
 Secretary that the requirements of subparagraphs (C) 
 and (D) are met with respect to the plan or other 
 arrangement.''.
 (c) Conforming Amendments to Definitions of Participant and 
Beneficiary.--Section 3(7) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 1002(7)) is amended 
by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``Such term includes 
an individual who is a covered individual described in paragraph 
(40)(C)(ii).''.

SEC. 424. ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS RELATING TO ASSOCIATION HEALTH PLANS.

 (a) Criminal Penalties for Certain Willful Misrepresentations.--
Section 501 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 
U.S.C. 1131) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(a)'' after ``Sec. 501.''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(b) Any person who willfully falsely represents, to any employee, 
any employee's beneficiary, any employer, the Secretary, or any State, 
a plan or other arrangement established or maintained for the purpose 
of offering or providing any benefit described in section 3(1) to 
employees or their beneficiaries as--
 ``(1) being an association health plan which has been 
 certified under part 8;
 ``(2) having been established or maintained under or 
 pursuant to one or more collective bargaining agreements which 
 are reached pursuant to collective bargaining described in 
 section 8(d) of the National Labor Relations Act (29 U.S.C. 
 158(d)) or paragraph Fourth of section 2 of the Railway Labor 
 Act (45 U.S.C. 152, paragraph Fourth) or which are reached 
 pursuant to labor-management negotiations under similar 
 provisions of State public employee relations laws; or
 ``(3) being a plan or arrangement with respect to which the 
 requirements of subparagraph (C), (D), or (E) of section 3(40) 
 are met,
shall, upon conviction, be imprisoned not more than 5 years, be fined 
under title 18, United States Code, or both.''.
 (b) Cease Activities Orders.--Section 502 of such Act (29 U.S.C. 
1132), as amended by sections 141 and 143, is further amended by adding 
at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(p) Association Health Plan Cease and Desist Orders.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), upon 
 application by the Secretary showing the operation, promotion, 
 or marketing of an association health plan (or similar 
 arrangement providing benefits consisting of medical care (as 
 defined in section 733(a)(2))) that--
 ``(A) is not certified under part 8, is subject 
 under section 514(b)(6) to the insurance laws of any 
 State in which the plan or arrangement offers or 
 provides benefits, and is not licensed, registered, or 
 otherwise approved under the insurance laws of such 
 State; or
 ``(B) is an association health plan certified under 
 part 8 and is not operating in accordance with the 
 requirements under part 8 for such certification,
 a district court of the United States shall enter an order 
 requiring that the plan or arrangement cease activities.
 ``(2) Exception.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply in the case 
 of an association health plan or other arrangement if the plan 
 or arrangement shows that--
 ``(A) all benefits under it referred to in 
 paragraph (1) consist of health insurance coverage; and
 ``(B) with respect to each State in which the plan 
 or arrangement offers or provides benefits, the plan or 
 arrangement is operating in accordance with applicable 
 State laws that are not superseded under section 514.
 ``(3) Additional equitable relief.--The court may grant 
 such additional equitable relief, including any relief 
 available under this title, as it deems necessary to protect 
 the interests of the public and of persons having claims for 
 benefits against the plan.''.
 (c) Responsibility for Claims Procedure.--Section 503 of such Act 
(29 U.S.C. 1133), as amended by section 301(b), is amended by adding at 
the end the following new subsection:
 ``(c) Association Health Plans.--The terms of each association 
health plan which is or has been certified under part 8 shall require 
the board of trustees or the named fiduciary (as applicable) to ensure 
that the requirements of this section are met in connection with claims 
filed under the plan.''.

SEC. 425. COOPERATION BETWEEN FEDERAL AND STATE AUTHORITIES.

 Section 506 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
(29 U.S.C. 1136) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection:
 ``(c) Consultation With States With Respect to Association Health 
Plans.--
 ``(1) Agreements with states.--The Secretary shall consult 
 with the State recognized under paragraph (2) with respect to 
 an association health plan regarding the exercise of--
 ``(A) the Secretary's authority under sections 502 
 and 504 to enforce the requirements for certification 
 under part 8; and
 ``(B) the Secretary's authority to certify 
 association health plans under part 8 in accordance 
 with regulations of the Secretary applicable to 
 certification under part 8.
 ``(2) Recognition of primary domicile state.--In carrying 
 out paragraph (1), the Secretary shall ensure that only one 
 State will be recognized, with respect to any particular 
 association health plan, as the State to with which 
 consultation is required. In carrying out this paragraph, the 
 Secretary shall take into account the places of residence of 
 the participants and beneficiaries under the plan and the State 
 in which the trust is maintained.''.

SEC. 426. EFFECTIVE DATE AND TRANSITIONAL AND OTHER RULES.

 (a) Effective Date.--The amendments made by sections 421, 424, and 
425 shall take effect one year from the date of the enactment. The 
amendments made by sections 422 and 423 shall take effect on the date 
of the enactment of this Act. The Secretary of Labor shall first issue 
all regulations necessary to carry out the amendments made by this 
subtitle within one year from the date of the enactment. Such 
regulations shall be issued through negotiated rulemaking.
 (b) Exception.--Section 801(a)(2) of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974 (added by section 421) does not apply in 
connection with an association health plan (certified under part 8 of 
subtitle B of title I of such Act) existing on the date of the 
enactment of this Act, if no benefits provided thereunder as of the 
date of the enactment of this Act consist of health insurance coverage 
(as defined in section 733(b)(1) of such Act).
 (c) Treatment of Certain Existing Health Benefits Programs.--
 (1) In general.--In any case in which, as of the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, an arrangement is maintained in a 
 State for the purpose of providing benefits consisting of 
 medical care for the employees and beneficiaries of its 
 participating employers, at least 200 participating employers 
 make contributions to such arrangement, such arrangement has 
 been in existence for at least 10 years, and such arrangement 
 is licensed under the laws of one or more States to provide 
 such benefits to its participating employers, upon the filing 
 with the applicable authority (as defined in section 812(a)(5) 
 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (as 
 amended by this subtitle)) by the arrangement of an application 
 for certification of the arrangement under part 8 of subtitle B 
 of title I of such Act--
 (A) such arrangement shall be deemed to be a group 
 health plan for purposes of title I of such Act;
 (B) the requirements of sections 801(a)(1) and 
 803(a)(1) of the Employee Retirement Income Security 
 Act of 1974 shall be deemed met with respect to such 
 arrangement;
 (C) the requirements of section 803(b) of such Act 
 shall be deemed met, if the arrangement is operated by 
 a board of directors which--
 (i) is elected by the participating 
 employers, with each employer having one vote; 
 and
 (ii) has complete fiscal control over the 
 arrangement and which is responsible for all 
 operations of the arrangement;
 (D) the requirements of section 804(a) of such Act 
 shall be deemed met with respect to such arrangement; 
 and
 (E) the arrangement may be certified by any 
 applicable authority with respect to its operations in 
 any State only if it operates in such State on the date 
 of certification.
 The provisions of this subsection shall cease to apply with 
 respect to any such arrangement at such time after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act as the applicable requirements of 
 this subsection are not met with respect to such arrangement.
 (2) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection, the 
 terms ``group health plan'', ``medical care'', and 
 ``participating employer'' shall have the meanings provided in 
 section 812 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
 1974, except that the reference in paragraph (7) of such 
 section to an ``association health plan'' shall be deemed a 
 reference to an arrangement referred to in this subsection.

 TITLE V--AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1986

 Subtitle A--Application of Patient Protection Provisions

SEC. 501. APPLICATION TO GROUP HEALTH PLANS UNDER THE INTERNAL REVENUE 
 CODE OF 1986.

 Subchapter B of chapter 100 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is 
amended--
 (1) in the table of sections, by inserting after the item 
 relating to section 9812 the following new item:

 ``Sec. 9813. Standard relating to 
 patients' bill of rights.'';
 and
 (2) by inserting after section 9812 the following:

``SEC. 9813. STANDARD RELATING TO PATIENTS' BILL OF RIGHTS.

 ``A group health plan shall comply with the requirements of title I 
of the Bipartisan Patient Protection Act and sections 503A through 503C 
of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (as in effect as 
of the date of the enactment of such Act), and such requirements shall 
be deemed to be incorporated into this section.''.

SEC. 502. CONFORMING ENFORCEMENT FOR WOMEN'S HEALTH AND CANCER RIGHTS.

 Subchapter B of chapter 100 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 
as amended by section 501, is further amended--
 (1) in the table of sections, by inserting after the item 
 relating to section 9813 the following new item:

 ``Sec. 9814. Standard relating to women's 
 health and cancer rights.'';
 and
 (2) by inserting after section 9813 the following:

``SEC. 9814. STANDARD RELATING TO WOMEN'S HEALTH AND CANCER RIGHTS.

 ``The provisions of section 713 of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974 (as in effect as of the date of the enactment of 
this section) shall apply to group health plans as if included in this 
subchapter.''.

 Subtitle B--Health Care Coverage Access Tax Incentives

SEC. 511. EXPANSION OF AVAILABILITY OF ARCHER MEDICAL SAVINGS ACCOUNTS.

 (a) Repeal of Limitations on Number of Medical Savings Accounts.--
 (1) In general.--Subsections (i) and (j) of section 220 of 
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 are hereby repealed.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Paragraph (1) of section 220(c) of such Code is 
 amended by striking subparagraph (D).
 (B) Section 138 of such Code is amended by striking 
 subsection (f).
 (b) Availability Not Limited to Accounts for Employees of Small 
Employers and Self-employed Individuals.--
 (1) In general.--Subparagraph (A) of section 220(c)(1) of 
 such Code (relating to eligible individual) is amended to read 
 as follows:
 ``(A) In general.--The term `eligible individual' 
 means, with respect to any month, any individual if--
 ``(i) such individual is covered under a 
 high deductible health plan as of the 1st day 
 of such month, and
 ``(ii) such individual is not, while 
 covered under a high deductible health plan, 
 covered under any health plan--
 ``(I) which is not a high 
 deductible health plan, and
 ``(II) which provides coverage for 
 any benefit which is covered under the 
 high deductible health plan.''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Section 220(c)(1) of such Code is amended by 
 striking subparagraph (C).
 (B) Section 220(c) of such Code is amended by 
 striking paragraph (4) (defining small employer) and by 
 redesignating paragraph (5) as paragraph (4).
 (C) Section 220(b) of such Code is amended by 
 striking paragraph (4) (relating to deduction limited 
 by compensation) and by redesignating paragraphs (5), 
 (6), and (7) as paragraphs (4), (5), and (6), 
 respectively.
 (c) Increase in Amount of Deduction Allowed for Contributions to 
Medical Savings Accounts.--
 (1) In general.--Paragraph (2) of section 220(b) of such 
 Code is amended to read as follows:
 ``(2) Monthly limitation.--The monthly limitation for any 
 month is the amount equal to \1/12\ of the annual deductible 
 (as of the first day of such month) of the individual's 
 coverage under the high deductible health plan.''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Clause (ii) of section 
 220(d)(1)(A) of such Code is amended by striking ``75 percent 
 of''.
 (d) Both Employers and Employees May Contribute to Medical Savings 
Accounts.--Paragraph (4) of section 220(b) of such Code (as 
redesignated by subsection (b)(2)(C)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(4) Coordination with exclusion for employer 
 contributions.--The limitation which would (but for this 
 paragraph) apply under this subsection to the taxpayer for any 
 taxable year shall be reduced (but not below zero) by the 
 amount which would (but for section 106(b)) be includible in 
 the taxpayer's gross income for such taxable year.''.
 (e) Reduction of Permitted Deductibles Under High Deductible Health 
Plans.--
 (1) In general.--Subparagraph (A) of section 220(c)(2) of 
 such Code (defining high deductible health plan) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``$1,500'' in clause (i) and 
 inserting ``$1,000''; and
 (B) by striking ``$3,000'' in clause (ii) and 
 inserting ``$2,000''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Subsection (g) of section 220 of 
 such Code is amended to read as follows:
 ``(g) Cost-of-Living Adjustment.--
 ``(1) In general.--In the case of any taxable year 
 beginning in a calendar year after 1998, each dollar amount in 
 subsection (c)(2) shall be increased by an amount equal to--
 ``(A) such dollar amount, multiplied by
 ``(B) the cost-of-living adjustment determined 
 under section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year in which 
 such taxable year begins by substituting `calendar year 
 1997' for `calendar year 1992' in subparagraph (B) 
 thereof.
 ``(2) Special rules.--In the case of the $1,000 amount in 
 subsection (c)(2)(A)(i) and the $2,000 amount in subsection 
 (c)(2)(A)(ii), paragraph (1)(B) shall be applied by 
 substituting `calendar year 2000' for `calendar year 1997'.
 ``(3) Rounding.--If any increase under paragraph (1) or (2) 
 is not a multiple of $50, such increase shall be rounded to the 
 nearest multiple of $50.''.
 (f) Providing Incentives for Preferred Provider Organizations To 
Offer Medical Savings Accounts.--
 (1) Preventive care coverage permitted.--Clause (ii) of 
 section 220(c)(2)(B) of such Code is amended by striking 
 ``preventive care if'' and all that follows and inserting 
 ``preventive care''.
 (2) Treatment of network services.--Subparagraph (B) of 
 section 220(c)(2) of such Code is amended by adding at the end 
 the following new clause:
 ``(iii) Treatment of network services.--In 
 the case of a health plan which provides 
 benefits for services provided by providers in 
 a network (as defined in section 161 of the 
 Patient's Bill of Rights Act of 2001) and which 
 would (without regard to services provided by 
 providers outside the network) be a high 
 deductible health plan, such plan shall not 
 fail to be a high deductible health plan 
 because--
 ``(I) the annual deductible for 
 services provided by providers outside 
 the network exceeds the applicable 
 maximum dollar amount in clause (i) or 
 (ii), or
 ``(II) the annual out-of-pocket 
 expenses required to be paid for 
 services provided by providers outside 
 the network exceeds the applicable 
 dollar amount in clause (iii).
 The annual deductible taken into account under 
 subsection (b)(2) with respect to a plan to 
 which the preceding sentence applies shall be 
 the annual deductible for services provided by 
 providers within the network.''.
 (g) Medical Savings Accounts May Be Offered Under Cafeteria 
Plans.--Subsection (f) of section 125 of such Code is amended by 
striking ``106(b),''.
 (h) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.

SEC. 512. DEDUCTION FOR 100 PERCENT OF HEALTH INSURANCE COSTS OF SELF-
 EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 162(l) of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 is amended to read as follows:
 ``(1) Allowance of deduction.--In the case of an individual 
 who is an employee within the meaning of section 401(c)(1), 
 there shall be allowed as a deduction under this section an 
 amount equal to 100 percent of the amount paid during the 
 taxable year for insurance which constitutes medical care for 
 the taxpayer and the taxpayer's spouse and dependents.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.

SEC. 513. CREDIT FOR HEALTH INSURANCE EXPENSES OF SMALL BUSINESSES.

 (a) In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business-related 
credits) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 45E. SMALL BUSINESS HEALTH INSURANCE EXPENSES.

 ``(a) General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, in the case of a 
small employer, the health insurance credit determined under this 
section for the taxable year is an amount equal to the applicable 
percentage of the expenses paid by the taxpayer during the taxable year 
for health insurance coverage for such year provided under a new health 
plan for employees of such employer.
 ``(b) Applicable Percentage.--For purposes of subsection (a), the 
applicable percentage is--
 ``(1) in the case of insurance purchased as a member of a 
 qualified health benefit purchasing coalition (as defined in 
 section 9841), 30 percent, and
 ``(2) in the case of insurance not described in paragraph 
 (1), 20 percent.
 ``(c) Limitations.--
 ``(1) Per employee dollar limitation.--The amount of 
 expenses taken into account under subsection (a) with respect 
 to any employee for any taxable year shall not exceed--
 ``(A) $2,000 in the case of self-only coverage, and
 ``(B) $5,000 in the case of family coverage.
 In the case of an employee who is covered by a new health plan 
 of the employer for only a portion of such taxable year, the 
 limitation under the preceding sentence shall be an amount 
 which bears the same ratio to such limitation (determined 
 without regard to this sentence) as such portion bears to the 
 entire taxable year.
 ``(2) Period of coverage.--Expenses may be taken into 
 account under subsection (a) only with respect to coverage for 
 the 4-year period beginning on the date the employer 
 establishes a new health plan.
 ``(d) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Health insurance coverage.--The term `health 
 insurance coverage' has the meaning given such term by section 
 9832(b)(1).
 ``(2) New health plan.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `new health plan' means 
 any arrangement of the employer which provides health 
 insurance coverage to employees if--
 ``(i) such employer (and any predecessor 
 employer) did not establish or maintain such 
 arrangement (or any similar arrangement) at any 
 time during the 2 taxable years ending prior to 
 the taxable year in which the credit under this 
 section is first allowed, and
 ``(ii) such arrangement provides health 
 insurance coverage to at least 70 percent of 
 the qualified employees of such employer.
 ``(B) Qualified employee.--
 ``(i) In general.--The term `qualified 
 employee' means any employee of an employer if 
 the annual rate of such employee's compensation 
 (as defined in section 414(s)) exceeds $10,000.
 ``(ii) Treatment of certain employees.--The 
 term `employee' shall include a leased employee 
 within the meaning of section 414(n).
 ``(3) Small employer.--The term `small employer' has the 
 meaning given to such term by section 4980D(d)(2); except that 
 only qualified employees shall be taken into account.
 ``(e) Special Rules.--
 ``(1) Certain rules made applicable.--For purposes of this 
 section, rules similar to the rules of section 52 shall apply.
 ``(2) Amounts paid under salary reduction arrangements.--No 
 amount paid or incurred pursuant to a salary reduction 
 arrangement shall be taken into account under subsection (a).
 ``(f) Termination.--This section shall not apply to expenses paid 
or incurred by an employer with respect to any arrangement established 
on or after January 1, 2010.''.
 (b) Credit To Be Part of General Business Credit.--Section 38(b) of 
such Code (relating to current year business credit) is amended by 
striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (12), by striking the period 
at the end of paragraph (13) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at 
the end the following:
 ``(14) in the case of a small employer (as defined in 
 section 45E(d)(3)), the health insurance credit determined 
 under section 45E(a).''.
 (c) No Carrybacks.--Subsection (d) of section 39 of such Code 
(relating to carryback and carryforward of unused credits) is amended 
by adding at the end the following:
 ``(10) No carryback of section 45e credit before effective 
 date.--No portion of the unused business credit for any taxable 
 year which is attributable to the employee health insurance 
 expenses credit determined under section 45E may be carried 
 back to a taxable year ending before the date of the enactment 
 of section 45E.''.
 (d) Denial of Double Benefit.--Section 280C of such Code is amended 
by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(d) Credit for Small Business Health Insurance Expenses.--
 ``(1) In general.--No deduction shall be allowed for that 
 portion of the expenses (otherwise allowable as a deduction) 
 taken into account in determining the credit under section 45E 
 for the taxable year which is equal to the amount of the credit 
 determined for such taxable year under section 45E(a).
 ``(2) Controlled groups.--Persons treated as a single 
 employer under subsection (a) or (b) of section 52 shall be 
 treated as 1 person for purposes of this section.''.
 (e) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of 
part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding 
at the end the following:

 ``Sec. 45E. Small business health 
 insurance expenses.''.
 (f) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to amounts paid or incurred in taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 2001, for arrangements established after the date of the 
enactment of this Act.

SEC. 514. CERTAIN GRANTS BY PRIVATE FOUNDATIONS TO QUALIFIED HEALTH 
 BENEFIT PURCHASING COALITIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 4942 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
(relating to taxes on failure to distribute income) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(k) Certain Qualified Health Benefit Purchasing Coalition 
Distributions.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (g), sections 
 170, 501, 507, 509, and 2522, and this chapter, a qualified 
 health benefit purchasing coalition distribution by a private 
 foundation shall be considered to be a distribution for a 
 charitable purpose.
 ``(2) Qualified health benefit purchasing coalition 
 distribution.--For purposes of paragraph (1)--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified health 
 benefit purchasing coalition distribution' means any 
 amount paid or incurred by a private foundation to or 
 on behalf of a qualified health benefit purchasing 
 coalition (as defined in section 9841) for purposes of 
 payment or reimbursement of amounts paid or incurred in 
 connection with the establishment and maintenance of 
 such coalition.
 ``(B) Exclusions.--Such term shall not include any 
 amount used by a qualified health benefit purchasing 
 coalition (as so defined)--
 ``(i) for the purchase of real property,
 ``(ii) as payment to, or for the benefit 
 of, members (or employees or affiliates of such 
 members) of such coalition, or
 ``(iii) for any expense paid or incurred 
 more than 48 months after the date of 
 establishment of such coalition.
 ``(3) Termination.--This subsection shall not apply--
 ``(A) to qualified health benefit purchasing 
 coalition distributions paid or incurred after December 
 31, 2009, and
 ``(B) with respect to start-up costs of a coalition 
 which are paid or incurred after December 31, 2010.''.
 (b) Qualified Health Benefit Purchasing Coalition.--
 (1) In general.--Chapter 100 of such Code (relating to 
 group health plan requirements) is amended by adding at the end 
 the following new subchapter:

 ``Subchapter D--Qualified Health Benefit Purchasing Coalition

 ``Sec. 9841. Qualified health benefit 
 purchasing coalition.

``SEC. 9841. QUALIFIED HEALTH BENEFIT PURCHASING COALITION.

 ``(a) In General.--A qualified health benefit purchasing coalition 
is a private not-for-profit corporation which--
 ``(1) sells health insurance through State licensed health 
 insurance issuers in the State in which the employers to which 
 such coalition is providing insurance are located, and
 ``(2) establishes to the Secretary, under State 
 certification procedures or other procedures as the Secretary 
 may provide by regulation, that such coalition meets the 
 requirements of this section.
 ``(b) Board of Directors.--
 ``(1) In general.--Each purchasing coalition under this 
 section shall be governed by a Board of Directors.
 ``(2) Election.--The Secretary shall establish procedures 
 governing election of such Board.
 ``(3) Membership.--The Board of Directors shall--
 ``(A) be composed of representatives of the members 
 of the coalition, in equal number, including small 
 employers and employee representatives of such 
 employers, but
 ``(B) not include other interested parties, such as 
 service providers, health insurers, or insurance agents 
 or brokers which may have a conflict of interest with 
 the purposes of the coalition.
 ``(c) Membership of Coalition.--
 ``(1) In general.--A purchasing coalition shall accept all 
 small employers residing within the area served by the 
 coalition as members if such employers request such membership.
 ``(2) Other members.--The coalition, at the discretion of 
 its Board of Directors, may be open to individuals and large 
 employers. 
 ``(3) Voting.--Members of a purchasing coalition shall have 
 voting rights consistent with the rules established by the 
 State.
 ``(d) Duties of Purchasing Coalitions.--Each purchasing coalition 
shall--
 ``(1) enter into agreements with small employers (and, at 
 the discretion of its Board, with individuals and other 
 employers) to provide health insurance benefits to employees 
 and retirees of such employers,
 ``(2) where feasible, enter into agreements with 3 or more 
 unaffiliated, qualified licensed health plans, to offer 
 benefits to members,
 ``(3) offer to members at least 1 open enrollment period of 
 at least 30 days per calendar year,
 ``(4) serve a significant geographical area and market to 
 all eligible members in that area, and
 ``(5) carry out other functions provided for under this 
 section.
 ``(e) Limitation on Activities.--A purchasing coalition shall not--
 ``(1) perform any activity (including certification or 
 enforcement) relating to compliance or licensing of health 
 plans,
 ``(2) assume insurance or financial risk in relation to any 
 health plan, or
 ``(3) perform other activities identified by the State as 
 being inconsistent with the performance of its duties under 
 this section.
 ``(f) Additional Requirements for Purchasing Coalitions.--As 
provided by the Secretary in regulations, a purchasing coalition shall 
be subject to requirements similar to the requirements of a group 
health plan under this chapter.
 ``(g) Relation to Other Laws.--
 ``(1) Preemption of state fictitious group laws.--
 Requirements (commonly referred to as fictitious group laws) 
 relating to grouping and similar requirements for health 
 insurance coverage are preempted to the extent such 
 requirements impede the establishment and operation of 
 qualified health benefit purchasing coalitions.
 ``(2) Allowing savings to be passed through.--Any State law 
 that prohibits health insurance issuers from reducing premiums 
 on health insurance coverage sold through a qualified health 
 benefit purchasing coalition to reflect administrative savings 
 is preempted. This paragraph shall not be construed to preempt 
 State laws that impose restrictions on premiums based on health 
 status, claims history, industry, age, gender, or other 
 underwriting factors.
 ``(3) No waiver of hipaa requirements.--Nothing in this 
 section shall be construed to change the obligation of health 
 insurance issuers to comply with the requirements of title 
 XXVII of the Public Health Service Act with respect to health 
 insurance coverage offered to small employers in the small 
 group market through a qualified health benefit purchasing 
 coalition.
 ``(h) Definition of Small Employer.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) In general.--The term `small employer' means, with 
 respect to any calendar year, any employer if such employer 
 employed an average of at least 2 and not more than 50 
 qualified employees on business days during either of the 2 
 preceding calendar years. For purposes of the preceding 
 sentence, a preceding calendar year may be taken into account 
 only if the employer was in existence throughout such year.
 ``(2) Employers not in existence in preceding year.--In the 
 case of an employer which was not in existence throughout the 
 1st preceding calendar year, the determination under paragraph 
 (1) shall be based on the average number of qualified employees 
 that it is reasonably expected such employer will employ on 
 business days in the current calendar year.''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--The table of subchapters for 
 chapter 100 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the 
 following item:

 ``Subchapter D. Qualified health benefit 
 purchasing coalition.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.

SEC. 515. STATE GRANT PROGRAM FOR MARKET INNOVATION.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in 
this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall establish a 
program (in this section referred to as the ``program'') to award 
demonstration grants under this section to States to allow States to 
demonstrate the effectiveness of innovative ways to increase access to 
health insurance through market reforms and other innovative means. 
Such innovative means may include (and are not limited to) any of the 
following:
 (1) Alternative group purchasing or pooling arrangements, 
 such as purchasing cooperatives for small businesses, 
 reinsurance pools, or high risk pools.
 (2) Individual or small group market reforms.
 (3) Consumer education and outreach.
 (4) Subsidies to individuals, employers, or both, in 
 obtaining health insurance.
 (b) Scope; Duration.--The program shall be limited to not more than 
10 States and to a total period of 5 years, beginning on the date the 
first demonstration grant is made.
 (c) Conditions for Demonstration Grants.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary may not provide for a 
 demonstration grant to a State under the program unless the 
 Secretary finds that under the proposed demonstration grant--
 (A) the State will provide for demonstrated 
 increase of access for some portion of the existing 
 uninsured population through a market innovation (other 
 than merely through a financial expansion of a program 
 initiated before the date of the enactment of this 
 Act);
 (B) the State will comply with applicable Federal 
 laws;
 (C) the State will not discriminate among 
 participants on the basis of any health status-related 
 factor (as defined in section 2791(d)(9) of the Public 
 Health Service Act), except to the extent a State 
 wishes to focus on populations that otherwise would not 
 obtain health insurance because of such factors; and
 (D) the State will provide for such evaluation, in 
 coordination with the evaluation required under 
 subsection (d), as the Secretary may specify.
 (2) Application.--The Secretary shall not provide a 
 demonstration grant under the program to a State unless--
 (A) the State submits to the Secretary such an 
 application, in such a form and manner, as the 
 Secretary specifies;
 (B) the application includes information regarding 
 how the demonstration grant will address issues such as 
 governance, targeted population, expected cost, and the 
 continuation after the completion of the demonstration 
 grant period; and
 (C) the Secretary determines that the demonstration 
 grant will be used consistent with this section.
 (3) Focus.--A demonstration grant proposal under section 
 need not cover all uninsured individuals in a State or all 
 health care benefits with respect to such individuals.
 (d) Evaluation.--The Secretary shall enter into a contract with an 
appropriate entity outside the Department of Health and Human Services 
to conduct an overall evaluation of the program at the end of the 
program period. Such evaluation shall include an analysis of 
improvements in access, costs, quality of care, or choice of coverage, 
under different demonstration grants.
 (e) Option To Provide for Initial Planning Grants.--Notwithstanding 
the previous provisions of this section, under the program the 
Secretary may provide for a portion of the amounts appropriated under 
subsection (f) (not to exceed $5,000,000) to be made available to any 
State for initial planning grants to permit States to develop 
demonstration grant proposals under the previous provisions of this 
section.
 (f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated $100,000,000 for each fiscal year to carry out this 
section. Amounts appropriated under this subsection shall remain 
available until expended.
 (g) State Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term 
``State'' has the meaning given such term for purposes of title XIX of 
the Social Security Act.

 TITLE VI--EFFECTIVE DATES; COORDINATION IN IMPLEMENTATION

SEC. 601. EFFECTIVE DATES.

 (a) Group Health Coverage.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2) and subsection 
 (d), the amendments made by sections 201(a), 401, 403, 501, and 
 502 (and title I insofar as it relates to such sections) shall 
 apply with respect to group health plans, and health insurance 
 coverage offered in connection with group health plans, for 
 plan years beginning on or after October 1, 2002 (in this 
 section referred to as the ``general effective date'').
 (2) Treatment of collective bargaining agreements.--In the 
 case of a group health plan maintained pursuant to one or more 
 collective bargaining agreements between employee 
 representatives and one or more employers ratified before the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the amendments made by 
 sections 201(a), 401, 403, 501, and 502 (and title I insofar as 
 it relates to such sections) shall not apply to plan years 
 beginning before the later of--
 (A) the date on which the last collective 
 bargaining agreements relating to the plan terminates 
 (excluding any extension thereof agreed to after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act); or
 (B) the general effective date,
 but shall apply not later than 1 year after the general 
 effective date. For purposes of subparagraph (A), any plan 
 amendment made pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement 
 relating to the plan which amends the plan solely to conform to 
 any requirement added by this Act shall not be treated as a 
 termination of such collective bargaining agreement.
 (b) Individual Health Insurance Coverage.--Subject to subsection 
(d), the amendments made by section 202 shall apply with respect to 
individual health insurance coverage offered, sold, issued, renewed, in 
effect, or operated in the individual market on or after the general 
effective date.
 (c) Treatment of Religious Nonmedical Providers.--
 (1) In general.--Nothing in this Act (or the amendments 
 made thereby) shall be construed to--
 (A) restrict or limit the right of group health 
 plans, and of health insurance issuers offering health 
 insurance coverage, to include as providers religious 
 nonmedical providers;
 (B) require such plans or issuers to--
 (i) utilize medically based eligibility 
 standards or criteria in deciding provider 
 status of religious nonmedical providers;
 (ii) use medical professionals or criteria 
 to decide patient access to religious 
 nonmedical providers;
 (iii) utilize medical professionals or 
 criteria in making decisions in internal or 
 external appeals regarding coverage for care by 
 religious nonmedical providers; or
 (iv) compel a participant or beneficiary to 
 undergo a medical examination or test as a 
 condition of receiving health insurance 
 coverage for treatment by a religious 
 nonmedical provider; or
 (C) require such plans or issuers to exclude 
 religious nonmedical providers because they do not 
 provide medical or other required data, if such data is 
 inconsistent with the religious nonmedical treatment or 
 nursing care provided by the provider.
 (2) Religious nonmedical provider.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term ``religious nonmedical provider'' means a 
 provider who provides no medical care but who provides only 
 religious nonmedical treatment or religious nonmedical nursing 
 care.
 (d) Transition for Notice Requirement.--The disclosure of 
information required under section 121 of this Act shall first be 
provided pursuant to--
 (1) subsection (a) with respect to a group health plan that 
 is maintained as of the general effective date, not later than 
 30 days before the beginning of the first plan year to which 
 title I applies in connection with the plan under such 
 subsection; or
 (2) subsection (b) with respect to a individual health 
 insurance coverage that is in effect as of the general 
 effective date, not later than 30 days before the first date as 
 of which title I applies to the coverage under such subsection.

SEC. 602. COORDINATION IN IMPLEMENTATION.

 The Secretary of Labor and the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services shall ensure, through the execution of an interagency 
memorandum of understanding among such Secretaries, that--
 (1) regulations, rulings, and interpretations issued by 
 such Secretaries relating to the same matter over which such 
 Secretaries have responsibility under the provisions of this 
 Act (and the amendments made thereby) are administered so as to 
 have the same effect at all times; and
 (2) coordination of policies relating to enforcing the same 
 requirements through such Secretaries in order to have a 
 coordinated enforcement strategy that avoids duplication of 
 enforcement efforts and assigns priorities in enforcement.

SEC. 603. SEVERABILITY.

 (a) In General.--Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), if 
any provision of this Act, an amendment made by this Act, or the 
application of such provision or amendment to any person or 
circumstance is held to be unconstitutional, the remainder of this Act, 
the amendments made by this Act, and the application of the provisions 
of such to any person or circumstance shall not be affected thereby.
 (b) Dependence of Remedies on Appeals.--If any provision of section 
503A, 503B, or 503C of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
1974 (as inserted by section 131) or the application of either such 
section to any person or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional, 
section 502(n) of such Act (as inserted by section 402) shall be deemed 
to be null and void and shall be given no force or effect.
 (c) Remedies.--If any provision of section 502(n) of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (as inserted by section 402), or 
the application of such section to any person or circumstance, is held 
to be unconstitutional, the remainder of such section shall be deemed 
to be null and void and shall be given no force or effect.

 TITLE VII--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

SEC. 701. NO IMPACT ON SOCIAL SECURITY TRUST FUNDS.

 (a) In General.--Nothing in this Act (or an amendment made by this 
Act) shall be construed to alter or amend the Social Security Act (or 
any regulation promulgated under that Act).
 (b) Transfers.--
 (1) Estimate of secretary.--The Secretary of the Treasury 
 shall annually estimate the impact that the enactment of this 
 Act has on the income and balances of the trust funds 
 established under section 201 of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 401).
 (2) Transfer of funds.--If, under paragraph (1), the 
 Secretary of the Treasury estimates that the enactment of this 
 Act has a negative impact on the income and balances of the 
 trust funds established under section 201 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 401), the Secretary shall transfer, not 
 less frequently than quarterly, from the general revenues of 
 the Federal Government an amount sufficient so as to ensure 
 that the income and balances of such trust funds are not 
 reduced as a result of the enactment of such Act.

SEC. 702. CUSTOMS USER FEES.

 Section 13031(j)(3) of the Consolidated Omnibus Budget 
Reconciliation Act of 1985 (19 U.S.C. 58c(j)(3)) is amended by striking 
``2003'' and inserting ``2011, except that fees may not be charged 
under paragraphs (9) and (10) of such subsection after March 31, 
2006''.

SEC. 703. FISCAL YEAR 2002 MEDICARE PAYMENTS.

 Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any letter of credit 
under part B of title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395j 
et seq.) that would otherwise be sent to the Treasury or the Federal 
Reserve Board on September 30, 2002, by a carrier with a contract under 
section 1842 of that Act (42 U.S.C. 1395u) shall be sent on October 1, 
2002.

SEC. 704. SENSE OF THE SENATE WITH RESPECT TO PARTICIPATION IN CLINICAL 
 TRIALS AND ACCESS TO SPECIALTY CARE.

 (a) Findings.--The Senate finds the following:
 (1) Breast cancer is the most common form of cancer among 
 women, excluding skin cancers.
 (2) During 2001, 182,800 new cases of female invasive 
 breast cancer will be diagnosed, and 40,800 women will die from 
 the disease.
 (3) In addition, 1,400 male breast cancer cases are 
 projected to be diagnosed, and 400 men will die from the 
 disease.
 (4) Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer 
 death among all women and the leading cause of cancer death 
 among women between ages 40 and 55.
 (5) This year 8,600 children are expected to be diagnosed 
 with cancer.
 (6) 1,500 children are expected to die from cancer this 
 year.
 (7) There are approximately 333,000 people diagnosed with 
 multiple sclerosis in the United States and 200 more cases are 
 diagnosed each week.
 (8) Parkinson's disease is a progressive disorder of the 
 central nervous system affecting 1,000,000 in the United 
 States.
 (9) An estimated 198,100 men will be diagnosed with 
 prostate cancer this year.
 (10) 31,500 men will die from prostate cancer this year. It 
 is the second leading cause of cancer in men.
 (11) While information obtained from clinical trials is 
 essential to finding cures for diseases, it is still research 
 which carries the risk of fatal results. Future efforts should 
 be taken to protect the health and safety of adults and 
 children who enroll in clinical trials.
 (12) While employers and health plans should be responsible 
 for covering the routine costs associated with federally 
 approved or funded clinical trials, such employers and health 
 plans should not be held legally responsible for the design, 
 implementation, or outcome of such clinical trials, consistent 
 with any applicable State or Federal liability statutes.
 (b) Sense of the Senate.--It is the sense of the Senate that--
 (1) men and women battling life-threatening, deadly 
 diseases, including advanced breast or ovarian cancer, should 
 have the opportunity to participate in a federally approved or 
 funded clinical trial recommended by their physician;
 (2) an individual should have the opportunity to 
 participate in a federally approved or funded clinical trial 
 recommended by their physician if--
 (A) that individual--
 (i) has a life-threatening or serious 
 illness for which no standard treatment is 
 effective;
 (ii) is eligible to participate in a 
 federally approved or funded clinical trial 
 according to the trial protocol with respect to 
 treatment of the illness;
 (B) that individual's participation in the trial 
 offers meaningful potential for significant clinical 
 benefit for the individual; and
 (C) either--
 (i) the referring physician is a 
 participating health care professional and has 
 concluded that the individual's participation 
 in the trial would be appropriate, based upon 
 the individual meeting the conditions described 
 in subparagraph (A); or
 (ii) the participant, beneficiary, or 
 enrollee provides medical and scientific 
 information establishing that the individual's 
 participation in the trial would be 
 appropriate, based upon the individual meeting 
 the conditions described in subparagraph (A);
 (3) a child with a life-threatening illness, including 
 cancer, should be allowed to participate in a federally 
 approved or funded clinical trial if that participation meets 
 the requirements of paragraph (2);
 (4) a child with a rare cancer should be allowed to go to a 
 cancer center capable of providing high quality care for that 
 disease; and
 (5) a health maintenance organization's decision that an 
 in-network physician without the necessary expertise can 
 provide care for a seriously ill patient, including a woman 
 battling cancer, should be appealable to an independent, 
 impartial body, and that this same right should be available to 
 all Americans in need of access to high quality specialty care.

SEC. 705. SENSE OF THE SENATE REGARDING FAIR REVIEW PROCESS.

 (a) Findings.--The Senate finds the following:
 (1) A fair, timely, impartial independent external appeals 
 process is essential to any meaningful program of patient 
 protection.
 (2) The independence and objectivity of the review 
 organization and review process must be ensured.
 (3) It is incompatible with a fair and independent appeals 
 process to allow a health maintenance organization to select 
 the review organization that is entrusted with providing a 
 neutral and unbiased medical review.
 (4) The American Arbitration Association and arbitration 
 standards adopted under chapter 44 of title 28, United States 
 Code (28 U.S.C. 651 et seq.) both prohibit, as inherently 
 unfair, the right of one party to a dispute to choose the judge 
 in that dispute.
 (b) Sense of the Senate.--It is the sense of the Senate that--
 (1) every patient who is denied care by a health 
 maintenance organization or other health insurance company 
 should be entitled to a fair, speedy, impartial appeal to a 
 review organization that has not been selected by the health 
 plan;
 (2) the States should be empowered to maintain and develop 
 the appropriate process for selection of the independent 
 external review entity;
 (3) a child battling a rare cancer whose health maintenance 
 organization has denied a covered treatment recommended by its 
 physician should be entitled to a fair and impartial external 
 appeal to a review organization that has not been chosen by the 
 organization or plan that has denied the care; and
 (4) patient protection legislation should not pre-empt 
 existing State laws in States where there already are strong 
 laws in place regarding the selection of independent review 
 organizations.

SEC. 706. ANNUAL REVIEW.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 24 months after the general 
effective date referred to in section 601(a)(1), and annually 
thereafter for each of the succeeding 4 calendar years (or until a 
repeal is effective under subsection (b)), the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services shall request that the Institute of Medicine of the 
National Academy of Sciences prepare and submit to the appropriate 
committees of Congress a report concerning the impact of this Act, and 
the amendments made by this Act, on the number of individuals in the 
United States with health insurance coverage.
 (b) Limitation With Respect to Certain Plans.--If the Secretary, in 
any report submitted under subsection (a), determines that more than 
1,000,000 individuals in the United States have lost their health 
insurance coverage as a result of the enactment of this Act, as 
compared to the number of individuals with health insurance coverage in 
the 12-month period preceding the date of the enactment of this Act, 
section 402 of this Act shall be repealed effective on the date that is 
12 month after the date on which the report is submitted, and the 
submission of any further reports under subsection (a) shall not be 
required.
 (c) Funding.--From funds appropriated to the Department of Health 
and Human Services for fiscal years 2003 and 2004, the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services shall provide for such funding as the 
Secretary determines necessary for the conduct of the study of the 
National Academy of Sciences under this section.

SEC. 707. DEFINITION OF BORN-ALIVE INFANT.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 1 of title 1, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 8. `Person', `human being', `child', and `individual' as 
 including born-alive infant
 ``(a) In determining the meaning of any Act of Congress, or of any 
ruling, regulation, or interpretation of the various administrative 
bureaus and agencies of the United States, the words `person', `human 
being', `child', and `individual', shall include every infant member of 
the species homo sapiens who is born alive at any stage of development.
 ``(b) As used in this section, the term `born alive', with respect 
to a member of the species homo sapiens, means the complete expulsion 
or extraction from his or her mother of that member, at any stage of 
development, who after such expulsion or extraction breathes or has a 
beating heart, pulsation of the umbilical cord, or definite movement of 
voluntary muscles, regardless of whether the umbilical cord has been 
cut, and regardless of whether the expulsion or extraction occurs as a 
result of natural or induced labor, caesarean section, or induced 
abortion.
 ``(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed to affirm, deny, 
expand, or contract any legal status or legal right applicable to any 
member of the species homo sapiens at any point prior to being born 
alive as defined in this section.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
chapter 1 of title 1, United States Code, is amended by adding at the 
end the following new item:

``8. `Person', `human being', `child', and `individual' as including 
 born-alive infant.''.

 Passed the House of Representatives August 2, 2001.

 Attest:

 JEFF TRANDAHL,

 Clerk.
 Calendar No. 150

107th CONGRESS

 1st Session

 H. R. 2563

_______________________________________________________________________

 AN ACT

To amend the Public Health Service Act, the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974, and the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to protect 
 consumers in managed care plans and other health coverage.

_______________________________________________________________________

 September 5, 2001

 Received and read the first time

 September 6, 2001

 Read the second time and placed on the calendar