[Congressional Bills 115th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 748 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

<DOC>

115th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 S. 748

 To protect United States citizens and residents from unlawful 
 profiling, arrest, and detention, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 March 28, 2017

Mr. Menendez (for himself, Mr. Booker, Mrs. Gillibrand, Ms. Harris, and 
 Mr. Wyden) introduced the following bill; which was read twice and 
 referred to the Committee on the Judiciary

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To protect United States citizens and residents from unlawful 
 profiling, arrest, and detention, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLES; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Titles.--This Act may be cited as the ``Protecting the 
Rights of Families and Immigrants Who Legally Entered From Detention 
Act'' or the ``PROFILED Act''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short titles; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings.
Sec. 3. Definitions.
 TITLE I--PROHIBITION OF RACIAL PROFILING

Sec. 101. Prohibition.
Sec. 102. Enforcement.
Sec. 103. Policies to eliminate racial profiling.
Sec. 104. Attorney General to issue regulations.
Sec. 105. Publication of data.
Sec. 106. Limitations on publication of data.
 TITLE II--PROTECTION FROM UNLAWFUL ARREST AND DETENTION

Sec. 201. Protections against unlawful detentions of citizens of the 
 United States.
Sec. 202. Protections for primary caregivers with children.
Sec. 203. Basic protections for vulnerable populations.
Sec. 204. Reports on protections from unlawful detention.
Sec. 205. Immigration and Customs Enforcement Ombudsman.
Sec. 206. Rulemaking.
Sec. 207. Rescission.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS.

 Congress finds the following:
 (1) Officials at U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
 have mistakenly detained and deported United States citizens 
 and lawful permanent residents.
 (2) Mistaken identities, bureaucratic mix-ups, and 
 discriminatory attitudes further contribute to unconstitutional 
 actions against United States citizens, lawful permanent 
 residents, and other persons lawfully present in the United 
 States.
 (3) The United States should not be a country in which 
 United States citizens and lawful permanent residents are 
 mistakenly or unlawfully detained, deported, or mistreated by 
 government agents.
 (4) No person in the United States should be subject to 
 government actions that deny basic protections or 
 constitutional rights.

SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act:
 (1) Department.--The term ``Department'' means the 
 Department of Homeland Security.
 (2) Detained.--The term ``detained'', with respect to an 
 individual, means an individual who is in government custody or 
 subject any other deprivation of the freedom of movement by 
 government agents.
 (3) Detainee.--The term ``detainee'' means an individual 
 detained during an immigration-related enforcement activity.
 (4) Detention.--The term ``detention'', in the context of 
 an immigration-related enforcement activity, means government 
 custody or any other deprivation of the freedom of movement of 
 an individual by government agents.
 (5) Governmental body.--The term ``governmental body'' 
 means any department, agency, special purpose district, or 
 other instrumentality of Federal, State, local, or Indian 
 tribal government.
 (6) Hit rate.--The term ``hit rate'' means the percentage 
 of stops and searches in which a law enforcement officer finds 
 drugs, a gun, or something else that leads to an arrest. The 
 hit rate is calculated by dividing the total number of searches 
 by the number of searches that yield contraband. The hit rate 
 is complementary to the rate of false stops.
 (7) Immigration-related enforcement activity.--The term 
 ``immigration-related enforcement activity'' means any action 
 by a government agent in which--
 (A) an individual suspected of an immigration 
 violation is detained for such violation; or
 (B) an individual who has been detained by 
 government agents is questioned about a possible 
 immigration violation.
 (8) Law enforcement agency.--The term ``law enforcement 
 agency'' means any Federal, State, local, or Indian tribal 
 public agency engaged in the prevention, detection, or 
 investigation of violations of criminal, immigration, or 
 customs laws.
 (9) Law enforcement agent.--The term ``law enforcement 
 agent'' means any Federal, State, local, or Indian tribal 
 official responsible for enforcing criminal, immigration, or 
 customs laws, including police officers and other agents of a 
 law enforcement agency.
 (10) Racial profiling.--The term ``racial profiling'' means 
 the practice of a law enforcement agent or agency relying, to 
 any degree, on actual or perceived race, ethnicity, national 
 origin, religion, gender, gender identity, or sexual 
 orientation in selecting which individual to subject to routine 
 or spontaneous investigatory activities or in deciding upon the 
 scope and substance of law enforcement activity following the 
 initial investigatory procedure, except when there is 
 trustworthy information, relevant to the locality and 
 timeframe, that links a person with a particular characteristic 
 described in this paragraph to an identified criminal incident 
 or scheme.
 (11) Routine or spontaneous investigatory activities.--The 
 term ``routine or spontaneous investigatory activities'' means 
 the following activities by a law enforcement agent:
 (A) Interviews.
 (B) Traffic stops.
 (C) Pedestrian stops.
 (D) Frisks and other types of body searches.
 (E) Consensual or nonconsensual searches of the 
 persons, property, or possessions (including vehicles) 
 of individuals using any form of public or private 
 transportation, including motorists and pedestrians.
 (F) Data collection and analysis, assessments, and 
 predicated investigations.
 (G) Inspections and interviews of entrants into the 
 United States that are more extensive than those 
 customarily carried out.
 (H) Immigration-related workplace investigations.
 (I) Such other types of law enforcement encounters 
 compiled for or by the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
 or the Department of Justice Bureau of Justice 
 Statistics.
 (12) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Homeland Security.
 (13) State.--The term ``State'' means each of the 50 
 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto 
 Rico, and any other territory or possession of the United 
 States.
 (14) Vulnerable population.--The term ``vulnerable 
 population'' includes any of the following:
 (A) Individuals with a nonfrivolous claim to United 
 States citizenship.
 (B) Individuals who have a disability or have been 
 determined by a medically trained professional to have 
 medical or mental health needs.
 (C) Pregnant or nursing women.
 (D) Individuals who are detained with one or more 
 of their children.
 (E) Individuals who provide financial, physical, 
 and other direct support to their minor children, 
 parents, or other dependents.
 (F) Individuals who are at least 65 years of age.
 (G) Children (as defined in section 101(b)(1) of 
 the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 
 1101(b)(1))).
 (H) Victims of abuse, violence, crime, or human 
 trafficking.
 (I) Individuals who have been referred for a 
 credible fear interview, a reasonable fear interview, 
 or an asylum hearing.
 (J) Stateless individuals.
 (K) Individuals who have applied or intend to apply 
 for asylum, withholding of removal, or protection under 
 the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman 
 or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, done at New York, 
 December 10, 1984.
 (L) Individuals who make a prima facie case for 
 eligibility for relief under any provision of the 
 Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101 et 
 seq.), including returning lawful permanent residents.
 (M) Individuals who self-identify as lesbian, gay, 
 bisexual, transgender, or queer (LGBTQ).
 (N) Any group designated by the Secretary as a 
 vulnerable population.

 TITLE I--PROHIBITION OF RACIAL PROFILING

SEC. 101. PROHIBITION.

 No law enforcement agent or law enforcement agency shall engage in 
racial profiling.

SEC. 102. ENFORCEMENT.

 (a) Remedy.--The United States, or an individual injured by racial 
profiling, may enforce this part in a civil action for declaratory or 
injunctive relief, filed either in a State court of general 
jurisdiction or in a district court of the United States.
 (b) Parties.--In any action brought under this part, relief may be 
obtained against--
 (1) any governmental body that employed any law enforcement 
 agent who engaged in racial profiling;
 (2) any agent of a governmental body who engaged in racial 
 profiling; and
 (3) any person with supervisory authority over an agent 
 described in paragraph (2).
 (c) Nature of Proof.--Proof that the routine or spontaneous 
investigatory activities of law enforcement agents in a jurisdiction 
have had a disparate impact on individuals with a particular 
characteristic described in section 3(11) shall constitute prima facie 
evidence of a violation of this part.
 (d) Attorney's Fees.--In any action or proceeding to enforce this 
part against any governmental body, the court may allow a prevailing 
plaintiff, other than the United States, reasonable attorney's fees as 
part of the costs, and may include expert fees as part of the 
attorney's fees.

SEC. 103. POLICIES TO ELIMINATE RACIAL PROFILING.

 (a) In General.--Federal, State, local, and Indian tribal law 
enforcement agencies shall--
 (1) maintain adequate policies and procedures designed to 
 eliminate racial profiling; and
 (2) cease practices in effect on the date before the date 
 of enactment of this Act that allow racial profiling.
 (b) Policies.--The policies and procedures described in subsection 
(a)(1) shall include--
 (1) a prohibition on racial profiling;
 (2) training on racial profiling issues as part of law 
 enforcement training;
 (3) the collection of data in accordance with the 
 regulations issued by the Attorney General under section 104;
 (4) procedures for receiving, investigating, and responding 
 meaningfully to complaints alleging racial profiling by law 
 enforcement agents; and
 (5) any other policies and procedures the Attorney General 
 determines to be necessary to eliminate racial profiling by law 
 enforcement agencies.

SEC. 104. ATTORNEY GENERAL TO ISSUE REGULATIONS.

 (a) Regulations.--Not later than 6 months after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Attorney General, in consultation with 
stakeholders, including Federal, State, and local law enforcement 
agencies and community, professional, research, and civil rights 
organizations, shall issue regulations for the collection and 
compilation of data under section 103.
 (b) Requirements.--The regulations issued under subsection (a) 
shall--
 (1) provide for the collection of data on all routine or 
 spontaneous investigatory activities;
 (2) provide that the data collected shall--
 (A) be collected by race, ethnicity, national 
 origin, gender, and religion, as perceived by the law 
 enforcement officer;
 (B) include the date, time, and location of such 
 investigatory activities;
 (C) include detail sufficient to permit an analysis 
 of whether a law enforcement agency is engaging in 
 racial profiling; and
 (D) not include personally identifiable 
 information;
 (3) provide that a standardized form shall be made 
 available to law enforcement agencies for the submission of 
 collected data to the Department of Justice;
 (4) provide that law enforcement agencies shall compile 
 data on the standardized form made available under paragraph 
 (3), and submit the form to the Civil Rights Division and the 
 Department of Justice Bureau of Justice Statistics;
 (5) provide that law enforcement agencies shall maintain 
 all data collected under this subtitle for not less than 4 
 years;
 (6) include guidelines for setting comparative benchmarks, 
 consistent with best practices, against which collected data 
 shall be measured;
 (7) provide that the Department of Justice Bureau of 
 Justice Statistics shall--
 (A) analyze the data for any statistically 
 significant disparities, including--
 (i) disparities in the percentage of 
 drivers or pedestrians stopped relative to the 
 proportion of the population passing through 
 the neighborhood;
 (ii) disparities in the hit rate; and
 (iii) disparities in the frequency of 
 searches performed on racial or ethnic minority 
 drivers and the frequency of searches performed 
 on non-minority drivers; and
 (B) not later than 3 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter--
 (i) prepare a report regarding the findings 
 of the analysis conducted under subparagraph 
 (A);
 (ii) provide such report to Congress; and
 (iii) make such report available to the 
 public, including on a website of the 
 Department of Justice; and
 (8) protect the privacy of individuals whose data is 
 collected by--
 (A) limiting the use of the data collected under 
 this subtitle to the purposes set forth in this 
 subtitle;
 (B) except as otherwise provided in this subtitle, 
 limiting access to the data collected under this 
 subtitle to those Federal, State, local, or tribal 
 employees or agents who require such access in order to 
 fulfill the purposes for the data set forth in this 
 subtitle;
 (C) requiring contractors or other non-governmental 
 agents who are permitted access to the data collected 
 under this subtitle to sign use agreements 
 incorporating the use and disclosure restrictions set 
 forth in subparagraph (A); and
 (D) requiring the maintenance of adequate security 
 measures to prevent unauthorized access to the data 
 collected under this subtitle.

SEC. 105. PUBLICATION OF DATA.

 The Department of Justice Bureau of Justice Statistics shall 
provide to Congress and make available to the public, together with 
each annual report described in section 104(b)(7)(B), the data 
collected pursuant to this subtitle, excluding any personally 
identifiable information described in section 106.

SEC. 106. LIMITATIONS ON PUBLICATION OF DATA.

 The name or identifying information of a law enforcement officer, 
complainant, or any other individual involved in any activity for which 
data is collected and compiled under this subtitle shall not be--
 (1) released to the public;
 (2) disclosed to any person, except for--
 (A) such disclosures as are necessary to comply 
 with this subtitle;
 (B) disclosures of information regarding a 
 particular person to that person; or
 (C) disclosures pursuant to litigation; or
 (3) subject to disclosure under section 552 of title 5, 
 United States Code (commonly known as the ``Freedom of 
 Information Act''), except for disclosures of information 
 regarding a particular person to that person.

 TITLE II--PROTECTION FROM UNLAWFUL ARREST AND DETENTION

SEC. 201. PROTECTIONS AGAINST UNLAWFUL DETENTIONS OF CITIZENS OF THE 
 UNITED STATES.

 (a) Notifications.--
 (1) In general.--Prior to questioning an individual who has 
 been detained on the basis of a suspected immigration violation 
 or has been detained during an immigration-related enforcement 
 activity, any law enforcement agent shall first advise the 
 individual, in the language requested by the individual that--
 (A) the individual has the right to be represented 
 by counsel at no expense to the Federal Government;
 (B) the individual may remain silent; and
 (C) any statement made by the individual may be 
 used against the detainee in a subsequent removal or 
 criminal proceeding.
 (2) Effect of violation.--Any evidence obtained by a law 
 enforcement agent from an individual in violation of paragraph 
 (1) may not be--
 (A) admissible in a removal proceeding against the 
 individual; or
 (B) used to confirm that the individual is not a 
 citizen of the United States.
 (b) Access to Counsel.--
 (1) In general.--An individual who is subject to, or 
 detained during, an immigration-related enforcement activity 
 may be represented by legal counsel at any time.
 (2) List of free legal services.--The examining officer 
 shall, in the language requested by the individual being 
 detained--
 (A) provide such individual, at the time of 
 detention of such individual for an immigration-related 
 violation, with a list of available free or low-cost 
 legal services provided by organizations and attorneys 
 that are located in the region in which the detention 
 occurred; and
 (B) certify on the Notice to Appear issued to such 
 individual that such a list was provided to the 
 individual.
 (3) Amendment.--Section 236 of the Immigration and 
 Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1226) is amended--
 (A) by redesignating subsection (e) as subsection 
 (k);
 (B) by redesignating subsections (b), (c), and (d) 
 as subsections (f), (g), and (h), respectively; and
 (C) by inserting before subsection (k), as so 
 redesignated, the following:
 ``(j) Right of Access to Counsel.--An individual may be represented 
by counsel of the individual's choosing while being subject to any 
immigration-related enforcement activity, including--
 ``(1) interviews;
 ``(2) processing appointments;
 ``(3) booking or intake questions;
 ``(4) hearings; and
 ``(5) any procedure that may result in a conclusion that 
 the detainee will be detained or removed from the United 
 States.''.
 (c) Notice.--
 (1) Amendment.--Section 236 of such Act, as amended by 
 subsection (b)(3), is further amended by inserting before 
 subsection (j), the following:
 ``(i) Notice and Charges.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 48 hours after the 
 commencement of a detention of an individual under this 
 section, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall--
 ``(A) file a Notice to Appear or other relevant 
 charging document with the immigration court closest to 
 the location at which the individual was apprehended; 
 and
 ``(B) serve such notice or charging document on the 
 individual.
 ``(2) Custody determination.--Any individual who is 
 detained under this section for more than 48 hours shall be 
 brought before an immigration judge for a custody determination 
 not later than 72 hours after the commencement of such 
 detention unless the individual waives the right in accordance 
 with paragraph (3).
 ``(3) Waiver.--The requirements of this subsection may be 
 waived for not more than 7 days if the detainee--
 ``(A) enters into a written agreement with the 
 Department of Homeland Security to waive such 
 requirements; and
 ``(B) is prima facie eligible for immigration 
 benefits or demonstrates prima facie eligibility for a 
 defense against removal.''.
 (2) Applicability of other law.--Nothing in subsection (i) 
 of section 236 of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as added 
 by paragraph (1), may be construed to repeal section 236A of 
 such Act (8 U.S.C. 1226a).
 (d) Access to Telephones.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 6 hours after the 
 commencement of a detention of an individual during an 
 immigration-related enforcement activity, an official of the 
 Department or a law enforcement agency shall provide the 
 individual with access to a telephone to make telephone calls 
 at no charge to the detainee to--
 (A) the consulate of the individual;
 (B) designated free legal-service providers or 
 legal representatives who are providing free 
 representation for the individual;
 (C) an office of the U.S. Immigration and Customs 
 Enforcement;
 (D) an immigration court or the Board of 
 Immigration Appeals;
 (E) the Office of the Inspector General of the 
 Department;
 (F) the Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties 
 of the Department; and
 (G) any Federal or State court in which the 
 detainee is or may become involved in a legal 
 proceeding.
 (2) Confidential telephone calls.--
 (A) In general.--A detainee shall be permitted to 
 make confidential telephone calls at no charge to the 
 detainee if the detainee--
 (i) is subject to expedited removal;
 (ii) has dependents; or
 (iii) is experiencing a personal or family 
 emergency.
 (B) Additional confidential telephone calls.--A 
 detainee shall be permitted to make additional 
 confidential telephone calls at no cost to the Federal 
 Government.
 (e) Protection of Community-Based Organizations, Faith-Based 
Organizations and Other Institutions.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall issue regulations 
 requiring officials of the Department or law enforcement 
 agencies--
 (A) to prohibit the apprehension of an individual 
 as part of an immigration-related enforcement activity 
 on the premises or in the immediate vicinity of--
 (i) a childcare provider;
 (ii) a school;
 (iii) a legal-service provider;
 (iv) a Federal court or State court 
 proceeding;
 (v) an administrative proceeding;
 (vi) a funeral home;
 (vii) a cemetery;
 (viii) a college, university, or community 
 college;
 (ix) a victim services agency;
 (x) a social service agency;
 (xi) a hospital or emergency care center;
 (xii) a health care clinic; and
 (xiii) a place of worship; and
 (B) to tightly control investigative operations at 
 the locations described in subparagraph (A).
 (2) Exception.--
 (A) In general.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1), an 
 immigration-related enforcement activity may be carried 
 out in a location described under paragraph (1)(A) if 
 the Secretary determines that exigent circumstances 
 exist and approves such activity.
 (B) Exigent circumstances defined.--In this 
 paragraph, the term ``exigent circumstances'' means, 
 with respect to an immigration-related enforcement 
 activity, that such activity--
 (i) involves a national security or 
 terrorism matter;
 (ii) involves an imminent risk of death, 
 violence, or physical harm to any person or 
 property;
 (iii) involves the immediate arrest or 
 pursuit of a dangerous felon, terrorist 
 suspect, or any other individual that present 
 an imminent danger to public safety; or
 (iv) involves an imminent risk of 
 destruction of evidence material to an ongoing 
 criminal case.
 (3) Notice to appear.--The Secretary shall amend the Notice 
 to Appear form to include a statement that no immigration-
 related enforcement activity was undertaken in any of the 
 locations described under paragraph (1)(A) unless such activity 
 was approved under paragraph (2).
 (f) Transfer of Detainees.--
 (1) Procedures.--In adopting procedures relating to the 
 transfer of individuals detained under section 236 of the 
 Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1226), the Secretary 
 shall promulgate regulations requiring officials of the 
 Department to give substantial weight to--
 (A) the access of the detainee to legal 
 representation;
 (B) the residence of the detainee prior to 
 apprehension;
 (C) the location of family members of the detainee;
 (D) the stage of any legal proceeding involving the 
 detainee, including Federal, State, or administrative 
 proceedings;
 (E) the proximity of the transferee facility to the 
 venue of any legal proceeding described in subparagraph 
 (D);
 (F) the health and medical fitness of the detainee; 
 and
 (G) whether the detainee has a pending application 
 for relief with U.S. Citizenship and Immigration 
 Services or the Executive Office for Immigration 
 Review.
 (2) Notice.--Unless emergency circumstances, such as a 
 natural disaster or comparable exigency, dictate an immediate 
 transfer, the Secretary--
 (A) shall provide at least 72-hour notice to the 
 detainee in the language requested by the detainee and 
 to the representative of record before transferring a 
 detainee to another facility; and
 (B) may not transfer the detainee until the 
 detainee has received any custody hearing for which the 
 detainee is eligible.
 (3) Additional requirements.--
 (A) In general.--Absent emergency circumstances, 
 such as a natural disaster or comparable exigency, the 
 Secretary or law enforcement agent may not transfer a 
 detainee who has an existing attorney-client 
 relationship to another facility if the transfer of the 
 detainee would--
 (i) impair the existing attorney-client 
 relationship;
 (ii) prejudice the rights of the detainee 
 in any legal proceeding; or
 (iii) affect the ability of the detainee to 
 present evidence or witnesses.
 (B) Legal rights of detainees.--In any custody, 
 bond, or removal decision involving a detainee detained 
 under section 236 of the Immigration and Nationality 
 Act (8 U.S.C. 1226)--
 (i) legal precedent in the location of 
 apprehension shall control any custody, bond, 
 or removal decision; and
 (ii) in cases of ambiguity, an immigration 
 judge shall use the rule of lenity in choosing 
 from among the laws of the relevant circuits.
 (C) Record.--If a detainee is transferred, the 
 Secretary or law enforcement agent shall prepare a 
 record of--
 (i) the reasons necessitating the transfer; 
 and
 (ii) actions taken to ameliorate any 
 adverse effect on the legal rights of the 
 detainee.
 (D) Investigation.--If a detainee makes an 
 allegation of retaliation, such allegation shall be 
 investigated by an independent entity.
 (g) Training.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation with the 
 Civil Rights and Civil Liberties Officer, shall provide all 
 officers of the Department, other Federal agencies, and all 
 State and local officers involved in immigration-related 
 enforcement activities with periodic training regarding--
 (A) immigration law;
 (B) civil rights law;
 (C) medical and mental health needs and treatment;
 (D) due process protections;
 (E) humanitarian guidelines under current law, 
 including--
 (i) the right of access to immigration 
 legal counsel; and
 (ii) the appropriate treatment of 
 vulnerable populations during immigration-
 related enforcement activities; and
 (F) racial profiling and implicit bias.
 (2) Implicit bias defined.--In this subsection, the term 
 ``implicit bias'' means--
 (A) bias in judgment or behavior that results from 
 subtle cognitive processes, including implicit 
 attitudes and implicit stereotypes, that often operate 
 at a level below conscious awareness and without 
 intentional control; and
 (B) implicit attitudes and stereotypes that result 
 in beliefs or simple associations that a person makes 
 between an object and its evaluation that are 
 automatically activated by the mere presence (actual or 
 symbolic) of the attitude object.

SEC. 202. PROTECTIONS FOR PRIMARY CAREGIVERS WITH CHILDREN.

 (a) Apprehension Procedures.--In any immigration-related 
enforcement activity, the Secretary and any entity cooperating with the 
Secretary on such activity shall--
 (1) as soon as possible after an individual is subject to 
 detention in an immigration-related enforcement activity, but 
 generally not later than 2 hours after the commencement of such 
 detention, determine whether the individual is a parent or 
 primary caregiver of a child in the United States and, if the 
 individual is a parent or primary caregiver, provide the 
 individual with--
 (A) the opportunity to make a minimum of 2 
 telephone calls to arrange for the care of such child 
 in the individual's absence; and
 (B) contact information for--
 (i) child welfare agencies and family 
 courts in the jurisdiction in which the child 
 is located; and
 (ii) consulates, attorneys, and legal 
 service providers capable of providing free 
 legal advice or representation regarding child 
 welfare, child custody determinations, and 
 immigration matters;
 (2) notify the child welfare agency with jurisdiction over 
 the child if the child's parent or primary caregiver is unable 
 to make care arrangements for the child or if the child is in 
 imminent risk of serious harm;
 (3) ensure that personnel of the Department and cooperating 
 entities do not, absent medical necessity or extraordinary 
 circumstances, compel or request children to interpret or 
 translate for interviews of their parents or of other 
 individuals who are encountered as part of an immigration 
 enforcement action; and
 (4) ensure that any parent or primary caregiver of a child 
 in the United States--
 (A) absent medical necessity or extraordinary 
 circumstances, is not transferred from his or her area 
 of apprehension until the individual--
 (i) has made arrangements for the care of 
 such child; or
 (ii) if such arrangements are unavailable 
 or the individual is unable to make such 
 arrangements, is informed of the care 
 arrangements made for the child and of a means 
 to maintain communication with the child;
 (B) absent medical necessity or extraordinary 
 circumstances, and to the extent practicable, is placed 
 in a detention facility either--
 (i) proximate to the location of 
 apprehension; or
 (ii) proximate to the individual's habitual 
 place of residence; and
 (C) receives due consideration of the best 
 interests of such child in any decision or action 
 relating to his or her detention, release, or transfer 
 between detention facilities.
 (b) Requests to Local and State Entities.--If the Secretary 
requests a State or local entity to hold in custody an individual who 
the Department has reason to believe is removable pending transfer of 
that individual to the custody of the Secretary or to a detention 
facility, the Secretary shall also request that the State or local 
entity provide the individual the protections specified in paragraphs 
(1) and (2) of subsection (a), if that individual is found to be the 
parent or primary caregiver of a child in the United States.
 (c) Access to Children, State and Local Courts, Child Welfare 
Agencies, and Consular Officials.--At all detention facilities, the 
Secretary shall--
 (1) prominently post in a manner accessible to detainees 
 and visitors and include in detainee handbooks information on 
 the protections of this title as well as information on 
 potential eligibility for parole or release;
 (2) absent extraordinary circumstances, ensure that 
 individuals who are detained by the Department and are parents 
 of children in the United States are--
 (A) permitted regular phone calls and contact 
 visits with their children;
 (B) provided with contact information for child 
 welfare agencies and family courts in the relevant 
 jurisdictions;
 (C) able to participate fully, and to the extent 
 possible in-person, in all family court proceedings and 
 any other proceedings that may impact their right to 
 custody of their children;
 (D) granted free and confidential telephone calls 
 to relevant child welfare agencies and family courts as 
 often as is necessary to ensure that the best interest 
 of their children, including a preference for family 
 unity whenever appropriate, can be considered in child 
 welfare agency or family court proceedings;
 (E) able to fully comply with all family court or 
 child welfare agency orders impacting custody of their 
 children;
 (F) provided access to United States passport 
 applications or other relevant travel document 
 applications for the purpose of obtaining travel 
 documents for their children;
 (G) afforded timely access to a notary public for 
 the purpose of applying for a passport for their 
 children or executing guardianship or other agreements 
 to ensure the safety of their children; and
 (H) granted adequate time before removal to obtain 
 passports, apostilled birth certificates, travel 
 documents, and other necessary records on behalf of 
 their children if such children will accompany them on 
 their return to their country of origin or join them in 
 their country of origin; and
 (3) if doing so would not impact public safety or national 
 security, facilitate the ability of a detained individual who 
 is a parent or primary caregiver to share information regarding 
 travel arrangements with their consulate, children, child 
 welfare agencies, or other caregivers in advance of the 
 detained individual's departure from the United States.

SEC. 203. BASIC PROTECTIONS FOR VULNERABLE POPULATIONS.

 (a) Vulnerable Populations.--Not later than 72 hours after the 
commencement of an immigration-related enforcement activity, the 
Department shall screen each detainee to determine whether the detainee 
is a member of a vulnerable population.
 (b) Options Regarding Detention Decisions for Vulnerable 
Populations.--Section 236 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 
U.S.C. 1226), as amended by this Act, is further amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by 
 striking ``(c)'' and inserting ``(g)''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``or'' 
 at the end;
 (ii) in subparagraph (B), by striking 
 ``but'' and inserting ``or''; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(C) the individual's own recognizance;'';
 (C) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph 
 (4); and
 (D) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following:
 ``(3) may enroll the alien in an alternatives program; 
 but''; and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (a) the following:
 ``(b) Detention Decisions.--
 ``(1) Criteria to be considered.--If an alien is not 
 subject to mandatory detention under subsection (g) or section 
 236A, the criteria that the Secretary or the Attorney General 
 shall use to demonstrate that detention of the alien is 
 necessary are the following:
 ``(A) Whether the alien poses a risk to public 
 safety, including a risk to national security.
 ``(B) Whether--
 ``(i) the alien poses a risk of flight; and
 ``(ii) there are no conditions of release 
 that will reasonably ensure that the alien will 
 appear for immigration proceedings, including 
 bond or other conditions of release that reduce 
 the risk of flight.
 ``(2) Exception for mandatory detainees.--The requirements 
 described in paragraph (1) shall not apply if the Secretary of 
 Homeland Security demonstrates by substantial evidence that the 
 alien is subject to detention under subsection (g).
 ``(c) Custody Decisions for Vulnerable Populations.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 72 hours after an 
 individual is detained under this section (unless the 72-hour 
 requirement is waived in writing by the individual), an 
 individual who is a member of a vulnerable population (as 
 defined in section 3 of the Protecting the Rights of Families 
 and Immigrants Who Legally Entered From Detention Act) shall be 
 released from the custody of the Department of Homeland 
 Security and shall not be subject to electronic monitoring 
 unless the Department demonstrates by a preponderance of the 
 evidence that the individual--
 ``(A) is subject to mandatory custody or mandatory 
 detention under subsection (g) or section 236A;
 ``(B) poses a risk to the national security of the 
 United States; or
 ``(C) is a flight risk and the risk cannot be 
 mitigated through supervision or placement in an 
 alternative program.
 ``(2) Release.--An individual shall be released from 
 custody under this subsection--
 ``(A) on the individual's own recognizance;
 ``(B) by posting a minimum bond under subsection 
 (a)(2)(a); or
 ``(C) on parole in accordance with section 
 212(d)(5)(A).
 ``(d) Decisions To Detain Aliens.--
 ``(1) In general.--All detention decisions under this 
 section shall--
 ``(A) be made in writing by an official of the 
 Department of Homeland Security;
 ``(B) specify the reasons for the decision, if the 
 decision is made to continue the detention without bond 
 or parole; and
 ``(C) be served upon the detainee, in the language 
 spoken by the alien, not later than 72 hours after--
 ``(i) the commencement of the detention; or
 ``(ii) a positive determination of credible 
 fear of persecution or reasonable fear of 
 persecution or torture, if the detainee is 
 subject to section 235 or 241(a)(5).
 ``(2) Redetermination.--
 ``(A) Request.--Any alien detained by the 
 Department of Homeland Security, at any time after 
 being served with the decision described in paragraph 
 (1)(A), may request a redetermination of such decision 
 by an immigration judge.
 ``(B) Other decisions.--All custody decisions by 
 the Secretary of Homeland Security shall be subject to 
 redetermination by an immigration judge.
 ``(C) Savings provision.--Nothing in this paragraph 
 may be construed to prevent a detainee from requesting 
 a bond redetermination.
 ``(e) Alternatives Programs.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary of Homeland Security shall 
 establish secure alternatives programs to ensure public safety 
 and appearances at immigration proceedings.
 ``(2) Contract authority.--The Secretary shall contract 
 with nongovernmental organizations to conduct screening of 
 detainees, provide appearance assistance services, and operate 
 community-based supervision programs.
 ``(3) Individualized determinations.--When deciding whether 
 to use secure alternatives, the Secretary shall make an 
 individualized determination and review each case on a monthly 
 basis.
 ``(4) Custody.--If an individual is not eligible for 
 release from custody, the Secretary shall consider the alien 
 for placement in secure alternatives that maintain custody over 
 the alien, including the use of electronic ankle devices. The 
 Secretary may use secure alternatives programs to maintain 
 custody over any alien detained under this Act except for 
 aliens detained under section 236A.
 ``(5) Secure alternatives program defined.--In this 
 section, the term `secure alternatives program' means any 
 custodial or noncustodial program under which an individual is 
 screened and provided with appearance assistance services or 
 placed in supervision programs, as needed, to ensure that the 
 individual appears at all immigration interviews, appointments, 
 and removal or deportation hearings.''.

SEC. 204. REPORTS ON PROTECTIONS FROM UNLAWFUL DETENTION.

 (a) Report Requirement.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall 
submit to Congress a report that describes the impact of worksite and 
fugitive operations on citizens of the United States, lawful permanent 
residents, and individuals otherwise lawfully present in the United 
States.
 (b) Content.--Each report submitted under subsection (a) shall 
include an assessment of--
 (1) the number of individuals detained during worksite or 
 nonworksite operations who are children, United States 
 citizens, or adult lawful permanent residents;
 (2) immigration-related enforcement activity at homes, 
 schools, places of worship, medical care facilities, victim 
 services agencies, social services agencies, and community 
 centers;
 (3) arrests, detentions, and removals of individuals who 
 are--
 (A) sole caregivers;
 (B) primary earners of income in a family;
 (C) pregnant or nursing mothers; or
 (D) members of other vulnerable groups subject to 
 immigration-related enforcement activity;
 (4) transfers of immigrants during the course of a raid or 
 immigration-enforcement activity, including--
 (A) whether the immigrants had access to legal 
 counsel before being transferred;
 (B) whether the immigrants received notice of an 
 impending transfer; and
 (C) whether the immigrants, if primary or sole 
 caregivers, were given an opportunity to make care 
 arrangements for their children;
 (5)(A) U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement protocol 
 for humanitarian screening during a worksite enforcement 
 action;
 (B) the compliance with such protocol; and
 (C) the nature of any related protocol in smaller worksite 
 or nonworksite actions;
 (6) collateral arrests under the National Fugitive 
 Operations Program and worksite enforcement initiatives;
 (7) whether individuals detained in an immigration-related 
 enforcement activity are notified of their right to counsel;
 (8) whether U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents 
 or any law enforcement agents--
 (A) use excessive force in executing warrants, 
 arrests, detentions, or other immigration-related 
 enforcement activities;
 (B) enter private homes or residences without a 
 search warrant or consent;
 (C) use ruses to conceal their identity during 
 enforcement activities; or
 (D) display and use weapons during immigration-
 related enforcement activity or interrogations;
 (9) the extent to which U.S. Immigration and Customs 
 Enforcement cooperates and coordinates with State and local law 
 enforcement during immigration-related enforcement activity;
 (10) whether U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
 agents or other law enforcement agents identify themselves when 
 entering a location for enforcement purposes;
 (11) the conditions under which individuals are confined 
 and whether detainees are provided access to a telephone;
 (12) the number of children left behind when a parent or 
 parents are detained;
 (13) whether detainees are notified of their rights in a 
 language they can understand;
 (14) whether individuals detained during an immigration-
 related enforcement activity are forced or coerced to sign any 
 documents or waive any rights without consulting with an 
 attorney;
 (15) the procedures used by the Department or law 
 enforcement agency--
 (A) to notify agents about humanitarian standards 
 regarding enforcement actions; and
 (B) hold agents accountable when they violate such 
 standards;
 (16) the per detainee cost of each raid involving more than 
 50 detainees;
 (17) the number of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
 agents disciplined for violations in detention proceedings; and
 (18) recommendations for improving worksite operations and 
 fugitive operations.
 (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.

SEC. 205. IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS ENFORCEMENT OMBUDSMAN.

 (a) Establishment.--Subtitle D of title IV of the Homeland Security 
Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 251 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:

``SEC. 447. IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS ENFORCEMENT OMBUDSMAN.

 ``(a) In General.--There established in the Department a position 
of Immigration and Customs Enforcement Ombudsman (referred to in this 
section as the `Ombudsman').
 ``(b) Requirements.--The Ombudsman shall--
 ``(1) report directly to the Director for U.S. Immigration 
 and Customs Enforcement (referred to in this section as the 
 `Director'); and
 ``(2) have a background in immigration law.
 ``(c) Functions.--The Ombudsman shall--
 ``(1) undertake regular and unannounced inspections of 
 detention facilities and local offices of U.S. Immigration and 
 Customs Enforcement to determine whether the facilities and 
 offices comply with relevant policies, procedures, standards, 
 laws, and regulations;
 ``(2) report all findings of compliance or noncompliance of 
 the facilities and local offices described in paragraph (1) to 
 the Secretary and the Director;
 ``(3) develop procedures for detainees or their 
 representatives to submit confidential written complaints 
 directly to the Ombudsman;
 ``(4) investigate and resolve all complaints, including 
 confidential and anonymous complaints, related to decisions, 
 recommendations, acts, or omissions made by the Director or the 
 Commissioner of U.S. Customs and Border Protection in the 
 course of custody and detention operations;
 ``(5) initiate investigations into allegations of systemic 
 problems at detention facilities;
 ``(6) conduct any review or audit relating to detention, as 
 directed by the Secretary or Director;
 ``(7) refer matters, as appropriate, to the Office of 
 Inspector General of the Department of Justice, the Office of 
 Civil Rights and Civil Liberties of the Department, or any 
 other relevant office or agency;
 ``(8) propose changes in the policies or practices of U.S. 
 Immigration and Customs Enforcement to improve the treatment of 
 United States citizens and residents, immigrants, detainees, 
 and others subject to immigration-related enforcement 
 operations;
 ``(9) establish a public advisory group consisting of 
 nongovernmental organization representatives and Federal, 
 State, and local government officials with expertise in 
 detention and vulnerable populations to provide the Ombudsman 
 with input on--
 ``(A) the priorities of the Ombudsman; and
 ``(B) current practices of U.S. Immigration and 
 Customs Enforcement; and
 ``(10) recommend to the Director personnel action based on 
 any finding of noncompliance.
 ``(d) Annual Report.--
 ``(1) Objectives.--Not later than June 30 of each year, the 
 Ombudsman shall submit to the Committee on the Judiciary of the 
 Senate and the Committee on the Judiciary of the House of 
 Representatives a report on the objectives of the Office of the 
 Ombudsman for the next fiscal year.
 ``(2) Contents.--Each report submitted under paragraph (1) 
 shall include--
 ``(A) full and substantive analysis of the 
 objectives of the Office of the Ombudsman;
 ``(B) statistical information regarding such 
 objectives;
 ``(C) a description of each detention facility 
 found to be in noncompliance with the detention 
 standards of the Department or other applicable 
 regulations;
 ``(D) a description of the actions taken by the 
 Department to remedy any findings of noncompliance or 
 other identified problems;
 ``(E) information regarding whether the actions 
 described in subparagraph (D) resulted in compliance 
 with detention standards;
 ``(F) a summary of the most pervasive and serious 
 problems encountered by individuals subject to the 
 enforcement operations of the Department, including a 
 description of the nature of such problems; and
 ``(G) such other information as the Ombudsman may 
 consider advisable.
 ``(3) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(A) Detainee.--The term `detainee' has the 
 meaning given that term in section 2 of the Protecting 
 the Rights of Families and Immigrants Who Legally 
 Entered From Detention Act.
 ``(B) Detention facility.--The term `detention 
 facility' means any Federal, State, or local government 
 facility, or any facility providing services under 
 government contract, which is used to hold detainees 
 for more than 72 hours.''.
 (b) Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of the 
Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 101 et seq.) is amended by 
inserting after the item relating to section 446 the following:

``Sec. 447. Immigration and Customs Enforcement Ombudsman.''.

SEC. 206. RULEMAKING.

 Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
the Secretary shall promulgate regulations to implement this Act and 
the amendments made by this Act.

SEC. 207. RESCISSION.

 The provisions of Executive Order 13768 of January 25, 2017 (82 
Fed. Reg. 8799), titled ``Enhancing Public Safety in the Interior of 
the United States'' and of Executive Order 13767 of January 25, 2017 
(82 Fed. Reg. 8793), titled ``Border Security and Immigration 
Enforcement Improvements'' are rescinded and shall not have any legal 
effect.
 <all>