HR 2837 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2837
To amend the Agricultural Act of 1949 to improve the milk price support
program and to establish a milk inventory management program to operate
during calendar years in which purchases of milk and milk products by the
Commodity Credit Corporation are estimated to exceed 5,000,000,000 pounds.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
JULY 9, 1991
Mr. STENHOLM introduced the following bill; which was referred to the
Committee on Agriculture
A BILL
To amend the Agricultural Act of 1949 to improve the milk price support
program and to establish a milk inventory management program to operate
during calendar years in which purchases of milk and milk products by the
Commodity Credit Corporation are estimated to exceed 5,000,000,000 pounds.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Milk Inventory Management
 Act of 1991'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents for this Act is as follows:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Sec. 1. Short title and table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings.
Sec. 3. Policy and purpose.
Sec. 4. Annual estimate of purchases of milk and the products of milk.
Sec. 5. Price support levels.
Sec. 6. Manufacturing allowance.
Sec. 7. Price support operations--reductions in price received by producers.
Sec. 8. Establishment and duties of the National Dairy Inventory Management
Board.
Sec. 9. Limitation on Commodity Credit Corporation acquisition of excess
inventory.
Sec. 10. Limitation on State milk price support programs.
Sec. 11. Amendment of milk marketing orders.
Sec. 12. Establishment of trusts for the protection of milk producers and
handlers.
Sec. 13. Prevention of adverse impact of dairy cattle slaughter on beef
producers.
Sec. 14. Effective date and rules.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 Congress finds the following:
 (1) Milk and dairy products are basic foods and a valuable part of the
 human diet as a primary source of required nutrients, such as calcium.
 (2) The production of milk and dairy products plays a significant role in
 the economy of the United States, in that--
 (A) milk and dairy products are consumed by millions of people in the
 United States every day; and
 (B) the production of milk and dairy products involves tens of thousands of
 dairy farmers and employs hundreds of thousands of persons in the handling,
 processing, and marketing of milk and dairy products.
 (3) Dairy farmers have a relatively limited ability to protect themselves
 from price risk because milk is a highly perishable commodity.
 (4) In the absence of an effective dairy inventory management program,
 producer prices for milk in future years may become too unstable to maintain
 an economically healthy dairy sector.
 (5) Milk and dairy products move in interstate and foreign commerce, and
 milk and dairy products that do not move in interstate or foreign commerce
 directly burden or affect interstate commerce.
 (6) The problems currently facing dairy farmers disrupt the orderly exchange
 of milk and dairy products in interstate commerce and, because they affect
 the national public interest, burden and obstruct the normal channels of
 interstate commerce.
 (7) The measures initiated by the amendments made by this Act, including
 the inventory management component, are needed to--
 (A) ensure consumers of a reliable and adequate supply of pure and wholesome
 milk and dairy products at reasonable prices;
 (B) respond adequately to current and anticipated future dairy supply and
 demand imbalances; and
 (C) ensure a level of farm income for dairy farmers adequate to maintain
 productive capacity sufficient to meet anticipated consumer needs.
 (8) The establishment of the National Dairy Inventory Management Board
 in section 8 is vital to the success of the dairy inventory management
 program required by this Act in that the Board provides dairy farmers,
 whose prices will be reduced to adjust excess milk inventories, a role in
 determining how the problems affecting dairy farmers will be addressed.
SEC. 3. POLICY AND PURPOSE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- It is declared to be the policy of Congress that it is in
 the public interest to authorize, through the amendments made by this Act,
 the establishment of programs to--
 (1) achieve a proper balance between milk production and consumption,
 so as to improve and stabilize farm income;
 (2) reduce the likelihood of unreasonable fluctuations in supplies and
 prices of milk and stabilize the price of milk at fair and reasonable
 levels, so as to protect the interests of consumers and producers; and
 (3) facilitate orderly marketing conditions for milk and dairy products,
 so as to enable dairy farmers in the United States to respond adequately
 to the needs of consumers.
 (b) PROTECTION OF CONSUMERS- The programs authorized by the amendments
 made by this Act shall not be used to reduce the production of pure and
 wholesome milk and dairy products below the level required to meet the
 needs of consumers in the United States. In carrying out these amendments,
 the Secretary of Agriculture and the National Dairy Inventory Management
 Board shall give due regard to the maintenance of a continuous and stable
 supply of milk and dairy products adequate to meet consumer demand.
SEC. 4. ANNUAL ESTIMATE OF PURCHASES OF MILK AND THE PRODUCTS OF MILK.
 Subsection (e) of section 204 of the Agricultural Act of 1949 (7
 U.S.C. 1446e) is amended to read as follows:
 `(e) ANNUAL ESTIMATE OF PURCHASES BY COMMODITY CREDIT CORPORATION- Not later
 than November 20 of each calendar year, the Secretary shall publish in the
 Federal Register an estimate of the amount of milk and the products of milk
 in pounds (on a milk equivalent, total milk solids basis) that the Commodity
 Credit Corporation would purchase during the following calendar year under
 this section. When making an estimate under this subsection, the Secretary--
 `(1) shall use the rate of price support to be in effect for the following
 calendar year under subsection (b); and
 `(2) may not consider any inventory management program to balance supply
 and demand.'.
SEC. 5. PRICE SUPPORT LEVELS.
 (a) INCREASE IN BASIC PRICE SUPPORT RATES- Subsection (b) of section 204 of
 the Agricultural Act of 1949 (7 U.S.C. 1446e) is amended to read as follows:
 `(b) BASIC PRICE SUPPORT RATES- The price of milk shall be supported at a
 rate not less than $10.10 per hundredweight in calendar year 1991, $12.60
 per hundredweight in calendar years 1992 and 1993, $12.10 per hundredweight
 in calendar year 1994, and $11.60 per hundredweight in calendar year 1995,
 for milk containing 3.67 percent milkfat. Notwithstanding any other provision
 of this title, in no event shall the price of milk be supported for a year
 at less than the rate specified in this subsection for that year.'.
 (b) SUPPORT RATE ADJUSTMENTS- Subsection (d) of section 204 of the
 Agricultural Act of 1949 (7 U.S.C. 1446e) is amended--
 (1) by striking paragraphs (1)(B), (2)(B), and (4);
 (2) by striking `(A) IN GENERAL- ' in paragraphs (1) and (2) and conforming
 the margins of those paragraphs to the paragraph headings; and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph:
 `(4) NOTIFICATION- Not later than November 20 of each calendar year,
 the Secretary shall notify the Committee on Agriculture of the House of
 Representatives and the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry
 of the Senate of any adjustment in the rate of price support under this
 subsection for the following calendar year.'.
SEC. 6. MANUFACTURING ALLOWANCE.
 Subsection (c) of section 204 of the Agricultural Act of 1949 (7
 U.S.C. 1446e) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (4); and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraph:
 `(3) MANUFACTURING ALLOWANCE-
 `(A) MINIMUM ALLOWANCE ESTABLISHED- Notwithstanding any other provision
 of law, for purposes of supporting the price of milk through purchases of
 the products of milk under this section, the Secretary shall establish--
 `(i) the manufacturing allowance for milk manufactured into butter and
 nonfat dry milk at not less than $1.37 per hundredweight of milk; and
 `(ii) the manufacturing allowance for milk manufactured into cheese at
 not less than $1.52 per hundredweight of milk.
 `(B) MANUFACTURING ALLOWANCE DEFINED- For purposes of this paragraph, the
 term `manufacturing allowance' means an amount (determined for purposes of
 the price support program for milk) applied separately to milk manufactured
 into butter and nonfat dry milk and to milk manufactured into cheese that,
 when added to the support price for milk, will enable a manufacturing plant
 of average efficiency in manufacturing these products to pay producers,
 on average, a price not less than the rate of price support for milk in
 effect during a 12-month period under this section when selling these
 products to the Commodity Credit Corporation.
 `(C) COSTS AND RETURNS REFLECTED IN ALLOWANCE- A manufacturing allowance
 shall reflect both the costs of manufacturing and selling products
 to the Corporation and the returns the plant receives from byproducts
 (other than whey solids pursuant to section 106 of the Food, Agriculture,
 Conservation, and Trade Act of 1990 (7 U.S.C. 1446e note)) not purchased
 by the Corporation.
 `(D) FACTORS ESTABLISHING THE VALUE OF DAIRY PRODUCTS PER HUNDREDWEIGHT-
 For purposes of supporting the price of milk through purchases of the
 products of milk, the Secretary may not take into consideration any factors
 establishing the value per hundredweight of milk of--
 `(i) butter in excess of 4.48 pounds;
 `(ii) nonfat dry milk in excess of 8.13 pounds;
 `(iii) cheese in excess of 10.1 pounds;
 `(iv) whey fat in excess of .25 pound; and
 `(v) buttermilk solids in any amount.
 `(E) BENEFIT OF INCREASE FOR PRODUCERS- Additional receipts that a
 manufacturing plant receives as a result of an increase in the manufacturing
 allowance under subparagraph (A) shall, to the extent practicable, be
 passed through to producers supplying milk to the plant.'.
SEC. 7. PRICE SUPPORT OPERATIONS--REDUCTIONS IN PRICE RECEIVED BY PRODUCERS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 204 of the Agricultural Act of 1949 (7 U.S.C. 1446e)
 is amended by striking subsections (f) and (g) and inserting the following
 new subsections:
 `(f) REDUCTIONS FOR EXCESS INVENTORY-
 `(1) REDUCTIONS REQUIRED- If the estimate under subsection (e) of the
 level of purchases of milk and the products of milk by the Commodity Credit
 Corporation for a calendar year exceeds 5,000,000,000 pounds, the Secretary
 shall provide for a reduction in the price received by producers to be in
 effect for that year. The price reduction shall occur under paragraph (2)
 or subsection (g) (based on the amount of excess inventory, as defined in
 section 204B(a)) and shall be implemented and carried out by the Secretary
 in consultation with the National Dairy Inventory Management Board.
 `(2) ESTIMATED PURCHASES BETWEEN 5,000,000,000 AND 7,000,000,000 POUNDS-
 If the Secretary estimates under subsection (e) that purchases under this
 section for that year will be more than 5,000,000,000 pounds but not in
 excess of 7,000,000,000 pounds, the reduction in the price received by
 producers during that year shall be applied to all milk produced in the
 48 contiguous States and marketed for commercial use. The amount of the
 reduction shall be an amount per hundredweight determined by the Board,
 subject to approval by the Secretary, sufficient to--
 `(A) cover net costs of the Commodity Credit Corporation incurred in the
 purchase of milk and the products of milk in excess of 5,000,000,000 pounds
 during that year on behalf of the Board;
 `(B) enable the Board to cover the costs during that year of inventory
 management activities of the Board under section 204B, administrative
 activities of the Board under section 204A, and any funding contribution
 by the Board required under section 204C(c)(2); and
 `(C) cover refunds under paragraph (3).
 `(3) REFUNDS- The Secretary shall provide a refund of the entire reduction
 under paragraph (2) in the price of milk received by a producer during a
 calendar year if the producer provides evidence that the producer did not
 increase marketings during the calendar year in which the reduction was in
 effect when compared to the immediately preceding calendar year. A refund
 under this paragraph or subsection (h)(3) shall not be considered as any
 type of price support or payment for purposes of sections 1211 and 1221
 of the Food Security Act of 1985 (16 U.S.C. 3811 and 3821).
 `(4) MARKET SAFEGUARDS BASED ON MANUFACTURING GRADE PRICES- To prevent undue
 disruption of domestic markets, the Secretary may suspend all reductions in
 price in effect under this subsection or subsection (g) or, notwithstanding
 subsection (k), provide for the Commodity Credit Corporation to take
 responsibility for price support purchases in excess of 5,000,000,000 pounds
 during any calendar year in which the average price received by producers
 in the United States for milk of manufacturing grade exceeds the rate of
 price support for milk in effect during that year under this section--
 `(A) by more than five percent during each of the months of March, April,
 May, and June of that year; or
 `(B) by more than 15 percent during each month of any four-month period
 of that year.
 `(5) COLLECTION- The funds represented by any reduction in the price received
 by producers for milk under this subsection or subsection (g) shall be
 collected and remitted to the Commodity Credit Corporation in conjunction
 with collections and remittances of reductions required under subsection
 (h). The Secretary shall ensure that, to the extent practicable, the
 procedures for making the reductions under this subsection and subsections
 (g) and (h) shall allow a single combined reduction in the price received
 by producers equal to the combined amount of the reductions required under
 these subsections.
 `(6) TREATMENT OF PAYMENTS- The funds remitted to the Commodity Credit
 Corporation under this subsection and subsections (g) and (h) shall
 be considered as included in the payments to a producer of milk for
 purposes of the minimum price provisions of the Agricultural Adjustment
 Act (7 U.S.C. 601 et seq.), reenacted with amendments by the Agricultural
 Marketing Agreement Act of 1937.
 `(7) USE OF FUNDS- The funds remitted to the Commodity Credit Corporation
 under this subsection or subsection (g) shall be available only for the
 activities of the Board as provided in section 204A(i).
 `(8) PRODUCER TO INCLUDE CERTAIN DAIRY FARMERS USING ANOTHER'S LAND- For
 purposes of this section, the term `producer' includes a person who is
 actively engaged in a dairy operation on a farm as a full-time occupation
 (as evidenced by the person's contribution of active personal labor and
 dairy cows to the operation), although the person uses the land, equipment,
 or facilities of another person.
 `(g) TWO-TIER PRICES-
 `(1) ESTIMATED PURCHASES IN EXCESS OF 7,000,000,000 POUNDS- If the Secretary
 estimates under subsection (e) that purchases under this section for a
 calendar year will exceed 7,000,000,000 pounds, a reduction in the price
 received by producers during that year shall be applied to all milk produced
 in the 48 contiguous States and marketed for commercial use by producers
 in excess of individual producer bases for that year.
 `(2) MONTHLY MARKETING HISTORY-
 `(A) ONE OR TWO YEAR AVERAGE- For purposes of reductions during a calendar
 year under this subsection, the Secretary shall assign to each producer
 of milk a monthly marketing history for each farm of the producer equal
 (at the producer's option) to--
 `(i) the quantity of milk marketed by the producer from the farm during
 each month of the preceding calendar year; or
 `(ii) the average quantity of milk marketed by the producer from the farm
 during each month of the two preceding calendar years.
 `(B) AMOUNTS PRODUCED- For purposes of determining a producer's milk
 marketings from a farm under subparagraph (A), all milk marketed by the
 producer from the farm for a preceding calendar year shall be counted,
 including milk subject to a reduction of the price received under this
 subsection or subsection (f).
 `(C) NONTRANSFERABILITY- A producer's marketing history for a farm may
 not be transferred (by sale, lease, gift, devise, or other method) except
 as follows:
 `(i) A producer who is an individual may transfer the marketing history
 of a farm to an immediate family member (as defined by the Secretary)
 for use on the same farm.
 `(ii) The Secretary shall approve the transfer of the marketing history
 of a farm to another farm or producer (for use on the same farm or another
 farm) to prevent extreme hardship.
 `(D) NEW PRODUCERS- A producer who has been operating a dairy farm for
 less than 12 consecutive months shall be assigned a marketing history for
 the farm for each month for which the producer does not have a marketing
 history under subparagraph (A) or (C) at a level that is equal to 75
 percent of the actual marketings for the farm for that month.
 `(E) EQUITABLE ADJUSTMENTS FOR PRODUCERS RESTRAINING PRODUCTION- In the case
 of a producer who restrained milk production on a farm during a calendar
 year so as to qualify for a refund under subsection (f)(3) or (h)(3),
 the Secretary shall assign the producer a monthly marketing history for
 the farm for the next calendar year equal (at the producer's option) to--
 `(i) the amount determined under subparagraph (A); or
 `(ii) the quantity of milk marketed by the producer from the farm during
 each month of the most recent calendar year in which the producer did not
 receive such a refund.
 `(F) SCHEME OR DEVICE- If the Secretary determines that a producer has
 adopted a scheme or device for a calendar year to inflate the monthly
 marketing history of the producer assigned under this paragraph or to evade
 reductions in price required under this subsection, the producer shall be
 ineligible for that year and the succeeding calendar year to receive--
 `(i) any marketing history under this paragraph; or
 `(ii) any base under paragraph (3).
 `(3) BASES-
 `(A) DETERMINATION OF PRODUCER'S BASE- Each producer's base for a farm
 for each month of a calendar year shall be an amount of milk marketings
 equal to the producer's farm marketing history for the month (determined
 under paragraph (2)) multiplied by the base percentage for the year.
 `(B) UNIFORM APPLICATION OF BASE PERCENTAGE- The base percentage for
 a year shall be the same for, and applied uniformly to, all producers,
 farms, and months.
 `(C) DETERMINATION OF BASE PERCENTAGE- The base percentage for a year shall
 be established by the Secretary, after consultation with the Board. The
 base percentage shall be equal to the amount that bears the same relation
 to 100 percent as the sum of
 `(i) estimated market consumption of milk in the 48 contiguous States in
 fluid form or as a product of milk during that year, plus a reasonable
 private market net carry-over; and
 `(ii) Commodity Credit Corporation purchases of 5,000,000,000 pounds during
 that year,
bears to the total amount of milk that the Secretary estimates will be
otherwise marketed by producers in the 48 contiguous States during that year.
 `(4) APPLICATION OF REDUCTION- For each month in which the two-tier price
 is in effect under this subsection, a reduction in the price received by
 a producer shall be applied to the producer's commercial marketings during
 the month that exceed the producer's monthly marketing history multiplied
 by the base percentage.
 `(5) REDUCTION AMOUNT- The amount of the reduction in price for any year
 under this subsection shall be uniformly applied to all producers, farms,
 and months. The reduction shall be an amount per hundredweight determined
 by the Board, subject to approval by the Secretary, that is sufficient to--
 `(A) effectively restrain milk production during that year such that
 purchases of milk and the products of milk by the Commodity Credit
 Corporation will not exceed 5,000,000,000 pounds (milk equivalent, total
 milk solids basis);
 `(B) cover net Commodity Credit Corporation costs involved in the purchase
 of any milk and the products of milk in excess of 5,000,000,000 pounds
 (milk equivalent, total milk solids basis) during that year on behalf of
 the Board; and
 `(C) enable the Board to cover the costs during that year of inventory
 management activities of the Board under section 204B, administrative
 activities of the Board under section 204A, and any funding contribution
 by the Board required under section 204C(c)(2).
 `(6) MARKET PROTECTION FOR HIGH FLUID MILK USE AREAS-
 `(A) EXCLUSION- To prevent undue market disruption, producers located in a
 area that has high fluid milk use during the year immediately preceding
 a year for which a two-tier price program is implemented under this
 subsection shall not be required to receive monthly marketing histories
 or be restricted to full pricing only on that part of their production
 that falls within their base for that year.
 `(B) DEFINITION- For purposes of this paragraph, the term `area that has
 high fluid milk use' means any one of the geographical regions described
 in section 204A(c)(2) in which the amount of milk consumed during the year
 involved in fluid form by consumers located within the area is equal to
 more than 80 percent of the amount of milk produced by milk producers
 located within the area during that year. The amount of milk consumed
 by consumers located within an area shall be determined by multiplying
 the resident population within the area by the United States average per
 capita consumption of fluid milk and cream, as most recently reported by
 the Economic Research Service of the Department of Agriculture.'.
 (b) TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Section 204 of the Agricultural
 Act of 1949 (7 U.S.C. 1446e) is further amended--
 (1) in subsection (h)(1), by striking `subsection (g)' and inserting
 `subsection (f) or (g)'; and
 (2) in subsection (i), by striking `subsection (g)' each place it appears
 and inserting `subsection (f), (g),'.
SEC. 8. ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES OF THE NATIONAL DAIRY INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
BOARD.
 The Agricultural Act of 1949 is amended by inserting after section 204
 (7 U.S.C. 1446e) the following new sections:
`SEC. 204A. NATIONAL DAIRY INVENTORY MANAGEMENT BOARD.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD REQUIRED-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT- Not later than November 1, 1991, a National Dairy
 Inventory Management Board shall be established pursuant to this section.
 `(2) BOARD DEFINED- For purposes of this section and sections 204 and
 204B, the term `Board' means the National Dairy Inventory Management Board
 established under this section.
 `(b) MEMBERSHIP AND ACTIVITIES- The Board shall consist of seven members
 nominated by producers and appointed by the Secretary, as provided in
 subsection (c). The Board shall conduct operations as provided for in this
 section and section 204B and in rules issued by the Secretary to carry
 out these sections.
 `(c) NOMINATION AND APPOINTMENT-
 `(1) CONDUCT OF NOMINATING ELECTIONS- Not later than October 15, 1991,
 the Secretary shall conduct ballotings to elect nominees for appointment
 to the Board. A separate election shall be held in each of the seven
 geographic regions specified in paragraph (2) to elect two nominees to
 the Board from each region.
 `(2) BOARD REGIONS- For purposes of electing nominees for appointment to
 the Board, the 48 contiguous States of the United States shall be divided
 into seven geographic regions as follows:
 `(A) California, Oregon, and Washington;
 `(B) Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Idaho, Kansas, Montana, Nevada, New
 Mexico, Oklahoma, Texas, Utah, and Wyoming;
 `(C) Illinois, Iowa, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, and
 South Dakota;
 `(D) Wisconsin;
 `(E) Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, North
 Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, and Virginia;
 `(F) Delaware, Indiana, Maryland, Michigan, New Jersey, Ohio, Pennsylvania,
 and West Virginia; and
 `(G) Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New York, Rhode
 Island, and Vermont.
 `(3) PROCEDURE FOR NOMINATIONS- During the period ending on October 1,
 1991, the Secretary shall solicit the names of individuals to be included
 as candidates on the ballot for the election in each region. Such names may
 be submitted by milk producers in the region or by organizations or other
 persons that represent milk producers in the region, including general farm
 organizations. The Secretary shall establish such additional rules for
 the conduct of these elections as are appropriate. Individuals shall be
 eligible to appear on a ballot only if the Secretary determines that the
 individual has a demonstrable expertise in the area of milk production,
 processing, or marketing.
 `(4) VOTING BY PRODUCERS-
 `(A) ELIGIBLE VOTERS- The Secretary shall conduct an election in each region
 to determine the two nominees eligible for appointment to the Board from
 that region. The election shall be conducted only among individual milk
 producers who have been producing milk during a representative period, as
 determined by the Secretary. Only individual producers may cast ballots in
 the election. An organization or other person representing milk producers,
 including a general farm organization, may not cast ballots in the election
 on behalf of their members.
 `(B) CASTING BALLOTS- The Secretary shall establish the methods by which
 ballots may be cast. Such methods shall include casting ballots by mail
 (subject to appropriate safeguards) and in person with a representative
 of the county office of the Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation
 Service or the Extension Service.
 `(5) APPOINTMENT- The Secretary shall appoint one of the two nominees
 elected from each region to serve as the member of the Board for that region.
 `(d) MEETINGS OF THE BOARD-
 `(1) FIRST MEETING- Within two weeks after the Secretary first appoints
 the members of the Board under subsection (c), the Board shall convene
 for its initial meeting and elect officers.
 `(2) OTHER MEETINGS- The Board shall meet at the call of the chair, or as
 requested by the Secretary, but at least once every three months.
 `(e) PROCEDURES OF THE BOARD-
 `(1) QUORUM- A quorum of the Board shall be four persons.
 `(2) RULES OF PROCEDURE AND BYLAWS- The Board shall adopt written bylaws
 and rules of procedures to govern its operations.
 `(3) EX OFFICIO REPRESENTATION- The Board shall notify the Secretary in
 advance of each meeting of the Board. The Secretary, or a representative of
 the Secretary, shall attend each meeting as a nonvoting ex officio member
 of the Board.
 `(f) TERMS; COMPENSATION-
 `(1) FULL TERM- Each person appointed to the Board shall serve for a term
 ending on July 31, 1996, or such later date as determined appropriate by
 the Secretary. The Secretary may remove for cause a member from the Board
 before the expiration of the term of the member.
 `(2) VACANCIES- A vacancy on the Board shall be filled in the same manner
 as the initial nomination and appointment under subsection (c).
 `(3) TERMINATION- The Board shall terminate on July 31, 1996, or such
 later date as determined appropriate by the Secretary.
 `(4) REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES- The members of the Board shall serve
 without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for reasonable expenses
 incurred in performing their duties as members of the Board.
 `(g) DUTIES-
 `(1) ALLOCATION OF FUNDS AND MANAGEMENT OF ACQUISITIONS- The Board shall
 have the responsibility, as provided in rules issued by the Secretary, to
 allocate funds available for a year under subsection (f) or (g) of section
 204 for the acquisition of excess inventory, as defined in section 204B(a),
 for that year and to manage and market the excess inventory acquired.
 `(2) REDUCTION RATE DETERMINATIONS- The Board shall make its determinations
 regarding each rate of reduction in prices received by producers required
 under subsection (f) or (g) of section 204 not later than December 15 of
 the year preceding the year in which the reduction will be made.
 `(h) POWERS- Subject to subsection (i), the Board shall have such incidental
 powers consistent with the requirements of this section and sections 204B
 and 204C as specified in rules issued by the Secretary. Such powers shall
 include the power to hire such staff and incur such other administrative
 expenses as necessary to meet the responsibilities of the Board, except
 that administrative expenses for a year may not exceed three percent of
 the funds available to the Board for that year under subsection (f) an
 (g) of section 204.
 `(i) FUNDING AND BUDGETS-
 `(1) BOARD FUNDS- The funds received by the Commodity Credit Corporation
 when reductions of prices are made under subsection (f) or (g) of section
 204 may be used to pay for activities of the Board under this section and
 sections 204B and 204C.
 `(2) AVAILABILITY- Funds will remain available for use by the Board at
 any time before the termination of the Board under subsection (f)(3).
 `(3) BUDGETS AND OPERATING PLANS- The Board shall submit to the Secretary
 its proposed annual budget and plan of operations for each year in which
 it operates. Each budget shall be submitted not later than December 15
 preceding the beginning of the year to which the budget will apply. The
 proposed budget shall include the proposed rate of reduction in the price
 received by producers to be effective for that year under subsection (f) or
 (g) of section 204. The budget and plan of operations shall be subject to the
 approval of the Secretary, and the Secretary may require such changes in the
 budget or plan of operations as the Secretary considers to be necessary. The
 Board may not enter into any obligations or expend any funds for a year
 except as authorized in the budget for the year approved by the Secretary.
 `(4) BUDGET REVISIONS- After a budget for a year is initially submitted
 under paragraph (3), the Board may submit to the Secretary in addition,
 on a quarterly basis (or as otherwise agreed to by the Secretary), any
 revisions in the budget needed to reflect changes in anticipated receipt
 or disbursement of funds during that year.
 `(j) SPECIAL RULES ON FUNDS-
 `(1) FUNDS NEEDED- If the funds available to the Board for a year under
 subsections (f) and (g) of section 204 prove to be insufficient to allow
 it to meet all obligations approved by the Secretary for that year,
 any reduction in prices received by producers in effect under subsection
 (f) or (g) of section 204 during the following year shall be increased to
 cover the shortfall. In the interim, the Commodity Credit Corporation may
 provide advances on the receipts accruing from such reductions effected
 under this paragraph in amounts sufficient to allow the Board timely to
 meet such obligations.
 `(2) EXCESS FUNDS- If funds available from reductions in prices received
 by producers during a year under subsections (f) and (g) of section 204
 prove to exceed the amount needed by the Board to conduct its activities
 during that year, any future reduction in prices for a year under those
 subsections shall be adjusted to take account of these surplus funds.
 `(3) REVERSION OF FUNDS- Any funds made available to the Board that remain
 after the Board liquidates all debts and claims and otherwise ceases
 operations shall revert to the Commodity Credit Corporation.
 `(k) FACA NOT APPLICABLE- The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5
 U.S.C. App.) shall not apply to the Board or the operations of the Board.
`SEC. 204B. DAIRY INVENTORY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM.
 `(a) PROGRAM-
 `(1) PURPOSE- In each of calendar years 1992 through 1995, the acquisition
 and disposition of excess inventory during the year shall be achieved
 under the dairy inventory management program established under this section.
 `(2) EXCESS INVENTORY DEFINED- For purposes of this section, the term `excess
 inventory' means that portion of the milk price support purchases made by
 the Commodity Credit Corporation under section 204 for a calendar year in
 excess of 5,000,000,000 pounds (milk equivalent, total milk solids basis).
 `(b) PROGRAM ELEMENTS- The dairy inventory management program shall include
 provisions to--
 `(1) provide greater stability and strength to market prices for milk
 by working toward an improved balance between production and consumption
 of milk;
 `(2) provide effective mechanisms (in addition to the reductions in prices
 required under section 204) to curb the production of milk exceeding
 overall market needs; and
 `(3) institute programs to facilitate the export of dairy products that
 are in excess supply domestically.
 `(c) USE OF BOARD TO OPERATE PROGRAM- The Board shall carry out the dairy
 inventory management program under rules issued by the Secretary.
 `(d) HANDLING OF EXCESS INVENTORY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Disposition of excess inventory under the dairy inventory
 management program shall be the responsibility of the Board. The Board
 shall determine, in consultation with the Secretary, the best methods by
 which to dispose of excess inventory to obtain a maximum return for the
 product without adversely affecting the domestic market for producers of
 milk. Such determination may include consideration of a diversion program and
 base determinations for handlers with reduction in prices paid to handlers.
 `(2) INVENTORY STOCKS- Excess inventory that becomes the responsibility
 of the Board under this section shall be identity-preserved.
 `(3) STORAGE AND HANDLING- The funds available to the Board may be used
 to cover the costs of storage and handling of excess inventory stocks,
 as well as to facilitate disposition of the inventory.
 `(e) DISPOSAL OF EXCESS INVENTORY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Board may orderly dispose of excess inventory under
 the dairy inventory management program only in export markets (using export
 sales and foreign donations) and through donations to domestic food programs.
 `(2) HOLDING STOCKS- The Board may hold stocks of excess inventory for as
 long as the Board determines necessary to maximize returns on disposition.
 `(3) DEPARTMENT RESOURCES- With the consent of the Secretary, the Board
 may use the resources of the Department of Agriculture (including those
 of the General Sales Manager) for activities under this subsection.
 `(4) COORDINATION- The Board shall maintain on-going coordination and
 consultations with the appropriate officials and agencies of the Department
 of Agriculture regarding export sales activities and donations under
 this subsection.
 `(5) PROCEEDS OF SALES- Proceeds of export sales made under this subsection
 shall be made available to reduce the amount of any needed reduction in
 the price received by producers under section 204. Any such reduction
 in the price received by producers in effect in 1995 shall be adjusted
 by the Secretary in July of 1995 to reflect estimated net proceeds of
 sales under this subsection that will become available before the end
 of 1995. Any net sales proceeds received or remaining after December 31,
 1995, shall revert to the Commodity Credit Corporation.
 `(f) DAIRY HEIFER EXPORTS-
 `(1) AUTHORITY OF THE BOARD- The Board may develop a dairy heifer export
 program to contract with producers to sell their dairy heifers for export.
 `(2) SAFEGUARDS- A dairy heifer export program developed under this
 subsection shall include safeguards to ensure that--
 `(A) all feasible steps are taken to minimize any adverse effect of the
 program on beef, pork, and poultry producers; and
 `(B) producers who sell their dairy heifers under the program do not replace
 such heifers during the five-year period beginning on the date of the sale.
 `(g) EXPORTS WITH INCENTIVES (CLASS IV)-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Board may establish and operate an export facilitation
 program as described in this subsection to move dairy products from
 nongovernmental stocks into the export market at market-clearing prices.
 `(2) PAYMENTS UNDER BID PROCESS- The export facilitation program shall
 provide for payments from funds available to the Board, on a bid basis,
 to any entity that sells for export United States dairy products. The Board
 shall have discretion to accept or reject bids under such criteria as the
 Board deems appropriate.
 `(3) SAFEGUARDS- The rules and conditions governing the export facilitation
 program shall ensure, among other things, that--
 `(A) payments may be made under the program only on the quantity of dairy
 products sold by an entity for export in any year that is in addition to,
 and not in place of, any export sales of dairy products that the entity
 would otherwise make in the absence of the program; and
 `(B) to the extent practicable, dairy products sold for export under the
 program will not displace commercial exports sales of the United States
 dairy products by other exporters.
 `(4) PAYMENTS- Payments under the export facilitation program shall be
 made in cash or in dairy products of equal value that are available to the
 Board. If payments are made in dairy products, the Board shall ensure that
 such products, or an equal amount of other dairy products, will be sold for
 export by the entity and that any such export sales by the entity will be
 in addition to, and not in place of, export sales of dairy products that
 the entity would otherwise make under the program or in the absence of
 the program, and, to the extent practicable, will not displace commercial
 export sales of United States dairy products by other exporters.
 `(5) PAYMENT RATE- Payments under the export facilitation program shall be
 made at a rate or rates (publicly announced through appropriate means) that--
 `(A) encourage the exportation of United States dairy products by entities;
 and
 `(B) take into consideration, among other things, the type of product to
 be exported, the domestic price of dairy products, and the world price of
 the dairy products.'.
SEC. 9. LIMITATION ON COMMODITY CREDIT CORPORATION ACQUISITION OF EXCESS
INVENTORY.
 Section 204 of the Agricultural Act of 1949 (7 U.S.C. 1446e) is further
 amended by redesignating subsection (k) as subsection (m) and inserting
 after subsection (j) the following new subsection:
 `(k) PURCHASES OF EXCESS INVENTORY-
 `(1) LIMITATION ON COMMODITY CREDIT CORPORATION PURCHASES- Except as provided
 in paragraphs (2) and (3), direct purchases of milk and the products of
 milk by the Commodity Credit Corporation under this section during any
 year for its account may not exceed 5,000,000,000 pounds (milk equivalent,
 total milk solids basis). Purchases of amounts in excess of 5,000,000,000
 pounds shall be the responsibility of the Board, through an agreement with
 the Commodity Credit Corporation under paragraph (3).
 `(2) EXCEPTION- The limitation contained in paragraph (1) shall not apply
 to any purchases in excess of 5,000,000,000 pounds during a year--
 `(A) which are needed to maintain the price of milk at the support level
 applicable to that year; and
 `(B) for which sufficient funds are not available for purchases from amounts
 representing any reductions in the price received by producers made under
 subsection (f) or (g) during that year or any previous year.
 `(3) CONTINUED COMMODITY CREDIT CORPORATION ACTIVITY- The Commodity Credit
 Corporation shall handle all purchases of milk and the products of milk
 necessary to maintain the price of milk at the support level that are
 made for the account of the Board under this Act and shall enter into an
 agreement with the Board for such purposes as soon as practicable after
 the establishment of the Board.'.
SEC. 10. LIMITATION ON STATE MILK PRICE SUPPORT PROGRAMS.
 Section 204 of the Agricultural Act of 1949 (7 U.S.C. 1446e) is further
 amended by inserting after subsection (k), as added by section 9, the
 following new subsection:
 `(l) LIMITATION ON SUPPORT PROVIDED BY STATES- The price of milk shall not
 be supported under this section in any State in which the State Government
 supports the price of milk by establishing minimum prices to be paid for
 milk or the products of milk in that State in excess of the price support
 rate in effect under this section.'.
SEC. 11. AMENDMENT TO MILK MARKETING ORDERS.
 (a) HEARING- Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of
 this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall conduct a hearing on an
 amendment to milk marketing orders issued pursuant to section 8c of the
 Agricultural Adjustment Act (7 U.S.C. 608c), reenacted with amendments by the
 Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937, to implement subsection 5(H)
 of such section (as amended by subsection (b)). The Secretary shall not
 conduct a referendum under paragraph (19) of such section among producers
 or processors regarding such amendment.
 (b) AMENDMENT- Section 8c(5) of the Agricultural Adjustment Act (7
 U.S.C. 608c(5)), reenacted with amendments by the Agricultural Marketing
 Agreement Act of 1937, is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (G), by striking `No' and inserting `Except as provided
 in paragraph (H), no'; and
 (2) by striking paragraph (H) and inserting the following new paragraph:
 `(H) An order issued pursuant to this section shall contain terms and
 conditions to require handlers of fluid milk subject to the order to market
 as class I milk for fluid use in the geographic area covered by the order
 only milk of the following qualities:
 `(i) Milk marketed as skim milk shall contain not less than 9 percent milk
 solids not fat.
 `(ii) Milk marketed as lowfat milk shall contain not less than 12 percent
 total milk solids.
 `(iii) Milk marketed as whole milk shall contain not less than 8.7 percent
 milk solids not fat.
The administrator of an order may test milk sold at the retail level in
the geographic area covered by the order to ensure compliance with this
paragraph. Violations shall be subject to the penalties provided in subsection
(14).'.
 (c) APPLICATION TO STATE MILK MARKETING ORDERS- The requirements of
 section 8c(5)(H) of the Agricultural Adjustment Act (7 U.S.C. 608c(5)(H)),
 reenacted with amendments by the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of
 1937, shall apply with regard to comparable milk marketed under State milk
 marketing orders.
SEC. 12. ESTABLISHMENT OF TRUSTS FOR THE PROTECTION OF MILK PRODUCERS AND
HANDLERS.
 (a) STATUTORY TRUST ESTABLISHED- Title II of the Packers and Stockyards Act,
 1921 (7 U.S.C. 191 et seq.), is amended--
 (1) by inserting after the heading of the title the following:
`Subtitle A--In General'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
`Subtitle B--Establishment of Trusts for Producers
`SEC. 211. STATUTORY TRUST ESTABLISHED FOR MILK.
 `(a) PROTECTION OF PUBLIC INTEREST FROM INADEQUATE FINANCING ARRANGEMENTS-
 `(1) FINDING- It is hereby found that a burden on commerce in milk and
 an obstruction to commerce in milk are caused by financing arrangements
 under which milk handlers encumber, give lenders a security interest in,
 or have liens placed on milk purchased or received by milk handlers or on
 inventories of milk, on receivables or proceeds from milk, or on products
 derived from milk when payment is not made for the milk. Such arrangements
 are contrary to the public interest.
 `(2) PURPOSE- This section is intended to remedy such burden on commerce in
 milk and obstruction to commerce in milk and to protect the public interest.
 `(b) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section:
 `(1) The term `milk' means cow's milk.
 `(2) The term `milk product' means any product or by-product from processing
 milk.
 `(3) The term `milk producer' means any person who produces milk.
 `(4) The term `milk handler' means any person who, in commerce, receives or
 otherwise acquires milk, processes or prepares milk, arranges for marketing
 milk, or markets milk.
 `(c) TRUSTS-
 `(1) MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS- All milk purchased or received by a milk
 handler, all inventories of milk or milk products, and all receivables
 or proceeds from milk or milk products, shall be held by the milk handler
 in trust for the benefit of all unpaid milk producers of the milk or milk
 products or unpaid milk handlers until full payment has been received by
 those producers and handlers.
 `(2) PAYMENTS FOR SALES- On receipt of a payment from the sale of milk or
 milk products, a milk handler subject to a trust under paragraph (1) for
 the benefit of unpaid milk producers or unpaid milk handlers shall hold
 in trust a sum of money equivalent to the amount owed to milk producers
 or milk handlers until those producers and handlers have received full
 payment of the purchase of the milk or milk product.
 `(3) PROPORTIONAL DISTRIBUTION- If the Secretary determines that the funds
 in the trust are insufficient to provide full payment to milk producers
 and milk handlers for whose benefit the trust is established, the milk
 handler subject to the trust shall distribute the funds in proportion to
 the amount then due to each unpaid producer or handler.
 `(4) ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES- Sections 203 and 204 (7 U.S.C. 193 and 194)
 shall apply with respect to a violation of this section by a milk handler
 subject to a trust under this section.
 `(d) EFFECT OF DISHONORED INSTRUMENTS- Payment shall not be considered to
 have been made if the milk producer or milk handler for whose benefit the
 trust is established receives from the milk handler subject to the trust
 a payment instrument which is dishonored.
 `(e) PRESERVATION OF TRUST BENEFITS BY MILK PRODUCER OR HANDLER- The
 unpaid milk producer or unpaid milk handler for whose benefit the trust
 is established shall lose the benefit of the trust if the producer or
 the handler has not preserved the trust established under this section
 by giving written notice to the milk handler subject to the trust and by
 filing such notice with the Secretary--
 `(1) within 30 days after the final date for making a payment for milk
 when a payment instrument has not been received; or
 `(2) within 15 business days after the producer or handler has received
 notice that the payment instrument promptly presented for payment has
 been dishonored.
 `(f) PAYMENT WHEN DUE- A milk handler subject to the trust shall pay for milk
 received from a milk producer or another milk handler when due according to
 the provisions prescribed by an applicable Federal milk marketing order,
 any applicable State payment requirement, or any additional provisions
 agreed on by both parties. Such an agreement between a milk producer or milk
 handler and a milk handler subject to the trust shall not be considered
 as an extension of credit unless the agreement expressly states that the
 producer or the handler agrees to extend credit to the handler.
 `(g) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 for a fiscal year such sums as may be necessary to administer this section.'.
 (b) RECORDS AND RESPONSIBILITY- Sections 401 and 403 The Packers and
 Stockyards Act, 1921 (7 U.S.C. 221 and 223), are amended by inserting `milk
 handler (as defined in section 211(b)),' after `any live poultry dealer,'.
 (c) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Section 203 of the Packers and Stockyards Act,
 1921 (7 U.S.C. 193), is amended by striking `title' in subsections (a)
 and (b) and inserting `subtitle'.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall take effect
 January 1, 1992.
SEC. 13. PREVENTION OF ADVERSE IMPACT OF DAIRY CATTLE SLAUGHTER ON BEEF
PRODUCERS.
 The Agricultural Act of 1949 (7 U.S.C. 1421 et seq.) is amended by inserting
 after section 204B, as added by section 8, the following new section:
`SEC. 204C. PREVENTION OF ADVERSE IMPACT OF INVENTORY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM ON
BEEF PRODUCERS.
 `(a) ESTIMATION OF DAIRY CATTLE SLAUGHTERING- An estimate under section
 204(e) of purchases of milk and the products of milk by the Commodity
 Credit Corporation for a calendar year shall include an estimate by the
 Secretary of the total number of dairy cattle that will be marketed for
 slaughter during that year.
 `(b) PREVENTION OF ADVERSE IMPACTS-
 `(1) OPERATION- This subsection shall apply only for calendar years in
 which an inventory management program is in effect under section 204B.
 `(2) PURCHASE- If the Secretary estimates under subsection (a) that the
 total number of dairy cattle to be marketed for slaughter during a calendar
 year will exceed the average annual number of dairy cattle culled during
 calendar years 1988 through 1990, the Secretary shall take such steps
 as may be necessary to offset the adverse price reductions of red meat
 caused by the excess marketing of dairy cattle through the purchase and
 distribution of red meat in addition to those quantities normally purchased
 and distributed by the Secretary.
 `(3) SPECIFIC USES- The Secretary may make meat purchased under this
 subsection available--
 `(A) to the Secretary of Defense, on a nonreimbursable basis, for use
 in commissaries on military installations located outside of the United
 States; or
 `(B) for export under the authority of any law in effect on or after the
 date of the enactment of this Act.
 `(c) FUNDS-
 `(1) AVAILABILITY- The Secretary of Agriculture may use funds available for
 the purposes of clause (2) of section 32 of the Act entitled `An Act to amend
 the Agricultural Adjustment Act, and for other purposes' (7 U.S.C. 612c),
 approved August 24, 1935 (including the contingency funds appropriated under
 that section), and other funds available to the Secretary under the commodity
 distribution and other nutrition programs of the Department of Agriculture
 (including funds available through the Commodity Credit Corporation) to
 carry out this section. Such purchases by the Secretary shall not reduce
 purchases of any other agricultural commodities under section 32 of such Act.
 `(2) FUNDING SHORTFALL- If the Secretary determines for a calendar year that
 funding sources specified in paragraph (1) are inadequate for sufficient
 purchases of red meat under subsection (b) to satisfy the purpose of
 such subsection, the Secretary shall notify the National Dairy Inventory
 Management Board of the amount of additional funds required to carry
 out such subsection. Upon notification, the Board shall provide these
 additional funds to the Secretary from funds available to the Board for
 inventory management activities under section 204B.
 `(d) OTHER EFFORTS- The Secretary of Defense, the heads of other Federal
 agencies, and State agencies to the maximum extent practicable, are
 encouraged to use increased quantities of red meat to meet the food needs
 of the programs that they administer.'.
SEC. 14. EFFECTIVE DATE AND RULES.
 (a) EFFECTIVE DATE- Except as provided in section 12(d), this Act and the
 amendments made by this Act shall take effect on the date of the enactment
 of this Act.
 (b) RULES- Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this
 Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall issue such rules as are necessary to
 implement the amendments made by this Act. Rules relating to the election of
 nominees for appointment by the Secretary to the National Dairy Inventory
 Management Board shall be issued not later than September 15, 1991. Rules
 regarding the trust established for milk under section 12 shall be issued
 not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.