[Congressional Bills 106th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 4893 Introduced in House (IH)]

106th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 H. R. 4893

To enhance the availability of capital and credit for all citizens and 
communities, to ensure that community reinvestment keeps pace as banks, 
 securities firms, and other financial service providers become 
affiliates as a result of the enactment of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, 
 and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 July 19, 2000

 Mr. Barrett of Wisconsin (for himself, Mr. Gutierrez, Mr. Coyne, Ms. 
Baldwin, Ms. Carson, Mr. Frank of Massachusetts, Mr. Brown of Ohio, Mr. 
 Lipinski, Mr. Rush, Mr. Hinchey, Mr. Doyle, Mr. Bonior, Mr. 
Blagojevich, Mr. Owens, Mrs. Meek of Florida, Mr. Filner, Mr. Davis of 
 Illinois, Ms. Jackson-Lee of Texas, Ms. McKinney, Mr. Brady of 
 Pennsylvania, Ms. Schakowsky, Ms. Stabenow, Mr. Capuano, Mr. Sanders, 
Mrs. Jones of Ohio, Ms. Norton, Mr. Towns, and Mr. Conyers) introduced 
the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Banking and 
Financial Services, and in addition to the Committee on Commerce, for a 
 period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for 
consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the 
 committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

To enhance the availability of capital and credit for all citizens and 
communities, to ensure that community reinvestment keeps pace as banks, 
 securities firms, and other financial service providers become 
affiliates as a result of the enactment of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, 
 and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Community 
Reinvestment Modernization Act of 2000''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings.
Sec. 3. Purposes.
 TITLE I--MODERNIZATION OF COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT ACT OF 1977 AND 
 COMMUNITY SERVICE OBLIGATIONS.

Sec. 101. Extension of community reinvestment obligations within a 
 financial holding company.
Sec. 102. Provisions relating to improved responsiveness of insured 
 depository institutions to Community 
 Reinvestment Act of 1977.
Sec. 103. Reduction of CRA rating due to predatory lending and other 
 negative credit practices.
Sec. 104. Responsiveness to community needs for securities and 
 investment services.
Sec. 105. Responsiveness to community needs for mortgages and mortgage 
 related services by mortgage banks.
Sec. 106. Responsiveness to community needs for insurance services.
Sec. 107. Satisfactory ratings required by securities company, mortgage 
 bank, and insurance company affiliates of 
 financial holding companies.
 TITLE II--DATA DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS

Subtitle A--Disclosure of Insurance Availability and Insurer Investment 
 Information

Sec. 201. Short title.
Sec. 202. Establishment of general requirements to submit information.
Sec. 203. Reporting of noncommercial insurance information.
Sec. 204. Reporting of rural insurance information.
Sec. 205. Waiver of reporting requirements.
Sec. 206. Reporting by private mortgage insurers.
Sec. 207. Reporting of information regarding investments by insurers.
Sec. 208. Submission of information to Secretary and maintenance of 
 information.
Sec. 209. Availability and access system.
Sec. 210. Designations.
Sec. 211. Enforcement.
Sec. 212. Exemption and relation to State laws.
Sec. 213. Regulations.
Sec. 214. Definitions.
Sec. 215. Effective date.
 Subtitle B--Improvements in Other Data Disclosure Requirements

Sec. 221. Improve small business and agriculture lending data 
 disclosure.
Sec. 222. Maintenance and disclosure of information by the Financial 
 Institutions Examination Counsel.
 TITLE III--REGULATORY AND STRUCTURAL REFORMS

Sec. 301. Antiredlining requirement for financial holding companies.
Sec. 302. Notice and public comment required before establishing a 
 financial holding company.
Sec. 303. Public meetings for bank acquisitions and mergers.
Sec. 304. CRA examination schedule for small banks.
Sec. 305. CRA sunshine requirements.
Sec. 306. Continuing community reinvestment requirement for financial 
 holding companies.
Sec. 307. Changes in reporting requirements under the Home Mortgage 
 Disclosure Act of 1975.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS.

 The Congress hereby finds as follows:
 (1) It is necessary to increase homeownership and small 
 business ownership for low- and moderate-income borrowers and 
 persons of color.
 (2) The United States has an overall homeownership rate of 
 66.7 percent, while Hispanic and African-American homeownership 
 rates are 46.2 percent and 46.9 percent respectively.
 (3) The homeownership rate in central cities is 50.3 
 percent, compared to 73.5 percent for the suburbs.
 (4) It is necessary to close the wealth gap in the United 
 States and to increase access to insurance products.
 (5) In 1998, the median net worth for Hispanic, African-
 American, Asian, and other minority families was $16,400, which 
 was 17.3 percent of the median net worth of $94,900 for 
 nonhispanic white families.
 (6) Families earning $10,000 to $25,000 had a median net 
 worth of $24,800 in 1998 but $31,000 in 1995.
 (7) Research conducted by the chief economist of the 
 National Association of Insurance Commissioners found that 
 after controlling for risk of loss, a 10 percentage point 
 increase in the number of minorities in a zip code is 
 associated with a 2 percentage point increase in the number of 
 ``FAIR plans'', which are government-sponsored insurance plans 
 of last resort for those who cannot obtain insurance in the 
 private market.
 (8) In order to increase access to credit, wealth and 
 insurance, it is necessary to modernize the Community 
 Reinvestment Act of 1977 to reflect shifting trends in the 
 financial services industry.
 (9) Currently, about 40 percent of the assets in the 
 financial industry reside in bank and thrifts and are covered 
 by the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977, down from about 60 
 percent in the early 1980s.

SEC. 3. PURPOSES.

 The purposes of this Act are as follows:
 (1) To enhance the availability of financial services to 
 citizens of all economic circumstances and in all geographic 
 areas.
 (2) To enhance the ability of financial institutions to 
 meet the capital and credit needs of all citizens and 
 communities, including underserved communities and populations.
 (3) To ensure that community reinvestment keeps pace with 
 the affiliation of banks, securities firms, and other financial 
 service providers, as provided by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act.

 TITLE I--MODERNIZATION OF COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT ACT OF 1977 AND 
 COMMUNITY SERVICE OBLIGATIONS.

SEC. 101. EXTENSION OF COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT OBLIGATIONS WITHIN A 
 FINANCIAL HOLDING COMPANY.

 Section 4(l) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 
1843(l)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Community needs.--
 ``(A) In general.--All nonbank affiliates of bank 
 holding companies that engage in lending or offer 
 banking products or services shall be subject to the 
Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 in accordance with this paragraph 
and in the same manner as a regulated financial institution (as defined 
in such Act) and the record of any such affiliate in meeting community 
credit, investment, and consumer needs shall be taken into account by 
the Federal regulatory agency with jurisdiction over the affiliate's 
bank holding company in the course of reviewing the activities of the 
bank holding company or any application by such affiliate.
 ``(B) Banking products and services defined.--For 
 purposes of this paragraph, the term `banking products 
 and services' includes--
 ``(i) insured deposits (as defined in 
 section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act) 
 and related deposit services;
 ``(ii) consumer loans and extensions of 
 credit and the servicing such loans and 
 extensions of credit;
 ``(iii) loans to purchase, refinance, 
 construct, improve, or repair domestic 
 residential housing or manufactured housing, 
 including single-family and multifamily 
 residential housing loans and home-equity 
 loans, and the servicing of such loans;
 ``(iv) small business and commercial loans 
 and the servicing of such loans; and
 ``(v) checking accounts, savings accounts, 
 and related accounts or instruments, including 
 accounts from which the owner may make 
 withdrawals by negotiable or transferable 
 instruments for the purpose of making payments 
 to third parties.''.

SEC. 102. PROVISIONS RELATING TO IMPROVED RESPONSIVENESS OF INSURED 
 DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS TO COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT ACT OF 
 1977.

 (a) Rating Required for Each State, Metropolitan Area, and Service 
Area.--Section 807(b)(1) of the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 (12 
U.S.C. 2906(b)(1)) is amended by striking subparagraph (B) and 
inserting the following new subparagraphs to read as follows:
 ``(B) Initial separate evaluation and rating for 
 state, metropolitan, other service areas required.--The 
 information required by clauses (i) and (ii) of 
 subparagraph (A) with respect to any regulated 
 financial institution shall be presented separately, 
 and an initial rating shall be determined separately, 
 for--
 ``(i) each metropolitan area in which the 
 regulated financial institution maintains 1 or 
 more domestic branches;
 ``(ii) each State in which the regulated 
 financial institution maintains 1 or more 
 domestic branches outside of a metropolitan 
 area; and
 ``(iii) each community in which the 
 regulated financial institution makes more than 
 0.5 percent of the total amount of loans.
 ``(C) Content of separate evaluation.--A written 
 evaluation to which subparagraph (B) applies shall 
 describe how the Federal financial supervisory agency 
 has performed the examination of the regulated 
 financial institution, including a list of the 
 individual domestic branches examined.
 ``(D) Low and high satisfactory ratings.--In 
 assigning ratings under subparagraphs (A) and (B), a 
 Federal financial supervisory agency may assign a 
 rating of `low satisfactory record of meeting community 
 credit needs' or `high satisfactory record of meeting 
 community credit needs' in lieu of the rating referred 
 to in paragraph (2)(B).''.
 (b) Additional Performance Factors.--Section 804(a)(1) of the 
Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 (12 U.S.C. 2903(a)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``and neighborhoods of different racial 
 characteristics'' after ``low- and moderate-income 
 neighborhoods''; and
 (2) By inserting ``, taking into account the institution's 
 share of the total amount of credit extended in neighborhoods 
 of different racial and income characteristics within such 
 community'' before the semicolon at the end.
 (c) Technical and Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 807(b)(1)(A)(iii) of the Community Reinvestment 
 Act of 1977 (12 U.S.C. 2906(b)(1)(A)(iii)) is amended--
 (A) by inserting ``overall'' after ``the 
 institution's''; and
 (B) by inserting ``, taking into account each of 
 the initial ratings determined under subparagraph (B) 
 for each State, metropolitan, and service area in which 
 the institution makes more than 0.5 percent of the 
 total amount of loans'' before the period at the end.
 (2) Section 807 of the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 
 (12 U.S.C. 2906) is amended--
 (A) by striking subsection (d); and
 (B) by redesignating subsection (e) as subsection 
 (d).

SEC. 103. REDUCTION OF CRA RATING DUE TO PREDATORY LENDING AND OTHER 
 NEGATIVE CREDIT PRACTICES.

 (a) In General.--Section 804 of the Community Reinvestment Act of 
1977 (12 U.S.C. 2903) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsections:
 ``(d) Treatment of Predatory Lending and Other Discriminatory 
Credit Practices.--In the case of a regulated financial institution, or 
affiliate of any such institution, which the appropriate Federal 
financial supervisory agency determines has engaged in any credit 
practice which has a negative impact on a community or neighborhood, 
such as predatory lending, or has engaged in any other lending practice 
or service in a manner which unlawfully discriminates against any 
person or against low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, the agency--
 ``(1) may not take any such practice or service into 
 account in assessing the institution's record of meeting the 
credit needs of its entire community; and
 ``(2) shall reduce the rating that would otherwise obtain 
 under section 807 with respect to such institution after 
 consideration of the extent of such negative or discriminatory 
 practice or service.
 ``(e) Maintenance of Certain Records.--For purposes of determining 
whether a regulated financial institution engages in any practice or 
service described in subsection (d), an appropriate Federal financial 
supervisory agency may require, by regulation, regulated financial 
institutions to maintain records of the terms and conditions of credit 
extended by the institution or the terms and conditions at which credit 
was offered even though no credit was extended.''.

SEC. 104. RESPONSIVENESS TO COMMUNITY NEEDS FOR SECURITIES AND 
 INVESTMENT SERVICES.

 (a) Affirmative Obligation.--The purpose of this section is to 
recognize that each securities company has, with respect to each 
community comprising an assessment area of such company, a continuing 
and affirmative obligation to meet the need for financial services in 
such communities, including the needs of low- and moderate-income 
neighborhoods and persons of modest means.
 (b) Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the following 
definitions shall apply:
 (1) Assessment area.--The term ``assessment area'' means, 
 with respect to a securities company, each community in which 
 such company--
 (A) maintains a retail office or is represented by 
 an agent; or
 (B) has not less than 0.5 percent of the total 
 market in securities.
 (2) Community development investment.--The term ``community 
 development investment'' means investment in activities that 
 revitalize and stabilize low- and moderate-income neighborhoods 
 and directly benefit low- and moderate-income individuals, 
 including investment in affordable housing, community services, 
 small-business development, and economic development.
 (3) Securities company.--The term ``securities company'' 
 means any person who is--
 (A) a broker or dealer that is registered under the 
 Securities Exchange Act of 1934;
 (B) a registered investment adviser, properly 
 registered by or on behalf of either the Securities and 
 Exchange Commission, with respect to the investment 
 advisory activities of such investment adviser and 
 activities incidental to such investment advisory 
 activities; or
 (C) an investment company that is registered under 
 the Investment Company Act of 1940.
 (c) Program.--
 (1) In general.--The Securities and Exchange Commission, in 
 consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, shall develop 
 a program to ensure that securities companies meet the 
 obligations described in subsection (a) and the requirements of 
 the program under this subsection.
 (2) Factors to be included.--
 (A) Customer evaluation.--The program shall 
 include, as appropriate, a method for evaluating a 
 securities company's record of helping to meet the 
 securities investment needs of its assessment area, 
 including--
 (i) the number and distribution of 
 customers throughout the community, including 
 low- and moderate-income neighborhoods and the 
 dollar amounts of the investments made by such 
 customers; and
 (ii) the extent to which the company has 
 adopted innovative and flexible marketing 
 methods, such as low minimum amounts to open 
 accounts and low transaction fees, that 
 facilitate the sale of securities to low- and 
 moderate-income customers.
 (B) Community development investments.--The program 
 shall include, as appropriate, a method for evaluating 
 a securities company's record of community development 
 investment in each assessment area, including--
 (i) the number and dollar amount of 
 community development investments in the 
 assessment area; and
 (ii) the responsiveness of the securities 
 company, through community development 
 investments, to the credit, capital, and 
 community development needs of the assessment 
 area, including low- and moderate-income 
 neighborhoods.
 (C) Performance.--The program shall include, as 
 appropriate, a method for evaluating a securities 
 company's record of providing access to securities 
 services in each assessment area, including--
 (i) the company's record of opening or 
 closing retail offices in the assessment area;
 (ii) the extent to which the securities 
 company has adopted effective alternate 
 marketing systems in low- and moderate-income 
 neighborhoods, such as providing the means for 
 low- and moderate-income individuals to gain 
 electronic access to the company at community 
 centers and similar locations in low- and 
 moderate-income neighborhoods; and
 (iii) the extent to which the securities 
 company has provided investment education and 
 other investment services, such as financial 
 counseling classes, in low- and moderate-income 
 neighborhoods in the assessment area.
 (3) Rating.--
 (A) In general.--The program shall provide for--
 (i) an evaluation and an initial rating of 
 the performance of each securities company in 
 meeting the obligation established under 
subsection (a) in each assessment area of the company; and
 (ii) an overall rating, based on the 
 initial ratings pursuant to clause (i) of the 
 overall achievement of the securities company 
 in meeting such obligation.
 (B) Treatment of investment practices with negative 
 impacts.--In the case of any securities company which 
 the Securities and Exchange Commission determines has 
 engaged in securities and investment practices which 
 have a negative impact on any assessment area of the 
 company or has otherwise engaged in any practice or 
 provided any service in a manner which unlawfully 
 discriminates against any person or against low- and 
 moderate-income neighborhoods, the Commission--
 (i) may not take any such practice into 
 account in assessing the extent to which such 
 company has met its obligation under subsection 
 (a); and
 (ii) shall reduce the rating that would 
 otherwise obtain under subparagraph (A) with 
 respect to such company, after considering the 
 extent of such negative or discriminatory 
 practice or service.''.
 (C) Maintenance of certain records.--For purposes 
 of determining whether a securities company engages in 
 any practice or service described in subparagraph (B), 
 the Securities and Exchange Commission may require, by 
 regulation, securities companies to maintain records of 
 the terms and conditions at which securities products 
 and services were provided by the company and the terms 
 and conditions at which such securities products or 
 services were offered by the company even though no 
 transaction occurred.
 (4) Consideration of securities company rating.--Whenever 
 the Commission considers an application to the Commission by a 
 securities company, the Securities and Exchange Commission 
 shall--
 (A) take into account the overall rating of the 
 securities company under this subsection;
 (B) provide opportunity for comment on such rating; 
 and
 (C) take into account changes in the community 
 reinvestment performance of such company since the last 
 overall rating and the likely future community 
 reinvestment performance of such company.
 (d) Release of Data.--Information collected by the Securities and 
Exchange Commission in connection with the program under subsection (c) 
shall be made publicly available by the Commission in a format similar 
to the format for public disclosure of information under the Home 
Mortgage Disclosure Act of 1975, as determined to be appropriate by the 
Commission.

SEC. 105. RESPONSIVENESS TO COMMUNITY NEEDS FOR MORTGAGES AND MORTGAGE 
 RELATED SERVICES BY MORTGAGE BANKS.

 (a) Affirmative Obligation.--Each mortgage bank shall have, with 
respect to each community comprising an assessment area of such 
mortgage bank, a continuing and affirmative obligation to meet the 
mortgage credit and mortgage service needs of such communities, 
including extensions of credit in low- and moderate-income 
neighborhoods of such communities.
 (b) Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the following 
definitions shall apply:
 (1) Assessment area.--The term ``assessment area'' means, 
 with respect to a mortgage bank, each community in which such 
 company--
 (A) maintains a retail office or is represented by 
 an agent; or
 (B) has not less than 0.5 percent of the total 
 market in housing-related loans.
 (2) Community development investment.--The term ``community 
 development investment'' means investment in activities that 
 revitalize and stabilize low- and moderate-income neighborhoods 
 and directly benefit low- and moderate-income individuals, 
 including investment in affordable housing, community services, 
 small-business development, and economic development.
 (3) Mortgage Bank.--The term ``mortgage bank'' means any 
 lender who does not accept deposits (as defined in section 3 of 
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Act) and originates housing-
 related loans.
 (4) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Housing and Urban Development.
 (c) Program.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation with the 
 Secretary of the Treasury, shall develop a program to ensure 
 that mortgage banks meet the obligations described in 
 subsection (a) and the requirements of the program under this 
 subsection.
 (2) Factors to be included.--
 (A) Customer evaluation.--The program shall 
 include, as appropriate, a method for evaluating a 
 mortgage bank's record of helping to meet the mortgage 
 credit and mortgage service needs of its assessment 
 area, including--
 (i) the number and distribution of 
 customers throughout the community, including 
 low- and moderate-income neighborhoods and the 
 dollar amounts of the mortgage credit extended 
 to such customers by the mortgage bank; and
 (ii) the extent to which the mortgage bank 
 has adopted innovative and flexible marketing 
 methods that facilitate the extension of 
 mortgage credit on a nondiscriminatory basis to 
 low- and moderate-income customers.
 (B) Community development investments.--The program 
 shall include, as appropriate, a method for evaluating 
 a mortgage bank's record of community development 
 investment in each assessment area, including--
 (i) the number and dollar amount of 
 community development investments in the 
 assessment area; and
 (ii) the responsiveness of the mortgage 
 bank, through community development 
 investments, to the credit, capital, and 
 community development needs of the assessment 
 area, including low- and moderate-income 
 neighborhoods.
 (C) Performance.--The program shall include, as 
 appropriate, a method for evaluating a mortgage bank's 
 record of providing access to mortgage credit and 
 mortgage services in each assessment area, including--
 (i) the bank's record of opening or closing 
 retail offices in the assessment area;
 (ii) the extent to which the mortgage bank 
 has adopted effective alternate marketing 
 systems in low- and moderate-income 
 neighborhoods, such as providing the means for 
 low- and moderate-income individuals to gain 
 electronic access to the mortgage bank at 
 community centers and similar locations in low- 
 and moderate-income neighborhoods;
 (iii) the extent to which the mortgage bank 
 has provided home purchaser and home owner 
 education and other counseling services, such 
 as financial counseling classes, in low- and 
 moderate-income neighborhoods in the assessment 
 area.
 (iv) the mortgage bank's market share in 
 neighborhoods of different racial and income 
 characteristics;
 (v) the number of applications received 
 from and loans made to minorities and low- and 
 moderate-income persons;
 (vi) a comparison of the rate at which the 
 mortgage bank rejects applications from 
 minority and white applicants; and
 (vii) any evidence of illegal 
 discriminatory credit practices, including 
 prescreening, or offering less favorable loan 
 products to applicants of different racial 
 backgrounds.
 (3) Rating.--
 (A) In general.--The program shall provide for--
 (i) an evaluation and an initial rating of 
 the performance of each mortgage bank in 
 meeting the obligation established under 
 subsection (a) in each assessment area of the 
 bank; and
 (ii) an overall rating, based on the 
 initial ratings pursuant to clause (i) of the 
 overall achievement of the mortgage bank in 
 meeting such obligation.
 (B) Treatment of credit practices with negative 
 impacts.--In the case of any mortgage bank which the 
 Secretary determines has engaged in credit practices 
 which have a negative impact on any individuals or any 
 assessment area of the company, such as prescreening or 
 predatory mortgage lending, or has otherwise engaged in 
 any practice or provided any service in a manner which 
 unlawfully discriminates against any person or against 
 low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, the 
 Commission--
 (i) may not take any such practice into 
 account in assessing the extent to which such 
 company has met its obligation under subsection 
 (a); and
 (ii) shall reduce the rating that would 
 otherwise obtain under subparagraph (A) with 
 respect to such company, after considering the 
 extent of such negative or discriminatory 
 practice or service.
 (C) Maintenance of certain records.--For purposes 
 of determining whether a mortgage bank engages in any 
 practice or service described in subparagraph (B), the 
 Secretary may require, by regulation, mortgage banks to 
 maintain records of the terms and conditions at which 
 mortgage loans and other services were provided by the 
 company and the terms and conditions at which such 
 mortgage loans and other products and services were 
 offered by the bank even though no transaction 
 occurred.
 (d) Consideration of Mortgage Bank's Rating.--
 (1) Review of rating.--On an annual basis or at such 
 shorter time-period as the Secretary may determine to be 
 appropriate, the Secretary shall--
 (A) review the overall rating of each mortgage bank 
 under this subsection;
 (B) provide opportunity for comment on such rating; 
 and
 (C) review changes in the community reinvestment 
 performance of such mortgage bank since the last 
 overall rating and the likely future community 
 reinvestment performance of such mortgage bank.
 (2) Notification of unsatisfactory performance.--If, in 
 conjunction with a review pursuant to paragraph (1), the 
 Secretary determines that a mortgage bank has failed to meet 
 the bank's obligations described in subsection (a) and the 
 requirements of the program under this subsection or failed to 
 make satisfactory improvements in meeting such obligations and 
 requirements, the Secretary shall notify the mortgage bank of 
 such determination, describing the conditions giving rise to 
 the notice.
 (3) Agreement to correct conditions required.--Not later 
 than 45 days after the date of receipt by a mortgage bank of a 
 notice given under paragraph (2) (or such additional period as 
 the Secretary may permit), the mortgage bank shall execute an 
 agreement with the Secretary to comply with the obligations and 
 requirements applicable to the mortgage bank under this 
 section.
 (4) Secretary may impose limitations.--Until the conditions 
 described in a notice to a mortgage bank under paragraph (2) 
 are corrected, the Secretary may impose such limitations on the 
 extent to which mortgage loans originated, held, or serviced by 
 such mortgage bank may be acquired by the Federal Home Mortgage 
 Corporation or the Federal National Mortgage Association as the 
 Secretary determines to be appropriate under the circumstances 
 and consistent with the purposes of this section.
 (5) Failure to correct.--If the conditions described in a 
 notice to a mortgage bank under paragraph (2) are not corrected 
 within 180 days after the date of receipt by the mortgage bank 
 of a notice under paragraph (2), the Secretary shall prohibit 
 the Federal Home Mortgage Corporation and the Federal National 
 Mortgage Association from acquiring any mortgage loan 
 originated, held, or serviced by such mortgage bank.
 (6) Consultation.--In taking any action under this 
 subsection, the Secretary shall consult with all relevant 
 Federal and State regulatory agencies and authorities.

SEC. 106. RESPONSIVENESS TO COMMUNITY NEEDS FOR INSURANCE SERVICES.

 (a) Affirmative Obligation.--The purpose of this section is to 
recognize that each insurance company has, with respect to each 
community comprising an assessment area of such company, a continuing 
and affirmative obligation to meet the need for insurance services in 
such communities, including the needs of low- and moderate-income 
neighborhoods and persons of modest means.
 (b) Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the following 
definitions shall apply:
 (1) Assessment area.--The term ``assessment area'' means, 
 with respect to an insurance company, each community in which 
 such company--
 (A) maintains a retail office or is represented by 
 an agent; or
 (B) has not less than 0.5 percent of the total 
 market in insurance.
 (2) Community development investment.--The term ``community 
 development investment'' means investment in activities that 
 revitalize and stabilize low- and moderate-income neighborhoods 
 and directly benefit low- and moderate-income individuals, 
 including investment in affordable housing, community services, 
 small-business development, and economic development.
 (3) Insurance company.--The term ``insurance company'' 
 includes any person engaged in the business of insurance to the 
 extent of such activities.
 (4) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Housing and Urban Development.
 (c) Program.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation with the 
 Secretary of the Treasury, shall develop a program to ensure 
 that insurance companies meet the obligations described in 
 subsection (a) and the requirements of the program under this 
 subsection.
 (2) Factors to be included.--
 (A) Customer evaluation.--The program shall 
 include, as appropriate, a method for evaluating an 
 insurance company's record of helping to meet the 
 insurance needs of its assessment area, including--
 (i) the number and distribution of 
 customers throughout the community, including 
 low- and moderate-income neighborhoods and the 
 dollar amounts of the insurance policies held 
 by such customers; and
 (ii) the extent to which the company has 
 adopted innovative and flexible marketing 
 methods that facilitate the sale of insurance 
 on a nondiscriminatory basis to low- and 
 moderate-income customers.
 (B) Community development investments.--The program 
 shall include, as appropriate, a method for evaluating 
 an insurance company's record of community development 
 investment in each assessment area, including--
 (i) the number and dollar amount of 
 community development investments in the 
 assessment area; and
 (ii) the responsiveness of the insurance 
 company, through community development 
 investments, to the credit, capital, and 
 community development needs of the assessment 
 area, including low- and moderate-income 
 neighborhoods.
 (C) Performance.--The program shall include, as 
 appropriate, a method for evaluating an insurance 
 company's record of providing access to insurance 
 services in each assessment area, including--
 (i) the company's record of opening or 
 closing retail offices or affiliating with 
 agents in the assessment area;
 (ii) the extent to which the insurance 
 company has adopted effective alternate 
 marketing systems in low- and moderate-income 
 neighborhoods, such as providing the means for 
 low- and moderate-income individuals to gain 
 electronic access to the company at community 
 centers and similar locations in low- and 
 moderate-income neighborhoods; and
 (iii) the extent to which the insurance 
 company has provided insurance education and 
 other insurance services, such as financial 
 counseling classes, in low- and moderate-income 
 neighborhoods in the assessment area.
 (3) Rating.--The program shall provide for--
 (i) an evaluation and an initial rating of 
 the performance of each insurance company in 
 meeting the obligation established under 
 subsection (a) in each assessment area of the 
 company; and
 (ii) an overall rating, based on the 
 initial ratings pursuant to clause (i) of the 
 overall achievement of the insurance company in 
 meeting such obligation.
 (B) Treatment of insurance practices with negative 
 impacts.--In the case of any insurance company which 
 the Secretary determines has engaged in practices which 
 have a negative impact on any assessment area of the 
 company or has otherwise engaged in any practice or 
 provided any service in a manner which unlawfully 
 discriminates against any person or against low- and 
 moderate-income neighborhoods, the Commission--
 (i) may not take any such practice into 
 account in assessing the extent to which such 
 company has met its obligation under subsection 
 (a); and
 (ii) shall reduce the rating that would 
 otherwise obtain under subparagraph (A) with 
 respect to such company after consideration of 
 the extent of such negative or discriminatory 
 practice or service.
 (C) Maintenance of certain records.--For purposes 
 of determining whether an insurance company engages in 
 any practice or service described in subparagraph (B), 
 the Secretary may require, by regulation, insurance 
 companies to maintain records of the terms and 
 conditions at which insurance products and services 
 were provided by the company and the terms and 
 conditions at which such insurance products or services 
 were offered by the company even though no transaction 
 occurred.
 (d) Consideration of Insurance Company's Rating.--
 (1) Review of rating.--On an annual basis or at such 
 shorter time-period as the Secretary may determine to be 
 appropriate, the Secretary shall--
 (A) review the overall rating of each insurance 
 company under this subsection;
 (B) provide opportunity for comment on such rating; 
 and
 (C) review changes in the community reinvestment 
 performance of such insurance company since the last 
 overall rating and the likely future community 
 reinvestment performance of such insurance company.
 (2) Notification of unsatisfactory performance.--If, in 
 conjunction with a review pursuant to paragraph (1), the 
 Secretary determines that an insurance company has failed to 
 meet the company's obligations described in subsection (a) and 
 the requirements of the program under this subsection or failed 
 to make satisfactory improvements in meeting such obligations 
 and requirements, the Secretary shall notify the insurance 
 company and each appropriate State insurance regulator of such 
 determination, describing the conditions giving rise to the 
 notice.
 (3) Agreement to correct conditions required.--Not later 
 than 45 days after the date of receipt by an insurance company 
 of a notice given under paragraph (2) (or such additional 
 period as the Secretary may permit), the insurance company 
 shall execute an agreement with the Secretary to comply with 
 the obligations and requirements applicable to the insurance 
 company under this section.
 (4) Secretary may impose limitations.--Until the conditions 
 described in a notice to an insurance company under paragraph 
 (2) are corrected, the Secretary may impose such limitations on 
 the extent to which mortgage loans secured by real property 
 insured by such insurance company may be acquired by the 
 Federal Home Mortgage Corporation or the Federal National 
 Mortgage Association as the Secretary determines to be 
 appropriate under the circumstances and consistent with the 
 purposes of this section.
 (5) Failure to correct.--If the conditions described in a 
 notice to a mortgage bank under paragraph (2) are not corrected 
 within 180 days after the date of receipt by the mortgage bank 
 of a notice under paragraph (2), the Secretary shall--
 (A) prohibit the Federal Home Mortgage Corporation 
 and the Federal National Mortgage Association from 
 acquiring any mortgage loan secured by real property 
 insured by such insurance company;
 (B) publish notice of such failure to correct in 
 the Federal Register; and
 (C) notify each appropriate State insurance 
 regulator of such failure to correct.
 (6) Consultation.--In taking any action under this 
 subsection, the Secretary shall consult with all relevant 
 Federal and State regulatory agencies and authorities.

SEC. 107. SATISFACTORY RATINGS REQUIRED BY SECURITIES COMPANY, MORTGAGE 
 BANK, AND INSURANCE COMPANY AFFILIATES OF FINANCIAL 
 HOLDING COMPANIES.

 (a) In General.--Section 4(l)(1) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 
1956 (12 U.S.C. 1843(l)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (B);
 (2) by redesignating subparagraph (C) as subparagraph (F); 
 and
 (3) by inserting after subparagraph (B) the following new 
 subparagraphs:
 ``(C) all of the securities company affiliates of 
 the bank holding company have a satisfactory rating of 
 meeting community needs under section 104 of the 
 Community Reinvestment Modernization Act of 2000;
 ``(D) all of the mortgage bank affiliates of the 
 bank holding company have a satisfactory rating of 
 meeting community needs under section 105 of the 
 Community Reinvestment Modernization Act of 2000;
 ``(E) all of the insurance company affiliates of 
 the bank holding company have a satisfactory rating of 
 meeting community needs under section 106 of the 
Community Reinvestment Modernization Act of 2000; and''.
 (b) Technical and Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 5(a) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 
 (12 U.S.C. 1844(a)) is amended by striking ``section 
 4(l)(1)(C)'' and inserting ``section 4(l)(1)(F)''.
 (2) Section 8(c)(3)(A) of the International Banking Act of 
 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3106(c)(3)(A)) is amended by striking ``section 
 4(l)(1)(C)'' and inserting ``section 4(l)(1)(F)''.

 TITLE II--DATA DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS

Subtitle A--Disclosure of Insurance Availability and Insurer Investment 
 Information

SEC. 201. SHORT TITLE.

 This title may be cited as the ``Insurance Disclosure Act''.

SEC. 202. ESTABLISHMENT OF GENERAL REQUIREMENTS TO SUBMIT INFORMATION.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development 
shall, by regulation, establish requirements for insurers to compile 
and submit information to the Secretary for each annual reporting 
period, in accordance with this title.
 (b) Consultation.--In establishing the requirements for the 
submission of information under this title, the Secretary shall consult 
with Federal agencies having appropriate expertise, the National 
Association of Insurance Commissioners, State insurance regulators, 
statistical agents, representatives of small businesses, 
representatives of insurance agents (including minority insurance 
agents), representatives of property and casualty insurers, and 
community, consumer, and civil rights organizations, as appropriate.

SEC. 203. REPORTING OF NONCOMMERCIAL INSURANCE INFORMATION.

 (a) In General.--The requirements established pursuant to section 
202 to carry out this section shall--
 (1) be designed to ensure that information is submitted and 
 compiled under this section as may be necessary to permit 
 analysis and comparison of--
 (A) the availability and affordability of insurance 
 coverage and the quality or type of insurance coverage, 
 by census tract, including low- and moderate-income 
 neighborhoods, and the race and gender of 
 policyholders; and
 (B) the location of the principal place of business 
 of insurance agents and the race of such agents, and 
 the location of the principal place of business of 
 insurance agents terminated and the race of such 
 agents, by census tract, including low- and moderate-
 income neighborhoods; and
 (2) specify the data elements required to be reported under 
 this section and require uniformity in the definitions of the 
 data elements.
 (b) Insurers.--
 (1) Aggregate information.--The regulations issued under 
 section 203 shall require that each insurer for a designated 
 line of insurance under subparagraph (A) or (B) of section 
 210(a)(1) shall compile and submit to the Secretary, for each 
 annual reporting period--
 (A) the total number of policies issued in such 
 line, total exposures covered by such policies, and 
 total amount of premiums for such policies, by 
 designated line and by census tract, including low- and 
 moderate-income neighborhoods, in which the insured 
 risk is located;
 (B) the total number of cancellations and 
 nonrenewals (expressed in terms of policies or 
 exposures, as determined by the Secretary), by 
 designated line and by census tract, including low- and 
 moderate-income neighborhoods, in which the insured 
 risk is located;
 (C) the total number and racial characteristics 
 of--
 (i) licensed agents of such insurer selling 
 insurance in the designated line, by census 
 tract, including low- and moderate-income 
 neighborhoods, in which the agent's principal 
 place of business is located; and
 (ii) such agents who were terminated by the 
 insurer, by census tract in which the agent's 
 principal place of business was located; and
 (D) for such designated line of insurance, 
 information that will enable the Secretary to assess 
 the aggregate loss experience for the insurer, by 
 census tract, including low- and moderate-income 
 neighborhoods, in which the insured risk is located.
 (2) Specification of information for itemized disclosure.--
 (A) In general.--The regulations issued under 
 section 202 regarding annual reporting requirements for 
 insurers for a designated line of insurance under 
 subparagraph (A) or (B) of section 210(a)(1) shall, 
 with respect to policies issued under the designated 
 line or exposure units covered by such policies, as 
 determined by the Secretary--
 (i) specify the data elements that shall be 
 submitted;
 (ii) provide for the submission of 
 information on an individual insurer basis;
 (iii) provide for the submission of the 
 information with the least burden on insurers, 
 particularly small insurers, and insurance 
 agents;
 (iv) take into account existing statistical 
 reporting systems in the insurance industry;
 (v) require reporting by census tract, 
 including low- and moderate-income 
 neighborhoods, in which the insured risk is 
 located;
 (vi) provide for the submission of 
 information that--
 (I) identifies the designated line, 
 and subline or coverage type; and
 (II) where applicable, 
 distinguishes between the type of 
 policy under each such subline or 
 coverage type that provides full 
 replacement cost and all other bases 
 for computing claims, such as actual 
 cash value and fair market value;
 (vii) provide for the submission of 
 information that distinguishes policies written 
 in a residual market from policies written in 
 the voluntary market;
 (viii) specify--
 (I) whether information shall be 
 submitted on the basis of policy or 
 exposure unit; and
 (II) whether information, when 
 submitted, shall be aggregated by like 
 policyholders with like policies, 
 except that the Secretary shall not 
 permit such aggregation if it will 
 adversely affect the accuracy of the 
 information reported;
 (ix) in addition to reporting approvals, 
 provide for the submission of information 
 regarding the number of denials, cancellations, 
 and nonrenewals of policies under the 
 designated line by census tract in which the 
 insured risk is located, by race, gender, and 
 income of the policyholder (if known to the 
 insurer), and by whether the policy was issued 
 in a voluntary or residual market; and
 (x) provide for the submission of 
 information on the racial characteristics, 
 gender, and income levels of policyholders at 
 the level of detail comparable to that required 
 by the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act of 1975 
 (and the regulations issued thereunder).
 (B) Rules regarding obtaining racial information.--
 (i) Writing requirement.--The information 
 specified in subparagraph (A)(x) relating to 
 the racial characteristics of applicants for, 
 and policyholders of, insurance shall be 
 obtained only in accordance with the procedures 
 for requesting and recording racial information 
 established in Regulation C of the Board of 
 Governors of the Federal Reserve System under 
 the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act of 1975, as in 
 effect on the date of the enactment of this 
 Act.
 (ii) Notice of voluntary nature of 
 question.--Any such written question shall 
 clearly indicate that a response to the 
 question is voluntary on the part of the 
 applicant or policyholder, but encouraged, and 
 that the information is being requested by the 
 Federal Government to monitor the availability 
 and affordability of insurance.
 (iii) Provision of information by agent or 
 insurer.--If an applicant for, or policyholder 
 of, insurance declines to provide such 
 information, the agent or insurer for such 
 insurance may provide such information.
 (3) Rule for reporting by insurers.--An insurer for a 
 designated line shall submit--
 (A) information required under subparagraphs (A), 
 (B), and (D) of paragraph (1) and information required 
 pursuant to paragraph (2), for risks insured under such 
 line that are located within each census tract any part 
 of which is located in a State for which the insurer is 
 offering the designated line; and
 (B) information required under paragraph (1)(C) for 
 agents within such census tracts.

SEC. 204. REPORTING OF RURAL INSURANCE INFORMATION.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall, by regulation, establish 
requirements for insurers to annually compile and submit to the 
Secretary information concerning the availability, affordability, and 
quality or type of insurance in rural areas and to small businesses.
 (b) Content.--The regulations under this section shall provide that 
the information compiled and submitted under this section shall be 
compiled and submitted on the basis of each census tract in which the 
insured risks are located.

SEC. 205. WAIVER OF REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) Waiver for States Collecting Equivalent Information.--
 (1) Authority.--Subject to the requirements under this 
 section, the Secretary shall provide, by regulation, for the 
 waiver of the applicability of the provisions of sections 203 
 and 204 for each insurer transacting business within a State 
 referred to in paragraph (2), but only with respect to 
 information required to be submitted under such sections that 
 relates to agents or insured risks located in the State.
 (2) Requirements.--The Secretary may make a waiver pursuant 
 to paragraph (1) only with respect to a State that the 
 Secretary determines has in effect a law or other requirement 
 that--
 (A) requires insurers to submit to the State 
 information that is at least the same or equivalent to 
 the information that is required to be submitted to the 
 Secretary pursuant to sections 203 and 204;
 (B) provides for adequate enforcement of such law 
 or other requirements; and
 (C) provides for the same annual reporting period 
 used by the Secretary under this title and for 
 submission of the information to the Secretary in a 
 timely fashion, as determined by the Secretary.
 (3) Duration.--A waiver pursuant to paragraph (1) may 
 remain in effect only during the period for which the State law 
 or other requirement required under paragraph (2) remains in 
 effect.
 (b) Multiple-State Areas.--In the case of any census tract that 
contains area within (1) any State for which a waiver has been made 
pursuant to subsection (a), and (2) any State for which such a waiver 
has not been made, the provisions of this title requiring submission of 
information to the Secretary regarding such tract or area shall be 
considered to apply only to the portion that is located within the 
State for which such a waiver has not been made.
 (c) Authority for Secretary To Obtain Information Directly From 
Insurers.--If the State for which a waiver has been made pursuant to 
subsection (a) does not submit to the Secretary the information 
required under subsection (a)(2)(A) or submits information that is not 
complete, the Secretary shall require the insurers transacting business 
within the State to submit such information directly to the Secretary.

SEC. 206. REPORTING BY PRIVATE MORTGAGE INSURERS.

 (a) HMDA Reporting.--On an annual basis, the Financial Institutions 
Examination Council shall determine the extent to which each insurer 
providing private mortgage insurance is making available to the public 
and submitting to the appropriate agency information regarding such 
insurance that is equivalent to the information regarding mortgages 
required to be reported under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act of 1975.
 (b) Reporting Under This Title.--
 (1) Certification of noncompliance.--If, for any annual 
 period referred to in subsection (a), such Council determines 
 that any insurer providing private mortgage insurance is not 
 making available to the public or submitting the information 
 referred to in subsection (a) or that the information made 
 available or submitted is not equivalent information as 
 described in subsection (a), then the Council shall notify the 
 insurer of such noncompliance. If, after the expiration of a 
 reasonable period of time, the insurer has not remedied such 
 noncompliance to the satisfaction of the Council, then the 
 Council shall immediately certify such noncompliance to the 
 Secretary.
 (2) Requirement.--Upon the receipt of a certification under 
 paragraph (1), the Secretary shall, by order, require such 
 insurer to submit to the Secretary information regarding such 
 insurance that complies with the provisions of section 203 that 
 are applicable to such insurance.

SEC. 207. REPORTING OF INFORMATION REGARDING INVESTMENTS BY INSURERS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development 
shall, by regulation, require that each insurer that makes an 
investment in a property or business shall compile and submit to the 
Secretary for each annual reporting period, the following information:
 (1) Direct loans.--
 (A) Commercial real estate loans.--The total number 
 of loans for the purchase of commercial real estate 
 made by the insurer, the aggregate amount of such 
 loans, and the amount of each such loan, by census 
 tract, including low- and moderate-income 
 neighborhoods, in which the real estate for which the 
 loan was made is located.
 (B) Single-family mortgages.--The total number of 
 mortgage loans for the purchase of 1- to 4-family 
 dwellings made by the insurer, the aggregate amount of 
 such loans, and the amount of each such loan, by census 
 tract, including low- and moderate-income 
 neighborhoods, in which the dwelling for which the loan 
 was made is located, which information shall be 
 disaggregated by racial characteristics, income level, 
 and gender of the borrower under the loan.
 (C) Commercial and industrial loans.--The total 
 number of commercial and industrial loans made by the 
 insurer, the aggregate amount of such loans, and the 
 amount of each such loan, by census tract, including 
 low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, in which the 
 property or business involved in the loan is located, 
 which information shall be disaggregated by the size of 
 business of the borrower under the loan and by the 
 ownership characteristic of the business, which shall 
 be classified as either minority-owned, women-owned, or 
 otherwise-owned.
 (2) Loan purchases.--
 (A) Commercial real estate loans.--The total number 
 of loans for the purchase of commercial real estate 
 purchased by the insurer, the aggregate amount of such 
 loans, and the amount of each such loan, by census 
 tract, including low- and moderate-income 
 neighborhoods, in which the real estate for which the 
 loan was made is located.
 (B) Single-family mortgages.--The total number of 
 mortgage loans for the purchase of 1- to 4-family 
 dwellings purchased by the insurer, the aggregate 
 amount of such loans, and the amount of each such loan, 
 by census tract, including low- and moderate-income 
 neighborhoods, in which the dwelling for which the loan 
 was made is located, which information shall be 
 disaggregated by racial characteristics, income level, 
 and gender of the borrower under the loan.
 (C) Commercial and industrial loans.--The total 
 number of commercial and industrial loans purchased by 
 the insurer, the aggregate amount of such loans, and 
 the amount of each such loan, by census tract, 
 including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, in 
 which the property or business involved in the loan is 
 located, which information shall be disaggregated by 
 the size of business of the borrower under the loan and 
 by the ownership characteristic of the business, which 
 shall be classified as either minority-owned, women-
 owned, or otherwise-owned.
 (3) Other investments.--For such other investments made by 
 the insurer as the Secretary may designate pursuant to 
 subsection (b), the total number of such investments, the 
 aggregate amount of such investments, and the amount of each 
 such investment, by census tract, including low- and moderate-
 income neighborhoods, in which the property or business 
involved in the investment is located, as determined by the Secretary, 
which information shall be disaggregated by the size of business of the 
borrower under the loan and by the ownership characteristic of the 
business, which shall be classified as either minority-owned, women-
owned, or otherwise-owned.
 (b) Designation of Other Investments.--
 (1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a)(3), the 
 Secretary may designate activities and investments other than 
 the investments described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of 
 subsection (a) for which insurers shall compile and submit 
 information under this section.
 (2) Requirement.--In making designations under this 
 subsection, the Secretary shall designate (A) activities and 
 investments that significantly benefit low- and moderate-income 
 families and persons, small businesses in distressed 
 communities, or minority- or women-owned businesses, and (B) 
 activities and investments that contribute to the creation of 
 jobs and economic development of distressed communities.
 (3) Considerations.--The Secretary shall specifically 
 consider for designation under this subsection investments in 
 community development financial institutions, community 
 development corporations, State-issued bonds, and securities 
 backed by State development funds.
 (c) Size of Business.--The Secretary shall, by regulation, 
establish various categories of the sizes of businesses, for purposes 
of disaggregating information under paragraphs (1)(C), (2)(C), and (3) 
of subsection (a) by various sizes of businesses.

SEC. 208. SUBMISSION OF INFORMATION TO SECRETARY AND MAINTENANCE OF 
 INFORMATION.

 (a) Period of Maintenance.--Each insurer required by this title to 
compile and submit information to the Secretary shall maintain such 
information for the 3-year period beginning upon the conclusion of the 
annual reporting period to which such information relates. The 
Secretary shall maintain any information submitted to the Secretary for 
such period as the Secretary considers appropriate and feasible to 
carry out the purposes of this title and to allow for historical 
analysis and comparison of the information.
 (b) Submission.--The Secretary shall issue regulations prescribing 
a standard schedule (taking into consideration the provisions of 
section 209(a)), format, and method for submitting information under 
this title to the Secretary. The format and method of submitting the 
information shall facilitate and encourage the submission in a form 
readable by a computer. Any insurer submitting information to the 
Secretary may submit in writing to the Secretary any additional 
information or explanations that the insurer considers relevant to the 
decision by the insurer to sell insurance.

SEC. 209. AVAILABILITY AND ACCESS SYSTEM.

 (a) Availability to Public.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall maintain and make 
 available to the public, in accordance with the requirements of 
 this section, any information submitted to the Secretary under 
 this title and any information compiled by the Secretary under 
 this title.
 (2) Timing.--The Secretary shall make such information 
 publicly available on a timetable determined by the Secretary, 
 but not later than 9 months after the conclusion of the annual 
 reporting period to which the information relates, except that 
 such information shall not be made available to the public 
 until it is available in its entirety unless not all the 
 information required to be reported is available by such date.
 (b) Public Access System.--
 (1) Implementation.--The Secretary shall implement a system 
 to facilitate access to any information required to be made 
 available to the public under this title.
 (2) Bases of availability.--The system shall provide access 
 in the following manners:
 (A) Access to itemized information.--With respect 
 to information submitted under by insurers, on the 
 basis of the insurer submitting the information, on the 
 basis of the census tract, including low- and moderate-
 income neighborhoods, and on any other basis the 
 Secretary considers feasible and appropriate.
 (B) Access to aggregate information.--With respect 
 to aggregate information compiled by the Secretary, on 
 the basis of (i) the insurer submitting the 
 information, and (ii) the census tract, including low- 
 and moderate-income neighborhoods, and on any other 
 basis the Secretary considers feasible and appropriate.
 (c) Protections Regarding Loss Information.--
 (1) Prohibition of disclosure of loss information.--
 Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, the 
 Secretary may not make available to the public or otherwise 
 disclose any information submitted under this title regarding 
 the amount or number of claims paid by any insurer, the amount 
 of losses of any insurer, or the loss experience for any 
 insurer, except (A) in the form of a loss ratio (expressing the 
 relationship of claims paid to premiums) made available or 
 disclosed in compliance with the provisions of paragraph (2), 
 or (B) as provided in paragraph (3).
 (2) Protection of identity of insurer.--In making available 
 to the public or otherwise disclosing a loss ratio for an 
 insurer--
 (A) the Secretary may not identify the insurer to 
 which the loss ratio relates; and
 (B) the Secretary may disclose the loss ratio only 
 in a manner that does not allow any party to determine 
 the identity of the specific insurer to which the loss 
 ratio relates, except parties having access to 
 information under paragraph (3).
 (3) Confidentiality of information disclosed to 
 governmental agencies.--The Secretary may make information 
 referred to in paragraph (1) and the identity of the specific 
 insurer to which such information relates available to any 
Federal entity and any State agency responsible for regulating 
insurance in a State and may otherwise disclose such information to any 
such entity or agency, but only to the extent such entity or agency 
agrees not to make any such information available or disclose such 
information to any other person.

SEC. 210. DESIGNATIONS.

 (a) Designation of Lines of Insurance.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall, by regulation, 
 designate lines of insurance as designated lines for purposes 
 of this title, as follows:
 (A) Automobile.--The Secretary shall designate 
 private passenger automobile insurance and shall also 
 designate any sublines and coverage types of private 
 passenger automobile insurance that the Secretary 
 considers appropriate to determine and compare the 
 availability, affordability, and type of coverage in 
 such line among applicable regions.
 (B) Noncommercial insurance for residential 
 property.--The Secretary shall designate homeowners 
 insurance and dwelling fire and allied lines, and shall 
 distinguish the coverage types in such lines by the 
 perils covered and by market or replacement value. For 
 purposes of this title, homeowners insurance shall not 
 include any renters coverage or coverage for the 
 personal property of a condominium owner.
 (2) Report.--At any time the Secretary determines that any 
 line of insurance not described in paragraph (1) should be a 
 designated line because disparities in coverage provided under 
 such line exist among geographic areas having different income 
 levels or racial composition, the Secretary shall submit a 
 report recommending designating such line of insurance as a 
 designated line for purposes of this title to the Committee on 
 Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives and the appropriate Committees of the Senate.
 (3) Duration.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B), the Secretary shall make the designations under 
 this subsection once every 5 years, by regulation, and 
 each line and subline or coverage type designated under 
 such regulations shall be designated for each of the 
 first 5 successive annual reporting periods occurring 
 after issuance of the regulations.
 (B) Alteration.--During any 5-year period referred 
 to in subparagraph (A) in which designations are in 
 effect, the Secretary may amend or revise the 
 designated lines, sublines, and coverage types only by 
 regulation and only in accordance with the requirements 
 of this subsection. Such regulations amending or 
 revising designations shall apply only to annual 
 reporting periods beginning after the expiration of the 
 6-month period beginning on the date of issuance of the 
 regulations.
 (b) Timing of Designations.--The Secretary shall make the 
designations required by subsection (a)(3)(A) and notify interested 
parties during the 6-month period ending 6 months before the 
commencement of the first annual reporting period to which such 
designations apply.
 (c) Obtaining Information.--The Secretary may require insurers to 
submit to the Secretary such information as the Secretary considers 
necessary to make designations specifically required under this title. 
The Secretary may not require insurers to submit any information under 
this subsection that relates to any line of insurance not specifically 
authorized to be designated pursuant to this title or that is to be 
used solely for the purpose of a report under subsection (a)(2).

SEC. 211. ENFORCEMENT.

 (a) Civil Penalties.--Any insurer who is determined by the 
Secretary, after providing opportunity for a hearing on the record, to 
have violated any requirement pursuant to this title shall be subject 
to a civil penalty of not to exceed $5,000 for each day during which 
such violation continues.
 (b) Injunction.--The Secretary may bring an action in an 
appropriate United States district court for appropriate declaratory 
and injunctive relief against any insurer who violates the requirements 
referred to in subsection (a).
 (c) Insurer Liability.--An insurer shall be responsible under 
subsections (a) and (b) for any violation of a statistical agent acting 
on behalf of the insurer.

SEC. 212. EXEMPTION AND RELATION TO STATE LAWS.

 (a) Exemption for United States Programs.--Reporting shall not be 
required under this title with respect to insurance provided by any 
program underwritten or administered by the United States.
 (b) Relation to State Laws.--This title shall not be construed as 
annulling, altering, or affecting the laws of any State or any 
political subdivision of a State relating to public disclosure, 
submission of information, and recordkeeping or exempting any insurer 
subject to this title from any obligation under, or an obligation to 
comply with, any such law.

SEC. 213. REGULATIONS.

 (a) Authorization.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall issue any 
 regulations required under this title and any other 
 regulations that may be necessary to carry out this 
 title.
 (2) Substantive regulations.--The regulations shall be 
 issued in accordance with the procedures under section 553 of 
 title 5, United States Code, for substantive regulations.
 (3) Effective date.--Except as otherwise provided in this 
 title, such final regulations shall be issued before the end of 
 the 18-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of 
 this Act.
 (b) Burdens.--In prescribing such regulations, the Secretary shall 
take into consideration the administrative, paperwork, and other 
burdens on insurance agents, including independent insurance agents, 
involved in complying with the requirements of this title and shall 
minimize the burdens imposed by such requirements with respect to such 
agents.

SEC. 214. DEFINITIONS.

 For purposes of this subtitle, the following definitions shall 
apply:
 (1) Agent.--The term ``agent''--
 (A) means, with respect to an insurer, an agent 
 licensed by a State who sells property and casualty 
 insurance; and
 (B) includes agents who are employees of the 
 insurer, agents who are independent contractors working 
 exclusively for the insurer, and agents who are 
 independent contractors appointed to represent the 
 insurer on a nonexclusive basis.
 (2) Commercial insurance.--The term ``commercial 
 insurance'' means any line of property and casualty insurance, 
 except private passenger automobile, homeowner's insurance and 
 dwelling fire and allied lines, and other personal lines of 
 insurance.
 (3) Designated line.--The term ``designated line'' means a 
 line of insurance or bid, performance, and payment bonds 
 designated by the Secretary under section 210(a).
 (4) Exposures.--The term ``exposures'' means, for purposes 
 of section 203, with respect to an insurance policy, an 
 expression of an exposure unit covered under the policy 
 compared to the duration of the policy (pursuant to standards 
 established by the Secretary for uniform reporting of 
 exposures).
 (5) Exposure units.--The term ``exposure units'' means, for 
 purposes of section 203, an automobile or dwelling covered 
 under an insurance policy for private passenger automobile or 
 homeowners or dwelling fire and allied lines coverage.
 (6) Insurance.--The term ``insurance'' means property and 
 casualty insurance. Such term includes primary insurance, 
 surplus lines insurance, and any other arrangement for the 
 shifting and distributing of risks that is determined to be 
 insurance under the law of any State in which the insurer or 
 insurer group engages in an insurance business.
 (7) Insurer.--The term ``insurer''
 (A) means any corporation, association, society, 
 order, firm, company, mutual, partnership, individual, 
 aggregation of individuals, or any other legal entity 
 that is authorized to transact the business of property 
 or casualty insurance in any State or that is engaged 
 in a property or casualty insurance business; and
 (B) does not include an individual or entity which 
 represents an insurer as agent solely for the purpose 
 of selling or which represents a consumer as a broker 
 solely for the purpose of buying insurance.
 (8) Issued.--The term ``issued'' means, with respect to an 
 insurance policy, newly issued or renewed.
 (9) Joint underwriting association.--The term ``joint 
 underwriting association'' means an unincorporated association 
 of insurers established to provide a particular form of 
 insurance to the public.
 (10) Mortgage insurance.--The term ``mortgage insurance'' 
 means insurance against the nonpayment of, or default on, a 
 mortgage or loan for residential or commercial property.
 (11) Private mortgage insurance.--The term ``private 
 mortgage insurance'' means mortgage insurance other than 
 mortgage insurance made available under the National Housing 
 Act, title 38 of the United States Code, or title V of the 
 Housing Act of 1949.
 (12) Property and casualty insurance.--The term ``property 
 and casualty insurance''--
 (A) means insurance against loss of or damage to 
 property, insurance against loss of income or extra 
 expense incurred because of loss of, or damage to, 
 property, and insurance against third party liability 
 claims caused by negligence or imposed by statute or 
 contract; and
 (B) does not include workers' compensation, 
 professional liability, or title insurance.
 (13) Residual market.--The term ``residual market''--
 (A) means an assigned risk plan, joint underwriting 
 association, or any similar mechanism designed to make 
 insurance available to those unable to obtain it in the 
 voluntary market; and
 (B) includes each statewide plan under part A of 
 title XII of the National Housing Act to assure fair 
 access to insurance requirements.
 (14) Rural area.--The term ``rural area'' means any area 
 that--
 (A) has a population of 10,000 or more;
 (B) has a continuous boundary; and
 (C) contains only areas that are rural areas, as 
 such term is defined in section 520 of the Housing Act 
 of 1949 (except that clause (3)(B) of such section 520 
 shall not apply for purposes of this title).
 (15) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Housing and Urban Development.
 (16) State.--The term ``State'' means any State, the 
 District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the 
 Northern Mariana Islands, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, 
 and the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.

SEC. 215. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 The requirements of this title relating to reporting of information 
by insurers shall take effect with respect to the first annual 
reporting period that begins more than 36 months after the date of the 
enactment of this Act.

 Subtitle B--Improvements in Other Data Disclosure Requirements

SEC. 221. IMPROVE SMALL BUSINESS AND AGRICULTURE LENDING DATA 
 DISCLOSURE.

 (a) Reporting Requirements.--Section 806 of the Community 
Reinvestment Act of 1977 (12 U.S.C. 2905) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(a) In General.--'' after ``Sec. 806.''; 
 and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(b) Regulatory Exemptions From Reporting Requirements.--
 ``(1) Prohibition on regulatory exemptions from certain 
 reporting requirements.--No provision of this title may be 
 construed as authorizing the Board or any other Federal agency 
 to exempt any depository institution from the requirements of 
 any regulation prescribed under this title relating to the 
 provision of data relating to farm and small business loans, 
 except with regard to any institution described in section 
 809(a) which is not an affiliate of any bank holding company or 
 savings and loan holding company.
 ``(2) Improved data collection for small business and farm 
 loans.--Regulations prescribed under this section shall require 
 the following information to be collected by regulated 
 financial institutions in connection with applications for farm 
 and small business loans:
 ``(A) The race and gender of applicants, including 
 minority-owned and women-owned farms or small 
 businesses.
 ``(B) The revenue of applicants for farm and small 
 business loans.
 ``(C) The actual census tract in which the 
 applicant resides or is located.
 ``(D) The disposition of the application by the 
 regulated financial institution and applicant.
 ``(3) Definitions.--For purposes of this paragraph (2), the 
 following definitions shall apply:
 ``(A) Minority-owned farm or small business.--The 
 term `minority-owned farm or small business' means a 
 farm or small business--
 ``(i) more than 50 percent of the ownership 
 or control of which is held by 1 or more 
 minority individuals; and
 ``(ii) more than 50 percent of the net 
 profit or loss of which accrues to 1 or more 
 minority individuals.
 ``(B) Women-owned farm or small business.--The term 
 `women-owned farm or small business' means a farm or 
 small business--
 ``(i) more than 50 percent of the ownership 
 or control of which is held by 1 or more women; 
 and
 ``(ii) more than 50 percent of the net 
 profit or loss of which accrues to 1 or more 
 women.
 ``(C) Minority.--The term `minority' has the 
 meaning given to such term by section 1204(c)(3) of the 
 Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement 
 Act of 1989.''.

SEC. 222. MAINTENANCE AND DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION BY THE FINANCIAL 
 INSTITUTIONS EXAMINATION COUNSEL.

 In collecting information from financial institutions, and 
affiliates of financial institutions, under the Community Reinvestment 
Act of 1977 and the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act of 1975 relating to 
farm, small business, and home loans, and maintaining such information 
on and disclosing such information from the national information center 
database, the Financial Institutions Examination Council shall identify 
whether the financial institution or affiliate is transmitting such 
information pursuant to the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 or the 
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act of 1975.

 TITLE III--REGULATORY AND STRUCTURAL REFORMS

SEC. 301. ANTIREDLINING REQUIREMENT FOR FINANCIAL HOLDING COMPANIES.

 Section 4(l)(1) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 
1843(l)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (B);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (C) 
 and inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(D) in the case of any bank holding company which 
 underwrites or sells, or any affiliate of which 
 underwrites or sells, annuities contracts or contracts 
 insuring, guaranteeing, or indemnifying against loss, 
 harm, damage, illness, disability, or death--
 ``(i) the company or affiliate has not been 
 adjudicated in any Federal court, and has not 
 entered into a consent decree filed in a 
 Federal court or into a settlement agreement, 
 premised upon a violation of the Fair Housing 
 Act for the activities described in this 
 subparagraph; or
 ``(ii) if such company or affiliate has 
 entered into any such consent decree or 
 settlement agreement, the company or the 
 affiliate is not in violation of the decree or 
 settlement agreement as determined by a court 
 of competent jurisdiction or the agency with 
 which the decree or agreement was entered 
 into.''.

SEC. 302. NOTICE AND PUBLIC COMMENT REQUIRED BEFORE ESTABLISHING A 
 FINANCIAL HOLDING COMPANY.

 Paragraph (6) of section 4(k) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 
1956 (12 U.S.C. 1843(k)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(6) Notice and opportunity for comment required.--
 ``(A) In general.--No financial holding company 
 shall directly or indirectly acquire, and no company 
 that becomes a financial holding company shall directly 
 or indirectly acquire control of, any company in the 
 United States, including through merger, consolidation, 
 or other type of business combination, that is engaged 
 in activities permitted under this subsection or 
 subsection (n) or (o), unless--
 ``(i) such holding company has provided 
 notice to the Board, not later than 60 days 
 prior to such proposed acquisition or prior to 
 becoming a financial holding company, and 
 during that time period, or such longer time 
 period not exceeding an additional 60 days, as 
 established by the Board;
 ``(ii) the Board has provided public notice 
 and opportunity for comment for not less than 
 30 days; and
 ``(iii) the Board has not issued a notice 
 disapproving the proposed acquisition or 
 retention.
 ``(B) Factors for consideration.--In reviewing any 
 prior notice filed under this paragraph, the Board 
 shall take into consideration--
 ``(i) whether the company is in compliance 
 with all applicable criteria set forth in 
 subsection (b) and the provisions of subsection 
 (d);
 ``(ii) whether the proposed combination 
 represents an undue aggregation of resources;
 ``(iii) whether the proposed combination 
 poses a risk to the deposit insurance system;
 ``(iv) whether the proposed combination 
 poses a risk to State insurance guaranty funds;
 ``(v) whether the proposed combination can 
 reasonably be expected to be in the best 
 interests of depositors or policyholders of the 
 respective entities;
 ``(vi) whether the proposed transaction can 
 reasonably be expected to further the purposes 
 of this Act and produce benefits to the public;
 ``(vii) whether, and the extent to which, 
 the proposed combination poses an undue risk to 
 the stability of the financial system in the 
 United States; and
 ``(viii) the community reinvestment record 
 of all parties to the proposed transaction.
 ``(C) Required information.--The Board may 
 disapprove any prior notice filed under this paragraph 
 if the company submitting such notice neglects, fails, 
 or refuses to furnish to the Board all relevant 
 information required by the Board.
 ``(D) Solicitation of views of other supervisory 
 agencies.--
 ``(i) In general.--Upon receiving a prior 
 notice under this paragraph, in order to 
 provide for the submission of their views and 
 recommendations, the Board shall give notice of 
 the proposal to--
 ``(I) the appropriate Federal 
 banking agency of any bank involved;
 ``(II) the appropriate functional 
 regulator of any functionally regulated 
 nondepository institution (as defined 
 in section 5(c)(1)(C)) involved; and
 ``(III) the Secretary of the 
 Treasury, the Attorney General, and the 
 Federal Trade Commission.
 ``(ii) Timing.--The views and 
 recommendations of any agency provided notice 
 under this paragraph shall be submitted to the 
 Board not later than 30 calendar days after the 
 date on which notice to the agency was given, 
 unless the Board determines that another 
 shorter time period is appropriate.

SEC. 303. PUBLIC MEETINGS FOR BANK ACQUISITIONS AND MERGERS.

 (a) Bank Holding Company Act of 1956.--Section 3(c)(2) of the Bank 
Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1842(c)(2)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``factors.--In every case'' and inserting 
 ``factors.--
 ``(A) In general.--In every case''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(B) Public meetings.--In the case of each 
 application for approval under this section, the Board 
 shall, as necessary and on a timely basis, conduct 
 public meetings in 1 or more areas where the Board 
 believes, in the sole discretion of the Board, there 
 will be a substantial public impact.''.
 (b) Federal Deposit Insurance Act.--Section 18(c) of the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1828(c)) is amended by adding at the 
end the following new paragraph:
 ``(12) Public Meetings.--In each merger transaction involving 1 or 
more insured depository institutions, the responsible agency shall, as 
necessary and on a timely basis, conduct public meetings in 1 or more 
areas where the agency believes, in the sole discretion of the agency, 
there will be a substantial public impact.''.
 (c) National Bank Consolidation and Merger Act.--The National Bank 
Consolidation and Merger Act (12 U.S.C. 215 et seq.) is amended by 
adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 6. PUBLIC MEETINGS FOR BANK CONSOLIDATIONS AND MERGERS.

 ``In each case of a consolidation or merger under this Act, the 
Comptroller shall, as necessary and on a timely basis, conduct public 
meetings in 1 or more areas where the Comptroller believes, in the sole 
discretion of the Comptroller, there will be a substantial public 
impact.''.
 (d) Home Owners' Loan Act.--Section 10(e) of the Home Owners' Loan 
Act (12 U.S.C. 1463) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(7) Public meetings for depository institution 
 acquisitions and mergers.--In each case involving an 
 application under this subsection, the Director shall, as 
 necessary and on a timely basis, conduct public meetings in 1 
 or more areas where the Director believes, in the sole 
 discretion of the Director, there will be a substantial public 
impact.''.

SEC. 304. CRA EXAMINATION SCHEDULE FOR SMALL BANKS.

 Section 809(a) of the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 (12 U.S.C. 
2908(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``60 months'' and 
 inserting ``48 months''; and
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking ``48 months'' and 
 inserting ``36 months''.

SEC. 305. CRA SUNSHINE REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 48 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act 
(12 U.S.C. 1831y) (as added by section 711 of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley 
Act) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by striking paragraphs (1) and (2) 
 and inserting the following new paragraphs:
 ``(1) shall be disclosed to the appropriate Federal banking 
 agency and subsequently may be made available in accordance 
 with, and to the extent provided in, section 552 of title 5, 
 United States Code, subject to section 552a of such title; and
 ``(2) may be monitored by the appropriate Federal banking 
 agency, during the effective period of the agreement, for 
 purposes of determining the extent to which the parties to the 
 agreement are complying with the agreement.'';
 (2) by striking subsections (b), (c), (d), (f), (g), and 
 (h);
 (3) by redesignating subsection (e) as subsection (b); and
 (4) in paragraph (1)(B) of subsection (b) (as so 
 redesignated by paragraph (3) of this subsection)--
 (A) by inserting ``or'' after the semicolon at the 
 end of clause (i);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of clause 
 (ii) and inserting ``; or''; and
 (C) by striking clause (iii).

SEC. 306. CONTINUING COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT REQUIREMENT FOR FINANCIAL 
 HOLDING COMPANIES.

 (a) In General.--Section 4(l)(2) of the Community Reinvestment Act 
of 1977 (12 U.S.C. 1843(l)(2)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A), by inserting ``or continuing'' 
 after ``commencing''; and
 (2) in subparagraph (B), by inserting ``or maintaining'' 
 after ``acquiring''.
 (b) Technical and Conforming Amendment.--
 (1) Paragraph (1) of section 4(m) of the Bank Holding 
 Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1843(m)(1)) is amended by 
 striking ``subsection (l)(1)'' and inserting ``paragraph (1) or 
 (2) of subsection (l)''.
 (2) Paragraph (2) of section 4(m) of the Bank Holding 
 Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1843(m)(2)) is amended by 
 striking ``subsection (l)(1)'' and inserting ``paragraphs (1) 
 and (2) of subsection (l)''.

SEC. 307. CHANGES IN REPORTING REQUIREMENTS UNDER THE HOME MORTGAGE 
 DISCLOSURE ACT OF 1975.

 (a) Prohibition on Regulatory Exemptions From Reporting 
Requirements.--Section 304 of the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act of 1975 
(12 U.S.C. 2803) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection:
 ``(n) Prohibition on Regulatory Exemptions From Reporting 
Requirements.--Subject to subsection (i)--
 ``(1) no provision of this title may be construed as 
 authorizing the Board, the Secretary, or any other Federal 
 agency to exempt any depository institution from the 
 requirements of this title; and
 ``(2) any exemption from the requirements of this title 
 provided in any regulation, such as the exemption provided in 
 Appendix A to part 203 of the Code of Federal Regulations for 
 lending institutions described in section 303(2)(B) whose total 
 dollar amount of purchase loans originated in any year did not 
 exceed 10 percent of the total dollar amount of all loan 
 originations by such institution in such year, shall cease to 
 be effective as of the date of the enactment of the Community 
 Reinvestment Modernization Act of 2000.''
 (b) Information on Prime and Subprime Mortgage Loans.--
 (1) In general.--Section 304(b) of the Home Mortgage 
 Disclosure Act of 1975 (12 U.S.C. 2803(b)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph 
 (3);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph 
 (4) and inserting a semicolon; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(5) the number and dollar amount of mortgage loans that 
 were subprime loans and the number and dollar amount of 
 mortgage loans that were not subprime loans;''.
 (2) Subprime lending program defined.--Section 303 of the 
 Home Mortgage Disclosure Act of 1975 (12 U.S.C. 2802) is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(7) Subprime loans.--The term `subprime loan'--
 ``(A) has the meaning given such term by the 
 Secretary, in regulations; and
 ``(B) includes any loan made through a program 
 maintained by a depository institution that involves 
 higher interest rates or fees than traditional mortgage 
 loans.''.
 (c) Reporting of Additional Data Required.--Section 304(b) of the 
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act of 1975 (12 U.S.C. 2803(b)) is amended by 
inserting after paragraph (5) (as added by subsection (b) of this 
section) the following new paragraph:
 ``(6) information on loan pricing and terms, including 
 interest rates, bona fide discount points, origination fees, 
 financing of lump sum insurance premium payments, balloon 
 payment, and prepayment penalties; and''.
 (d) Reporting on Manufactured Home Loans That Are Not Treated by 
the Depository Institution as Real Estate Loans.--
 (1) In general.--Section 304(b) of the Home Mortgage 
 Disclosure Act of 1975 (12 U.S.C. 2803(b)) is amended by 
 inserting after paragraph (6) (as added by subsection (c) of 
 this section) the following new paragraph:
 ``(7) the number and dollar amount of mortgage loans 
 secured by manufactured homes (as defined in section 603 of the 
 National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Act of 
 1974).''.
 (2) Mortgage loan defined to include manufactured home 
 loans.--Section 303(1) of the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act of 
 1975 (12 U.S.C. 2802(1)) is amended by inserting ``or a 
 manufactured home'' after ``residential real property''.
 (e) Enforcement Powers for Secretary.--Section 305 of the Home 
Mortgage Disclosure Act of 1975 (12 U.S.C. 2804) is amended by 
inserting at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(d) Authority To Carry Out Subsection (b)(4).--For purposes of 
enforcing compliance with the requirements of this title pursuant to 
subsection (b)(4)--
 ``(1) subsections (b) through (n) of section 8 of the 
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act shall apply to depository 
 institutions described in section 303(2)(B) in the same manner 
 they apply to depository institutions (as defined in section 3 
 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act); and
 ``(2) the Secretary shall have the same powers and duties 
 under such subsections with respect to depository institutions 
 described in section 303(2)(B) as an appropriate Federal 
 banking agency (as defined in such Act) has with respect to 
 depository institutions (as defined in section 3 of the Federal 
 Deposit Insurance Act).''.
 <all>