S 719 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 719
To amend the McCarran-Ferguson Act to limit the Federal antitrust exemption
of the business of insurance, to reaffirm the continued State regulation of
the business of insurance, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
April 6 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. METZENBAUM (for himself, Mr. SIMON, Mr. BIDEN, and Mr. KENNEDY) introduced
the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on
the Judiciary
A BILL
To amend the McCarran-Ferguson Act to limit the Federal antitrust exemption
of the business of insurance, to reaffirm the continued State regulation of
the business of insurance, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act may be cited as the
 `Insurance Competition Improvement Act of 1989'.
FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF PURPOSE
 SEC. 2. (a) The Congress finds and declares that--
 (1) the continued regulation and taxation by the several States of the
 business of insurance is in the public interest; and
 (2) the Federal antitrust laws comprise an essential component of
 congressional policy in favor of competition and consumer protection, and
 the current broad exemption from the antitrust laws afforded the insurance
 industry has adversely affected free competition and consumers of insurance.
 (b) It is the purpose of this Act to promote free competition among insurers
 and to protect consumers of insurance by modifying the current antitrust
 exemption of the business of insurance.
AMENDMENTS TO THE MCCARRAN-FERGUSON ACT
 SEC. 3. (a) The first section of the Act entitled `An Act to express the
 intent of the Congress with reference to the regulation of the business of
 insurance', approved March 9, 1945 (15 U.S.C. 1011), commonly known as the
 McCarran-Ferguson Act, is amended by striking out the period and inserting
 in lieu thereof the following: `; but that a continued broad exemption of
 the business of insurance from the Federal antitrust laws is not in the
 public interest.'.
 (b) Section 2(b) of the McCarran-Ferguson Act (15 U.S.C. 1012(b)), is
 amended by striking out all after `insurance' the second place it appears
 and inserting in lieu thereof a period.
 (c) Section 3 of the McCarran-Ferguson Act (15 U.S.C. 1013) is amended to
 read as follows:
 `SEC. 3. (a) Except as provided in subsections (b) and (d), the antitrust
 laws shall apply to the business of insurance and to acts in the conduct
 of such business.
 `(b) The antitrust laws shall not be construed to prohibit any agreement,
 understanding, or concert of action between or among insurers, any insurance
 advisory organizations or their members, any individual insurers or any
 other persons that is limited to--
 `(1) collecting, compiling, and disseminating historical data on paid
 claims or reserves for reported claims from insurers or any other source,
 provided that such information is made available to an appropriate State
 regulatory agency;
 `(2) preparing and filing policy forms and endorsements for voluntary use by
 individual insurers, provided that such forms do not include benefit levels;
 `(3) conducting research and on-the-site inspections in order to prepare
 classifications of public fire defenses; and
 `(4) collecting, compiling, and distributing information relating to
 fraudulent claims and other fraudulent practices, provided that such
 information is made available to an appropriate State regulatory agency.
 `(c) Nothing in this Act or any State law shall render the antitrust
 laws inapplicable to any agreement to boycott, coerce, or intimidate,
 or to any act of boycott, coercion, or intimidation.
 `(d) Insurers and other persons participating in joint underwriting, pools,
 or residual market mechanisms may, in connection with such activity, act
 in cooperation with each other in the making of rates, rating systems,
 policy forms, underwriting rules, surveys, inspections, and investigations,
 if the residual market mechanism is required by law or is approved by and
 subject to the active supervision of an appropriate State regulatory agency,
 or if the joint underwriting or pools do not unreasonably restrain trade.
 `(e) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to prohibit any State from
 establishing or approving a residual market mechanism.
 `(f) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to prohibit any State from
 requiring a worker's compensation and employers' liability insurer to adhere
 to the uniform classification system and uniform rating plan applicable
 to these categories of insurance in such State, but no such insurer shall
 agree with any other insurer or with an insurance advisory organization
 to adhere to or use any rate.
 `(g) As used in this section, the term--
 `(1) `advisory organization' means any organization which is comprised
 of, or is controlled by, one or more insurers and which prepares policy
 forms and endorsements for use by its members or subscribers, compiles
 and promulgates insurance-related statistical data, prepares and revises
 insurance rating plans and classification systems, and provides assistance
 in the preparation of insurance rates;
 `(2) `antitrust laws' means the Sherman Act (15 U.S.C. 1 et seq.), the
 Clayton Act (15 U.S.C. 12 et seq.), and the Federal Trade Commission Act
 (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.);
 `(3) `residual market mechanism' means an arrangement, either voluntary
 or mandated by law, involving participation by insurers in the equitable
 apportionment among them of insurance which may be afforded applicants
 who are unable to obtain insurance through ordinary methods;
 `(4) `joint underwriting' means a voluntary arrangement established on an
 ad hoc basis to provide insurance coverage for a commercial individually
 rated risk under which two or more insurers contract with the insured
 at a price and under policy terms agreed upon between the insurers, or
 negotiated between the underwriter and the insured; and
 `(5) `pool' means a voluntary arrangement, other than a residual market
 mechanism, established on an ongoing basis, under which two or more insurers
 participate in the sharing of risks on a predetermined basis by means of
 an association, syndicate, or other pooling agreement.'.
 SEC. 4. (a) This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall become
 effective one year after the date of enactment.
 (b) In any action brought under the provisions of the antitrust laws
 alleging a violation of those laws for conduct that would have otherwise
 been lawful under the provisions of the McCarran-Ferguson Act on the day
 before the effective date of this Act, no award of treble damages or criminal
 penalties shall be awarded against any such person for conduct by such person
 occurring within two years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (c) During the two-year period referred to in subsection (b), no relief shall
 be granted against any person in an action referred to in subsection (b)
 for conduct by such person during such period, if such person has, in good
 faith, relied upon an advisory opinion issued by the Department of Justice.