HR 2700 SC
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 2700
To establish uniform product liability standards.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
June 21, 1989
Mr. THOMAS A. LUKEN (for himself, Mr. GLICKMAN, Mr. SLATTERY, and Mr. SYNAR)
introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the Committees
on Energy and Commerce and the Judiciary
July 16, 1990
Additional sponsors: Mr. HENRY, Mr. CLINGER, Mr. HASTERT, Mr. MCEWEN,
Mrs. MEYERS of Kansas, Mr. SOLOMON, Mr. GALLEGLY, Mr. PETRI, Mr. MILLER
of Ohio, Mr. COX, Mr. HYDE, Mr. FISH, Mr. LEACH of Iowa, Mr. MOORHEAD,
Mr. LAGOMARSINO, Mr. HANCOCK, Mr. YATRON, Mr. DANNY SMITH, Mr. THOMAS of
Georgia, Mr. BALLENGER, Mr. WILSON, Mr. JONES of North Carolina, Mr. INHOFE,
Mr. HUTTO, Ms. KAPTUR, Mr. SANDQUIST, Mr. BARNARD, Mr. BOEHLERT, Mrs. JOHNSON
of Connecticut, Mr. MARTIN of New York, Mr. BURTON of Indiana, Mr. SHAYS,
Mr. ROTH, Mr. RAVENEL, Mr. BROOMFIELD, Mr. NIELSON of Utah, Mr. PEASE,
Mr. COUGHLIN, Mr. WALSH, Mr. GILLMOR, Mr. LIGHTFOOT, Mr. GRANDY, Mr. SMITH
of Texas, Mr. MORRISON of Washington, and Mr. EDWARDS of Oklahoma
Deleted sponsors: Mr. Foglietta (added July 27, 1989; deleted September
14, 1989)
A BILL
To establish uniform product liability standards.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Product Liability Reform Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. PREEMPTION.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- This Act governs any product liability action brought
 in any State or Federal court against a manufacturer or product seller,
 on any theory, for harm. A civil action brought against a manufacturer or
 product seller for commercial loss shall be governed only by applicable
 commercial or contract law.
 (b) STATE LAW- This Act supersedes any State law regarding recovery for any
 harm only to the extent that this Act establishes a rule of law applicable to
 any such recovery. Any issue regarding recovery for harm that is not governed
 by this Act shall be governed by otherwise applicable State or Federal law.
 (c) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this Act shall be construed to--
 (1) waive or affect any defense of sovereign immunity asserted by any
 State under any law,
 (2) supersede any Federal law, except the Federal Employees Compensation
 Act and the Longshoremen's and Harborworker's Compensation Act,
 (3) waive or affect any defense of sovereign immunity asserted by the
 United States,
 (4) affect the applicability of the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976
 (28 U.S.C. 1602 et seq.),
 (5) preempt State choice-of-law rules with respect to claims brought by
 a foreign nation or a citizen of a foreign nation,
 (6) affect the right of any court to transfer venue or to apply the law of
 a foreign nation or to dismiss a claim of a foreign nation or of a citizen
 of a foreign nation on the ground of inconvenient forum, or
 (7) supersede any statutory or common law cause of action which is not
 for harm caused by a product or an action to abate a nuisance and which
 is for civil damages or civil penalties, cleanup costs, injunctions,
 restitution, cost recovery, punitive damages, or any other form of relief
 from contamination or pollution of the environment or the threat of such
 contamination or pollution.
For purposes of paragraph (7), the term `environment' has the meaning given
to such term in section 101(8) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601(8)).
 (d) ASBESTOS- Nothing in this Act (except section 9 relating to worker's
 compensation offset) shall be construed to apply to any product liability
 action brought in State or Federal court, on any theory, for harm caused
 by asbestos or asbestos products.
 (e) Vaccine Injury-
 (1) If title XXI of the Public Health Service Act takes effect and
 establishes a Federal rule of law or defense applicable to a civil action
 brought for a vaccine-related injury or death--
 (A) this Act does not affect the application of the rule of law or defense
 to such an action, and
 (B) any rule of law or defense prescribed by this Act in conflict with a
 rule of law or defense of such title XXI shall not apply to such an action.
 (2) If there is an aspect of a civil action brought for a vaccine-related
 injury or death to which a Federal rule of law or defense under title XXI
 of the Public Health Service Act does not apply, then this Act or otherwise
 applicable law (as determined under this section) will apply to such aspect
 of such action.
SEC. 3. STANDARD OF MANUFACTURER LIABILITY.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- In a product liability action, a manufacturer is liable
 to a claimant for harm only if the claimant establishes by a preponderance
 of the evidence one of the following:
 (1) NEGLIGENCE- The manufacturer--
 (A) failed to act in constructing the product involved in the action,
 (B) failed to act in designing such product, or
 (C) failed to act in providing warnings or instructions about a risk
 associated with such product or about the proper use of the product or
 failed to provide such warnings or instructions,
as a reasonably prudent person would have in circumstances which are the same
or similar to the circumstances involved in the action and the manufacturer's
failure to so act as such a person was a proximate cause of the harm for
which the action was brought.
 (2) Strict liability-
 (A) The product causing the harm was in a defective condition unreasonably
 dangerous to the claimant or to the claimant's property--
 (i) in that it deviated from the design specifications, formulations,
 or performance standards of the manufacturer or from otherwise identical
 units of the same product,
 (ii) in that it did not conform to an express warranty made by its
 manufacturer,
 (iii) in that it failed to contain adequate warnings or instructions, or
 (iv) because of its design,
and the defective and unreasonably dangerous aspect of the product was a
proximate cause of the harm complained of by the claimant.
 (B) In a product liability action brought under subparagraph (A)(iv)
 State law governs with respect to the establishment by the plaintiff in
 such action of a prima facie case.
 (3) INTENTIONAL WRONGDOING- The manufacturer engaged in intentional
 wrongdoing as determined under applicable State law and such intentional
 wrongdoing was a proximate cause of the harm complained of by the claimant.
 (b) Manufacturer Liability-
 (1) Inherent characteristics-
 (A) In a product liability action, a product shall not be considered to
 be in a defective condition unreasonably dangerous if the aspect of the
 product which allegedly caused the claimant's harm cannot be made safe and
 is not dangerous to an extent beyond that which would be contemplated by
 the ordinary person who uses or consumes the product with the knowledge
 common to the community as to its characteristics.
 (B) Subparagraph (A) shall not be construed to limit a manufacturer's
 liability solely because the risk of harm is patent, open, or obvious.
 (2) Unavoidably unsafe-
 (A) In a product liability action against a manufacturer for harm allegedly
 caused by an improperly designed and unavoidably unsafe drug or medical
 device, the liability of the manufacturer of the drug or medical device
 shall be determined under State law. Subsection (c) shall not be construed
 to establish a rule of law in a product liability action for harm allegedly
 caused by a drug or medical device.
 (B) In a product liability action, a manufacturer shall not be relieved
 of liability on the grounds that the product that allegedly caused the
 harm was unavoidably unsafe unless the product is a drug or medical device.
 (c) State-of-the-Art Defense-
 (1) GENERAL RULE- In a product liability action, a manufacturer shall
 not be liable under subsection (a)(2)(A)(iv) because of the design of the
 product for which the action was brought if the manufacturer establishes
 by a preponderance of the evidence that at the time the product left the
 manufacturer's control--
 (A) the manufacturer did not know and could not know that the product was
 in a defective condition unreasonably dangerous to the claimant because
 of its design in light of knowledge reasonably available to experts, or
 (B) there was not a feasible alternative design that would have prevented
 the harm without substantially impairing the reasonably anticipated or
 intended function of the product.
In determining if a manufacturer has established the matter described in
subparagraph (B) all relevant factors shall be considered, including when
comparing potential alternative designs, the gravity of the danger posed by
the design of the product and the likelihood that such danger would occur,
the technical feasibility of a safer alternative design for the product,
the financial cost of an improved design for the product, the adverse
or beneficial consequences to the product and to the consumer that would
result from an alternative design for the product, and the relevant design
and engineering practices at the time the product was manufactured.
 (2) DEFENSE NOT APPLICABLE- Paragraph (1) shall not apply if the court
 finds on its own motion or on the motion of a party that the claimant
 has established by a preponderance of the evidence that the product is so
 unsafe compared to its usefulness that it should not have been marketed.
 (d) Warnings and Instructions-
 (1) GENERAL RULE- For purposes of subsection (a)(2)(A)(iii), a product is in
 a defective condition unreasonably dangerous to a claimant or the claimant's
 property because it failed to contain adequate warnings and instructions if--
 (A) at the time the product left the manufacturer's control, the product
 was not accompanied by adequate warnings and instructions, if any, that a
 reasonably prudent person under the same or similar circumstances would
 have provided with respect to the aspect of the product, including an
 aspect of the product's design, which caused the claimant's harm, in light
 of knowledge reasonably available to experts, or
 (B) prior to time of the claimant's injury, the manufacturer did not
 give on a timely basis adequate warnings and instructions, if any, that a
 reasonably prudent person under the same or similar circumstances would
 have provided with respect to the aspect of the product, including an
 aspect of the product's design, which caused the claimant's harm, in light
 of knowledge reasonably available to experts.
For purposes of subparagraph (B), a warning is timely if it is given within
a reasonable period of time after the manufacturer discovered or reasonably
could have discovered the aspect of the product which caused the claimant's
harm, including an aspect of the product's design which caused such harm.
 (2) CONSIDERATIONS- In determining the matter described in subparagraphs
 (A) and (B) of paragraph (1), all relevant factors shall be considered,
 including the gravity of the risks associated with the product which caused
 the claimant's harm, the likelihood of harm associated with such risks,
 the form and intensity of the warning and instruction, the difficulty
 of providing such warning or instruction, past representations regarding
 the safety of the product, and the reasonable expectations of those using
 the product.
 (e) Liability of Manufacturer's of Fire Fighting Equipment and Clothing-
 (1) GENERAL RULE- In addition to the liability prescribed in subsection
 (a), the manufacturer of fire fighting equipment or protective clothing
 shall be presumed liable in a product liability action for harm suffered
 by any firefighter performing interior structural firefighting if--
 (A) the harm was the result of the use of such equipment or protective
 clothing which left the control of the manufacturer after the date of the
 enactment of this subsection, and
 (B) the equipment or clothing did not comply with--
 (i) the OSHA fire brigade occupational safety and health standard (29
 C.F.R. 1910.156), or
 (ii) a State fire brigade occupational safety and health standard if--
 (I) the State standard is more stringent than the OSHA fire brigade
 occupational safety and health standard, and
 (II) the equipment or protective clothing was provided for use in the
 State in which such standard is in effect.
 (2) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of paragraph (1)--
 (A) the term `firefighter' means any person engaged in the performance of
 work directly associated with the prevention, control, and extinguishment
 of fires and the use of apparatus, equipment, and protective clothing,
 (B) the term `OSHA fire brigade occupational safety and health standard'
 means the fire brigade occupational safety and health standard set out in
 section 1910.156 of title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and
 (C)(i) the term `fire fighting equipment' means equipment designed
 specifically to be used by firefighters in the course of work directly
 associated with the prevention, control, and extinguishment of fires, and
 (ii) the term `protective clothing' means clothing designed to be worn by
 firefighters in the course of work directly associated with the prevention,
 control, and extinguishment of fires.
SEC. 4. STANDARD OF PRODUCT SELLER LIABILITY.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Except as provided in subsection (b), in a product
 liability action, a product seller shall be liable to a claimant for harm
 only if the claimant establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that--
 (1)(A) the product which allegedly caused the harm complained of was sold
 by the product seller, (B) the product seller failed to exercise reasonable
 care with respect to the product, and (C) such failure to exercise reasonable
 care was a proximate cause of the claimant's harm,
 (2)(A) the product seller made an express warranty applicable to the
 product which allegedly caused the harm complained of, independent of
 any express warranty made by a manufacturer as to the same product, (B)
 the product failed to conform to the warranty, (C) the failure of the
 product to conform to the warranty caused the claimant's harm, or
 (3) the product seller engaged in intentional wrongdoing as determined
 under applicable State law and such intentional wrongdoing was a proximate
 cause of the harm complained of by the claimant.
For purposes of paragraph (1)(B), a product seller shall not be considered
to have failed to exercise reasonable care with respect to a product based
upon an alleged failure to inspect a product where there was no reasonable
opportunity to inspect the product in a manner which would or should, in the
exercise of reasonable care, have revealed the aspect of the product which
allegedly caused the claimant's harm.
 (b) LIABILITY AS A MANUFACTURER- In a product liability action, a product
 seller shall be liable for harm to the claimant caused by such product as
 if the product seller were the manufacturer of such product if--
 (1) the manufacturer is not subject to service of process under the laws
 of the State in which the claimant brings the action, or
 (2) the court determines that the claimant would be unable to enforce a
 judgment against the manufacturer.
SEC. 5. ALCOHOL AND DRUG DEFENSE.
 (a) General Rule-
 (1) ALL DEFENDANTS MANUFACTURERS OR PRODUCT SELLERS- In any product liability
 action subject to this Act in which all defendants are manufacturers or
 product sellers, it shall be a complete defense to such action that--
 (A) the claimant was intoxicated or was under the influence of intoxicating
 alcohol or any drug, and
 (B) the claimant as a result of such intoxication or the influence of
 the alcohol or drug was more than 50 percent responsible for causing the
 accident or event which resulted in such claimant's harm.
 (2) NOT ALL DEFENDANTS MANUFACTURERS OR PRODUCT SELLERS- In any product
 liability action subject to this Act in which not all defendants are
 manufacturers or product sellers and the trier of fact determines that
 no liability exists against those defendants who are not manufacturers
 or product sellers, the court shall enter a judgment notwithstanding the
 verdict in favor of any defendant which is a manufacturer or product seller
 if it is proved that--
 (A) the claimant was intoxicated or was under the influence of intoxicating
 alcohol or any drug, and
 (B) the claimant as a result of such intoxication or the influence of
 the alcohol or drug was more than 50 percent responsible for causing the
 accident or event which resulted in such claimant's harm.
 (b) CONSTRUCTION- For purposes of subsections (a) and (b)--
 (1) the determination of whether a person was intoxicated or was under
 the influence of intoxicating alcohol or any drug shall be made pursuant
 to applicable State law, and
 (2) the term `drug' means any non-over-the-counter drug which has not been
 prescribed by a physician for use by the claimant.
SEC. 6. MISUSE OR ALTERATION.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- In a product liability action, the damages for which
 a manufacturer or product seller is otherwise liable under State law
 shall be reduced by the percentage of responsibility for claimant's harm
 attributable to misuse or alteration of a product if the manufacturer or
 product seller establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that such
 percentage of the claimant's harm was proximately caused by--
 (1) a use or alteration of a product in violation of, or contrary to,
 the manufacturer's or product seller's express warnings or instructions
 if the warnings or instructions are adequate as defined in section 3(d), or
 (2) a use or alteration of a product involving a risk of harm which was
 known or should have been known by the ordinary person who uses or consumes
 the product with the knowledge common to the class of persons who used or
 would be reasonably anticipated to use the product.
 (b) STATE LAW- Subsection (a) supersedes State law concerning misuse or
 alteration of a product only to the extent that State law is inconsistent.
SEC. 7. PUNITIVE DAMAGES.
 (a) General Rule-
 (1) STANDARD FOR AWARD OF DAMAGES- Except as provided in paragraph (2),
 punitive damages may, to the extent permitted by applicable State law,
 be awarded against a manufacturer or product seller in a product liability
 action if the claimant establishes by clear and convincing evidence that
 such manufacturer or product seller engaged in conduct giving rise to
 punitive damages under applicable State law.
 (2) REASONABLE CARE- A failure to exercise reasonable care in selecting among
 alternative product designs, formulations, instructions or warnings shall
 not, by itself, constitute conduct that may give rise to punitive damages.
 (b) SEPARATE PROCEEDING- At the request of the manufacturer or product
 seller, the trier of fact shall consider in a separate proceeding (1)
 whether punitive damages are to be awarded and the amount of such award, or
 (2) the amount of punitive damages following a determination of punitive
 liability. If a separate proceeding is requested, evidence relevant only
 to the claim of punitive damages, as determined by applicable State law,
 shall be inadmissible in any proceeding to determine whether compensatory
 damages are to be awarded.
 (c) CONSIDERATIONS- In determining the amount of punitive damages, the
 trier of fact shall consider all relevant evidence, including--
 (1) the financial condition of the manufacturer or product seller,
 (2) the severity of the harm caused by the conduct of the manufacturer or
 product seller,
 (3) the duration of the conduct or any concealment of it by the manufacturer
 or product seller,
 (4) the profitability of the conduct to the manufacturer or product seller,
 (5) the number of products sold by the manufacturer or product seller of
 the kind causing the harm complained of by the claimant,
 (6) awards of punitive or exemplary damages to persons similarly situated
 to the claimant,
 (7) prospective awards of compensatory damages to persons similarly situated
 to the claimant,
 (8) any criminal penalties imposed on the manufacturer or product seller
 as a result of the conduct complained of by the claimant, and
 (9) the amount of any civil fines assessed against the defendant as a
 result of the conduct complained of by the claimant.
 (d) Drugs and Devices-
 (1) GENERAL RULE- If in a product liability action (other than an action
 described in paragraph (2)) the manufacturer who is the defendant in the
 action shows that the drug or device which allegedly caused the harm for
 which the action was brought meets the definition of a drug or device in
 paragraph (3), the manufacturer shall not be held liable for punitive
 damages unless a claimant has met the requirements of section 7(a)(1)
 and unless the manufacturer engaged in--
 (A) intentional and wrongful withholding or misrepresentation of information
 required to be submitted under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act or
 the Public Health Service Act before the approval of the drug or device
 under such Act and if the withholding or misrepresentation was material
 and relevant to the claimant's harm,
 (B) intentional and wrongful withholding or misrepresentation of information
 relating to the safety and efficacy of the drug or device after its
 approval as required by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act or the
 Public Health Service Act and if the withholding or misrepresentation was
 material and relevant to the claimant's harm, or
 (C) a violation of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act which was
 material and relevant to the claimant's harm and which was committed with
 the intent to defraud or mislead, as determined by the court and as proven
 by clear and convincing evidence.
 (2) PACKAGING- In a product liability action for harm which is alleged
 to relate to the adequacy of the packaging (or labeling relating to such
 packaging) of a drug which is required to have tamper-resistant packaging
 under the tamper-resistant packaging regulations of the Secretary of
 Health and Human Services (including labeling regulations related to
 such packaging), the manufacturer of the drug shall not be held liable
 for punitive damages unless the drug is found by the court by clear
 and convincing evidence to be substantially out of compliance with such
 regulations.
 (3) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of paragraph (1)--
 (A) the term `drug' means--
 (i) a drug which is approved under section 505 or 507 of the Federal Food,
 Drug, and Cosmetic Act or section 351 of the Public Health Service Act
 and which is subject to the prescription requirements of section 503(b)
 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act,
 (ii) a drug which is approved under section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug,
 and Cosmetic Act and which is not subject to the prescription requirements
 of section 503(b) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, or
 (iii) a drug which is not approved under section 505 of the Federal Food,
 Drug, and Cosmetic Act, which is not subject to prescription requirements
 under section 503(b) of such Act, which is subject to a final monograph
 that has been issued by the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and
 which is not found by the court by clear and convincing evidence to be
 substantially out of compliance with such monograph or other applicable
 regulations of the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and
 (B) the term `device' means a device approved under section 515 of the
 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
 (4) ADMISSABILITY- No finding made under this subsection is admissible in
 any criminal proceeding.
SEC. 8. TIME LIMITATION ON LIABILITY.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Except as provided in subsection (b), a civil action
 subject to this Act shall be brought within 2 years from the time the
 individual who would be the claimant in such action discovered, or in the
 exercise of due diligence should have discovered, the harm and its cause
 with respect to which the action would be brought.
 (b) CAPITAL GOOD- A civil action for harm caused by a product which is a
 capital good shall be barred unless the complaint is served and filed within
 25 years of the date of delivery of the product to its first purchaser
 or lessee who was not engaged in the business of selling or leasing the
 product or using the product as a component in the manufacture of another
 product. This subsection shall apply only if--
 (1) the court determines that the claimant has received or would be eligible
 to receive compensation under any State or Federal worker's compensation
 law for harm caused by the product, and
 (2) the harm caused by the product did not include chronic illness.
SEC. 9. WORKER'S COMPENSATION OFFSET.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- In any product liability action subject to this Act in
 which damages are sought for harm for which the person injured is or would
 have been entitled to receive compensation under any State or Federal
 workers' compensation law--
 (1) the action shall, on application of the claimant made at claimant's
 sole discretion, be stayed until such time as the full amount payable
 as workers' compensation benefits has been finally determined under such
 workers' compensation law, and
 (2) any damages awarded shall, where the employer or the workers'
 compensation insurance carrier of the employer does not have a lien against
 the claimant's recovery in a product liability action against a manufacturer
 or product seller, be reduced by the sum of the amount paid as workers'
 compensation benefits to which the employee is or would be entitled for
 such harm.
The determination of workers' compensation benefits by the trier of fact in
a product liability action subject to this Act shall have no binding effect
on and shall not be used as evidence in any other proceeding.
 (b) Subrogation, Contribution, Indemnity, Lien-
 (1) GENERAL RULE- Except as provided in paragraph (2), unless the
 manufacturer or product seller has expressly agreed to indemnify or hold
 an employer harmless for harm to an employee, neither the employer nor
 the workers' compensation insurance carrier of the employer shall have
 a right of subrogation, contribution, or implied indemnity against the
 manufacturer or product seller or a lien against the claimant's recovery
 from the manufacturer or product seller if the harm is one for which a
 product liability action may be brought pursuant to this Act.
 (2) Exception-
 (A) Except in jurisdictions which allocate payment of workers' compensation
 benefits among all responsible employers, if the claimant's injury arose
 as a result of exposure to workplace conditions with multiple employers,
 paragraph (1) shall not apply if the employer or the workers' compensation
 insurer of the employer establishes, and the trier of fact determines,
 that the claimant's harm was not in any way caused by the fault of any of
 such employers or co-employees.
 (B) In all other circumstances, paragraph (1) shall not apply if the
 employer or the workers' compensation insurer of the employer establishes,
 and the trier of fact determines, that the claimant's harm was not in any
 way caused by the fault of the claimant's employer or coemployee.
 (c) Third-Party Claim Tortfeasor-
 (1) GENERAL RULE- Except as provided in subsection (d), in any product
 liability action subject to this Act in which damages are sought for harm
 for which the person injured is or would have been entitled to receive
 compensation under any State or Federal workers' compensation law, no
 third-party claim tortfeasor may maintain any action for implied indemnity
 or contribution against the employer, any coemployee, or the exclusive
 representative of the person who was injured.
 (2) EFFECT ON ACTIONS- Nothing in this Act shall be construed to affect any
 provision of a State or Federal workers' compensation law which prohibits a
 person who is or would have been entitled to receive compensation under any
 such law, or any other person whose claim is or would have been derivative
 from such a claim, from recovering for harm in any action other than a
 workers' compensation claim against a present or former employer or workers'
 compensation insurer of the employer, any coemployee, or the exclusive
 representative of the person who was injured. Any action other than such
 a workers' compensation claim shall be prohibited, except that nothing
 in this Act shall be construed to affect any State or Federal workers'
 compensation law which permits recovery based on a claim of an intentional
 tort by the employer or co-employee, where the claimant's harm was caused
 by such an intentional tort.
 (d) NONAPPLICABILITY OF SUBSECTION (c)- Subsection (c) shall not apply
 and applicable State law shall control if the employer or the workers'
 compensation insurer of the employer, in a product liability action subject
 to this Act, asserts or attempts to assert, because of subsection (b),
 a right of subrogation, contribution, or implied indemnity against the
 manufacturer or product seller or a lien against the claimant's recovery
 from the manufacturer or product seller.
SEC. 10. FRIVOLOUS PLEADINGS.
 (a) General Rule-
 (1) SIGNING OF PLEADING- The signing or verification of a pleading in a
 product liability action subject to this Act constitutes a certificate
 that to the signatory's or verifier's best knowledge, information, and
 belief, formed after reasonable inquiry, the pleading is not frivolous as
 determined under paragraph (2).
 (2) Definitions-
 (A) For purposes of this section, a pleading is frivolous if the pleading
 is--
 (i) groundless and brought in bad faith,
 (ii) groundless and brought for the purpose of harassment, or
 (iii) groundless and interposed for any improper purpose, such as to cause
 unnecessary delay or needless increase in the cost of litigation.
 (B) For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `groundless' means--
 (i) no basis in fact, or
 (ii) not warranted by existing law or a good faith argument for the
 extension, modification, or reversal of existing law.
 (b) Determination That Pleading Frivolous-
 (1) MOTION FOR DETERMINATION- Not later than 60 days after the date a
 pleading in a product liability action is filed, a party to the action
 may make a motion that the court determined if the pleading is frivolous.
 (2) COURT ACTION- The court in a product liability action shall on the
 motion of a party or on its own motion determine if a pleading is frivolous.
 (c) CONSIDERATIONS- In making its determination of whether a pleading is
 frivolous, the court shall take into account--
 (1) the multiplicity of parties,
 (2) the complexity of the claims and defenses,
 (3) the length of time available to the party to investigate and conduct
 discovery, and
 (4) affidavits, depositions, and any other relevant matter.
 (d) SANCTION- If the court determines that a pleading is frivolous, the
 court shall impose an appropriate sanction on the signatory or verifier
 of the pleading. The sanction may include one or more of the following:
 (1) the striking of a pleading or the offending portion thereof,
 (2) the dismissal of a party, or
 (3) an order to pay to a party who stands in opposition to the offending
 pleading the amounts of the reasonable expenses incurred because of the
 filing of the pleading, including costs, reasonable attorney's fees,
 witness fees, fees of experts, and deposition expenses.
 (e) CONSTRUCTION- For purposes of this section--
 (1) a general denial does not constitute a frivolous pleading, and
 (2) the amount requested for damages does not constitute a frivolous
 pleading.
SEC. 11. AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- In a product liability action subject to this Act,
 where information is subject to limitations on its disclosure and--
 (1) indicates an unreasonable risk of harm presented by a product, or
 (2) reveals evidence which would be relevant to claims based on such harm,
the court in the action shall, notwithstanding such limitations, permit the
disclosure of such information to other claimants or to Federal government
agencies in accordance with subsections (b) through (d) unless the court
for good cause determines not to permit the disclosure of the information.
 (b) OTHER CLAIMANTS- The court, upon motion and hearing, shall permit
 disclosure of the information to another claimant who has filed a civil
 action alleging the existence of an identical product defect as that alleged
 in the subject action, if the claimant establishes by a preponderance of
 the evidence--
 (1) that the claimant has a substantial need for the information and is
 unable without undue hardship to obtain the substantial equivalent of the
 information by other means;
 (2) that the claimant will agree to be bound by appropriate court orders
 to protect the confidentiality of trade secrets and sensitive proprietary
 information; and
 (3) that the information would have been discoverable in the court where
 the claimant's action is pending.
 (c) FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AGENCIES- The court, upon motion and hearing,
 shall permit disclosure of the information to a Federal Government agency
 which has initiated a formal investigation of the alleged defect at issue
 in the subject action, if the agency establishes by a preponderance of
 the evidence--
 (1) that the agency has a substantial need for the information and is
 unable without undue hardship to obtain the substantial equivalent of the
 information by other means;
 (2) that the agency will agree to be bound by appropriate court orders
 to protect the confidentiality of trade secrets and sensitive proprietary
 information; and
 (3) that the agency is authorized by law to subpoena the information.
 (d) EXPENSES- If a motion under this section for disclosure of information
 is denied in full or in part, the court shall, after opportunity for hearing,
 require the movent to pay to any party who opposed the motion the reasonable
 expenses incurred in opposing the motion, including attorney's fees unless
 the court finds that the making of the motion was substantially justified
 or that other circumstances make an award of expenses unjust.
 (e) LIMIT ON ORDERS AND AGREEMENTS- In a product liability action subject
 to this Act, no court order or agreement of the parties to the action may
 require a claimant to destroy or to return to a defendant any document or
 other information unless the defendant agrees not to destroy such document
 or other information for a reasonable period of time so that the document
 or other information shall be available, under appropriate circumstances,
 to government agencies or to other litigants in future cases. For purposes
 of this subsection, `a reasonable period of time' shall be determined by
 the court.
 (f) ATTORNEYS- No settlement or other agreement in a product liability
 action subject to this Act may prohibit an attorney from representing any
 other claimant in a similar action against the defendant in the action.
SEC. 12. FEDERAL CAUSE OF ACTION PRECLUDED.
 The district courts of the United States shall not have jurisdiction under
 section 1331 or 1337 of title 28, United States Code, over any civil action
 arising under this Act.
SEC. 13. MEDIATION OF ACTIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Any action subject to this Act shall be mediated in
 accordance with this section and with the rules of the court in which
 the action is brought. Upon the application of any party to the action,
 the court shall refer the action to mediation, unless the court determines
 that the action involves novel or unsettled issues of law or is otherwise
 unsuitable for mediation. The court may impose such fees upon the parties
 as may be necessary to recover the costs of the mediation, including
 reasonable fees of the members of the mediation panel.
 (b) PANEL- A civil action referred to mediation under subsection (a) shall
 be heard by a mediation panel selected and sitting in accordance with the
 rules of the court in which the action was brought.
 (c) ADMISSABILITY OF STATEMENTS- Statements made by attorneys in any
 mediation hearing, and briefs and summaries presented in a hearing, are
 not admissible in any court or in any other evidentiary proceeding.
 (d) EVALUATION- After a mediation hearing, the mediation panel shall
 promptly make an evaluation and shall notify each party to the action. Each
 evaluation shall include a separate award as to each claim, crossclaim,
 counterclaim, or third-party claim that has been filed in the action. For
 the purpose of this subsection--
 (1) the term `award' includes a determination that a party is not entitled
 to damages or other relief, and
 (2) all claims filed by any one party against any other one party shall
 be treated as a single claim.
 (e) Responsibility of Parties-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Each party shall file a written acceptance or rejection
 of the mediation panel's award on claims in which the party is involved. A
 failure to file a written acceptance or rejection within the time prescribed
 by court rule shall constitute acceptance of the award.
 (2) MULTIPLE PARTIES- In mediations involving multiple parties:
 (A) Each party may accept or reject all awards on claims by or against
 that party or may accept awards on some claims and reject awards on other
 claims. However, as to any single opposing party, a party must accept or
 reject all relevant awards.
 (B) A party who accepts all awards of a mediation panel may specifically
 condition its acceptance on the acceptance of all awards by all other
 parties. Unless all parties accept all awards, a party making such a
 conditional acceptance shall be deemed to have rejected all awards.
 (3) SUBSEQUENT ACTION- If all parties to a claim accept an award, a
 stipulation of dismissal upon such terms shall be entered on the claim. If
 any party to a claim rejects the award, the civil action shall proceed to
 trial with respect to that claim.
 (4) ADMISSIBILITY- The findings and evaluations of the mediation panel,
 the award granted by the mediation panel, and the parties' acceptance or
 rejection of the award shall not be admissible evidence at trial.
 (f) Rejection-
 (1) IN GENERAL- If a party has rejected a unanimous award of a mediation
 panel which an opposing party has accepted, and the action proceeds to a
 verdict, the rejecting party shall, upon request, pay the opposing party's
 costs unless the verdict is more favorable to the rejecting party than
 the mediation award.
 (2) DEFINITIONS- For the purpose of this subsection--
 (A) the term `costs' means those costs and fees taxable in a civil action
 under the applicable rules of the court in which the action was brought,
 and attorney fees for each day of trial as determined by the court, and
 (B) a verdict shall be considered more favorable to a party if--
 (i) in the case of a plaintiff, the amount of the verdict is at least 10
 percent more than the award of the mediation panel, and
 (ii) in the case of a defendant, the amount of the verdict is at least 10
 percent less than the award of the mediation panel.
 (g) REPORT- Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment
 of this Act, each Attorney General of a State and the Administrative
 Office of the United States Courts shall report to the Attorney General
 on the implementation of this section and shall include in the report any
 recommendations for changes in this section. Not later than 6 months after
 receiving the reports required by the preceding sentence, the Attorney
 General shall report to the Congress an evaluation of such reports.
SEC. 14. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act--
 (1) the term `capital good'--
 (A) means any product, or any component of such product, which is of a
 character subject to allowance for depreciation under the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1954 and is--
 (i) used in a trade or business,
 (ii) held for the production of income, or
 (iii) sold, leased, or donated to a governmental or private entity for
 the production of goods for training, for demonstration, or other similar
 purposes, and
 (B) does not mean a motor vehicle, vessel, aircraft, or railroad car used
 primarily to transport passengers for hire,
 (2) the term `claimant' means any person who brings a product liability
 action and any person on whose behalf such an action is brought, if such
 an action is brought through or on behalf of an estate, the term includes
 the claimant's decedent, or if it is brought through or on behalf of a
 minor or incompetent, the term includes the claimant's parent or guardian,
 (3) with respect to a civil action brought against a manufacturer or product
 seller of a product the term `commercial loss' means loss, including damage
 to the product itself, which is not harm described in clause (i) or (ii)
 of paragraph (4)(A) and is of a kind for which there is a remedy under
 applicable contract or commercial law,
 (4) the term `harm'--
 (A) means--
 (i) personal physical illness, injury, or death of the claimant,
 (ii) mental anguish or emotional harm of the claimant caused by or causing
 the claimant personal physical illness or injury, or
 (iii) physical damage to property other than the product itself,
caused by a product, and
 (B) does not include commercial loss,
 (5) with respect to a product, the term `manufacturer' means--
 (A) any person who is engaged in a business to produce, create, make,
 or construct the product and who designs or formulates the product or has
 engaged another person to design or formulate the product,
 (B) a product seller of the product who, before placing the product in
 the stream of commerce--
 (i) designs or formulates or has engaged another person to design or
 formulate an aspect of the product after the product was initially made
 by another, and
 (ii) produces, creates, makes, or constructs such aspect of the product, or
 (C) any product seller not described in subparagraph (B) which holds itself
 out as a manufacturer to the user of the product,
 (6) the term `product'--
 (A) means any object, substance, mixture, or raw material in a gaseous,
 liquid, or solid state--
 (i) which is capable of delivery itself, in a mixed or combined state,
 or as a component part or ingredient,
 (ii) which is produced for introduction into trade or commerce,
 (iii) which has intrinsic economic value, and
 (iv) which is intended for sale or lease to persons for commercial or
 personal use, and
 (B) does not include--
 (i) industrial waste,
 (ii) pollutants or contaminants released into the ambient air or into water,
 (iii) human tissue, human organs, human blood, and human blood products,
 (iv) tobacco and tobacco products,
 (v) alcoholic beverages, or
 (vi) electricity, water delivered by a utility, natural gas, or steam.
 (7) the term `product liability action' means a civil action brought
 against a manufacturer or product seller, on any theory, for harm,
 (8) with respect to a product, the term `product seller'--
 (A) means a person--
 (i) who sells, distributes, leases, prepares, blends, packages, or labels
 such product or is otherwise involved in placing such product in the stream
 of commerce, or
 (ii) who installs, repairs, or maintains the harm-causing aspect of such
 product, and
 (B) does not include--
 (i) a seller or lessor of real property,
 (ii) a provider of professional services in any case in which the sale or
 use of a product is incidental to the transaction and the essence of the
 transaction is the furnishing of judgment, skill, or services,
 (iii) any person who acts in only a financial capacity with respect to
 the sale of a product, or
 (iv) any person who leases a product under a lease arrangement in which
 the selection, possession, maintenance, and operation of the product are
 controlled by a person other than the lessor, and
 (9) the term `State' means any State of the United States, the District
 of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam,
 American Samoa, the Northern Mariana Islands, the Trust Territory of the
 Pacific Islands, and any other territory or possession of the United States,
 or any political subdivision thereof.
SEC. 15. REPORTS TO CONGRESS REGARDING IMPLEMENTATION.
 (a) Report on Effect on Product Liability Insurance-
 (1) GENERAL RULE- The Secretary of Commerce shall report to the Congress on
 the effect of the implementation of this Act upon the cost and availability
 of product liability insurance. The report shall--
 (A) address the effect of changes in product liability law on the cost
 and amount of product liability insurance available in the United States
 and available in each of the States, and
 (B) identify and analyze the factors that affect the cost and amount of
 product liability insurance in the United States and in each of the States.
 (2) BASIS FOR REPORTS- The report under paragraph (1) shall be based on
 an analysis of--
 (A) the premiums charged for product liability insurance,
 (B) the claims made against such insurance and the loss adjustment and
 other expenses incurred by the carriers of such insurance,
 (C) changes in the number of claims made against such insurance and the
 size of the claims paid under such insurance,
 (D) investment income allocated by carriers of such insurance to product
 liability insurance,
 (E) the relationship between the years in which product liability insurance
 premiums are earned, claims against such insurance are reported, and such
 claims are paid,
 (F) the amount of product liability insurance available as related to the
 capital and surplus of the carriers of such insurance,
 (G) rates of interest,
 (H) the general rate of inflation in the United States and the specific
 rates of inflation applicable to medical costs, wages, and other items
 involved in product liability claims, and
 (I) the general rate of economic growth in the United States and the
 specific rate of economic growth applicable to manufacturers and product
 sellers who have product liability insurance.
Based on the information described in the preceding sentence and a comparison
of earlier reports, the Secretary shall include in the report an identification
and analysis of cyclical patterns in the cost and availability of product
liability insurance.
 (3) INFORMATION- In preparing the report under paragraph (1), the Secretary
 shall use information available to the Department of Commerce and other
 Federal agencies and information collected by the Department from State
 insurance commissioners. Each State insurance commissioner shall make
 available to the Secretary aggregate information which is collected with
 respect to product liability insurance and which the Secretary requires
 to prepare such report.
 (4) Reports-
 (A) The report prepared under paragraph (1) shall be first submitted to
 the Congress on the first October 30 which occurs at least 4 months after
 the date of the enactment of this Act and shall cover the calendar year
 ending before such date.
 (B) After the tenth report under subparagraph (A)--
 (i) the Secretary shall report to the Congress on the cost and benefits
 of continuing such reports, and
 (ii) the Secretary shall continue to make such reports to the Congress
 only if requested by a majority of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
 of the House of Representatives or the Committee on Commerce, Science,
 and Transportation of the Senate.
 (b) Report on Information to Measure Effect on Product Liability Actions-
 (1) GENERAL RULE- The Secretary of Commerce shall report to the Congress
 regarding what information is needed to enable the Congress to measure
 the effect of product liability reforms on product liability actions. In
 making the report, the Secretary shall consult with the National Center
 for State Courts, the Administrative Office of the United States Courts,
 and others. The Secretary shall include in the report--
 (A) an identification of whether such information is available from
 the claimants in such actions, manufacturers or product sellers who are
 defendants in such actions, counsel in such actions, or the courts,
 (B) a statement as to whether such information is being collected, and if
 it is, by whom and if it is not, why it is not being collected,
 (C) a means for the efficient and effective collection of such information,
 (D) an identification of who could collect the information and from whom
 it could be collected, and
 (E) the costs to the litigants, their counsel, the courts, and the Federal
 Government of providing, collecting, and analyzing such information.
 (2) REPORTS- The Secretary of Commerce shall submit the report prepared
 under paragraph (1) not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment
 of this Act.
 (c) Report on Effect of Product Liability Actions, Etc-
 (1) GENERAL RULE- The Secretary of Commerce shall report to the Congress on
 the effect of the implementation of this Act upon product liability actions,
 product manufacturers and product sellers (including small businesses),
 claimants, and Federal and State courts. In particular, the report shall
 assess the effect of changes in product liability law on--
 (A) product liability litigation and the costs to claimants, product
 manufacturers, and product sellers in such litigation,
 (B) the willingness of product manufacturers to introduce new products
 and their ability to compete against foreign product manufacturers, and
 (C) the ability of manufacturers or sellers to continue in business and
 the number of jobs affected.
 (2) Reports-
 (A) The report prepared under paragraph (1) shall be first submitted to
 the Congress on the first October 30 which occurs at least 4 months after
 the date of the enactment of this Act and shall cover the calendar year
 ending before such date and biennially thereafter.
 (B) One year after the fifth report under subparagraph (A)--
 (i) the Secretary shall report to the Congress on the cost and benefits
 of continuing such reports, and
 (ii) the Secretary shall continue to make such reports to the Congress
 only if requested by a majority of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
 of the House of Representatives or the Committee on Commerce, Science,
 and Transportation of the Senate.
 (3) Insufficient data-
 (A) If the Secretary of Commerce determines that sufficient data does not
 exist to measure the effect of product liability reform on litigation,
 the Secretary shall report regarding what information is needed to enable
 the Congress to measure the effect of product liability reforms on product
 liability actions. In making the report, the Secretary shall consult with
 the National Center for State Courts, the Administrative Office of the
 United States Courts, and others. The Secretary shall include in the report--
 (i) an identification of whether such information is available from
 the claimants in such actions, manufacturers or product sellers who are
 defendants in such actions, counsel in such actions, or the courts,
 (ii) a statement as to whether such information is being collected, and
 if it is, by whom and if it is not, why it is not being collected,
 (iii) a means for the efficient and effective collection of such information,
 (iv) an identification of who could collect the information and from whom
 it could be collected, and
 (v) the costs to the litigants, their counsel, the courts, and the Federal
 Government of providing, collecting, and analyzing such information.
 (B) The Secretary of Commerce shall submit the report prepared under
 subparagraph (A) not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment
 of this Act.
SEC. 7. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 This Act shall apply with respect to product liability causes of action
 which are commenced after the date of the enactment of this Act, except
 that such amendments shall not apply with respect to any product liability
 cause of action arising from the use of a product before the date of the
 enactment of this Act against a person who is a debtor in a case commenced
 on August 21, 1985, under title 11, United States Code.