[Congressional Bills 106th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 665 Introduced in House (IH)]

106th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 665

 To enhance the financial services industry by providing a prudential 
 framework for the affiliation of banks, securities firms, and other 
 financial service providers and ensuring adequate protection for 
 consumers, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 February 10, 1999

 Mr. LaFalce (for himself, Mr. Vento, Mr. Baker, Mr. Capuano, and Mr. 
 Ackerman) introduced the following bill; which was referred to the 
 Committee on Banking and Financial Services, and in addition to the 
 Committee on Commerce, for a period to be subsequently determined by 
the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall 
 within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To enhance the financial services industry by providing a prudential 
 framework for the affiliation of banks, securities firms, and other 
 financial service providers and ensuring adequate protection for 
 consumers, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Financial Services Modernization 
Act''.

SEC. 2. TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 The table of contents for this Act is as follows:

Sec. 1. Short title.
Sec. 2. Table of contents.
 TITLE I--FINANCIAL SERVICES MODERNIZATION

 Subtitle A--Affiliations

Sec. 101. Anti-affiliation provisions of ``Glass-Steagall Act'' 
 repealed.
Sec. 102. Financial activities.
Sec. 103. Limited nonfinancial activities and affiliations permitted.
Sec. 104. Operation of State law.
Sec. 105. Mutual bank holding companies authorized.
Sec. 106. Amendments relating to limited purpose banks.
 Subtitle B--Streamlining Supervision of Bank Holding Companies

Sec. 111. Streamlining bank holding company supervision.
Sec. 112. Authority of State insurance regulator and securities and 
 exchange commission.
Sec. 113. Limitation on rulemaking, prudential, supervisory, and 
 enforcement authority of the Board.
Sec. 114. Examination of investment companies.
Sec. 115. Equivalent regulation and supervision.
 Subtitle C--Subsidiaries of National Banks

Sec. 121. Subsidiaries of national banks authorized to engage in 
 financial activities.
Sec. 122. Safety and soundness firewalls between banks and their 
 financial subsidiaries.
Sec. 123. Functional regulation.
 Subtitle D--Review of Bank Mergers and Acquisitions

Sec. 131. Amendment to the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 to modify 
 notification and post-approval waiting 
 period for section 3 transactions.
Sec. 132. Interagency data sharing.
Sec. 133. Clarification of status of subsidiaries and affiliates.
Sec. 134. Annual GAO report.
 Subtitle E--Direct Activities of Banks

Sec. 141. Authority of national banks to underwrite certain municipal 
 bonds.
 TITLE II--FUNCTIONAL REGULATION

 Subtitle A--Brokers and Dealers

Sec. 201. Definition of broker.
Sec. 202. Definition of dealer.
Sec. 203. Registration for sales of private securities offerings.
Sec. 204. Information sharing.
Sec. 205. Definition and treatment of banking products.
Sec. 206. Derivative instrument and qualified investor defined.
Sec. 207. Government securities defined.
Sec. 208. Effective date.
Sec. 209. Rule of construction.
 Subtitle B--Bank Investment Company Activities

Sec. 211. Custody of investment company assets by affiliated bank.
Sec. 212. Lending to an affiliated investment company.
Sec. 213. Independent directors.
Sec. 214. Additional SEC disclosure authority.
Sec. 215. Definition of broker under the Investment Company Act of 
 1940.
Sec. 216. Definition of dealer under the Investment Company Act of 
 1940.
Sec. 217. Removal of the exclusion from the definition of investment 
 adviser for banks that advise investment 
 companies.
Sec. 218. Definition of broker under the Investment Advisers Act of 
 1940.
Sec. 219. Definition of dealer under the Investment Advisers Act of 
 1940.
Sec. 220. Interagency consultation.
Sec. 221. Treatment of bank common trust funds.
Sec. 222. Investment advisers prohibited from having controlling 
 interest in registered investment company.
Sec. 223. Conforming change in definition.
Sec. 224. Conforming amendment.
Sec. 225. Effective date.
 Subtitle C--Securities and Exchange Commission Supervision of 
 Investment Bank Holding Companies

Sec. 231. Supervision of investment bank holding companies by the 
 Securities and Exchange Commission.
 Subtitle D--Studies

Sec. 241. Study of methods to inform investors and consumers of 
 uninsured products.
Sec. 242. Study of limitation on fees associated with acquiring 
 financial products.
 TITLE III--INSURANCE

Sec. 301. State regulation of the business of insurance.
Sec. 302. Mandatory insurance licensing requirements.
Sec. 303. Functional regulation of insurance.
Sec. 304. Insurance underwriting in national banks.
Sec. 305. Title insurance activities of national banks and their 
 affiliates.
Sec. 306. Expedited dispute resolution for Federal regulators.
Sec. 307. Certain State affiliation laws preempted for insurance 
 companies and affiliates.
 TITLE IV--CUSTOMER SERVICE AND EDUCATION

Sec. 401. Customer service and education regulations.

 TITLE I--FINANCIAL SERVICES MODERNIZATION

 Subtitle A--Affiliations

SEC. 101. ANTI-AFFILIATION PROVISIONS OF ``GLASS-STEAGALL ACT'' 
 REPEALED.

 (a) Section 20 Repealed.--Section 20 of the Banking Act of 1933 (12 
U.S.C. 377) is repealed.
 (b) Section 32 Repealed.--Section 32 of the Banking Act of 1933 (12 
U.S.C. 78) is repealed.

SEC. 102. FINANCIAL ACTIVITIES.

 (a) Engaging in Activities Financial in Nature.--Section 4 of the 
Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1843) is amended by adding 
at the end the following new subsections:
 ``(k) Engaging in Activities Financial in Nature.--
 ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding subsection (a) and 
 subject to subsection (l) and (m), a bank holding company may 
 engage in any activity, and acquire and retain the shares of 
 any company engaged in any activity, which the Board and the 
 Secretary of the Treasury have jointly determined (by 
 regulation or order) to be financial in nature or incidental to 
 such financial activities.
 ``(2) Factors to be considered.--In determining whether an 
 activity is financial in nature or incidental to financial 
 activities, the Board and the Secretary shall take into 
 account--
 ``(A) the purposes of this Act and the Financial 
 Services Modernization Act;
 ``(B) changes or reasonably expected changes in the 
 marketplace in which bank holding companies compete;
 ``(C) changes or reasonably expected changes in the 
 technology for delivering financial services; and
 ``(D) whether such activity is necessary or 
 appropriate to allow bank holding companies and the 
 affiliates of a bank holding company to--
 ``(i) compete effectively with any company 
 seeking to provide financial services in the 
 United States;
 ``(ii) use any available or emerging 
 technological means, including any application 
 necessary to protect the security or efficacy 
 of systems for the transmission of data or 
 financial transactions, in providing financial 
 services; and
 ``(iii) offer customers any available or 
 emerging technological means for using 
 financial services.
 ``(3) Activities that are financial in nature.--The 
 following activities shall be considered to be financial in 
 nature:
 ``(A) Lending, exchanging, transferring, investing 
 for others, or safeguarding money or securities.
 ``(B) Insuring, guaranteeing, or indemnifying 
 against loss, harm, damage, illness, disability, or 
 death, or providing and issuing annuities, and acting 
 as principal, agent, or broker for purposes of the 
 foregoing, in any State, in full compliance with the 
 laws and regulations of such State that apply to each 
 type of insurance license or authorization in such 
 State, except that--
 ``(i) in no event shall the bank holding 
 company or any affiliate of the bank holding 
 company be subject to any State law or 
 regulation that restricts a bank from having an 
 affiliate, agent, or employee in such State 
 licensed to provide insurance as principal, 
 agent, or broker; and
 ``(ii) the Board shall prescribe 
 regulations concerning insurance affiliations 
 that provide equivalent treatment for all stock 
 and mutual insurance companies that control or 
 are otherwise affiliated with a bank and fully 
 accommodate and are consistent with State law.
 ``(C) Providing financial, investment, or economic 
 advisory services, including advising an investment 
 company (as defined in section 3 of the Investment 
 Company Act of 1940).
 ``(D) Issuing or selling instruments representing 
 interests in pools of assets permissible for a bank to 
 hold directly.
 ``(E) Underwriting, dealing in, or making a market 
 in securities.
 ``(F) Engaging in any activity that the Board has 
 determined, by order or regulation that is in effect on 
 the date of enactment of the Financial Services 
 Modernization Act, to be so closely related to banking 
 or managing or controlling banks as to be a proper 
 incident thereto (subject to the same terms and 
 conditions contained in such order or regulation, 
 unless modified by the Board).
 ``(G) Engaging, in the United States, in any 
 activity that--
 ``(i) a bank holding company may engage in 
 outside the United States; and
 ``(ii) the Board has determined, under 
 regulations issued pursuant to subsection 
 (c)(13) (as in effect on the day before the 
 date of enactment of the Financial Services 
 Modernization Act) to be usual in connection 
 with the transaction of banking or other 
 financial operations abroad.
 ``(H) Directly or indirectly acquiring or 
 controlling, whether as principal, on behalf of 1 or 
 more entities (including entities, other than a 
 depository institution or subsidiary of a depository 
 institution, that the bank holding company controls) or 
 otherwise, shares, assets, or ownership interests 
 (including without limitation debt or equity 
 securities, partnership interests, trust certificates 
 or other instruments representing ownership) of a 
 company or other entity, whether or not constituting 
 control of such company or entity, engaged in any 
 activity not authorized pursuant to this section if--
 ``(i) the shares, assets, or ownership 
 interests are not acquired or held by a 
 depository institution;
 ``(ii) such shares, assets, or ownership 
 interests are acquired and held as part of a 
 bona fide underwriting or merchant banking 
 activity, including investment activities 
 engaged in for the purpose of appreciation and 
 ultimate resale or disposition of the 
 investment;
 ``(iii) such shares, assets, or ownership 
 interests, are held for such a period of time 
 as will permit the sale or disposition thereof 
 on a reasonable basis consistent with the 
 nature of the activities described in clause 
 (ii); and
 ``(iv) during the period such shares, 
 assets, or ownership interests are held, the 
 bank holding company does not actively 
 participate, directly or indirectly, in the day 
 to day management or operation of such company 
 or entity, except insofar as necessary to 
 achieve the objectives of clause (ii).
 ``(I) Directly or indirectly acquiring or 
 controlling, whether as principal, on behalf of 1 or 
 more entities (including any subsidiary of the holding 
 company which is not a depository institution or 
 subsidiary of a depository institution) or otherwise, 
 shares, assets, or ownership interests (including 
 without limitation debt or equity securities, 
 partnership interests, trust certificates or other 
 instruments representing ownership) of a company or 
 other entity, whether or not constituting control of 
 such company or entity, engaged in any activity not 
 authorized pursuant to this section if--
 ``(i) the shares, assets, or ownership 
 interests are not acquired or held by a 
 depository institution or a subsidiary of a 
 depository institution;
 ``(ii) such shares, assets, or ownership 
 interests are acquired and held by an insurance 
 company that is predominantly engaged in 
 underwriting life, accident and health, or 
 property and casualty insurance (other than 
 credit-related insurance);
 ``(iii) such shares, assets, or ownership 
 interests represent an investment made in the 
 ordinary course of business of such insurance 
 company in accordance with relevant State law 
 governing such investments; and
 ``(iv) during the period such shares, 
 assets, or ownership interests are held, the 
 bank holding company does not directly or 
 indirectly participate in the day-to-day 
 management or operation of the company or 
 entity except insofar as necessary to achieve 
 the objectives of clause (iii).
 ``(4) Actions required.--
 ``(A) Regulation of merchant banking.--The Board 
 may prescribe regulations and issue interpretations to 
 implement paragraph 3(H);
 ``(B) Regulation of other activities.--The Board 
 and the Secretary--
 ``(i) may jointly prescribe regulations and issue 
 interpretations under paragraph (3), other than 
 subparagraph (H); and
 ``(ii) shall jointly define by regulation the 
 following activities, to the extent they are consistent 
 with the purposes of this Act, as financial in nature 
 or incidental to activities that are financial in 
 nature:
 ``(I) Lending, exchanging, 
 transferring, investing for others, or 
 safeguarding financial assets other 
 than money or securities.
 ``(II) Providing any device or 
 other instrumentality for transferring 
 money or other financial assets;
 ``(III) Arranging, effecting, or 
 facilitating financial transactions for 
 the account of third parties.
 ``(5) Notification.--
 ``(A) Commencement of new activity.--
 A bank holding company that commences any activity 
 pursuant to this subsection shall provide written 
 notice to the Board describing the activity commenced 
 or conducted by the company acquired no later than 30 
 calendar days after commencing the activity or 
 consummating the acquisition.
 ``(B) Notice required for acquisitions.--
 ``(i) In general.--At least 12 business 
 days before acquiring shares or assets of any 
going concern pursuant to paragraphs (3), (4), or (5), a bank holding 
company shall provide written notice of the proposal to the Board, 
unless the Board determines that no notice or a shorter notice period 
is appropriate.
 ``(ii) Grounds for disapproval The Board 
 shall not approve--
 ``(I) any acquisition which would 
 result in a monopoly, or which would be 
 in furtherance of any combination or 
 conspiracy to monopolize or attempt to 
 monopolize the business of financial 
 intermediation in any part of the 
 United States, or
 ``(II) any other proposed 
 acquisition whose effect in any section 
 of the country may be substantially to 
 lessen competition, or to tend to 
 create a monopoly, or which in any 
 other manner would be in restraint of 
 trade, unless it finds that the 
 anticompetitive effects of the proposed 
 transaction are clearly outweighed in 
 the public interest by the probable 
 effect of the transaction in meeting 
 the convenience and needs of the 
 community to be served.
 ``(iii) Additional information and 
 extension of period.--Before the expiration of 
 the 12-day period referred to in clause (i), 
 the Board may require the submission of 
 additional information and may extend the 12-
 day period for no more than 60 calendar days to 
 consider such additional information.
 ``(iv) Disapproval before end of period.--
 If, at the end of the 12-day period referred to 
 in clause (i) or the end of any extension of 
 such period pursuant to clause (iii), as the 
 case may be, the Board has not issued an order 
 disapproving the notice, the notice shall be 
 deemed approved.''
 ``(C) Approval not required for certain financial 
 activities.--Except as provided in subsection (j) with 
 regard to the acquisition of a savings association, a 
 bank holding company may commence any activity pursuant 
 to paragraph (3) or any regulation prescribed under 
 paragraph (4), without prior approval of the Board.
 ``(l) Conditions for Engaging in Broad Range of Financial 
Activities.--Notwithstanding subsection (k), a bank holding company may 
not engage in any activity, or directly or indirectly acquire or retain 
shares of any company engaged in any activity, under subsection (k), 
other than activities permissible for a bank holding company under 
subsection (c)(8), unless the bank holding company meets the following 
requirements:
 ``(1) All of the subsidiary depository institutions of the 
 bank holding company are well capitalized, as determined 
 pursuant to section 38 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
 ``(2) All of the subsidiary depository institutions of the 
 bank holding company are well managed, as determined by the 
 appropriate Federal banking agency.
 ``(3) All of the subsidiary depository institutions of the 
 bank holding company have achieved a rating of `satisfactory 
 record of meeting community credit needs', or better, at the 
 most recent examination of each such institution under the 
 Community Reinvestment Act of 1977.
 ``(4) The company has filed with the Board--
 ``(A) a declaration that the company elects to 
 engage in activities or acquire and retain shares of a 
 company which were not permissible for a bank holding 
 company to engage in or acquire before the enactment of 
 the Financial Services Modernization Act; and
 ``(B) a certification that the company meets the 
 requirements of paragraphs (1), (2), and (3).
 ``(m) Provisions Applicable to Bank Holding Companies That Fail To 
Meet Certain Requirements.--
 ``(1) In general.--If--
 ``(A) a bank holding company is engaged, directly 
 or indirectly, in any activity under subsection (k), 
 other than activities permissible for a bank holding 
 company under subsection (c)(8); and
 ``(B) such company is not in compliance with the 
 requirements of subsection (l),

 the Board shall give notice to the company to that effect, 
 describing the conditions giving rise to the notice.
 ``(2) Agreement to correct conditions required.--Within 45 
 days of receipt by a bank holding company of a notice given 
 under paragraph (1) (or such additional period as the Board may 
 permit), the company shall execute an agreement with the Board 
 to comply with the requirements applicable to a bank holding 
 company under subsection (l).
 ``(3) Appropriate federal banking agency may impose 
 limitations.--Until the conditions described in a notice to a 
 bank holding company under paragraph (1) are corrected, the 
 appropriate Federal banking agency may impose such limitations 
 on the conduct or activities of the company or any affiliate of 
 the company as the agency determines to be appropriate under 
 the circumstances.
 ``(4) Failure to correct.--If the conditions described in a 
 notice to a bank holding company under paragraph (1) are not 
 corrected within 180 days after receipt by the company of 
 notice under paragraph (1), the Board may require such company, 
 under such terms and conditions as may be imposed by the Board 
 and subject to such extension of time as may be granted in the 
 Board's discretion, either--
 ``(A) to divest control of any subsidiary insured 
 depository institutions; or
 ``(B) to cease to engage in any activity conducted 
 by such company or its subsidiaries (other than a 
 depository institution or a subsidiary of a depository 
 institution) that is not an activity that is 
 permissible for a bank holding company under subsection 
 (c)(8).''.
 (b) Financial Activities of Bank Holding Companies Ineligible for 
Subsection (k) Powers.--
 (1) In general.--Section 4(c)(8) of the Bank Holding 
 Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1843(c)(8)) is amended to read 
 as follows:
 ``(8) shares of any company the activities of which had 
 been determined by the Board by regulation under this paragraph 
 as of the day before the date of the enactment of the Financial 
 Services Modernization Act, to be so closely related to banking 
 as to be a proper incident thereto (subject to such terms and 
 conditions contained in such regulation, unless modified by the 
 Board);''.
 (2) Conforming changes to other statutes.--
 (A) Amendment to the bank holding company act 
 amendments of 1970.--Section 105 of the Bank Holding 
 Company Act Amendments of 1970 (12 U.S.C. 1850) is 
 amended by striking ``, to engage directly or 
 indirectly in a nonbanking activity pursuant to section 
 4 of such Act,''.
 (B) Amendments to the homeowners loan act.--
 (i) Section 10(c)(2)(F)(i) of the Home 
 Owners Loan Act is amended--
 (I) by inserting ``is permitted for 
 bank holding companies under 
 subsections (c) or (k) of section 4 of 
 the Bank Holding company Act of 1956, 
 or which'' after ``(i) which''; and
 (II) by striking ``section 4(c)'' 
 and inserting ``such subsections''.
 (ii) Section 10(o)(5) of the Home Owners 
 Loan Act is amended by striking ``, except 
 subparagraph (B)''.

SEC. 103. LIMITED NONFINANCIAL ACTIVITIES AND AFFILIATIONS PERMITTED.

 Section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1843) 
is amended by inserting after subsection (m) (as added by section 3(a) 
of this Act) the following new subsection:
 ``(n) Nonfinancial Activities.--
 ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding subsection (a), a bank 
 holding company may engage in activities which are not (or have 
 not been determined to be) financial in nature or incidental to 
 activities which are financial in nature, or acquire and retain 
 ownership and control of the shares of a company engaged in 
 such activities, if--
 ``(A) the aggregate annual gross revenues derived 
 from all such activities and all such companies does 
 not exceed 15 percent of the consolidated annual gross 
 revenues of the bank holding company;
 ``(B) the consolidated total assets of any company 
 the shares of which are acquired by the bank holding 
 company pursuant to this paragraph are less than 
 $750,000,000 at the time the shares are acquired by the 
 holding company; and
 ``(C) the holding company provides notice to the 
 Board within 30 days of commencing the activity or 
 acquiring the ownership or control.
 ``(2) Foreign banks.--In lieu of the limitation contained 
 in paragraph (1)(A) in the case of a foreign bank or a company 
 that owns or controls a foreign bank which engages in any 
 activity or acquires or retains ownership or control of shares 
 of any company pursuant to paragraph (1), the aggregate annual 
 gross revenues derived from all such activities and all such 
 companies in the United States shall not exceed 15 percent of 
 the consolidated annual gross revenues of the foreign bank or 
 company in the United States derived from any branch, agency, 
 commercial lending company, or depository institution 
 controlled by the foreign bank or company and any subsidiary 
 engaged in the United States in activities permissible under 
 this section.
 ``(3) Nonapplicability of other exemption.--Any foreign 
 bank or company that owns or controls a foreign bank which 
 engages in any activity or acquires or retains ownership or 
 control of shares of any company pursuant to this subsection 
 shall not be eligible for any exception described in section 
 2(h).
 ``(4) Transactions with nonfinancial affiliates.--An 
 insured depository institution controlled by a bank holding 
 company may not engage in a covered transaction (as defined by 
 section 23A(b)(7) of the Federal Reserve Act) with any 
 affiliate controlled by the company pursuant to this subsection 
or subparagraph (H) or (I) of subsection (k)(3).''.

SEC. 104. OPERATION OF STATE LAW.

 (a) Affiliations.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), no 
 State may, by statute, regulation, order, interpretation, or 
other action, prevent or restrict an insured depository institution, or 
a subsidiary or affiliate thereof, from being affiliated directly or 
indirectly or associated with any person or entity, as authorized or 
permitted by this Act or any other provision of Federal law.
 (2) Insurance.--With respect to affiliations between 
 insured depository institutions, or any subsidiary or affiliate 
 thereof, and persons or entities engaged in the business of 
 insurance, paragraph (1) does not prohibit any State from--
 (A) requiring any person or entity that proposes to 
 acquire control of an entity that is engaged in the 
 business of insurance and domiciled in that State 
 (hereafter in this subparagraph referred to as the 
 ``insurer'') to furnish to the insurance regulatory 
 authority of that State, not later than 60 days before 
 the effective date of the proposed acquisition--
 (i) the name and address of each person by 
 whom, or on whose behalf, the affiliation 
 referred to in this subparagraph is to be 
 effected (hereafter in this subparagraph 
 referred to as the ``acquiring party'');
 (ii) if the acquiring party is an 
 individual, his or her principal occupation and 
 all offices and positions held during the 5 
 years preceding the date of notification, and 
 any conviction of crimes other than minor 
 traffic violations during the 10 years 
 preceding the date of notification;
 (iii) if the acquiring party is not an 
 individual--
 (I) a report of the nature of its 
 business operations during the 5 years 
 preceding the date of notification, or 
 for such shorter period as such person 
 and any predecessors thereof shall have 
 been in existence;
 (II) an informative description of 
 the business intended to be done by the 
 acquiring party and any subsidiary 
 thereof; and
 (III) a list of all individuals who 
 are, or who have been selected to 
 become, directors or executive officers 
 of the acquiring party or who perform, 
 or will perform, functions appropriate 
 to such positions, including, for each 
 such individual, the information 
 required by clause (ii);
 (iv) the source, nature, and amount of the 
 consideration used, or to be used, in effecting 
 the merger or other acquisition of control, a 
 description of any transaction wherein funds 
 were, or are to be, obtained for any such 
 purpose, and the identity of persons furnishing 
 such consideration, except that, if a source of 
 such consideration is a loan made in the 
 lender's ordinary course of business, the 
 identity of the lender shall remain 
 confidential if the person filing such 
 statement so requests;
 (v) fully audited financial information as 
 to the earnings and financial condition of each 
 acquiring party for the 5 fiscal years 
 preceding the date of notification of each such 
 acquiring party, or for such lesser period as 
 such acquiring party and any predecessors 
 thereof shall have been in existence, and 
 similar unaudited information as of a date not 
 earlier than 90 days before the date of 
 notification, except that, in the case of an 
 acquiring party that is an insurer actively 
 engaged in the business of insurance, the 
 financial statements of such insurer need not 
 be audited, but such audit may be required if 
 the need therefor is determined by the 
 insurance regulatory authority of the State;
 (vi) any plans or proposals that each 
 acquiring party may have to liquidate such 
 insurer, to sell its assets, or to merge or 
 consolidate it with any person or to make any 
 other material change in its business or 
 corporate structure or management;
 (vii) the number of shares of any security 
 of the insurer that each acquiring party 
 proposes to acquire, the terms of any offer, 
 request, invitation, agreement, or acquisition, 
 and a statement as to the method by which the 
 fairness of the proposal was arrived at;
 (viii) the amount of each class of any 
 security of the insurer that is beneficially 
 owned or concerning which there is a right to 
 acquire beneficial ownership by each acquiring 
 party;
 (ix) a full description of any contracts, 
 arrangements, or understandings with respect to 
 any security of the insurer in which any 
 acquiring party is involved, including transfer 
 of any of the securities, joint ventures, loan 
 or option arrangements, puts or calls, 
 guarantees of loans, guarantees against loss or 
 guarantees of profits, division of losses or 
 profits, or the giving or withholding of 
 proxies, and identification of the persons with 
 whom such contracts, arrangements, or 
 understandings have been entered into;
 (x) a description of the purchase of any 
 security of the insurer during the 12-month 
 period preceding the date of notification by 
any acquiring party, including the dates of purchase, names of the 
purchasers, and consideration paid, or agreed to be paid, therefor;
 (xi) a description of any recommendations 
 to purchase any security of the insurer made 
 during the 12-month period preceding the date 
 of notification by any acquiring party or by 
 any person based upon interviews or at the 
 suggestion of such acquiring party;
 (xii) copies of all tender offers for, 
 requests or invitations for tenders of, 
 exchange offers for and agreements to acquire 
 or exchange any securities of the insurer and, 
 if distributed, of additional soliciting 
 material relating thereto; and
 (xiii) the terms of any agreement, 
 contract, or understanding made with any 
 broker-dealer as to solicitation of securities 
 of the insurer for tender and the amount of any 
 fees, commissions, or other compensation to be 
 paid to broker-dealers with regard thereto;
 (B) requiring an entity that is acquiring control 
 of an entity that is engaged in the business of 
 insurance and domiciled in that State to maintain or 
 restore the capital requirements of that insurance 
 entity to the level required under the capital 
 regulations of general applicability in that State to 
 avoid the requirement of preparing and filing with the 
 insurance regulatory authority of that State a plan to 
 increase the capital of the entity, except that any 
 determination by the State insurance regulatory 
 authority with respect to such requirement shall be 
 made not later than 60 days after the date of 
 notification under subparagraph (A);
 (C) taking actions with respect to the receivership 
 or conservatorship of any insurance company; or
 (D) restricting a change in the ownership of stock 
 in an insurance company, or a company formed for the 
 purpose of controlling such insurance company, for a 
 period of not more than 3 years beginning on the date 
 of the conversion of such company from mutual to stock 
 form.
 (3) Preservation of state antitrust and general corporate 
 laws.--
 (A) In general.--Nothing in paragraph (1) shall be 
 construed as affecting State laws, regulations, orders, 
 interpretations, or other actions of general 
 applicability relating to the governance of 
 corporations, partnerships, limited liability companies 
 or other business associations incorporated or formed 
 under the laws of that State or domiciled in that 
 State, or the applicability of the antitrust laws of 
 any State or any State law that is similar to the 
 antitrust laws.
 (B) Definition.--The term ``antitrust laws'' has 
 the same meaning as in subsection (a) of the first 
 section of the Clayton Act, and includes section 5 of 
 the Federal Trade Commission Act to the extent that 
 such section 5 relates to unfair methods of 
 competition.
 (b) Activities.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and 
 (3), no State may, by statute, regulation, order, 
 interpretation, or other action, prevent or restrict an insured 
 depository institution or any subsidiary or affiliate of an 
 insured depository institution from engaging directly or 
 indirectly, either by itself or in conjunction with a 
 subsidiary, affiliate, or any other entity or person, in any 
 activity authorized or permitted under this Act.
 (2) Insurance activities other than sales.--State statutes, 
 regulations, interpretations, orders, and other actions shall 
not be preempted under subsection (b)(1) to the extent that they--
 (A) relate to, or are issued, adopted, or enacted 
 for the purpose of regulating the business of insurance 
 in accordance with the Act of March 9, 1945 (commonly 
 known as the ``McCarran-Ferguson Act'');
 (B) apply only to persons or entities that are not 
 insured depository institutions, but that are directly 
 engaged in the business of insurance (except that they 
 may apply to depository institutions engaged in 
 providing savings bank life insurance as principal to 
 the extent of regulating such insurance);
 (C) do not relate to or directly or indirectly 
 regulate insurance sales, solicitations, or cross-
 marketing activities; and
 (D) are not prohibited under subsection (c).
 (3) Financial activities other than insurance.--No State 
 statute, regulation, interpretation, order, or other action 
 shall be preempted under subsection (b)(1) to the extent that--
 (A) it does not relate to, and is not issued and 
 adopted, or enacted for the purpose of regulating, 
 directly or indirectly, insurance sales, solicitations, 
 or cross marketing activities;
 (B) it does not relate to, and is not issued and 
 adopted, or enacted for the purpose of regulating, 
 directly or indirectly, the business of insurance 
 activities other than sales, solicitations, or cross 
 marketing activities;
 (C) it does not relate to securities investigations 
 or enforcement actions referred to in subsection (d); 
 and
 (D) it--
 (i) does not distinguish by its terms 
 between insured depository institutions and 
 subsidiaries and affiliates thereof engaged in 
 the activity at issue and other persons or 
 entities engaged in the same activity in a 
 manner that is in any way adverse with respect 
 to the conduct of the activity by any such 
 insured depository institution or subsidiary or 
 affiliate thereof engaged in the activity at 
 issue;
 (ii) as interpreted or applied, does not 
 have, and will not have, an impact on 
 depository institutions or subsidiaries or 
 affiliates thereof engaged in the activity at 
 issue, or any person or entity affiliated 
 therewith, that is substantially more adverse 
 than its impact on other persons or entities 
 engaged in the same activity that are not 
 insured depository institutions, or 
 subsidiaries or affiliates thereof, or persons 
 or entities affiliated therewith;
 (iii) does not effectively prevent a 
 depository institution, or a subsidiary or 
 affiliate thereof, from engaging in activities 
 authorized or permitted by this Act or any 
 other provision of Federal law; and
 (iv) does not conflict with the intent of 
 this Act generally to permit affiliations that 
 are authorized or permitted by Federal law.
 (4) Construction.--No provision of this subsection shall be 
 construed to limit the applicability of the decision of the 
 Supreme Court in Barnett Bank of Marion County N.A. v. Nelson, 
 116 S. Ct. 1103 (1996) with respect to a State statute, 
 regulation, order, interpretation, or other action.
 (c) Nondiscrimination.--No State may, by statute, regulation, 
order, interpretation, or other action, regulate the insurance 
activities authorized or permitted under this Act or any other 
provision of Federal law of an insured depository institution, or a 
subsidiary or affiliate thereof, to the extent that such statute, 
regulation, order, interpretation, or other action--
 (1) distinguishes by its terms between insured depository 
 institutions, or subsidiaries or affiliates thereof, and other 
 persons or entities engaged in such activities, in a manner 
 that is in any way adverse to any such insured depository 
 institution, or subsidiary or affiliate thereof;
 (2) as interpreted or applied, has or will have an impact 
 on depository institutions, or subsidiaries or affiliates 
 thereof, that is substantially more adverse than its impact on 
 other persons or entities providing the same products or 
services or engaged in the same activities that are not insured 
depository institutions, or subsidiaries or affiliates thereof, or 
persons or entities affiliated therewith;
 (3) effectively prevents a depository institution, or 
 subsidiary or affiliate thereof, from engaging in insurance 
 activities authorized or permitted by this Act or any other 
 provision of Federal law; or
 (4) conflicts with the intent of this Act generally to 
 permit affiliations that are authorized or permitted by Federal 
 law between insured depository institutions, or subsidiaries or 
affiliates thereof, and persons and entities engaged in the business of 
insurance.
 (d) Limitation.--Subsections (a) and (b) shall not be construed to 
affect the jurisdiction of the securities commission (or any agency or 
office performing like functions) of any State, under the laws of such 
State, to investigate and bring enforcement actions, consistent with 
section 18(c) of the Securities Act of 1933, with respect to fraud or 
deceit or unlawful conduct by any person, in connection with securities 
or securities transactions.
 (e) Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term ``State'' 
means any State of the United States, the District of Columbia, any 
territory of the United States, Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the 
Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, the Virgin Islands, and the 
Northern Mariana Islands.

SEC. 105. MUTUAL BANK HOLDING COMPANIES AUTHORIZED.

 Section 3(g)(2) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 
1842(g)(2)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(2) Regulations.--A bank holding company organized as a 
 mutual holding company shall be regulated on terms, and shall 
 be subject to limitations, comparable to those applicable to 
 any other bank holding company.''.

SEC. 106. AMENDMENTS RELATING TO LIMITED PURPOSE BANKS.

 (a) In General.--Section 4(f) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 
1956 (12 U.S.C. 1843(f)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2)(A)(ii)--
 (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of subclause 
 (IX);
 (B) by inserting ``and'' after the semicolon at the 
 end of subclause (X); and
 (C) by inserting after subclause (X) the following 
 new subclause:
 ``(XI) consumer loan assets that 
 are derived from, or are incidental to, 
 activities in which institutions 
 described in subparagraph (F) or (H) of 
 section 2(c)(2) are permitted to 
 engage,'';
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking subparagraph (B) and 
 inserting the following new subparagraphs:
 ``(B) any bank subsidiary of such company engages 
 in any activity in which the bank was not lawfully 
 engaged as of March 5, 1987, unless the bank is well 
 managed and well capitalized;
 ``(C) any bank subsidiary of such company both--
 ``(i) accepts demand deposits or deposits 
 that the depositor may withdraw by check or 
 similar means for payment to third parties; and
 ``(ii) engages in the business of making 
 commercial loans (and, for purposes of this 
 clause, loans made in the ordinary course of a 
 credit card operation shall not be treated as 
 commercial loans); or
 ``(D) after the date of the enactment of the 
 Competitive Equality Amendments of 1987, any bank 
 subsidiary of such company permits any overdraft 
 (including any intraday overdraft), or incurs any such 
 overdraft in such bank's account at a Federal reserve 
 bank, on behalf of an affiliate, other than an 
 overdraft described in paragraph (3).''; and
 (3) by striking paragraphs (3) and (4) and inserting the 
 following new paragraphs:
 ``(3) Permissible overdrafts described.--For purposes of 
 paragraph (2)(D), an overdraft is described in this paragraph 
 if--
 ``(A) such overdraft results from an inadvertent 
 computer or accounting error that is beyond the control 
 of both the bank and the affiliate; or
 ``(B) such overdraft--
 ``(i) is permitted or incurred on behalf of 
 an affiliate which is monitored by, reports to, 
 and is recognized as a primary dealer by the 
 Federal Reserve Bank of New York; and
 ``(ii) is fully secured, as required by the 
 Board, by bonds, notes, or other obligations 
 which are direct obligations of the United 
 States or on which the principal and interest 
 are fully guaranteed by the United States or by 
securities and obligations eligible for settlement on the Federal 
Reserve book entry system.
 ``(4) Divestiture in case of loss of exemption.--If any 
 company described in paragraph (1) fails to qualify for the 
 exemption provided under such paragraph by operation of 
 paragraph (2), such exemption shall cease to apply to such 
 company and such company shall divest control of each bank it 
 controls before the end of the 180-day period beginning on the 
 date that the company receives notice from the Board that the 
 company has failed to continue to qualify for such exemption, 
 unless before the end of such 180-day period, the company has--
 ``(A) corrected the condition or ceased the 
 activity that caused the company to fail to continue to 
 qualify for the exemption; and
 ``(B) implemented procedures that are reasonably 
 adapted to avoid the reoccurrence of such condition or 
 activity.''.
 (b) Industrial Loan Companies Affiliate Overdrafts.--Section 
2(c)(2)(H) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 
1841(c)(2)(H)) is amended by inserting before the period at the end ``, 
or that is otherwise permissible for a bank controlled by a company 
described in section 4(f)(1)''.

 Subtitle B--Streamlining Supervision of Bank Holding Companies

SEC. 111. STREAMLINING BANK HOLDING COMPANY SUPERVISION.

 Section 5(c) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 
1844(c)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(c) Reports and Examinations.--
 ``(1) Reports.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Board from time to time may 
 require any bank holding company and any subsidiary of 
 such company to submit reports under oath to keep the 
 Board informed as to--
 ``(i) its financial condition, systems for 
 monitoring and controlling financial and 
 operating risks, and transactions with 
 depository institution subsidiaries of the 
 holding company; and
 ``(ii) compliance by the company or 
 subsidiary with applicable provisions of this 
 Act.
 ``(B) Use of existing reports.--
 ``(i) In general.--The Board shall, to the 
 fullest extent possible, accept reports in 
 fulfillment of the Board's reporting 
 requirements under this paragraph that a bank 
 holding company or any subsidiary of such 
 company has provided or been required to 
 provide to other Federal and State supervisors 
 or to appropriate self-regulatory 
 organizations.
 ``(ii) Availability.--A bank holding 
 company or a subsidiary of such company shall 
 provide to the Board, at the request of the 
 Board, a report referred to in clause (i).
 ``(iii) Required use of publicly reported 
 information.--The Board shall, to the fullest 
 extent possible, accept in fulfillment of any 
 reporting or recordkeeping requirements under 
 this Act information that is otherwise required 
 to be reported publicly and externally audited 
 financial statements.
 ``(iv) Reports filed with other agencies.--
 In the event the Board requires a report from a 
 functionally regulated nondepository 
 institution subsidiary of a bank holding 
 company of a kind that is not required by 
 another Federal or State regulator or 
 appropriate self-regulatory organization, the 
 Board shall request that the appropriate 
 regulator or self-regulatory organization 
 obtain such report. If the report is not made 
 available to the Board, and the report is 
 necessary to assess a material risk to the bank 
 holding company or any of its subsidiary 
 depository institutions or compliance with this 
 Act, the Board may require such subsidiary to 
 provide such a report to the Board.
 ``(C) Definition.--For purposes of this subsection, 
 the term `functionally regulated nondepository 
 institution' means--
 ``(i) a broker or dealer registered under 
 the Securities Exchange Act of 1934;
 ``(ii) an investment adviser registered 
 under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940, or 
 with any State, with respect to the investment 
 advisory activities of such investment adviser 
 and activities incidental to such investment 
 advisory activities;
 ``(iii) an insurance company subject to 
 supervision by a State insurance commission, 
 agency, or similar authority; and
 ``(iv) an entity subject to regulation by 
 the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, with 
 respect to the commodities activities of such 
 entity and activities incidental to such 
 commodities activities.
 ``(2) Examinations.--
 ``(A) Examination authority.--
 ``(i) In general.--The Board may make 
 examinations of each bank holding company and 
 each subsidiary of a bank holding company.
 ``(ii) Functionally regulated nondepository 
 institution subsidiaries.--Notwithstanding 
 clause (i), the Board may make examinations of 
 a functionally regulated nondepository 
 institution subsidiary of a bank holding 
 company only if--
 ``(I) the Board has reasonable 
 cause to believe that such subsidiary 
 is engaged in activities that pose 
a material risk to an affiliated depository institution, or
 ``(II) based on reports and other 
 available information, the Board has 
 reasonable cause to believe that a 
 subsidiary is not in compliance with 
 this Act or with provisions relating to 
 transactions with an affiliated 
 depository institution and the Board 
 cannot make such determination through 
 examination of the affiliated 
 depository institution or bank holding 
 company.
 ``(B) Limitations on examination authority for bank 
 holding companies and subsidiaries.--Subject to 
 subparagraph (A)(ii), the Board may make examinations 
 under subparagraph (A)(i) of each bank holding company 
 and each subsidiary of such holding company in order 
 to--
 ``(i) inform the Board of the nature of the 
 operations and financial condition of the 
 holding company and such subsidiaries;
 ``(ii) inform the Board of--
 ``(I) the financial and operational 
 risks within the holding company system 
 that may pose a threat to the safety 
 and soundness of any subsidiary 
 depository institution of such holding 
 company; and
 ``(II) the systems for monitoring 
 and controlling such risks; and
 ``(iii) monitor compliance with the 
 provisions of this Act and those governing 
 transactions and relationships between any 
 subsidiary depository institution and its 
 affiliates.
 ``(C) Restricted focus of examinations.--The Board 
 shall, to the fullest extent possible, limit the focus 
 and scope of any examination of a bank holding company 
 to--
 ``(i) the bank holding company; and
 ``(ii) any subsidiary of the holding 
 company that, because of--
 ``(I) the size, condition, or 
 activities of the subsidiary;
 ``(II) the nature or size of 
 transactions between such subsidiary 
 and any depository institution which is 
 also a subsidiary of such holding 
 company; or
 ``(III) the centralization of 
 functions within the holding company 
 system,
 could have a materially adverse effect on the 
 safety and soundness of any depository 
 institution affiliate of the holding company.
 ``(D) Deference to bank examinations.--The Board 
 shall, to the fullest extent possible, use, for the 
 purposes of this paragraph, the reports of examinations 
 of depository institutions made by the appropriate 
 Federal and State depository institution supervisory 
 authority.
 ``(E) Deference to other examinations.--The Board 
 shall, to the fullest extent possible, address the 
 circumstances which might otherwise permit or require 
 an examination by the Board by forgoing an examination 
 and instead reviewing the reports of examination made 
 of--
 ``(i) any registered broker or dealer by or 
 on behalf of the Securities and Exchange 
 Commission;
 ``(ii) any registered investment adviser 
 properly registered by or on behalf of either 
 the Securities and Exchange Commission or any 
 State;
 ``(iii) any licensed insurance company by 
 or on behalf of any state regulatory authority 
 responsible for the supervision of insurance 
 companies; and
 ``(iv) any other subsidiary that the Board 
 finds to be comprehensively supervised by a 
 Federal or State authority.
 ``(3) Capital.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Board shall not, by 
 regulation, guideline, order or otherwise, prescribe or 
 impose any capital or capital adequacy rules, 
 guidelines, standards, or requirements on any 
 subsidiary of a bank holding company that is not a 
 depository institution and--
 ``(i) is in compliance with applicable 
 capital requirements of another Federal 
 regulatory authority (including the Securities 
 and Exchange Commission) or State insurance 
 authority; or
 ``(ii) is properly registered as an 
 investment adviser under the Investment 
 Advisers Act of 1940, or with any State.
 ``(B) Rule of construction.--Subparagraph (A) shall 
 not be construed as preventing the Board from imposing 
 capital or capital adequacy rules, guidelines, 
 standards, or requirements with respect to activities 
 of a registered investment adviser other than 
 investment advisory activities or activities incidental 
 to investment advisory activities.
 ``(4) Transfer of board authority to appropriate federal 
 banking agency.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of any bank holding 
 company which is not significantly engaged in 
 nonbanking activities, the Board, in consultation with 
 the appropriate Federal banking agency, may designate 
 the appropriate Federal banking agency of the lead 
 insured depository institution subsidiary of such 
 holding company as the appropriate Federal banking 
 agency for the bank holding company.
 ``(B) Authority transferred.--An agency designated 
 by the Board under subparagraph (A) shall have the same 
 authority as the Board under this Act to--
 ``(i) examine and require reports from the 
 bank holding company and any affiliate of such 
 company (other than a depository institution) 
 under section 5;
 ``(ii) approve or disapprove applications 
 or transactions under section 3;
 ``(iii) take actions and impose penalties 
 under subsections (e) and (f) of section 5 and 
 section 8; and
 ``(iv) take actions regarding the holding 
 company, any affiliate of the holding company 
 (other than a depository institution), or any 
 institution-affiliated party of such company or 
 affiliate under the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Act and any other statute which the Board may 
 designate.
 ``(C) Agency orders.--Section 9 of this Act and 
 section 105 of the Bank Holding Company Act Amendments 
 of 1970 shall apply to orders issued by an agency 
 designated under subparagraph (A) in the same manner 
 such sections apply to orders issued by the Board.''.

SEC. 112. AUTHORITY OF STATE INSURANCE REGULATOR AND SECURITIES AND 
 EXCHANGE COMMISSION.

 Section 5 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1844) 
is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(g) Authority of State Insurance Regulator and the Securities and 
Exchange Commission.--
 ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 law, any regulation, order, or other action of the Board which 
 requires a bank holding company to provide funds or other 
 assets to a subsidiary insured depository institution shall not 
 be effective nor enforceable if--
 ``(A) such funds or assets are to be provided by--
 ``(i) a bank holding company that is an 
 insurance company or is a broker or dealer 
 registered under the Securities Exchange Act of 
 1934; or
 ``(ii) an affiliate of the depository 
 institution which is an insurance company or a 
 broker or dealer registered under such Act; and
 ``(B) the State insurance authority for the 
 insurance company or the Securities and Exchange 
 Commission for the registered broker or dealer, as the 
 case may be, determines in writing sent to the holding 
 company and the Board that the holding company shall 
 not provide such funds or assets because such action 
 would have a material adverse effect on the financial 
 condition of the insurance company or the broker or 
 dealer, as the case may be.
 ``(2) Notice to state insurance authority or sec 
 required.--If the Board requires a bank holding company, or an 
 affiliate of a bank holding company, which is an insurance 
 company or a broker or dealer described in paragraph (1)(A) to 
 provide funds or assets to an insured depository institution 
 subsidiary of the holding company pursuant to any regulation, 
 order, or other action of the Board referred to in paragraph 
 (1), the Board shall promptly notify the State insurance 
 authority for the insurance company or the Securities and 
 Exchange Commission, as the case may be, of such requirement.
 ``(3) Divestiture in lieu of other action.--If the Board 
 receives a notice described in paragraph (1)(B) from a State 
 insurance authority or the Securities and Exchange Commission 
 with regard to a bank holding company or affiliate referred to 
 in such paragraph, the Board may order the bank holding company 
 to divest the insured depository institution within 180 days of 
 receiving notice or such longer period as the Board determines 
 consistent with the safe and sound operation of the insured 
 depository institution.
 ``(4) Conditions before divestiture.--During the period 
 beginning on the date an order to divest is issued by the Board 
 under paragraph (3) to a bank holding company and ending on the 
 date the divestiture is completed, the Board may impose any 
 conditions or restrictions on the holding company's ownership 
 or operation of the insured depository institution, including 
 restricting or prohibiting transactions between the insured 
 depository institution and any affiliate of the institution, as 
 are appropriate under the circumstances.''.

SEC. 113. LIMITATION ON RULEMAKING, PRUDENTIAL, SUPERVISORY, AND 
 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY OF THE BOARD.

 The Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1841 et seq.) is 
amended by inserting after section 10 the following new section:

``SEC. 10A. LIMITATION ON RULEMAKING, PRUDENTIAL, SUPERVISORY, AND 
 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY OF THE BOARD.

 ``(a) Limitation on Direct Action.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Board may not prescribe regulations, 
 issue or seek entry of orders, impose restraints, restrictions, 
 guidelines, requirements, safeguards, or standards, or 
 otherwise take any action under or pursuant to any provision of 
 this Act or section 8 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act 
 against or with respect to a regulated subsidiary of a bank 
 holding company unless the action is necessary to prevent or 
 redress an unsafe or unsound practice or breach of fiduciary 
 duty by such subsidiary that poses a material risk to--
 ``(A) the financial safety, soundness, or stability 
 of an affiliated depository institution; or
 ``(B) the domestic or international payment system.
 ``(2) Criteria for board action.--The Board shall not take 
 action otherwise permitted under paragraph (1) unless the Board 
 finds that it is not reasonably possible to effectively protect 
 against the material risk at issue through action directed at 
 or against the affiliated depository institution or against 
 depository institutions generally.
 ``(b) Limitation on Indirect Action.--The Board may not prescribe 
regulations, issue or seek entry of orders, impose restraints, 
restrictions, guidelines, requirements, safeguards, or standards, or 
otherwise take any action under or pursuant to any provision of this 
Act or section 8 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act against or with 
respect to a bank holding company where the purpose or effect of doing 
so would be to take action indirectly against or with respect to a 
regulated subsidiary that may not be taken directly against or with 
respect to such subsidiary in accordance with subsection (a).
 ``(c) Actions Specifically Authorized.--Notwithstanding subsection 
(a), the Board may take action under this Act or section 8 of the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Act to enforce compliance by a regulated 
subsidiary with Federal law that the Board has specific jurisdiction to 
enforce against such subsidiary.
 ``(d) Regulated Subsidiary Defined.--For purposes of this section, 
the term `regulated subsidiary' means any company that is not a bank 
holding company and is--
 ``(1) a broker or dealer registered under the Securities 
 Exchange Act of 1934;
 ``(2) an investment adviser registered under the Investment 
 Advisers Act of 1940, with respect to the investment advisory 
 activities of such investment adviser and activities incidental 
 to such investment advisory activities;
 ``(3) an investment company registered under the Investment 
 Company Act of 1940;
 ``(4) an insurance company or an insurance agency subject 
 to supervision by a State insurance commission, agency, or 
 similar authority; or
 ``(5) an entity subject to regulation by the Commodity 
 Futures Trading Commission, with respect to the commodities 
 activities of such entity and activities incidental to such 
 commodities activities.''.

SEC. 114. EXAMINATION OF INVESTMENT COMPANIES.

 (a) Exclusive Commission Authority.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (3), the 
 Commission shall be the sole Federal agency with authority to 
 inspect and examine any registered investment company that is 
 not a bank holding company or a savings and loan holding 
 company.
 (2) Prohibition on banking agencies.--Except as provided in 
 paragraph (3), a Federal banking agency may not inspect or 
 examine any registered investment company that is not a bank 
 holding company or a savings and loan holding company.
 (3) Certain examinations authorized.-- Nothing in this 
 subsection prevents the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 
 if the Corporation finds it necessary to determine the 
 condition of an insured depository institution for insurance 
 purposes, from examining an affiliate of any insured depository 
 institution, pursuant to its authority under section 10(b)(4) 
 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, as may be necessary to 
 disclose fully the relationship between the depository 
institution and the affiliate, and the effect of such relationship on 
the depository institution.
 (b) Examination Results and Other Information.--The Commission 
shall provide to any Federal banking agency, upon request, the results 
of any examination, reports, records, or other information with respect 
to any registered investment company to the extent necessary for the 
agency to carry out its statutory responsibilities.
 (c) Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the following 
definitions shall apply:
 (1) Bank holding company.--The term ``bank holding 
 company'' has the same meaning as in section 2 of the Bank 
 Holding Company Act of 1956.
 (2) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the 
 Securities and Exchange Commission.
 (3) Federal banking agency.--The term ``Federal banking 
 agency'' has the same meaning as in section 3(z) of the Federal 
 Deposit Insurance Act.
 (4) Registered investment company.--The term ``registered 
 investment company'' means an investment company which is 
 registered with the Commission under the Investment Company Act 
 of 1940.
 (5) Savings and loan holding company.--The term ``savings 
 and loan holding company'' has the same meaning as in section 
 10(a)(1)(D) of the Home Owners' Loan Act.

SEC. 115. EQUIVALENT REGULATION AND SUPERVISION.

 (a) In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the 
provisions of--
 (1) section 5(c) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 
 (as amended by this Act) that limit the authority of the Board 
 of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to require reports 
 from, to make examinations of, or to impose capital 
 requirements on bank holding companies and their nonbank 
 subsidiaries; and
 (2) section 10A of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (as 
 added by this Act) that limit whatever authority the Board 
 might otherwise have to take direct or indirect action with 
 respect to bank holding companies and their nonbank 
 subsidiaries,
shall also limit whatever authority that the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation might otherwise have under any statute to require reports, 
make examinations, impose capital requirements or take any other direct 
or indirect action with respect to bank holding companies and their 
nonbank subsidiaries (including nonbank subsidiaries of depository 
institutions), subject to the same standards and requirements as are 
applicable to the Board under such provisions.
 (b) Certain Examinations Authorized.--Nothing in this section shall 
prevent the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, if the Corporation 
finds it necessary to determine the condition of an insured depository 
institution for insurance purposes, from examining an affiliate of any 
insured depository institution, pursuant to its authority under section 
10(b)(4) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, as may be necessary to 
disclose fully the relationship between the depository institution and 
the affiliate, and the effect of such relationship on the depository 
institution.

 Subtitle C--Subsidiaries of National Banks

SEC. 121. SUBSIDIARIES OF NATIONAL BANKS AUTHORIZED TO ENGAGE IN 
 FINANCIAL ACTIVITIES.

 Chapter one of title LXII of the revised statutes of United States 
(12 U.S.C. 21 et seq.) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating section 5136A (12 U.S.C. 25a) as 
 section 5136C; and
 (2) by inserting after section 5136 (12 U.S.C. 24) the 
 following new section:

``SEC. 5136A. SUBSIDIARIES OF NATIONAL BANKS.

 ``(a) Activities Permissible.--
 ``(1) In general.--A subsidiary of a national bank may--
 ``(A) engage in any activity that is permissible 
 for the parent national bank; and
 ``(B) engage in any activity permissible for a bank 
 holding company under any provision of section 4(k) of 
 the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 other than--
 ``(i) paragraph (3)(B) of such section 
 (relating to insurance activities) insofar as 
 such paragraph permits a bank holding company 
 to engage as principal in insuring, 
 guaranteeing, or indemnifying against loss, 
 harm, damage, illness, disability, or death, on 
 in providing or issuing annuities; and
 ``(ii) paragraph (3)(I) of such section 
 (relating to insurance company investments).
 ``(2) Limitations.--A subsidiary of a national bank--
 ``(A) may not, pursuant to subparagraph (C) of 
 paragraph (1)--
 ``(i) underwrite insurance other than 
 credit-related insurance;
 ``(ii) engage in real estate investment or 
 development activities (except to the extent 
 that a Federal statute expressly authorizes a 
 national bank to engage directly in such an 
 activity); and
 ``(B) may not engage in any activity not 
 permissible under paragraph (1).
 ``(b) Requirements Applicable to National Banks With Financial 
Subsidiaries.--
 ``(1) In general.--A financial subsidiary of a national 
 bank may engage in activities pursuant to subsection (a)(1)(C) 
 only if--
 ``(A) the national bank is well capitalized, is 
 well managed, and achieved the rating described in 
 section 4(l)(3) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 
 during the most recent examination of the bank by the 
 Comptroller of the Currency;
 ``(B) each insured depository institution affiliate 
 of the national bank is well capitalized, is well 
 managed, and achieved the rating described in section 
 4(1)(3) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 during 
 the most recent examination of the institution by the 
 appropriate Federal banking agency; and
 ``(C) the national bank has received the approval 
 of the Comptroller of the Currency by regulation or 
 order.
 ``(2) Corrective procedures.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Comptroller of the Currency 
 shall, by regulation prescribe procedures to enforce 
 paragraph (1).
 ``(B) Stringency.--The regulation prescribed under 
 subparagraph (A) shall be no less stringent than the 
 corresponding restrictions and requirements of section 
 4(m) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956.
 ``(c) Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the following 
definitions shall apply:
 ``(1) Affiliate.--The term `affiliate' has the same meaning 
 in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
 ``(2) Financial subsidiary.--The term `financial 
 subsidiary' means a company that--
 ``(A) is a subsidiary of an insured bank; and
 ``(B) is engaged as principal in any financial 
 activity that is not permissible under subparagraph (A) 
 or (B) of subsection (a)(1) of this section.
 ``(3) Subsidiary.--The term `subsidiary' has the same 
 meaning as in section 2 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 
 1956.
 ``(4) Well capitalized.--The term `well capitalized' has 
 the same meaning as in section 38 of the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Act.
 ``(5) Well managed.--The term `well managed' means--
 ``(A) in the case of an insured depository 
 institution that has been examined, the achievement 
 of--
 ``(i) a composite rating of 1 or 2 under 
 the Uniform Financial Institutions Rating 
 System (or an equivalent rating under an 
 equivalent rating system) in connection with 
 the most recent examination or subsequent 
 review of the insured depository institution; 
 and
 ``(ii) at least a rating of 2 for 
 management, if that rating is given; or
 ``(B) in the case of an insured depository 
 institution that has not been examined, the existence 
 and use of managerial resources that the appropriate 
 Federal banking agency determines are satisfactory.
 ``(d) Rule of Construction.--No provision of this section shall be 
construed so as to prohibit national banks from owning or controlling 
subsidiaries pursuant to section 25 or 25A of the Federal Reserve Act, 
the Bank Service Company Act, or any other Federal statute that 
expressly by its terms authorizes national banks to own or control 
subsidiaries.''.

SEC. 122. SAFETY AND SOUNDNESS FIREWALLS BETWEEN BANKS AND THEIR 
 FINANCIAL SUBSIDIARIES.

 (a) Purposes.--The purposes of this section are--
 (1) to protect the safety and soundness of any insured bank 
 that has a financial subsidiary;
 (2) to apply to any transaction between the bank and the 
 financial subsidiary (including a loan, extension of credit, 
 guarantee, or purchase of assets), other than an equity 
 investment, the same restrictions and requirements as would 
 apply if the financial subsidiary were a subsidiary of a bank 
 holding company having control of the bank; and
 (3) to apply to any equity investment of the bank in the 
 financial subsidiary restrictions and requirements equivalent 
 to those that would apply if--
 (A) the bank paid a dividend in the same dollar 
 amount to a bank holding company having control of the 
 bank; and
 (B) the bank holding company used the proceeds of 
 the dividend to make an equity investment in a 
 subsidiary that was engaged in the same activities as 
 the financial subsidiary of the bank.
 (b) Safety and Soundness Firewalls Applicable to Subsidiaries of 
Banks.--The Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1811 et seq.) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 45. SAFETY AND SOUNDNESS FIREWALLS APPLICABLE TO SUBSIDIARIES OF 
 BANKS.

 ``(a) Limiting the Equity Investment of a Bank in a Subsidiary.--
 ``(1) Capital deduction.--In determining whether an insured 
 bank complies with applicable regulatory capital standards--
 ``(A) the appropriate Federal banking agency shall 
 deduct from the assets and tangible equity of the bank 
 the aggregate amount of the outstanding equity 
 investments of the bank in financial subsidiaries of 
 the bank; and
 ``(B) the assets and liabilities of such financial 
 subsidiaries shall not be consolidated with those of 
 the bank.
 ``(2) Investment limitation.--An insured bank shall not, 
 without the prior approval of the appropriate Federal banking 
 agency, make any equity investment in a financial subsidiary of 
 the bank if that investment would, when made, exceed the amount 
 that the bank could pay as a dividend without obtaining prior 
 regulatory approval.
 ``(b) Operational and Financial Safeguards for the Bank.--An 
insured bank that has a financial subsidiary shall maintain procedures 
for identifying and managing any financial and operational risks posed 
by the financial subsidiary.
 ``(c) Maintenance of Separate Corporate Identity and Separate Legal 
Status.--
 ``(1) In general.--Each insured bank shall ensure that the 
 bank maintains and complies with reasonable policies and 
 procedures to preserve the separate corporate identity and 
 legal status of the bank and any financial subsidiary or 
 affiliate of the bank.
 ``(2) Examinations.--The appropriate Federal banking 
 agency, as part of each examination, shall review whether an 
 insured bank is observing the separate corporate identity and 
 separate legal status of any subsidiaries and affiliates of the 
 bank.
 ``(d) Financial Subsidiary Defined.--For purposes of this section, 
the term `financial subsidiary' has the same meaning as section 
5136A(c)(2)(B) of the Revised Statutes of the United States.
 ``(e) Regulations.--The appropriate Federal banking agencies shall 
jointly prescribe regulations implementing this section.''.
 (c) Limiting a Bank's Credit Exposure to a Financial Subsidiary to 
the Amount of Permissible Credit Exposure to an Affiliate.--Section 23A 
of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 371c) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (e) as subsection (f); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (d), the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(e) Rules Relating to Banks With Financial Subsidiaries.--
 ``(1) Financial subsidiary defined.--For purposes of this 
 section and section 23B, the term `financial subsidiary' has 
 the same meaning as section 5136A(c)(2)(B) of the revised 
 statutes of the United States.
 ``(2) Application to transactions between a financial 
 subsidiary of a bank and the bank.--For purposes of applying 
 this section and section 23B to a transaction between a 
 financial subsidiary of a bank and the bank (or between such 
 financial subsidiary and any other subsidiary of the bank that 
 is not a financial subsidiary), and notwithstanding subsection 
 (b)(2) and section 23B(d)(1)--
 ``(A) the financial subsidiary of the bank--
 ``(i) shall be deemed to be an affiliate of 
 the bank and of any other subsidiary of the 
 bank that is not a financial subsidiary; and
 ``(ii) shall not be deemed a subsidiary of 
 the bank; and
 ``(B) a purchase of or investment in equity 
 securities issued by the financial subsidiary shall not 
 be deemed to be a covered transaction.
 ``(3) Application to transactions between financial 
 subsidiary and nonbank affiliates.--
 ``(A) In general.--A transaction between a 
 financial subsidiary and an affiliate of the financial 
 subsidiary (that is not a subsidiary of a bank) shall 
 not be deemed to be a transaction between a subsidiary 
 of a bank and an affiliate of the bank for purposes of 
 section 23A or section 23B of this Act.
 ``(B) Certain affiliates excluded.--For purposes of 
 this paragraph, the term `affiliate' shall not include 
 a bank, or a subsidiary of a bank that is engaged 
 exclusively in activities permissible for a national 
 bank to engage in directly or activities described in 
 clause (ii) of paragraph (1)(B).''.

SEC. 123. FUNCTIONAL REGULATION.

 (a) Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to ensure that--
 (1) securities activities conducted in a subsidiary of a 
 bank are functionally regulated by the Securities and Exchange 
 Commission to the same extent as if they were conducted in a 
 nondepository subsidiary of a bank holding company; and
 (2) insurance agency and brokerage activities conducted in 
 a subsidiary of a bank are functionally regulated by a State 
 insurance authority to the same extent as if they were 
 conducted in a nondepository subsidiary of a bank holding 
 company.
 (b) Functional Regulation of Financial Subsidiaries.--The Federal 
Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1811 et seq.), is amended by inserting 
after section 45 (as added by section 122 of this subtitle) the 
following new section:

``SEC. 46. FUNCTIONAL REGULATION OF SECURITIES SUBSIDIARIES AND 
 INSURANCE AGENCY SUBSIDIARIES OF INSURED DEPOSITORY 
 INSTITUTIONS.

 ``(a) Broker or Dealer Subsidiary.--A broker or dealer that is a 
subsidiary of an insured depository institution shall be subject to 
regulation under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 in the same manner 
and to the same extent as a broker or dealer that--
 ``(1) is controlled by the same bank holding company as 
 controls the insured depository institution; and
 ``(2) is not an insured depository institution or a 
 subsidiary of an insured depository institution.
 ``(b) Insurance Agency Subsidiary.--An insurance agency or 
brokerage that is a subsidiary of an insured depository institution 
shall be subject to regulation by a State insurance authority in the 
same manner and to the same extent as an insurance agency or brokerage 
that--
 ``(1) is controlled by the same bank holding company as 
 controls the insured depository institution; and
 ``(2) is not an insured depository institution or a 
 subsidiary of an insured depository institution.
 ``(c) Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the terms 
`broker' and `dealer' have the same meanings as in section 3 of the 
Securities Exchange Act of 1934.''.

 Subtitle D--Review of Bank Mergers and Acquisitions

SEC. 131. AMENDMENT TO THE BANK HOLDING COMPANY ACT OF 1956 TO MODIFY 
 NOTIFICATION AND POST-APPROVAL WAITING PERIOD FOR SECTION 
 3 TRANSACTIONS.

 Section 11(b)(1) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 
1849(b)(1)) is amended by inserting ``and, if the transaction also 
involves an acquisition under section 4 or section 6, the Board shall 
also notify the Federal Trade Commission of such approval'' before the 
period at the end of the first sentence.

SEC. 132. INTERAGENCY DATA SHARING.

 To the extent not prohibited by other law, the Comptroller of the 
Currency, the Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision, the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System shall make available to the Attorney General and 
the Federal Trade Commission any data in the possession of any such 
banking agency that the antitrust agency deems necessary for antitrust 
review of any transaction requiring notice to any such antitrust agency 
or the approval of such agency under section 3, 4, or 6 of the Bank 
Holding Company Act of 1956, section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Act, the National Bank Consolidation and Merger Act, section 
10 of the Home Owners' Loan Act, or the antitrust laws.

SEC. 133. CLARIFICATION OF STATUS OF SUBSIDIARIES AND AFFILIATES.

 (a) Clarification of Federal Trade Commission Jurisdiction.--Any 
person which directly or indirectly controls, is controlled directly or 
indirectly by, or is directly or indirectly under common control with, 
any bank or savings association (as such terms are defined in section 3 
of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act) and is not itself a bank or 
savings association shall not be deemed to be a bank or savings 
association for purposes of the Federal Trade Commission Act or any 
other law enforced by the Federal Trade Commission.
 (b) Savings Provision.--No provision of this section shall be 
construed as restricting the authority of any Federal banking agency 
(as defined in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act) under 
any Federal banking law, including section 8 of the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Act.
 (c) Hart-Scott-Rodino Amendment.--Section 7A(c)(7) of the Clayton 
Act (15 U.S.C. 18a(c)) is amended by inserting before the semicolon at 
the end the following: ``, except that a portion of a transaction is 
not exempt under this paragraph if such portion of the transaction (A) 
requires notice under section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 
1956; and (B) does not require approval under section 3 or 4 of the 
Bank Holding Company Act of 1956''.

SEC. 134. ANNUAL GAO REPORT.

 (a) In General.--By the end of the 1-year period beginning on the 
date of the enactment of this Act and annually thereafter, the 
Comptroller General of the United States shall submit a report to the 
Congress on market concentration in the financial services industry and 
its impact on consumers.
 (b) Analysis.--Each report submitted under subsection (a) shall 
contain an analysis of--
 (1) the positive and negative effects of affiliations 
 between various types of financial companies, and of 
 acquisitions pursuant to this Act and the amendments made by 
 this Act to other provisions of law, including any positive or 
 negative effects on consumers, area markets, and submarkets 
 thereof or on registered securities brokers and dealers which 
 have been purchased by depository institutions or depository 
 institution holding companies;
 (2) the changes in business practices and the effects of 
 any such changes on the availability of venture capital, 
 consumer credit, and other financial services or products and 
 the availability of capital and credit for small businesses; 
 and
 (3) the acquisition patterns among depository institutions, 
 depository institution holding companies, securities firms, and 
 insurance companies including acquisitions among the largest 20 
 percent of firms and acquisitions within regions or other 
 limited geographical areas.

 Subtitle E--Direct Activities of Banks

SEC. 141. AUTHORITY OF NATIONAL BANKS TO UNDERWRITE CERTAIN MUNICIPAL 
 BONDS.

 The paragraph designated the Seventh of section 5136 of the Revised 
Statutes of the United States (12 U.S.C. 24(7)) is amended by adding at 
the end the following new sentence: ``In addition to the provisions in 
this paragraph for dealing in, underwriting or purchasing securities, 
the limitations and restrictions contained in this paragraph as to 
dealing in, underwriting, and purchasing investment securities for the 
national bank's own account shall not apply to obligations (including 
limited obligation bonds, revenue bonds, and obligations that satisfy 
the requirements of section 142(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986) issued by or on behalf of any state or political subdivision of a 
state, including any municipal corporate instrumentality of 1 or more 
states, or any public agency or authority of any state or political 
subdivision of a state, if the national banking association is well 
capitalized (as defined in section 38 of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Act).''.

 TITLE II--FUNCTIONAL REGULATION

 Subtitle A--Brokers and Dealers

SEC. 201. DEFINITION OF BROKER.

 Section 3(a)(4) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 
78c(a)(4)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(4) Broker.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `broker' means any 
 person engaged in the business of effecting 
 transactions in securities for the account of others.
 ``(B) Exception for certain bank activities.--A 
 bank shall not be considered to be a broker because the 
 bank engages in any of the following activities under 
 the conditions described:
 ``(i) Third party brokerage arrangements.--
 The bank enters into a contractual or other 
 arrangement with a broker or dealer registered 
 under this title under which the broker or 
dealer offers brokerage services on or off the premises of the bank 
if--
 ``(I) such broker or dealer is 
 clearly identified as the person 
 performing the brokerage services;
 ``(II) the broker or dealer 
 performs brokerage services in an area 
 that is clearly marked and, to the 
 extent practicable, physically separate 
 from the routine deposit-taking 
 activities of the bank;
 ``(III) any materials used by the 
 bank to advertise or promote generally 
 the availability of brokerage services 
 under the contractual or other 
 arrangement clearly indicate that the 
 brokerage services are being provided 
 by the broker or dealer and not by the 
 bank;
 ``(IV) any materials used by the 
 bank to advertise or promote generally 
 the availability of brokerage services 
 under the contractual or other 
 arrangement are in compliance with the 
 Federal securities laws before 
 distribution;
 ``(V) bank employees (other than 
 associated persons of a broker or 
 dealer who are qualified pursuant to 
 the rules of a self-regulatory 
 organization) perform only clerical or 
 ministerial functions in connection 
 with brokerage transactions including 
 scheduling appointments with the 
 associated persons of a broker or 
 dealer, except that bank employees may 
 forward customer funds or securities 
 and may describe in general terms the 
 range of investment vehicles available 
 from the bank and the broker or dealer 
 under the contractual or other 
 arrangement;
 ``(VI) bank employees do not 
 directly receive incentive compensation 
 for any brokerage transaction unless 
 such employees are associated persons 
 of a broker or dealer and are qualified 
 pursuant to the rules of a self-
 regulatory organization, except that 
 the bank employees may receive 
 compensation for the referral of any 
 customer if the compensation is a 
 nominal one-time cash fee of a fixed 
 dollar amount and the payment of the 
 fee is not contingent on whether the 
 referral results in a transaction;
 ``(VII) such services are provided 
 by the broker or dealer on a basis in 
 which all customers which receive any 
 services are fully disclosed to the 
 broker or dealer;
 ``(VIII) the bank does not carry a 
 securities account of the customer 
 except in a customary custodian or 
 trustee capacity; and
 ``(IX) the bank, broker, or dealer 
 informs each customer that the 
 brokerage services are provided by the 
 broker or dealer and not by the bank 
 and that the securities are not 
 deposits or other obligations of the 
 bank, are not guaranteed by the bank, 
 and are not insured by the Federal 
 Deposit Insurance Corporation.
 ``(ii) Trust activities.--The bank effects 
 transactions in a trustee capacity, or effects 
 transactions in a fiduciary capacity in its 
 trust department or other department that is 
 regularly examined by bank examiners for 
 compliance with fiduciary principles and 
 standards, and (in either case)--
 ``(I) is primarily compensated for 
 such transactions on the basis of an 
 administration or annual fee (payable 
 on a monthly, quarterly, or other 
 basis), a percentage of assets under 
 management, or a flat or capped per 
 order processing fee equal to not more 
 than the cost incurred by the bank in 
 connection with executing securities 
 transactions for trustee and fiduciary 
 customers, or any combination of such 
 fees, consistent with fiduciary 
 principles and standards; and
 ``(II) does not publicly solicit 
 brokerage business, other than by 
 advertising that it effects 
 transactions in securities in 
 conjunction with advertising its other 
 trust activities.
 ``(iii) Permissible securities 
 transactions.--The bank effects transactions 
 in--
 ``(I) commercial paper, bankers 
 acceptances, or commercial bills;
 ``(II) exempted securities;
 ``(III) qualified Canadian 
 government obligations as defined in 
 section 5136 of the Revised Statutes, 
 in conformity with section 15C of this 
 title and the rules and regulations 
 thereunder, or obligations of the North 
 American Development Bank; or
 ``(IV) any standardized, credit 
 enhanced debt security issued by a 
 foreign government pursuant to the 
 March 1989 plan of then Secretary of 
 the Treasury Brady, used by such 
 foreign government to retire 
 outstanding commercial bank loans.
 ``(iv) Certain stock purchase plans.--
 ``(I) Employee benefit plans.--The 
 bank effects transactions, as part of 
 its transfer agency activities, in the 
 securities of an issuer as part of any 
 pension, retirement, profit-sharing, 
 bonus, thrift, savings, incentive, or 
 other similar benefit plan for the 
 employees of that issuer or its 
 subsidiaries, if--
 ``(aa) the bank does not 
 solicit transactions or provide 
 investment advice with respect 
 to the purchase or sale of 
 securities in connection with 
 the plan; and
 ``(bb) the bank's 
 compensation for such plan or 
 program consists primarily of 
 administration fees, or flat or 
 capped per order processing 
 fees, or both.
 ``(II) Dividend reinvestment 
 plans.--The bank effects transactions, 
 as part of its transfer agency 
 activities, in the securities of an 
 issuer as part of that issuer's 
 dividend reinvestment plan, if--
 ``(aa) the bank does not 
 solicit transactions or provide 
 investment advice with respect 
 to the purchase or sale of 
 securities in connection with 
 the plan;
 ``(bb) the bank does not 
 net shareholders' buy and sell 
 orders, other than for programs 
 for odd-lot holders or plans 
 registered with the Commission; 
 and
 ``(cc) the bank's 
 compensation for such plan or 
 program consists primarily of 
 administration fees, or flat or 
 capped per order processing 
 fees, or both.
 ``(III) Issuer plans.--The bank 
 effects transactions, as part of its 
 transfer agency activities, in the 
 securities of an issuer as part of a 
 plan or program for the purchase or 
 sale of that issuer's shares, if--
 ``(aa) the bank does not 
 solicit transactions or provide 
 investment advice with respect 
 to the purchase or sale of 
 securities in connection with 
 the plan or program;
 ``(bb) the bank does not 
 net shareholders' buy and sell 
 orders, other than for programs 
 for odd-lot holders or plans 
 registered with the Commission; 
 and
 ``(cc) the bank's 
 compensation for such plan or 
 program consists primarily of 
 administration fees, or flat or 
 capped per order processing 
 fees, or both.
 ``(IV) Permissible delivery of 
 materials.--The exception to being 
 considered a broker for a bank engaged 
 in activities described in subclauses 
 (I), (II), and (III) will not be 
 affected by a bank's delivery of 
 written or electronic plan materials to 
 employees of the issuer, shareholders 
 of the issuer, or members of affinity 
 groups of the issuer, so long as such 
 materials are--
 ``(aa) comparable in scope 
 or nature to that permitted by 
 the Commission as of the date 
 of the enactment of the 
 Financial Services 
 Modernization Act of 1999; or
 ``(bb) otherwise permitted 
 by the Commission.
 ``(v) Sweep accounts.--The bank effects 
 transactions as part of a program for the 
 investment or reinvestment of bank deposit 
 funds into any no-load, open-end management 
 investment company registered under the 
 Investment Company Act of 1940 that holds 
 itself out as a money market fund.
 ``(vi) Affiliate transactions.--The bank 
 effects transactions for the account of any 
 affiliate of the bank (as defined in section 2 
 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956) other 
 than--
 ``(I) a registered broker or 
 dealer; or
 ``(II) an affiliate that is engaged 
 in merchant banking, as described in 
 section 6(c)(3)(H) of the Bank Holding 
 Company Act of 1956.
 ``(vii) Private securities offerings.--The 
 bank--
 ``(I) effects sales as part of a 
 primary offering of securities not 
 involving a public offering, pursuant 
 to section 3(b), 4(2), or 4(6) of the 
 Securities Act of 1933 or the rules and 
 regulations issued thereunder;
 ``(II) at any time after the date 
 that is 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of the Financial Services 
 Modernization Act of 1999, is not 
 affiliated with a broker or dealer that 
 has been registered for more than 1 
 year in accordance with this Act, and 
 engages in dealing, market making, or 
 underwriting activities, other than 
 with respect to exempted securities; 
 and
 ``(III) effects transactions 
 exclusively with qualified investors.
 ``(viii) Safekeeping and custody 
 activities.--
 ``(I) In general.--The bank, as 
 part of customary banking activities--
 ``(aa) provides safekeeping 
 or custody services with 
 respect to securities, 
 including the exercise of 
 warrants and other rights on 
 behalf of customers;
 ``(bb) facilitates the 
 transfer of funds or 
 securities, as a custodian or a 
 clearing agency, in connection 
 with the clearance and 
 settlement of its customers' 
 transactions in securities;
 ``(cc) effects securities 
 lending or borrowing 
 transactions with or on behalf 
 of customers as part of 
 services provided to customers 
 pursuant to division (aa) or 
 (bb) or invests cash collateral 
 pledged in connection with such 
 transactions; or
 ``(dd) holds securities 
 pledged by a customer to 
 another person or securities 
 subject to purchase or resale 
 agreements involving a 
 customer, or facilitates the 
 pledging or transfer of such 
 securities by book entry or as 
 otherwise provided under 
 applicable law.
 ``(II) Exception for carrying 
 broker activities.--The exception to 
 being considered a broker for a bank 
 engaged in activities described in 
 subclause (I) shall not apply if the 
 bank, in connection with such 
 activities, acts in the United States 
 as a carrying broker (as such term, and 
 different formulations thereof, are 
 used in section 15(c)(3) and the rules 
 and regulations thereunder) for any 
 broker or dealer, unless such carrying 
 broker activities are engaged in with 
 respect to government securities (as 
 defined in paragraph (42) of this 
 subsection).
 ``(ix) Banking products.--The bank effects 
 transactions in traditional banking products, 
 as defined in section 205(a) of the Financial 
 Services Modernization Act of 1999.
 ``(x) De minimis exception.--The bank 
 effects, other than in transactions referred to 
 in clauses (i) through (ix), not more than 500 
 transactions in securities in any calendar 
 year, and such transactions are not effected by 
 an employee of the bank who is also an employee 
 of a broker or dealer.
 ``(C) Broker dealer execution.--The exception to 
 being considered a broker for a bank engaged in 
 activities described in clauses (ii), (iv), and (viii) 
 of subparagraph (B) shall not apply if the activities 
 described in such provisions result in the trade in the 
 United States of any security that is a publicly traded 
 security in the United States, unless--
 ``(i) the bank directs such trade to a 
 registered broker or dealer for execution;
 ``(ii) the trade is a cross trade or other 
 substantially similar trade of a security 
 that--
 ``(I) is made by the bank or 
 between the bank and an affiliated 
 fiduciary; and
 ``(II) is not in contravention of 
 fiduciary principles established under 
 applicable Federal or State law; or
 ``(iii) the trade is conducted in some 
 other manner permitted under rules, 
 regulations, or orders as the Commission may 
 prescribe or issue.
 ``(D) No effect of bank exemptions on other 
 commission authority.--The exception to being 
 considered a broker for a bank engaged in activities 
 described in subparagraphs (B) and (C) shall not affect 
 the authority of the Commission under any other 
 provision of this Act or any other securities law.
 ``(E) Fiduciary capacity.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (B)(ii), the term `fiduciary capacity' 
 means--
 ``(i) in the capacity as trustee, executor, 
 administrator, registrar of stocks and bonds, 
 transfer agent, guardian, assignee, receiver, 
 or custodian under a uniform gift to minor act, 
 or as an investment adviser if the bank 
 receives a fee for its investment advice;
 ``(ii) in any capacity in which the bank 
 possesses investment discretion on behalf of 
 another; or
 ``(iii) in any other similar capacity.
 ``(F) Exception for entities subject to section 
 15(e).--The term `broker' does not include a bank 
 that--
 ``(i) was, immediately prior to the 
 enactment of the Financial Services 
 Modernization Act of 1999, subject to section 
 15(e); and
 ``(ii) is subject to such restrictions and 
 requirements as the Commission considers 
 appropriate.''.

SEC. 202. DEFINITION OF DEALER.

 Section 3(a)(5) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 
78c(a)(5)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(5) Dealer.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `dealer' means any 
 person engaged in the business of buying and selling 
 securities for such person's own account through a 
 broker or otherwise.
 ``(B) Exception for person not engaged in the 
 business of dealing.--The term `dealer' does not 
 include a person that buys or sells securities for such 
 person's own account, either individually or in a 
 fiduciary capacity, but not as a part of a regular 
 business.
 ``(C) Exception for certain bank activities.--A 
 bank shall not be considered to be a dealer because the 
 bank engages in any of the following activities under 
 the conditions described:
 ``(i) Permissible securities 
 transactions.--The bank buys or sells--
 ``(I) commercial paper, bankers 
 acceptances, or commercial bills;
 ``(II) exempted securities;
 ``(III) qualified Canadian 
 government obligations as defined in 
 section 5136 of the Revised Statutes of 
 the United States, in conformity with 
 section 15C of this title and the rules 
 and regulations thereunder, or 
 obligations of the North American 
 Development Bank; or
 ``(IV) any standardized, credit 
 enhanced debt security issued by a 
 foreign government pursuant to the 
 March 1989 plan of then Secretary of 
 the Treasury Brady, used by such 
 foreign government to retire 
 outstanding commercial bank loans.
 ``(ii) Investment, trustee, and fiduciary 
 transactions.--The bank buys or sells 
 securities for investment purposes--
 ``(I) for the bank; or
 ``(II) for accounts for which the 
 bank acts as a trustee or fiduciary.
 ``(iii) Asset-backed transactions.--The 
 bank engages in the issuance or sale to 
 qualified investors, through a grantor trust or 
 otherwise, of securities backed by or 
 representing an interest in notes, drafts, 
 acceptances, loans, leases, receivables, other 
 obligations, or pools of any such obligations 
 predominantly originated by the bank, or a 
 syndicate of banks of which the bank is a 
 member, or an affiliate of any such bank other 
 than a broker or dealer.
 ``(iv) Banking products.--The bank buys or 
 sells traditional banking products, as defined 
in section 205(a) of the Financial Services Modernization Act of 1999.
 ``(v) Derivative instruments.--The bank 
 issues, buys, or sells any derivative 
 instrument to which the bank is a party--
 ``(I) to or from a qualified 
 investor, except that if the instrument 
 provides for the delivery of one or 
 more securities (other than a 
 derivative instrument or government 
 security), the transaction shall be 
 effected with or through a registered 
 broker or dealer;
 ``(II) to or from other persons, 
 except that if the derivative 
 instrument provides for the delivery of 
 one or more securities (other than a 
 derivative instrument or government 
 security), or is a security (other than 
 a government security), the transaction 
 shall be effected with or through a 
 registered broker or dealer; or
 ``(III) to or from any person if 
 the instrument is neither a security 
 nor provides for the delivery of one or 
 more securities (other than a 
 derivative instrument).''.

SEC. 203. REGISTRATION FOR SALES OF PRIVATE SECURITIES OFFERINGS.

 Section 15A of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78o-
3) is amended by inserting after subsection (i) the following new 
subsection:
 ``(j) Registration for Sales of Private Securities Offerings.--A 
registered securities association shall create a limited qualification 
category for any associated person of a member who effects sales as 
part of a primary offering of securities not involving a public 
offering, pursuant to section 3(b), 4(2), or 4(6) of the Securities Act 
of 1933 and the rules and regulations thereunder, and shall deem 
qualified in such limited qualification category, without testing, any 
bank employee who, in the six month period preceding the date of 
enactment of this Act, engaged in effecting such sales.''.

SEC. 204. INFORMATION SHARING.

 Section 18 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act is amended by 
adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(t) Recordkeeping Requirements.--
 ``(1) Requirements.--Each appropriate Federal banking 
 agency, after consultation with and consideration of the views 
 of the Commission, shall establish recordkeeping requirements 
 for banks relying on exceptions contained in paragraphs (4) and 
 (5) of section 3(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. 
 Such recordkeeping requirements shall be sufficient to 
 demonstrate compliance with the terms of such exceptions and be 
 designed to facilitate compliance with such exceptions. Each 
 appropriate Federal banking agency shall make any such 
 information available to the Commission upon request.
 ``(2) Definitions.--As used in this subsection the term 
 `Commission' means the Securities and Exchange Commission.''.

SEC. 205. DEFINITION AND TREATMENT OF BANKING PRODUCTS.

 (a) Definition of Traditional Banking Product.--For purposes of 
paragraphs (4) and (5) of section 3(a) of the Securities Exchange Act 
of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78c(a) (4), (5)), the term ``traditional banking 
product'' means--
 (1) a deposit account, savings account, certificate of 
 deposit, or other deposit instrument issued by a bank;
 (2) a banker's acceptance;
 (3) a letter of credit issued or loan made by a bank;
 (4) a debit account at a bank arising from a credit card or 
 similar arrangement;
 (5) a participation in a loan which the bank or an 
 affiliate of the bank (other than a broker or dealer) funds, 
 participates in, or owns that is sold--
 (A) to qualified investors; or
 (B) to other persons that--
 (i) have the opportunity to review and 
 assess any material information, including 
 information regarding the borrower's 
 creditworthiness; and
 (ii) based on such factors as financial 
 sophistication, net worth, and knowledge and 
 experience in financial matters, have the 
 capability to evaluate the information 
 available, as determined under generally 
 applicable banking standards or guidelines; and
 (6) any derivative instrument, whether or not individually 
 negotiated, involving or relating to--
 (A) foreign currencies, except options on foreign 
 currencies that trade on a national securities 
 exchange;
 (B) interest rates, except interest rate derivative 
 instruments that--
 (i) are based on a security or a group or 
 index of securities (other than government 
 securities or a group or index of government 
 securities);
 (ii) provide for the delivery of one or 
 more securities (other than government 
 securities); or
 (iii) trade on a national securities 
 exchange; or
 (C) commodities, other rates, indices, or other 
 assets, except derivative instruments that--
 (i) are securities or that are based on a 
 group or index of securities (other than 
 government securities or a group or index of 
 government securities);
 (ii) provide for the delivery of one or 
 more securities (other than government 
 securities); or
 (iii) trade on a national securities 
 exchange.
 (b) Amendment to the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.--Section 15 
of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78o) is amended by 
adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(i) Transactions Involving Hybrid Products.--
 ``(1) Commission authority.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Commission may, after 
 consultation with the Board, determine, by regulation 
 published in the Federal Register, that a bank that 
 effects transactions in, or buys or sells, a new 
 product should be subject to the registration 
 requirements of this section.
 ``(B) Limitation.--The Commission may not impose 
 the registration requirements of this section on any 
 bank that effects transactions in, or buys or sells, a 
 product under this subsection unless the Commission 
 determines in the regulations described in subparagraph 
 (A) that--
 ``(i) the subject product is a new product;
 ``(ii) the subject product is a security; 
 and
 ``(iii) imposing the registration 
 requirements of this section is necessary or 
 appropriate in the public interest and for the 
 protection of investors.
 ``(2) Objection to commission regulation.--
 ``(A) Filing of petition for review.--The Board, or 
 any aggrieved party, may obtain review of any final 
 regulation described in paragraph (1) in the United 
 States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia 
 Circuit by filing in such court, not later than 60 days 
 after the date of publication of the final regulation, 
 a written petition requesting that the regulation be 
 set aside.
 ``(B) Transmittal of petition and record.--A copy 
 of a petition described in subparagraph (A) shall be 
 transmitted as soon as possible by the Clerk of the 
 Court to an officer or employee of the Commission 
 designated for that purpose. Upon receipt of the 
 petition, the Commission shall file with the court the 
 regulation under review and any documents referred to 
 therein, and any other relevant materials prescribed by 
 the court.
 ``(C) Exclusive jurisdiction.--On the date of the 
 filing of the petition under subparagraph (A), the 
 court has jurisdiction, which becomes exclusive on the 
 filing of the materials set forth in subparagraph (B), 
 to affirm and enforce or to set aside the regulation at 
 issue.
 ``(D) Standard of review.--
 ``(i) In general.--The court shall 
 determine to affirm and enforce or set aside a 
 regulation of the Commission under this 
 subsection, based on the determination of the 
 court as to whether the subject product--
 ``(I) is a new product, as defined 
 in this subsection;
 ``(II) is a security; and
 ``(III) would be more appropriately 
 regulated under the Federal securities 
 laws or the Federal banking laws, 
 giving equal deference to the views of 
 the Commission and the Board.
 ``(ii) Considerations.--In making a 
 determination under clause (i)(III), the court 
 shall consider--
 ``(I) the nature of the subject new 
 product;
 ``(II) the history, purpose, 
 extent, and appropriateness of the 
 regulation of the new product under the 
Federal securities laws; and
 ``(III) the history, purpose, 
 extent, and appropriateness of the 
 regulation of the new product under the 
 Federal banking laws.
 ``(E) Judicial stay.--The filing of a petition by 
 the Board or an aggrieved party pursuant to 
 subparagraph (A) shall operate as a judicial stay, 
 until the date on which the court makes a final 
 determination under this paragraph, of--
 ``(i) any Commission requirement that a 
 bank register as a broker or dealer under this 
 section, because the bank engages in any 
 transaction in, or buys or sells, the new 
 product that is the subject of the petition; 
 and
 ``(ii) any Commission action against a bank 
 for a failure to comply with a requirement 
 described in clause (i).
 ``(3) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection--
 ``(A) the term `Board' means the Board of Governors 
 of the Federal Reserve System; and
 ``(B) the term `new product' means a product or 
 instrument offered or provided by a bank that--
 ``(i) was not subject to regulation by the 
 Commission as a security under this Act before 
 the date of enactment of this subsection; and
 ``(ii) is not a traditional banking 
 product, as defined in paragraphs (1) through 
 (6) of section 205(a) of the Financial Services 
 Modernization Act of 1999.''.
 (c) Classification Limited.--Classification of a particular product 
or instrument as a traditional banking product pursuant to this section 
or the amendments made by this section shall not be construed as 
finding or implying that such product or instrument is or is not a 
security for any purpose under the securities laws, or is or is not an 
account, agreement, contract, or transaction for any purpose under the 
Commodity Exchange Act.
 (d) No Limitation on Other Authority To Challenge.--Nothing in this 
section or the amendments made by this section shall affect the right 
or authority of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 
any appropriate Federal banking agency, or any interested party under 
any other provision of law to object to or seek judicial review as to 
whether a product or instrument is or is not appropriately classified 
as a traditional banking product under paragraphs (1) through (6) of 
section 205(a).
 (e) Incorporated Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 (1) the term ``appropriate Federal banking agency'' has the 
 same meaning as in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Act;
 (2) the term ``bank'' has the same meaning as in section 
 3(a)(6) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934;
 (3) the term ``Board'' means the Board of Governors of the 
 Federal Reserve System;
 (4) the term ``government securities'' has the same meaning 
 as in section 3(a)(42) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, 
 and, for purposes of this subsection, commercial paper, bankers 
 acceptances, and commercial bills shall be treated in the same 
 manner as government securities; and
 (5) the term ``qualified investor'' has the same meaning as 
 in section 3(a)(55) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as 
 amended by this Act.

SEC. 206. DERIVATIVE INSTRUMENT AND QUALIFIED INVESTOR DEFINED.

 Section 3(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 
78c(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
 ``(54) Derivative instrument.--
 ``(A) Definition.--The term `derivative instrument' 
 means any individually negotiated contract, agreement, 
 warrant, note, or option that is based, in whole or in 
 part, on the value of, any interest in, or any 
 quantitative measure or the occurrence of any event 
 relating to, one or more commodities, securities, 
 currencies, interest or other rates, indices, or other 
 assets, but does not include a traditional banking 
 product, as defined in section 205(a) of the Financial 
 Services Modernization Act of 1999.
 ``(B) Classification limited.--Classification of a 
 particular contract as a derivative instrument pursuant 
 to this paragraph shall not be construed as finding or 
 implying that such instrument is or is not a security 
 for any purpose under the securities laws, or is or is 
 not an account, agreement, contract, or transaction for 
 any purpose under the Commodity Exchange Act.
 ``(55) Qualified investor.--
 ``(A) Definition.--For purposes of this title, the 
 term `qualified investor' means--
 ``(i) any investment company registered 
 with the Commission under section 8 of the 
 Investment Company Act of 1940;
 ``(ii) any issuer eligible for an exclusion 
 from the definition of investment company 
 pursuant to section 3(c)(7) of the Investment 
 Company Act of 1940;
 ``(iii) any bank (as defined in paragraph 
 (6) of this subsection), savings association 
 (as defined in section 3(b) of the Federal 
 Deposit Insurance Act), broker, dealer, 
 insurance company (as defined in section 
 2(a)(13) of the Securities Act of 1933), or 
 business development company (as defined in 
 section 2(a)(48) of the Investment Company Act 
 of 1940);
 ``(iv) any small business investment 
 company licensed by the United States Small 
 Business Administration under section 301 (c) 
 or (d) of the Small Business Investment Act of 
 1958;
 ``(v) any State sponsored employee benefit 
 plan, or any other employee benefit plan, 
 within the meaning of the Employee Retirement 
 Income Security Act of 1974, other than an 
 individual retirement account, if the 
 investment decisions are made by a plan 
 fiduciary, as defined in section 3(21) of that 
 Act, which is either a bank, savings and loan 
 association, insurance company, or registered 
 investment adviser;
 ``(vi) any trust whose purchases of 
 securities are directed by a person described 
 in clauses (i) through (v) of this 
 subparagraph;
 ``(vii) any market intermediary exempt 
 under section 3(c)(2) of the Investment Company 
 Act of 1940;
 ``(viii) any associated person of a broker 
 or dealer other than a natural person;
 ``(ix) any foreign bank (as defined in 
 section 1(b)(7) of the International Banking 
 Act of 1978);
 ``(x) the government of any foreign 
 country;
 ``(xi) any corporation, company, or 
 partnership that owns and invests on a 
 discretionary basis, not less than $10,000,000 
 in investments;
 ``(xii) any natural person who owns and 
 invests on a discretionary basis, not less than 
 $10,000,000 in investments;
 ``(xiii) any government or political 
 subdivision, agency, or instrumentality of a 
 government who owns and invests on a 
 discretionary basis not less than $50,000,000 
 in investments; or
 ``(xiv) any multinational or supranational 
 entity or any agency or instrumentality 
 thereof.
 ``(B) Additional authority.--The Commission may, by 
 rule or order, define a `qualified investor' as any 
 other person, taking into consideration such factors as 
 the financial sophistication of the person, net worth, 
 and knowledge and experience in financial matters.''.

SEC. 207. GOVERNMENT SECURITIES DEFINED.

 Section 3(a)(42) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 
78c(a)(42)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (C);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (D) 
 and inserting ``; or''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(E) for purposes of section 15C as applied to a 
 bank, a qualified Canadian government obligation as 
 defined in section 5136 of the Revised Statutes.''.

SEC. 208. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 This subtitle shall take effect at the end of the 270-day period 
beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 209. RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.

 Nothing in this Act shall supersede, affect, or otherwise limit the 
scope and applicability of the Commodity Exchange Act (7 U.S.C. 1 et 
seq.).

 Subtitle B--Bank Investment Company Activities

SEC. 211. CUSTODY OF INVESTMENT COMPANY ASSETS BY AFFILIATED BANK.

 (a) Management Companies.--Section 17(f) of the Investment Company 
Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-17(f)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) as 
 subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C), respectively;
 (2) by striking ``(f) Every registered'' and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(f) Custody of Securities.--
 ``(1) Every registered'';
 (3) by redesignating the second, third, fourth, and fifth 
 sentences of such subsection as paragraphs (2) through (5), 
 respectively, and indenting the left margin of such paragraphs 
 appropriately; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(6) Services as trustee or custodian.--The Commission may 
 adopt rules and regulations, and issue orders, consistent with 
 the protection of investors, prescribing the conditions under 
 which a bank, or an affiliated person of a bank, either of 
 which is an affiliated person, promoter, organizer, or sponsor 
 of, or principal underwriter for, a registered management 
 company may serve as custodian of that registered management 
 company.''.
 (b) Unit Investment Trusts.--Section 26 of the Investment Company 
Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-26) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsections (b) through (e) as 
 subsections (c) through (f), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (a) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(b) The Commission may adopt rules and regulations, and issue 
orders, consistent with the protection of investors, prescribing the 
conditions under which a bank, or an affiliated person of a bank, 
either of which is an affiliated person of a principal underwriter for, 
or depositor of, a registered unit investment trust, may serve as 
trustee or custodian under subsection (a)(1).''.
 (c) Fiduciary Duty of Custodian.--Section 36(a) of the Investment 
Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-35(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``or'' at the end;
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting ``; or''; and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following:
 ``(3) as custodian.''.

SEC. 212. LENDING TO AN AFFILIATED INVESTMENT COMPANY.

 Section 17(a) of the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-
17(a)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (2);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3) and 
 inserting ``; or''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) to loan money or other property to such registered 
 company, or to any company controlled by such registered 
 company, in contravention of such rules, regulations, or orders 
 as the Commission may prescribe or issue consistent with the 
 protection of investors.''.

SEC. 213. INDEPENDENT DIRECTORS.

 (a) In General.--Section 2(a)(19)(A) of the Investment Company Act 
of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-2(a)(19)(A)) is amended--
 (1) by striking clause (v) and inserting the following new 
 clause:
 ``(v) any person or any affiliated person 
 of a person (other than a registered investment 
 company) that, at any time during the 6-month 
 period preceding the date of the determination 
 of whether that person or affiliated person is 
 an interested person, has executed any 
 portfolio transactions for, engaged in any 
 principal transactions with, or distributed 
 shares for--
 ``(I) the investment company;
 ``(II) any other investment company 
 having the same investment adviser as 
 such investment company or holding 
 itself out to investors as a related 
 company for purposes of investment or 
 investor services; or
 ``(III) any account over which the 
 investment company's investment adviser 
 has brokerage placement discretion,'';
 (2) by redesignating clause (vi) as clause (vii); and
 (3) by inserting after clause (v) the following new clause:
 ``(vi) any person or any affiliated person 
 of a person (other than a registered investment 
 company) that, at any time during the 6-month 
 period preceding the date of the determination 
 of whether that person or affiliated person is 
 an interested person, has loaned money or other 
 property to--
 ``(I) the investment company;
 ``(II) any other investment company 
 having the same investment adviser as 
 such investment company or holding 
 itself out to investors as a related 
 company for purposes of investment or 
 investor services; or
 ``(III) any account for which the 
 investment company's investment adviser 
 has borrowing authority,''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 2(a)(19)(B) of the Investment 
Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-2(a)(19)(B)) is amended--
 (1) by striking clause (v) and inserting the following new 
 clause:
 ``(v) any person or any affiliated person 
 of a person (other than a registered investment 
 company) that, at any time during the 6-month 
 period preceding the date of the determination 
 of whether that person or affiliated person is 
 an interested person, has executed any 
 portfolio transactions for, engaged in any 
 principal transactions with, or distributed 
 shares for--
 ``(I) any investment company for 
 which the investment adviser or 
 principal underwriter serves as such;
 ``(II) any investment company 
 holding itself out to investors, for 
 purposes of investment or investor 
 services, as a company related to any 
 investment company for which the 
 investment adviser or principal 
 underwriter serves as such; or
 ``(III) any account over which the 
 investment adviser has brokerage 
 placement discretion,'';
 (2) by redesignating clause (vi) as clause (vii); and
 (3) by inserting after clause (v) the following new clause:
 ``(vi) any person or any affiliated person 
 of a person (other than a registered investment 
 company) that, at any time during the 6-month 
 period preceding the date of the determination 
 of whether that person or affiliated person is 
 an interested person, has loaned money or other 
 property to--
 ``(I) any investment company for 
 which the investment adviser or 
 principal underwriter serves as such;
 ``(II) any investment company 
 holding itself out to investors, for 
 purposes of investment or investor 
 services, as a company related to any 
 investment company for which the 
 investment adviser or principal 
 underwriter serves as such; or
 ``(III) any account for which the 
 investment adviser has borrowing 
 authority,''.
 (c) Affiliation of Directors.--Section 10(c) of the Investment 
Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-10(c)) is amended by striking 
``bank, except'' and inserting ``bank (together with its affiliates and 
subsidiaries) or any one bank holding company (together with its 
affiliates and subsidiaries) (as such terms are defined in section 2 of 
the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956), except''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect at the end of the 1-year period beginning on the date of 
enactment of this subtitle.

SEC. 214. ADDITIONAL SEC DISCLOSURE AUTHORITY.

 Section 35(a) of the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-
34(a)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(a) Misrepresentation of Guarantees.--
 ``(1) In general.--It shall be unlawful for any person, 
 issuing or selling any security of which a registered 
 investment company is the issuer, to represent or imply in any 
 manner whatsoever that such security or company--
 ``(A) has been guaranteed, sponsored, recommended, 
 or approved by the United States, or any agency, 
 instrumentality or officer of the United States;
 ``(B) has been insured by the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Corporation; or
 ``(C) is guaranteed by or is otherwise an 
 obligation of any bank or insured depository 
 institution.
 ``(2) Disclosures.--Any person issuing or selling the 
 securities of a registered investment company that is advised 
 by, or sold through, a bank shall prominently disclose that an 
 investment in the company is not insured by the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Corporation or any other government agency. The 
 Commission may adopt rules and regulations, and issue orders, 
 consistent with the protection of investors, prescribing the 
 manner in which the disclosure under this paragraph shall be 
 provided.
 ``(3) Definitions.--The terms `insured depository 
 institution' and `appropriate Federal banking agency' have the 
 same meanings as in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Act.''.

SEC. 215. DEFINITION OF BROKER UNDER THE INVESTMENT COMPANY ACT OF 
 1940.

 Section 2(a)(6) of the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 
80a-2(a)(6)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(6) The term `broker' has the same meaning as in section 
 3 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, except that such term 
 does not include any person solely by reason of the fact that 
 such person is an underwriter for one or more investment 
 companies.''.

SEC. 216. DEFINITION OF DEALER UNDER THE INVESTMENT COMPANY ACT OF 
 1940.

 Section 2(a)(11) of the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 
80a-2(a)(11)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(11) The term `dealer' has the same meaning as in section 
 3 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, but does not include 
 an insurance company or investment company.''.

SEC. 217. REMOVAL OF THE EXCLUSION FROM THE DEFINITION OF INVESTMENT 
 ADVISER FOR BANKS THAT ADVISE INVESTMENT COMPANIES.

 (a) Investment Adviser.--Section 202(a)(11) of the Investment 
Advisers Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80b-2(a)(11)) is amended in 
subparagraph (A), by striking ``investment company'' and inserting 
``investment company, except that the term `investment adviser' 
includes any bank or bank holding company to the extent that such bank 
or bank holding company serves or acts as an investment adviser to a 
registered investment company, but if, in the case of a bank, such 
services or actions are performed through a separately identifiable 
department or division, the department or division, and not the bank 
itself, shall be deemed to be the investment adviser''.
 (b) Separately Identifiable Department or Division.--Section 202(a) 
of the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80b-2(a)) is amended 
by adding at the end the following:
 ``(26) The term `separately identifiable department or 
 division' of a bank means a unit--
 ``(A) that is under the direct supervision of an 
 officer or officers designated by the board of 
 directors of the bank as responsible for the day-to-day 
 conduct of the bank's investment adviser activities for 
 one or more investment companies, including the 
 supervision of all bank employees engaged in the 
 performance of such activities; and
 ``(B) for which all of the records relating to its 
 investment adviser activities are separately maintained 
 in or extractable from such unit's own facilities or 
 the facilities of the bank, and such records are so 
 maintained or otherwise accessible as to permit 
 independent examination and enforcement by the 
 Commission of this Act or the Investment Company Act of 
 1940 and rules and regulations promulgated under this 
 Act or the Investment Company Act of 1940.''.

SEC. 218. DEFINITION OF BROKER UNDER THE INVESTMENT ADVISERS ACT OF 
 1940.

 Section 202(a)(3) of the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 
80b-2(a)(3)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(3) The term `broker' has the same meaning as in section 
 3 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.''.

SEC. 219. DEFINITION OF DEALER UNDER THE INVESTMENT ADVISERS ACT OF 
 1940.

 Section 202(a)(7) of the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 
80b-2(a)(7)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(7) The term `dealer' has the same meaning as in section 
 3 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, but does not include 
 an insurance company or investment company.''.

SEC. 220. INTERAGENCY CONSULTATION.

 The Investment Advisers Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80b-1 et seq.) is 
amended by inserting after section 210 the following new section:

``SEC. 210A. CONSULTATION.

 ``(a) Examination Results and Other Information.--
 ``(1) The appropriate Federal banking agency shall provide 
 the Commission upon request the results of any examination, 
 reports, records, or other information to which such agency may 
 have access with respect to the investment advisory 
 activities--
 ``(A) of any--
 ``(i) bank holding company;
 ``(ii) bank; or
 ``(iii) separately identifiable department 
 or division of a bank, that is registered under 
 section 203 of this title; and
 ``(B) in the case of a bank holding company or bank 
 that has a subsidiary or a separately identifiable 
 department or division registered under that section, 
 of such bank or bank holding company.
 ``(2) The Commission shall provide to the appropriate 
 Federal banking agency upon request the results of any 
 examination, reports, records, or other information with 
 respect to the investment advisory activities of any bank 
 holding company, bank, or separately identifiable department or 
 division of a bank, any of which is registered under section 
 203 of this title.
 ``(b) Effect on Other Authority.--Nothing in this section shall 
limit in any respect the authority of the appropriate Federal banking 
agency with respect to such bank holding company, bank, or department 
or division under any provision of law.
 ``(c) Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term 
`appropriate Federal banking agency' has the same meaning as in section 
3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.''.

SEC. 221. TREATMENT OF BANK COMMON TRUST FUNDS.

 (a) Securities Act of 1933.--Section 3(a)(2) of the Securities Act 
of 1933 (15 U.S.C. 77c(a)(2)) is amended by striking ``or any interest 
or participation in any common trust fund or similar fund maintained by 
a bank exclusively for the collective investment and reinvestment of 
assets contributed thereto by such bank in its capacity as trustee, 
executor, administrator, or guardian'' and inserting ``or any interest 
or participation in any common trust fund or similar fund that is 
excluded from the definition of the term `investment company' under 
section 3(c)(3) of the Investment Company Act of 1940''.
 (b) Securities Exchange Act of 1934.--Section 3(a)(12)(A)(iii) of 
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78c(a)(12)(A)(iii)) is 
amended to read as follows:
 ``(iii) any interest or participation in any common 
 trust fund or similar fund that is excluded from the 
 definition of the term `investment company' under 
 section 3(c)(3) of the Investment Company Act of 
 1940;''.
 (c) Investment Company Act of 1940.--Section 3(c)(3) of the 
Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-3(c)(3)) is amended by 
inserting before the period the following: ``, if--
 ``(A) such fund is employed by the bank solely as 
 an aid to the administration of trusts, estates, or 
 other accounts created and maintained for a fiduciary 
 purpose;
 ``(B) except in connection with the ordinary 
 advertising of the bank's fiduciary services, interests 
 in such fund are not--
 ``(i) advertised; or
 ``(ii) offered for sale to the general 
 public; and
 ``(C) fees and expenses charged by such fund are 
 not in contravention of fiduciary principles 
 established under applicable Federal or State law''.

SEC. 222. INVESTMENT ADVISERS PROHIBITED FROM HAVING CONTROLLING 
 INTEREST IN REGISTERED INVESTMENT COMPANY.

 Section 15 of the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-15) 
is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(g) Controlling Interest in Investment Company Prohibited.--
 ``(1) In general.--If an investment adviser to a registered 
 investment company, or an affiliated person of that investment 
 adviser, holds a controlling interest in that registered 
 investment company in a trustee or fiduciary capacity, such 
 person shall--
 ``(A) if it holds the shares in a trustee or 
 fiduciary capacity with respect to any employee benefit 
 plan subject to the Employee Retirement Income Security 
 Act of 1974, transfer the power to vote the shares of 
 the investment company through to another person acting 
 in a fiduciary capacity with respect to the plan who is 
 not an affiliated person of that investment adviser or 
 any affiliated person thereof; or
 ``(B) if it holds the shares in a trustee or 
 fiduciary capacity with respect to any person or entity 
 other than an employee benefit plan subject to the 
 Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974--
 ``(i) transfer the power to vote the shares 
 of the investment company through to--
 ``(I) the beneficial owners of the 
 shares;
 ``(II) another person acting in a 
 fiduciary capacity who is not an 
 affiliated person of that investment 
 adviser or any affiliated person 
 thereof; or
 ``(III) any person authorized to 
 receive statements and information with 
 respect to the trust who is not an 
 affiliated person of that investment 
 adviser or any affiliated person 
 thereof;
 ``(ii) vote the shares of the investment 
 company held by it in the same proportion as 
 shares held by all other shareholders of the 
 investment company; or
 ``(iii) vote the shares of the investment 
 company as otherwise permitted under such 
 rules, regulations, or orders as the Commission 
 may prescribe or issue consistent with the 
 protection of investors.
 ``(2) Exemption.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any 
 investment adviser to a registered investment company, or any 
 affiliated person of that investment adviser, that holds shares 
 of the investment company in a trustee or fiduciary capacity 
if that registered investment company consists solely of assets held in 
such capacities.
 ``(3) Safe harbor.--No investment adviser to a registered 
 investment company or any affiliated person of such investment 
 adviser shall be deemed to have acted unlawfully or to have 
 breached a fiduciary duty under State or Federal law solely by 
 reason of acting in accordance with clause (i), (ii), or (iii) 
 of paragraph (1)(B).''.

SEC. 223. CONFORMING CHANGE IN DEFINITION.

 Section 2(a)(5) of the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 
80a-2(a)(5)) is amended by striking ``(A) a banking institution 
organized under the laws of the United States'' and inserting ``(A) a 
depository institution (as defined in section 3 of the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Act) or a branch or agency of a foreign bank (as such terms 
are defined in section 1(b) of the International Banking Act of 
1978)''.

SEC. 224. CONFORMING AMENDMENT.

 Section 202 of the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80b-
2) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(c) Consideration of Promotion of Efficiency, Competition, and 
Capital Formation.--Whenever pursuant to this title the Commission is 
engaged in rulemaking and is required to consider or determine whether 
an action is necessary or appropriate in the public interest, the 
Commission shall also consider, in addition to the protection of 
investors, whether the action will promote efficiency, competition, and 
capital formation.''.

SEC. 225. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 This subtitle shall take effect 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act.

 Subtitle C--Securities and Exchange Commission Supervision of 
 Investment Bank Holding Companies

SEC. 231. SUPERVISION OF INVESTMENT BANK HOLDING COMPANIES BY THE 
 SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION.

 (a) Amendment.--Section 17 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 
(15 U.S.C. 78q) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (i) as subsection (k); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (h) the following new 
 subsections:
 ``(i) Investment Bank Holding Companies.--
 ``(1) Elective supervision of an investment bank holding 
 company not having a bank or savings association affiliate.--
 ``(A) In general.--An investment bank holding 
 company that is not--
 ``(i) an affiliate of an insured bank 
 (other than an institution described in 
 subparagraph (D), (F), or (G) of section 
 2(c)(2), or held under section 4(f), of the 
 Bank Holding Company Act of 1956) or a savings 
 association;
 ``(ii) a foreign bank, foreign company, or 
 company that is described in section 8(a) of 
 the International Banking Act of 1978; or
 ``(iii) a foreign bank that controls, 
 directly or indirectly, a corporation chartered 
 under section 25A of the Federal Reserve Act,
 may elect to become supervised by filing with the 
 Commission a notice of intention to become supervised, 
 pursuant to subparagraph (B) of this paragraph. Any 
 investment bank holding company filing such a notice 
 shall be supervised in accordance with this section and 
 comply with the rules promulgated by the Commission 
 applicable to supervised investment bank holding 
 companies.
 ``(B) Notification of status as a supervised 
 investment bank holding company.--An investment bank 
 holding company that elects under subparagraph (A) to 
 become supervised by the Commission shall file with the 
 Commission a written notice of intention to become 
 supervised by the Commission in such form and 
 containing such information and documents concerning 
 such investment bank holding company as the Commission, 
 by rule, may prescribe as necessary or appropriate in 
 furtherance of the purposes of this section. Unless the 
 Commission finds that such supervision is not necessary 
 or appropriate in furtherance of the purposes of this 
 section, such supervision shall become effective 45 
 days after the date of receipt of such written notice 
 by the Commission, or within such shorter time period 
 as the Commission, by rule or order, may determine.
 ``(2) Election not to be supervised by the commission as an 
 investment bank holding company.--
 ``(A) Voluntary withdrawal.--A supervised 
 investment bank holding company that is supervised 
 pursuant to paragraph (1) may, upon such terms and 
 conditions as the Commission deems necessary or 
 appropriate, elect not to be supervised by the 
 Commission by filing a written notice of withdrawal 
 from Commission supervision. Such notice shall not 
 become effective until one year after receipt by the 
 Commission, or such shorter or longer period as the 
 Commission deems necessary or appropriate to ensure 
 effective supervision of the material risks to the 
 supervised investment bank holding company and to the 
 affiliated broker or dealer, or to prevent evasion of 
 the purposes of this section.
 ``(B) Discontinuation of commission supervision.--
 If the Commission finds that any supervised investment 
 bank holding company that is supervised pursuant to 
 paragraph (1) is no longer in existence or has ceased 
 to be an investment bank holding company, or if the 
 Commission finds that continued supervision of such a 
 supervised investment bank holding company is not 
 consistent with the purposes of this section, the 
 Commission may discontinue the supervision pursuant to 
 a rule or order, if any, promulgated by the Commission 
 under this section.
 ``(3) Supervision of investment bank holding companies.--
 ``(A) Recordkeeping and reporting.--
 ``(i) In general.--Every supervised 
 investment bank holding company and each 
affiliate thereof shall make and keep for prescribed periods such 
records, furnish copies thereof, and make such reports, as the 
Commission may require by rule, in order to keep the Commission 
informed as to--
 ``(I) the company's or affiliate's 
 activities, financial condition, 
 policies, systems for monitoring and 
 controlling financial and operational 
 risks, and transactions and 
 relationships between any broker or 
 dealer affiliate of the supervised 
 investment bank holding company; and
 ``(II) the extent to which the 
 company or affiliate has complied with 
 the provisions of this Act and 
 regulations prescribed and orders 
 issued under this Act.
 ``(ii) Form and contents.--Such records and 
 reports shall be prepared in such form and 
 according to such specifications (including 
 certification by an independent public 
 accountant), as the Commission may require and 
 shall be provided promptly at any time upon 
 request by the Commission. Such records and 
 reports may include--
 ``(I) a balance sheet and income 
 statement;
 ``(II) an assessment of the 
 consolidated capital of the supervised 
 investment bank holding company;
 ``(III) an independent auditor's 
 report attesting to the supervised 
 investment bank holding company's 
 compliance with its internal risk 
 management and internal control 
 objectives; and
 ``(IV) reports concerning the 
 extent to which the company or 
 affiliate has complied with the 
 provisions of this title and any 
 regulations prescribed and orders 
 issued under this title.
 ``(B) Use of existing reports.--
 ``(i) In general.--The Commission shall, to 
 the fullest extent possible, accept reports in 
 fulfillment of the requirements under this 
 paragraph that the supervised investment bank 
 holding company or its affiliates have been 
 required to provide to another appropriate 
 regulatory agency or self-regulatory 
 organization.
 ``(ii) Availability.--A supervised 
 investment bank holding company or an affiliate 
 of such company shall provide to the 
 Commission, at the request of the Commission, 
 any report referred to in clause (i).
 ``(C) Examination authority.--
 ``(i) Focus of examination authority.--The 
 Commission may make examinations of any 
 supervised investment bank holding company and 
 any affiliate of such company in order to--
 ``(I) inform the Commission 
 regarding--
 ``(aa) the nature of the 
 operations and financial 
 condition of the supervised 
 investment bank holding company 
 and its affiliates;
 ``(bb) the financial and 
 operational risks within the 
 supervised investment bank 
 holding company that may affect 
 any broker or dealer controlled 
 by such supervised investment 
 bank holding company; and
 ``(cc) the systems of the 
 supervised investment bank 
 holding company and its 
 affiliates for monitoring and 
 controlling those risks; and
 ``(II) monitor compliance with the 
 provisions of this subsection, 
 provisions governing transactions and 
 relationships between any broker or 
 dealer affiliated with the supervised 
 investment bank holding company and any 
 of the company's other affiliates, and 
 applicable provisions of subchapter II 
 of chapter 53, title 31, United States 
 Code (commonly referred to as the `Bank 
 Secrecy Act') and regulations 
 thereunder.
 ``(ii) Restricted focus of examinations.--
 The Commission shall limit the focus and scope 
 of any examination of a supervised investment 
 bank holding company to--
 ``(I) the company; and
 ``(II) any affiliate of the company 
 that, because of its size, condition, 
 or activities, the nature or size of 
 the transactions between such affiliate 
 and any affiliated broker or dealer, or 
 the centralization of functions within 
 the holding company system, could, in 
 the discretion of the Commission, have 
 a materially adverse effect on the 
 operational or financial condition of 
 the broker or dealer.
 ``(iii) Deference to other examinations.--
 For purposes of this subparagraph, the 
 Commission shall, to the fullest extent 
 possible, use the reports of examination of an 
 institution described in subparagraph (D), (F), 
 or (G) of section 2(c)(2), or held under 
 section 4(f), of the Bank Holding Company Act 
 of 1956 made by the appropriate regulatory 
 agency, or of a licensed insurance company made 
 by the appropriate State insurance regulator.
 ``(4) Holding company capital.--
 ``(A) Authority.--If the Commission finds that it 
 is necessary to adequately supervise investment bank 
 holding companies and their broker or dealer affiliates 
 consistent with the purposes of this subsection, the 
 Commission may adopt capital adequacy rules for 
 supervised investment bank holding companies.
 ``(B) Method of calculation.--In developing rules 
 under this paragraph:
 ``(i) Double leverage.--The Commission 
 shall consider the use by the supervised 
 investment bank holding company of debt and 
 other liabilities to fund capital investments 
 in affiliates.
 ``(ii) No unweighted capital ratio.--The 
 Commission shall not impose under this section 
 a capital ratio that is not based on 
 appropriate risk-weighting considerations.
 ``(iii) No capital requirement on regulated 
 entities.--The Commission shall not, by rule, 
 regulation, guideline, order or otherwise, 
 impose any capital adequacy provision on a 
 nonbanking affiliate (other than a broker or 
 dealer) that is in compliance with applicable 
 capital requirements of another Federal 
 regulatory authority or State insurance 
 authority.
 ``(iv) Appropriate exclusions.--The 
 Commission shall take full account of the 
 applicable capital requirements of another 
 Federal regulatory authority or State insurance 
 regulator.
 ``(C) Internal risk management models.--The 
 Commission may incorporate internal risk management 
 models into its capital adequacy rules for supervised 
 investment bank holding companies.
 ``(5) Functional regulation of banking and insurance 
 activities of supervised investment bank holding companies.--
 The Commission shall defer to--
 ``(A) the appropriate regulatory agency with regard 
 to all interpretations of, and the enforcement of, 
 applicable banking laws relating to the activities, 
 conduct, ownership, and operations of banks, and 
 institutions described in subparagraph (D), (F), and 
 (G) of section 2(c)(2), or held under section 4(f), of 
 the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956; and
 ``(B) the appropriate State insurance regulators 
 with regard to all interpretations of, and the 
 enforcement of, applicable State insurance laws 
 relating to the activities, conduct, and operations of 
 insurance companies and insurance agents.
 ``(6) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection and 
 subsection (j)--
 ``(A) the term `investment bank holding company' 
 means--
 ``(i) any person other than a natural 
 person that owns or controls one or more 
 brokers or dealers; and
 ``(ii) the associated persons of the 
 investment bank holding company;
 ``(B) the term `supervised investment bank holding 
 company' means any investment bank holding company that 
 is supervised by the Commission pursuant to this 
 subsection;
 ``(C) the terms `affiliate', `bank', `bank holding 
 company', `company', `control', and `savings 
 association' have the same meanings as in section 2 of 
 the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956;
 ``(D) the term `insured bank' has the same meaning 
 as in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act;
 ``(E) the term `foreign bank' has the same meaning 
 as in section 1(b)(7) of the International Banking Act 
 of 1978; and
 ``(F) the terms `person associated with an 
 investment bank holding company' and `associated person 
 of an investment bank holding company' mean any person 
 directly or indirectly controlling, controlled by, or 
 under common control with, an investment bank holding 
 company.
 ``(j) Authority To Limit Disclosure of Information.--
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Commission shall not be 
compelled to disclose any information required to be reported under 
subsection (h) or (i) or any information supplied to the Commission by 
any domestic or foreign regulatory agency that relates to the financial 
or operational condition of any associated person of a broker or 
dealer, investment bank holding company, or any affiliate of an 
investment bank holding company. Nothing in this subsection shall 
authorize the Commission to withhold information from Congress, or 
prevent the Commission from complying with a request for information 
from any other Federal department or agency or any self-regulatory 
organization requesting the information for purposes within the scope 
of its jurisdiction, or complying with an order of a court of the 
United States in an action brought by the United States or the 
Commission. For purposes of section 552 of title 5, United States Code, 
this subsection shall be considered a statute described in subsection 
(b)(3)(B) of such section 552. In prescribing regulations to carry out 
the requirements of this subsection, the Commission shall designate 
information described in or obtained pursuant to subparagraphs (A), 
(B), and (C) of subsection (i)(5) as confidential information for 
purposes of section 24(b)(2) of this title.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 3(a)(34) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 
 (15 U.S.C. 78c(a)(34)) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new subparagraphs:
 ``(H) When used with respect to an institution 
 described in subparagraph (D), (F), or (G) of section 
 2(c)(2), or held under section 4(f), of the Bank 
 Holding Company Act of 1956--
 ``(i) the Comptroller of the Currency, in 
 the case of a national bank or a bank in the 
 District of Columbia examined by the 
 Comptroller of the Currency;
 ``(ii) the Board of Governors of the 
 Federal Reserve System, in the case of a State 
 member bank of the Federal Reserve System or 
 any corporation chartered under section 25A of 
 the Federal Reserve Act;
 ``(iii) the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Corporation, in the case of any other bank the 
 deposits of which are insured in accordance 
 with the Federal Deposit Insurance Act; or
 ``(iv) the Commission in the case of all 
 other such institutions.''.
 (2) Section 1112(e) of the Right to Financial Privacy Act 
 of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3412(e)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``this title'' and inserting 
 ``law''; and
 (B) by inserting ``, examination reports'' after 
 ``financial records''.

 Subtitle D--Studies

SEC. 241. STUDY OF METHODS TO INFORM INVESTORS AND CONSUMERS OF 
 UNINSURED PRODUCTS.

 Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
Comptroller General of the United States shall submit a report to the 
Congress regarding the efficacy, costs, and benefits of requiring that 
any depository institution that accepts federally insured deposits and 
that, directly or through a contractual or other arrangement with a 
broker, dealer, or agent, buys from, sells to, or effects transactions 
for retail investors in securities or consumers of insurance to inform 
such investors and consumers through the use of a logo or seal that the 
security or insurance is not insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation.

SEC. 242. STUDY OF LIMITATION ON FEES ASSOCIATED WITH ACQUIRING 
 FINANCIAL PRODUCTS.

 Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
Comptroller General of the United States shall submit a report to the 
Congress regarding the efficacy and benefits of uniformly limiting any 
commissions, fees, markups, or other costs incurred by customers in the 
acquisition of financial products.

 TITLE III--INSURANCE

SEC. 301. STATE REGULATION OF THE BUSINESS OF INSURANCE.

 The Act entitled ``An Act to express the intent of the Congress 
with reference to the regulation of the business of insurance'' and 
approved March 9, 1945 (15 U.S.C. 1011 et seq.), commonly referred to 
as the ``McCarran-Ferguson Act'' remains the law of the United States.

SEC. 302. MANDATORY INSURANCE LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.

 No person or entity shall provide insurance in a State as principal 
or agent unless such person or entity is licensed as required by the 
appropriate insurance regulator of such State in accordance with the 
relevant State insurance law, subject to section 104.

SEC. 303. FUNCTIONAL REGULATION OF INSURANCE.

 The insurance sales activity of any person or entity shall be 
functionally regulated by the States, subject to section 104.

SEC. 304. INSURANCE UNDERWRITING IN NATIONAL BANKS.

 (a) In General.--Except as provided in section 305, a national bank 
and the subsidiaries of a national bank may not provide insurance in a 
State as principal except that this prohibition shall not apply to 
authorized products.
 (b) Authorized Products.--For the purposes of this section, a 
product is authorized if--
 (1) as of January 1, 1997, the Comptroller of the Currency 
 had determined in writing that national banks may provide such 
 product as principal, or national banks were in fact lawfully 
providing such product as principal;
 (2) no court of relevant jurisdiction had, by final 
 judgment, overturned a determination of the Comptroller of the 
 Currency that national banks may provide such product as 
 principal; and
 (3) the product is not title insurance, or an annuity 
 contract the income of which is subject to tax treatment under 
 section 72 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (c) Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term 
``insurance'' means--
 (1) any product regulated as insurance as of January 1, 
 1997, in accordance with the relevant State insurance law, in 
 the State in which the product is provided;
 (2) any product first offered after January 1, 1997, 
 which--
 (A) a State insurance regulator determines shall be 
 regulated as insurance in the State in which the 
 product is provided because the product insures, 
 guarantees, or indemnifies against liability, loss of 
 life, loss of health, or loss through damage to or 
 destruction of property, including, but not limited to, 
 surety bonds, life insurance, health insurance, title 
insurance, and property and casualty insurance (such as private 
passenger or commercial automobile, homeowners, mortgage, commercial 
multiperil, general liability, professional liability, workers' 
compensation, fire and allied lines, farm owners multiperil, aircraft, 
fidelity, surety, medical malpractice, ocean marine, inland marine, and 
boiler and machinery insurance); and
 (B) is not a product or service of a bank that is--
 (i) a deposit product;
 (ii) a loan, discount, letter of credit, or 
 other extension of credit;
 (iii) a trust or other fiduciary service;
 (iv) a qualified financial contract (as 
 defined in or determined pursuant to section 
 11(e)(8)(D)(i) of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Act); or
 (v) a financial guaranty, except that this 
 subparagraph (B) shall not apply to a product 
 that includes an insurance component such that 
 if the product is offered or proposed to be 
 offered by the bank as principal--
 (I) it would be treated as a life 
 insurance contract under section 7702 
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; 
 or
 (II) in the event that the product 
 is not a letter of credit or other 
 similar extension of credit, a 
 qualified financial contract, or a 
 financial guaranty, it would qualify 
 for treatment for losses incurred with 
 respect to such product under section 
 832(b)(5) of the Internal Revenue Code 
 of 1986, if the bank were subject to 
 tax as an insurance company under 
 section 831 of that Code; or
 (3) any annuity contract, the income on which is subject to 
 tax treatment under section 72 of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986.

SEC. 305. TITLE INSURANCE ACTIVITIES OF NATIONAL BANKS AND THEIR 
 AFFILIATES.

 (a) Authority.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act or 
any other law, no national bank, and no subsidiary of a national bank, 
may engage in any activity involving the underwriting of title 
insurance, other than title insurance underwriting activities in which 
such national bank or subsidiary was actively and lawfully engaged 
before the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) Insurance Affiliate.--In the case of a national bank which has 
an affiliate which provides insurance as principal and is not a 
subsidiary of the bank, the national bank and any subsidiary of the 
national bank may not engage in any activity involving the underwriting 
of title insurance pursuant to subsection (a).
 (c) Insurance Subsidiary.--In the case of a national bank which has 
a subsidiary which provides insurance as principal and has no affiliate 
which provides insurance as principal and is not a subsidiary, the 
national bank may not engage in any activity involving the underwriting 
of title insurance pursuant to subsection (a).
 (d) ``Affiliate'' and ``Subsidiary'' Defined.--For purposes of this 
section, the terms ``affiliate'' and ``subsidiary'' have the same 
meanings as in section 2 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956.

SEC. 306. EXPEDITED DISPUTE RESOLUTION FOR FEDERAL REGULATORS.

 (a) Filing in Court of Appeals.--In the case of a regulatory 
conflict between a State insurance regulator and a Federal regulator as 
to whether any product is or is not insurance, as defined in section 
304(c) of this Act, either regulator may seek expedited judicial review 
of such determination by the United States Court of Appeals for the 
circuit in which the State is located or in the United States Court of 
Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit by filing a petition for 
review in such court.
 (b) Expedited Review.--The United States Court of Appeals in which 
a petition for review is filed in accordance with subsection (a) shall 
complete all action on such petition, including rendering a judgment, 
before the end of the 60-day period beginning on the date on which such 
petition is filed, unless all parties to such proceeding agree to any 
extension of such period.
 (c) Supreme Court Review.--Any request for certiorari to the 
Supreme Court of the United States of any judgment of a United States 
Court of Appeals with respect to a petition for review under this 
section shall be filed with the Supreme Court of the United States as 
soon as practicable after such judgment is issued.
 (d) Statute of Limitation.--No action may be filed under this 
section challenging an order, ruling, determination, or other action of 
a Federal regulator or State insurance regulator after the later of--
 (1) the end of the 12-month period beginning on the date on 
 which the first public notice is made of such order, ruling, 
 determination or other action in its final form; or
 (2) the end of the 6-month period beginning on the date on 
 which such order, ruling, determination, or other action takes 
 effect.
 (e) Standard of Review.--The court shall decide an action filed 
under this section based on its review on the merits of all questions 
presented under State and Federal law, including the nature of the 
product or activity and the history and purpose of its regulation under 
State and Federal law.

SEC. 307. CERTAIN STATE AFFILIATION LAWS PREEMPTED FOR INSURANCE 
 COMPANIES AND AFFILIATES.

 Except as provided in section 104(a)(2), no State may, by law, 
regulation, order, interpretation, or otherwise--
 (1) prevent or significantly interfere with the ability of 
 any insurer, or any affiliate of an insurer (whether such 
 affiliate is organized as a stock company, mutual holding 
 company, or otherwise), to become a bank holding company or to 
 acquire control of an insured depository institution;
 (2) limit the amount of an insurer's assets that may be 
 invested in the voting securities of an insured depository 
 institution (or any company which controls such institution), 
 except that the laws of an insurer's State of domicile may 
 limit the amount of such investment to an amount that is not 
 less than 5 percent of the insurer's admitted assets; or
 (3) prevent, significantly interfere with, or have the 
 authority to review, approve, or disapprove a plan of 
 reorganization by which an insurer proposes to reorganize from 
 mutual form to become a stock insurer (whether as a direct or 
 indirect subsidiary of a mutual holding company or otherwise) 
 unless such State is the State of domicile of the insurer.

 TITLE IV--CUSTOMER SERVICE AND EDUCATION

SEC. 401. CUSTOMER PROTECTION AND EDUCATION REGULATIONS.

 The Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1811 et seq.) is 
amended by inserting after section 46 (as added by section 123 of this 
Act) the following new section:

``SEC. 47. CUSTOMER SERVICE AND EDUCATION REGULATIONS.

 ``(a) Regulations Required.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Federal banking agencies shall 
 prescribe and publish in final form, before the end of the 1-
 year period beginning on the date of enactment of the Financial 
 Services Modernization Act, customer protection regulations 
 (which the agencies jointly determine to be appropriate) that--
 ``(A) apply to retail sales practices, 
 solicitations, advertising, or offers of any nondeposit 
 product by any insured depository institution or any 
 person who is engaged in such activities at an office 
 of the institution or on behalf of the institution; and
 ``(B) are consistent with the requirements of this 
 Act and provide such additional protections for 
 customers to whom such sales, solicitations, 
 advertising, or offers are directed as the agency 
 determines to be appropriate.
 ``(2) Applicability to subsidiaries.--The regulations 
 prescribed pursuant to paragraph (1) shall extend such 
 protections to any subsidiary of an insured depository 
 institution, as deemed appropriate by the regulators referred 
 to in paragraph (3), where such extension is determined to be 
 necessary to ensure the customer protections provided by this 
 section.
 ``(3) Consultation and joint regulations.--The Federal 
 banking agencies shall consult with each other and prescribe 
 joint regulations pursuant to paragraph (1), after consultation 
 with the State insurance regulators, as appropriate.
 ``(4) Nondeposit product defined.--For purposes of this 
 section, the term `nondeposit product'--
 ``(A) means any investment and insurance product 
 which is not a deposit;
 ``(B) includes shares issued by a registered 
 investment company; and
 ``(C) does not include--
 ``(i) any loan or any other extension of 
 credit by an insured depository institution;
 ``(ii) any letter of credit;
 ``(iii) any trust services;
 ``(iv) any discount; or
 ``(v) any other instrument or insurance or 
 investment product specifically excluded from 
 the definition of such term by regulations 
 prescribed jointly by the Federal banking 
 agencies, to the extent necessary to carry out 
 the purpose of this Act.
 ``(5) Insurance product defined.--For purposes of this 
 section, the term `insurance product' includes an annuity 
 contract the income of which is subject to tax treatment under 
 section 72 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 ``(b) Sales Practices.--
 ``(1) Anticoercion rules.--The regulations prescribed 
 pursuant to subsection (a) shall include anticoercion rules 
 applicable to the sale of nondeposit products which prohibit an 
 insured depository institution from engaging in any practice 
 that would lead a customer to believe an extension of credit, 
in violation of section 106(b) of the Bank Holding Company Act 
Amendments of 1970, is conditional upon--
 ``(A) the purchase of a nondeposit product from the 
 institution or any of its affiliates; or
 ``(B) an agreement by the customer not to obtain, 
 or a prohibition on the customer from obtaining, a 
 nondeposit product from an unaffiliated entity.
 ``(2) Suitability of product.--
 ``(A) In general.--The regulations prescribed 
 pursuant to subsection (a) with respect to the sale of 
 nondeposit products shall include standards to ensure 
 that an investment product sold to a customer is 
 suitable and any other nondeposit product is 
 appropriate for the customer based on financial 
 information disclosed by the customer.
 ``(B) Rules of fair practice.--In prescribing the 
 standards under subparagraph (A) with respect to the 
 sale of investments, the Federal banking agencies shall 
 take into account the Rules of Fair Practice of the 
 National Association of Securities Dealers.
 ``(c) Disclosures and Advertising.--The regulations prescribed 
pursuant to subsection (a) shall include the following provisions 
relating to disclosures and advertising in connection with the initial 
purchase of a nondeposit product:
 ``(1) Disclosures.--
 ``(A) In general.--Requirements that the following 
 disclosures be made orally and in writing before the 
 completion of the initial sale and, in the case of 
 clause (iii), at the time of application for an 
 extension of credit:
 ``(i) Uninsured status.--As appropriate, 
 the product is not insured by the Federal 
 Deposit Insurance Corporation, the United 
 States Government, or the insured depository 
 institution.
 ``(ii) Insurance product.--In the case of 
 an insurance policy which is sold by the 
 depository institution, or any affiliate of the 
 institution, as agent, the product is not an 
 obligation of or guaranteed by the depository 
 institution.
 ``(iii) Investment risk.--In the case of an 
 investment product, variable annuity, or other 
 product which involves an investment risk, that 
 there is an investment risk associated with the 
 product, including possible loss of value.
 ``(iv) Coercion.--The approval of an 
 extension of credit may not be conditioned on--
 ``(I) the purchase of a nondeposit 
 product from the institution in which 
 the application for credit is pending 
 or any of affiliate of the institution; 
 or
 ``(II) an agreement by the customer 
 not to obtain, or a prohibition on the 
 customer from obtaining, a nondeposit 
 product from an unaffiliated entity.
 ``(B) Making disclosure readily understandable.--
 Regulations prescribed under subparagraph (A) shall 
 encourage the use of disclosure that is conspicuous, 
 simple, direct, and readily understandable, such as the 
 following:
 ``(i) `NOT FDIC-INSURED'.
 ``(ii) `NOT GUARANTEED BY THE BANK'.
 ``(iii) `MAY GO DOWN IN VALUE'.
 ``(C) Adjustments for alternative methods of 
 purchase.--In prescribing the requirements under 
 subparagraphs (A) and (D), necessary adjustments shall 
 be made for purchase in person, by telephone, or by 
 electronic media to provide for the most appropriate 
 and complete form of disclosure and acknowledgments.
 ``(D) Customer acknowledgment.--A requirement that 
 an insured depository institution shall require any 
 person selling a nondeposit product at any office of, 
 or on behalf of, the institution to obtain, at the time 
 a customer receives the disclosures required under this 
 paragraph or at the time of the initial purchase by the 
 customer of such product, an acknowledgment by such 
 customer of the receipt of the disclosure required 
 under this paragraph with respect to such product.
 ``(2) Prohibition on misrepresentations.--A prohibition on 
 any practice, or any advertising, at any office of, or on 
 behalf of, the insured depository institution, or any 
 subsidiary as appropriate, which could mislead any person or 
 otherwise cause a reasonable person to reach an erroneous 
belief with respect to--
 ``(A) the uninsured nature of any nondeposit 
 product sold, or offered for sale, by the institution 
 or any subsidiary of the institution; or
 ``(B) in the case of a nondeposit product that 
 involves an investment risk, the investment risk 
 associated with any such product.
 ``(d) Separation of Banking and Nonbanking Activities.--
 ``(1) Regulations required.--The regulations prescribed 
 pursuant to subsection (a) shall include such provisions as the 
 Federal banking agencies consider appropriate to ensure that 
 the routine acceptance of deposits is kept, to the extent 
 practicable, physically segregated from nondeposit product 
 activity.
 ``(2) Requirements.--Regulations prescribed pursuant to 
 paragraph (1) shall include the following requirements:
 ``(A) Separate setting.--A clear delineation of the 
 setting in which, and the circumstances under which, 
 transactions involving nondeposit products should be 
 conducted in a location physically segregated from an 
 area where retail deposits are routinely accepted.
 ``(B) Referrals.--Standards which permit any person 
 accepting deposits from the public in an area where 
 such transactions are routinely conducted in an insured 
 depository institution to refer a customer who seeks to 
 purchase any nondeposit product to a qualified person 
 who sells such product, only if the person making the 
 referral receives no more than a one-time nominal fee 
 of a fixed dollar amount for each referral that does 
 not depend on whether the referral results in a 
 transaction.
 ``(C) Qualification and licensing requirements.--
 Standards prohibiting any insured depository 
 institution from permitting any person to sell or offer 
 for sale any nondeposit product in any part of any 
 office of the institution, or on behalf of the 
 institution, unless such person is appropriately 
 qualified and licensed.
 ``(e) Customer Grievance Process.--The Federal banking agencies 
shall jointly establish a customer complaint mechanism, for receiving 
and expeditiously addressing customer complaints alleging a violation 
of regulations issued under this section, which mechanism shall--
 ``(1) establish a group within each regulatory agency to 
 receive such complaints;
 ``(2) develop procedures for investigating such complaints;
 ``(3) develop procedures for informing customers of rights 
 they may have in connection with such complaints; and
 ``(4) develop procedures for addressing concerns raised by 
 such complaints, as appropriate, including procedures for the 
 recovery of losses to the extent appropriate.
 ``(f) Effect on Other Authority.--
 ``(1) In general.--No provision of this section shall be 
 construed as granting, limiting, or otherwise affecting--
 ``(A) any authority of the Securities and Exchange 
 Commission, any self-regulatory organization, the 
 Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board, or the Secretary 
 of the Treasury under any Federal securities law; or
 ``(B) except as provided in paragraph (2), any 
 authority of any State insurance commissioner or other 
 State authority under any State law.
 ``(2) Coordination with state law.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B), regulations prescribed by a Federal 
 banking agency under this section shall not apply to 
 retail sales, solicitations, advertising, or offers of 
 any nondeposit product by any insured depository 
 institution or to any person who is engaged in such 
 activities at an office of such institution or on 
 behalf of the institution, in a State where the State 
 has in effect statutes, regulations, orders, or 
 interpretations, that are inconsistent with or contrary 
 to the regulations prescribed by the Federal banking 
 agencies.
 ``(B) Preemption.--If, with respect to any 
 provision of the regulations prescribed under this 
 section, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
 System, the Comptroller of the Currency, the Director 
 of the Office of Thrift Supervision, and the Board of 
 Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
 determine jointly that the protection afforded by such 
 provision for consumers is greater than the protection 
 provided by a comparable provision of the statutes, 
 regulations, orders, or interpretations referred to in 
 subparagraph (A) of any State, such provision of the 
 regulations prescribed under this section shall 
 supersede the comparable provision of such State 
 statute, regulation, order, or interpretation.''.
 <all>