[Congressional Bills 109th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 3378 Introduced in House (IH)]

109th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 3378

 To provide comprehensive reform regarding medical malpractice.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 July 21, 2005

 Mr. Baird (for himself, Mr. Moran of Virginia, Mr. Ruppersberger, and 
Mr. Lipinski) introduced the following bill; which was referred to the 
 Committee on Energy and Commerce, and in addition to the Committee on 
 the Judiciary, for a period to be subsequently determined by the 
 Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall 
 within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To provide comprehensive reform regarding medical malpractice.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Comprehensive 
Medical Malpractice Reform Act of 2005''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
 TITLE I--HEALTH CARE MALPRACTICE LIABILITY REFORM

Sec. 101. Cap on non-economic damages.
Sec. 102. Sanctions for meritless actions and pleadings.
Sec. 103. Performance standards applicable to State medical boards.
Sec. 104. Interstate patient reporting and physician tracking database.
Sec. 105. Definitions.
 TITLE II--HEALTH CARE MALPRACTICE LIABILITY MEDIATION PROGRAMS

Sec. 201. Grants to States and health care entities for mediation 
 programs.
Sec. 202. Training and assistance for mediation programs.
Sec. 203. Authorization of appropriations.
 TITLE III--VOLUNTARY REPORTING OF MEDICAL SAFETY INCIDENTS

 Subtitle A--Reporting by Individuals Involved in the Provision of 
 Health Care

Sec. 301. Amendments to Public Health Service Act.
 Subtitle B--Liability Protection in Good-Faith Reporting

Sec. 311. Liability protection for health care providers in good-faith 
 reporting to State medical boards.
 TITLE IV--INSURANCE REFORM

Sec. 401. Uniform state requirements regarding proposed rate increases.
Sec. 402. Reduction in premiums paid by physicians for medical 
 malpractice insurance coverage.
Sec. 403. Effective date.
 TITLE V--EXCLUSION OF PHARMACEUTICALS AND DEVICES FROM LIABILITY 
 REFORMS

Sec. 501. Exclusion of pharmaceuticals and devices.

 TITLE I--HEALTH CARE MALPRACTICE LIABILITY REFORM

SEC. 101. CAP ON NON-ECONOMIC DAMAGES.

 (a) In General.--When an individual is injured or dies as the 
result of health care malpractice, a person entitled to recover non-
economic damages from a health care provider responsible for that 
malpractice may not recover such damages, in the aggregate from all 
such providers, in an amount more than $250,000, adjusted for inflation 
from 1975 as provided in subsection (b). This limitation applies 
separately to each person entitled to recover such damages.
 (b) Adjustment for Inflation From 1975.--
 (1) Publication by secretary of labor.--On or about 
 December 1 of each year, the Secretary of Labor shall publish 
 in the Federal Register a dollar amount determined by adjusting 
 the dollar amount specified in subsection (a) according to the 
 adjustments in the Consumer Price Index of the Bureau of Labor 
 Statistics of the Department of Labor for the period beginning 
 on or about October 1, 1975, and ending on or about October 1 
 of that year.
 (2) Applicability.--For purposes of subsection (a), the 
 dollar amount that applies to a calendar year is the dollar 
 amount published on or about December 1 of the preceding year.
 (3) Estimation.--Congress estimates that the dollar amount 
 that would apply to calendar year 2005 would be approximately 
 $878,000, though the dollar amount published under paragraph 
 (1), rather than the estimation in this paragraph, is to be 
 applied.
 (c) Applicability.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), this section 
 applies whenever the amount of a recovery is made final in a 
 calendar year after the date of the enactment of this Act. In 
 applying the dollar amount to a recovery, all recoveries made 
 final (whether before or after the date of the enactment of 
 this Act) are included in the aggregate.
 (2) Not applicable when state board not in compliance.--
 During a period in which a State medical board is not in 
 compliance with the voluntary performance standards developed 
 under section 103 or is failing to submit the information 
 described in paragraphs (2) and (3)(A) of section 104(b) (as 
 determined by the Secretary under section 103 or 104, 
 respectively), the limitation in subsection (a) does not apply 
 to liability arising under the law of that State.
 (d) Relationship to State Law.--This section operates on a case-by-
case basis to provide a maximum recovery and to prevent State law from 
providing a recovery above that maximum. It does not prevent State law 
from providing a recovery below that maximum.

SEC. 102. SANCTIONS FOR MERITLESS ACTIONS AND PLEADINGS.

 (a) Signature Required.--Every pleading, written motion, and other 
paper in any medical malpractice action shall be signed by at least 1 
attorney of record in the attorney's individual name, or, if the party 
is not represented by an attorney, shall be signed by the party. Each 
paper shall state the signer's address and telephone number, if any. An 
unsigned paper shall be stricken unless omission of the signature is 
corrected promptly after being called to the attention of the attorney 
or party.
 (b) Certificate of Merit.--
 (1) In general.--A medical malpractice action shall be 
 dismissed unless the attorney or unrepresented party presenting 
 the complaint certifies that, to the best of the person's 
 knowledge, information, and belief, formed after an inquiry 
 reasonable under the circumstances--
 (A) it is not being presented for any improper 
 purpose, such as to harass or to cause unnecessary 
 delay or needless increase in the cost of litigation;
 (B) the claims and other legal contentions therein 
 are warranted by existing law or by a nonfrivolous 
 argument for the extension, modification, or reversal 
 of existing law or the establishment of new law; and
 (C) the allegations and other factual contentions 
 have evidentiary support or, if specifically so 
 identified, are likely to have evidentiary support 
 after a reasonable opportunity for further 
 investigation and discovery.
 (2) Paper considered to be a certification.--By presenting 
 to the court (whether by signing, filing, submitting, or later 
 advocating) a pleading, written motion, or other paper, an 
 attorney or unrepresented party is certifying that to the best 
 of the person's knowledge, information and belief, formed after 
 an inquiry reasonable under the circumstances--
 (A) it is not being presented for any improper 
 purpose, such as to harass or to cause unnecessary 
 delay or needless increase in the cost of litigation;
 (B) the claims, defenses, and other legal 
 contentions therein are warranted by existing law or by 
 a nonfrivolous argument for the extension, 
 modification, or reversal of existing law or the 
 establishment of new law; and
 (C) the allegations and other factual contentions 
 have evidentiary support or, if specifically so 
 identified, are reasonable based on a lack of 
 information or belief.
 (c) Mandatory Sanctions.--
 (1) First violation.--If, after notice and a reasonable 
 opportunity to respond, a court, upon motion or upon its own 
 initiative, determines that subsection (b) has been violated, 
 the court shall find each attorney or party in violation in 
 contempt of court and shall require the payment of costs and 
 attorneys fees. The court may also impose additional 
 appropriate sanctions, such as striking the pleadings, 
 dismissing the suit, and sanctions plus interest, upon the 
 person in violation, or upon both such person and such person's 
 attorney or client (as the case may be).
 (2) Second violation.--If, after notice and a reasonable 
 opportunity to respond, a court, upon motion or upon its own 
 initiative, determines that subsection (b) has been violated 
 and that the attorney or party with respect to which the 
 determination was made has committed one previous violation of 
 subsection (b) before this or any other court, the court shall 
 find each such attorney or party in contempt of court and shall 
 require the payment of costs and attorneys fees, and require 
 such person in violation (or both such person and such person's 
 attorney or client (as the case may be)) to pay a monetary 
 fine. The court may also impose additional appropriate 
 sanctions, such as striking the pleadings, dismissing the suit 
 and sanctions plus interest, upon such person in violation, or 
 upon both such person and such person's attorney or client (as 
 the case may be).
 (3) Third and subsequent violations.--If, after notice and 
 a reasonable opportunity to respond, a court, upon motion or 
 upon its own initiative, determines that subsection (b) has 
 been violated and that the attorney or party with respect to 
 which the determination was made has committed more than one 
 previous violation of subsection (b) before this or any other 
 court, the court shall find each such attorney or party in 
 contempt of court, refer each such attorney to one or more 
 appropriate State bar associations for disciplinary 
 proceedings, require the payment of costs and attorneys fees, 
 and require such person in violation (or both such person and 
 such person's attorney or client (as the case may be)) to pay a 
 monetary fine. The court may also impose additional appropriate 
 sanctions, such as striking the pleadings, dismissing the suit, 
 and sanctions plus interest, upon such person in violation, or 
 upon both such person and such person's attorney or client (as 
 the case may be).
 (d) Central Tracking Database.--The Attorney General shall 
establish and maintain a central tracking database reporting system to 
which courts are to report violations of subsection (b). The database 
shall include all identifying information with respect to the attorney 
or the party (if not represented by an attorney). The Attorney General 
shall permit courts to consult the database to determine the extent to 
which an attorney or party has violated subsection (b) previously.

SEC. 103. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO STATE MEDICAL BOARDS.

 (a) Development.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, in 
consultation with the Federation of State Medical Boards, shall develop 
and make publicly available voluntary performance standards applicable 
to State medical boards.
 (b) Contents.--In developing performance standards under this 
section, the Secretary shall include standards to require the 
following:
 (1) Processing patient complaints within a specified 
 limited period of time.
 (2) Maintaining a website or toll-free telephone number to 
 enable a patient submitting a complaint to track the status of 
 the complaint.
 (3) Maintaining an adequate level of staff for the 
 activities of the State medical board.
 (4) Ensuring that staff are qualified.
 (5) Making the following information available to the 
 public for physicians:
 (A) Each physician's education and training.
 (B) Each physician's medical specialties.
 (C) For each physician a description of medical 
 malpractice claims paid, hospital disciplinary actions 
 taken, criminal convictions occurring, and disciplinary 
 actions taken by the State medical board, within the 
 previous 10 years.
 (D) At the option of a State medical board, each 
 physician's professional demographics (such as business 
 address, insurance plan and hospital affiliations, and 
 available translation services), professional or 
 community awards received, and research or other 
 professional publications.
 (6) Issuing an annual report that includes aggregate 
 disciplinary statistics, including--
 (A) statistics on the number and type of complaints 
 received; and
 (B) with respect to physicians, statistics on the 
 number and type of complaints received, disaggregated 
 by the medical school and graduate medical education 
 program completed by the physicians involved.
 (7) Such other issues as the Secretary determines 
 appropriate.
 (c) Determination Required.--For the period beginning 3 years after 
the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall determine 
whether the State medical board of each State is in compliance with the 
voluntary performance standards developed under subsection (a).
 (d) Determination of Noncompliance.--Before making a determination 
under subsection (c) that a State medical board is not in compliance 
with the voluntary performance standards developed under subsection 
(a), the Secretary shall--
 (1) propose a determination of noncompliance;
 (2) identify the reasons for such noncompliance; and
 (3) give the State medical board an opportunity to correct 
 such noncompliance.
 (e) Revision of Determinations.--The Secretary shall periodically 
review and, as necessary, revise determinations of compliance and 
noncompliance under subsection (c).
 (f) Report by Secretary.--Not later than 5 years after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall 
submit a report to the Congress on the activities of the Secretary 
under this section, including a listing of the State medical boards 
determined by the Secretary to be in compliance or not in compliance 
with the voluntary standards developed under subsection (a).

SEC. 104. INTERSTATE PATIENT REPORTING AND PHYSICIAN TRACKING DATABASE.

 (a) Establishment.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
shall establish and maintain an interstate patient reporting and 
physician tracking database (in this section referred to as the 
``database'').
 (b) Database Contents.--
 (1) In general.--The database shall consist of information 
 about physicians voluntarily submitted to the database by--
 (A) State medical boards; and
 (B) patients.
 (2) Submissions by state medical boards.--The database 
 shall encourage the State medical board of each State to 
 submit, with respect to each physician licensed by the State, 
 the following:
 (A) The physician's identity.
 (B) The physician's education and training.
 (C) The physician's medical specialties.
 (D) A description of medical malpractice claims 
 paid, hospital disciplinary actions taken, criminal 
 convictions occurring, and disciplinary actions taken 
 by the State medical board, within the previous 10 
 years.
 (3) Patient complaints.--The database shall--
 (A) encourage the State medical board of each State 
 to submit, with respect to each physician licensed by 
 the State, a description of pending patient complaints 
 about the physician; and
 (B) allow patients to submit complaints about 
 physicians directly to the database.
 (c) Availability of Information.--
 (1) In general.--The information submitted to the database 
 pursuant to subsection (b)(2) shall be available to the public, 
 including by means of the Internet and a toll-free telephone 
 number.
 (2) Patient complaints.--
 (A) Confidentiality.--Any patient complaint about a 
 physician submitted to the database shall be kept 
 confidential and shall not be subject to disclosure 
 under section 552 of title 5, United States Code. 
 Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the database 
 may disclose information derived from such a patient 
 complaint only if the information is not individually 
 identifiable.
 (B) Tracking patient complaints.--The database 
 shall--
 (i) assign a tracking number to each 
 patient complaint submitted to the database 
 pursuant to subsection (b)(3);
 (ii) provide notice and a description of 
 each patient complaint submitted pursuant to 
 subsection (b)(3)(B) to the applicable State 
 medical board; and
 (iii) allow the patient making any 
 complaint submitted to the database pursuant to 
 subsection (b)(3) to track the status of the 
 complaint, including by means of the Internet 
 and a toll-free telephone number.
 (C) Analysis.--Subject to subparagraph (A), the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services shall conduct 
 analysis of patient complaints submitted to the 
 database, including complaints that do not result in 
 disciplinary action, and use the data and conclusions 
 derived from such analysis to provide timely public 
 health safety information to health care consumers and 
 practitioners.
 (d) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services shall provide technical assistance to States to facilitate the 
exchange of information between State medical boards and the database.
 (e) Determination Required.--For the period beginning 3 years after 
the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall determine 
whether the State medical board of each State is failing to submit the 
information described in subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3)(A).
 (f) Determination of Noncompliance.--Before making a determination 
under subsection (e) that a State medical board is failing to submit 
such information, the Secretary shall--
 (1) propose a determination of noncompliance;
 (2) identify the reasons for such noncompliance; and
 (3) give the State medical board an opportunity to correct 
 such noncompliance.
 (g) Revision of Determinations.--The Secretary shall periodically 
review and, as necessary, revise determinations of compliance and 
noncompliance under subsection (e).
 (h) Assessment.--Not later than 3 years after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall--
 (1) conduct an assessment of the database, including an 
 assessment of the value of the database to patients and the 
 effect of the database on physicians; and
 (2) submit a report to the Congress on the results of the 
 assessment, including any recommendations for improvement of 
 the database.

SEC. 105. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) The term ``State medical board'' means a State entity 
 responsible for licensing physicians or a subdivision of such 
 an entity.
 (2) The term ``health care malpractice'' means the 
 negligence or other fault of a health care provider.
 (3) The term ``health care provider'' means--
 (A) any individual who is engaged in the delivery 
 of health care services in a State and who is required 
 by State law or regulation to be licensed or certified 
 by the State to engage in the delivery of such services 
 in the State; and
 (B) any entity that is engaged in the delivery of 
 health care services in a State and that, if it is 
 required by State law or regulation to be licensed or 
 certified by the State to engage in the delivery of 
 such services in the State, is so licensed.
 (4) The term ``State'' includes the District of Columbia, 
 the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and other territories and 
 possessions of the United States.

 TITLE II--HEALTH CARE MALPRACTICE LIABILITY MEDIATION PROGRAMS

SEC. 201. GRANTS TO STATES AND HEALTH CARE ENTITIES FOR MEDIATION 
 PROGRAMS.

 (a) Grants Authorized.--From amounts made available to carry out 
this section, the Attorney General shall carry out a program under 
which the Attorney General makes grants to States and health care 
entities to carry out mediation programs described in subsection (b).
 (b) Mediation Programs.--A mediation program referred to in 
subsection (a) is a program, based on the Rush model, under which an 
allegation that an individual has been injured or has died as the 
result of health care malpractice is mediated by those parties 
consenting to do so in an effort to resolve the matter without 
litigation.
 (c) Rush Model.--For purposes of this section, a program is based 
on the Rush model if the program satisfies each of the following:
 (1) Participation by the parties in the mediation is 
 voluntary.
 (2) The mediator is neutral, having no interest in or power 
 to determine the outcome of the proceedings.
 (3) The site of the mediation conference is held in a 
 neutral setting, one that the parties mutually agree upon.
 (4) At the commencement of a mediation, the parties enter 
 into a mediation agreement that--
 (A) states that the parties--
 (i) will not request or subpoena the 
 mediator to testify or produce any documents or 
 other information in any proceeding related to 
 the mediation; and
 (ii) will defend and indemnify the mediator 
 in connection with any summons or subpoena 
 arising out of the mediation proceeding;
 (B) provides for confidentiality of the mediation 
 proceedings; and
 (C) states that any apology or expression of 
 remorse by a health care provider or other entity at 
 any time during the mediation proceedings will be kept 
 confidential and will not be used in any subsequent 
 legal proceeding.
 (5) The program is similar to the mediation program carried 
 out as of January 1, 2005, at Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's 
 Medical Center in Chicago, Illinois.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``health care entity'' means an entity covered 
 by section 105(3)(B).
 (2) The term ``health care malpractice'' has the meaning 
 given such term in section 105.
 (3) The term ``State'' has the meaning given such term in 
 section 105.

SEC. 202. TRAINING AND ASSISTANCE FOR MEDIATION PROGRAMS.

 From amounts made available to carry out this section, the Attorney 
General shall carry out a program under which the Attorney General 
provides training and assistance to recipients of grant amounts under 
section 201 to carry out mediation programs under that section.

SEC. 203. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 There are authorized to be appropriated to the Attorney General 
such sums as may be necessary to carry out sections 201 and 202.

 TITLE III--VOLUNTARY REPORTING OF MEDICAL SAFETY INCIDENTS

 Subtitle A--Reporting by Individuals Involved in the Provision of 
 Health Care

SEC. 301. AMENDMENTS TO PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT.

 (a) In General.--Title IX of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 299 et seq.) is amended--
 (1) in section 912(c), by inserting ``, in accordance with 
 part C,'' after ``The Director shall'';
 (2) by redesignating part C as part D;
 (3) by redesignating sections 921 through 928, as sections 
 931 through 938, respectively;
 (4) in section 938(1) (as so redesignated), by striking 
 ``921'' and inserting ``931''; and
 (5) by inserting after part B the following:

 ``PART C--PATIENT SAFETY IMPROVEMENT

``SEC. 921. DEFINITIONS.

 ``In this part:
 ``(1) Identifiable information.--The term `identifiable 
 information' means information that is presented in a form and 
 manner that allows the identification of any provider, patient, 
 or reporter of patient safety work product. With respect to 
 patients, such information includes any individually 
 identifiable health information as that term is defined in the 
 regulations promulgated pursuant to section 264(c) of the 
 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 
 (Public Law 104-191; 110 Stat. 2033).
 ``(2) Nonidentifiable information.--The term 
 `nonidentifiable information' means information that is 
 presented in a form and manner that prevents the identification 
 of any provider, patient, or reporter of patient safety work 
 product. With respect to patients, such information must be de-
 identified consistent with the regulations promulgated pursuant 
 to section 264(c) of the Health Insurance Portability and 
 Accountability Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-191; 110 Stat. 
 2033).
 ``(3) Patient safety evaluation system.--The term `patient 
 safety evaluation system' means a process that involves the 
 collection, management, or analysis of information for 
 submission to or by a patient safety organization.
 ``(4) Patient safety organization.--The term `patient 
 safety organization' means a private or public organization or 
 component thereof that is certified, through a process to be 
 determined by the Secretary under section 925, to perform each 
 of the following activities:
 ``(A) The conduct, as the organization or 
 component's primary activity, of efforts to improve 
 patient safety and the quality of health care delivery.
 ``(B) The collection and analysis of patient safety 
 work product that is submitted by providers.
 ``(C) The development and dissemination of 
 evidence-based information to providers with respect to 
 improving patient safety, such as recommendations, 
 protocols, or information regarding best practices.
 ``(D) The utilization of patient safety work 
 product to carry out activities limited to those 
 described under this paragraph and for the purposes of 
 encouraging a culture of safety and of providing direct 
 feedback and assistance to providers to effectively 
 minimize patient risk.
 ``(E) The maintenance of confidentiality with 
 respect to identifiable information.
 ``(F) The provision of appropriate security 
 measures with respect to patient safety work product.
 ``(G) The submission of nonidentifiable information 
 to the Agency consistent with standards established by 
 the Secretary under section 923(b) for any National 
 Patient Safety Database.
 ``(5) Patient safety work product.--
 ``(A) The term `patient safety work product' means 
 any document or communication (including any 
 information, report, record, memorandum, analysis, 
 deliberative work, statement, or root cause analysis) 
 that--
 ``(i) except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B), is developed by a provider for the purpose 
 of reporting to a patient safety organization, 
 and is reported to a patient safety 
 organization;
 ``(ii) is created by a patient safety 
 organization; or
 ``(iii) would reveal the deliberations or 
 analytic process of a patient safety evaluation 
 system (as defined in paragraph (3)).
 ``(B)(i) Patient safety work product described in 
 subparagraph (A)(i)--
 ``(I) does not include any separate 
 information described in clause (ii); and
 ``(II) shall not be construed to include 
 such separate information merely by reason of 
 inclusion of a copy of the document or 
 communication involved in a submission to, or 
 the fact of submission of such a copy to, a 
 patient safety organization.
 ``(ii) Separate information described in this 
 clause is a document or communication (including a 
 patient's medical record or any other patient or 
 hospital record) that is developed or maintained, or 
 exists, separately from any patient safety evaluation 
 system.
 ``(C) Information available from sources other than 
 a patient safety work product under this section may be 
 discovered or admitted in a civil or administrative 
 proceeding, if discoverable or admissible under 
 applicable law.
 ``(6) Provider.--The term `provider' means--
 ``(A) an individual or entity licensed or otherwise 
 authorized under State law to provide health care 
 services, including--
 ``(i) a hospital, nursing facility, 
 comprehensive outpatient rehabilitation 
 facility, home health agency, and hospice 
 program;
 ``(ii) a physician, physician assistant, 
 nurse practitioner, clinical nurse specialist, 
 certified nurse midwife, nurse anesthetist, 
 psychologist, certified social worker, 
 registered dietitian or nutrition professional, 
 physical or occupational therapist, or other 
 individual health care practitioner;
 ``(iii) a pharmacist; and
 ``(iv) a renal dialysis facility, 
 ambulatory surgical center, pharmacy, physician 
 or health care practitioner's office, long-term 
 care facility, behavioral health residential 
 treatment facility, clinical laboratory, or 
 community health center; or
 ``(B) any other person or entity specified in 
 regulations by the Secretary after public notice and 
 comment.

``SEC. 922. PRIVILEGE FOR PATIENT SAFETY WORK PRODUCT.

 ``(a) Privilege.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law and 
subject to subsection (c), patient safety work product shall not be--
 ``(1) subject to a civil or administrative subpoena or 
 order;
 ``(2) subject to discovery in connection with a civil or 
 administrative proceeding;
 ``(3) subject to disclosure pursuant to section 552 of 
 title 5, United States Code (commonly known as the Freedom of 
 Information Act), or any other similar Federal or State law;
 ``(4) required to be admitted as evidence or otherwise 
 disclosed in any State or Federal civil or administrative 
 proceeding; or
 ``(5) if the patient safety work product is identifiable 
 information and is received by a national accreditation 
 organization in its capacity as a patient safety organization--
 ``(A) used by a national accreditation organization 
 in an accreditation action against the provider that 
 reported the information;
 ``(B) shared by such organization with its survey 
 team; or
 ``(C) required as a condition of accreditation by a 
 national accreditation association.
 ``(b) Reporter Protection.--
 ``(1) In general.--A provider may not use against an 
 individual in an adverse employment action described in 
 paragraph (2) the fact that the individual in good faith 
 reported information--
 ``(A) to the provider with the intention of having 
 the information reported to a patient safety 
 organization; or
 ``(B) directly to a patient safety organization.
 ``(2) Adverse employment action.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, an `adverse employment action' includes--
 ``(A) the failure to promote an individual or 
 provide any other employment-related benefit for which 
 the individual would otherwise be eligible;
 ``(B) an adverse evaluation or decision made in 
 relation to accreditation, certification, 
 credentialing, or licensing of the individual; and
 ``(C) a personnel action that is adverse to the 
 individual concerned.
 ``(3) Remedies.--Any provider that violates this subsection 
 shall be subject to a civil monetary penalty of not more than 
 $20,000 for each such violation involved. Such penalty shall be 
 imposed and collected in the same manner as civil money 
 penalties under subsection (a) of section 1128A of the Social 
 Security Act are imposed and collected.
 ``(c) Disclosures.--Nothing in this section prohibits any of the 
following disclosures:
 ``(1) Voluntary disclosure of nonidentifiable information.
 ``(2) Voluntary disclosure of identifiable information by a 
 provider or patient safety organization, if such disclosure--
 ``(A) is authorized by the provider for the 
 purposes of improving quality and safety;
 ``(B) is to an entity or person subject to the 
 requirements of section 264(c) of the Health Insurance 
 Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (Public Law 
 104-191; 110 Stat. 2033), or any regulation promulgated 
 under such section; and
 ``(C) is not in conflict with such section or any 
 regulation promulgated under such section.
 ``(3) Disclosure as required by law by a provider to the 
 Food and Drug Administration, or on a voluntary basis by a 
 provider to a federally established patient safety program, 
 with respect to an Administration-regulated product or activity 
 for which that entity has responsibility, for the purposes of 
 activities related to the quality, safety, or effectiveness of 
 such Administration-regulated product or activity.
 ``(4) Disclosures of patient safety work product in 
 accordance with this part by a provider to a patient safety 
 organization.
 ``(d) Effect of Transfer, Disclosure.--The following shall not be 
treated as a waiver of any privilege or protection established under 
this part:
 ``(1) The transfer of any patient safety work product 
 between a provider and a patient safety organization.
 ``(2) Disclosure of patient safety work product as 
 described in subsection (c).
 ``(3) The unauthorized disclosure of patient safety work 
 product.
 ``(e) Penalty.--
 ``(1) Prohibition.--Except as provided in this part, and 
 subject to paragraphs (2) and (4), it shall be unlawful for any 
 person to disclose patient safety work product in violation of 
 this section, if such disclosure constitutes a negligent or 
 knowing breach of confidentiality.
 ``(2) Relation to hipaa.--The penalty under paragraph (3) 
 for a disclosure in violation of paragraph (1) does not apply 
 if the person would be subject to a penalty under section 
 264(c) of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
 Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-191; 110 Stat. 2033), or any 
 regulation promulgated under such section, for the same 
 disclosure.
 ``(3) Amount.--Any person who violates paragraph (1) shall 
 be subject to a civil monetary penalty of not more than $10,000 
 for each such violation involved. Such penalty shall be imposed 
 and collected in the same manner as civil money penalties under 
 subsection (a) of section 1128A of the Social Security Act are 
 imposed and collected.
 ``(4) Subsequent disclosure.--Paragraph (1) applies only to 
 the first person that breaches confidentiality with respect to 
 particular patient safety work product.
 ``(f) Relation to HIPAA.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of applying the regulations 
 promulgated pursuant to section 264(c) of the Health Insurance 
 Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-191; 
 110 Stat. 2033)--
 ``(A) patient safety organizations shall be treated 
 as business associates; and
 ``(B) activities of such organizations described in 
 section 921(4) in relation to a provider are deemed to 
 be health care operations (as defined in such 
 regulations) of the provider.
 ``(2) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this section shall 
 be construed to alter or affect the implementation of such 
 regulations or such section 264(c).
 ``(g) No Limitation of Other Privileges.--Nothing in this section 
shall be construed to affect privileges, including peer review and 
confidentiality protections, that are otherwise available under Federal 
or State laws.
 ``(h) No Limitation on Contracts.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to limit the power of a provider and a patient safety 
organization, or a patient safety organization and the Agency or any 
National Patient Safety Database, consistent with the provisions of 
this Act and other applicable law, to enter into a contract requiring 
greater confidentiality or delegating authority to make an authorized 
disclosure.
 ``(i) Relation to State Reporting Requirements.--Nothing in this 
part shall be construed as preempting or otherwise affecting any State 
law requiring a provider to report information, including information 
described in section 921(5)(B), that is not patient safety work 
product.
 ``(j) Continuation of Privilege.--Patient safety work product of an 
organization that is certified as a patient safety organization shall 
continue to be privileged and confidential, in accordance with this 
section, if the organization's certification is terminated or revoked 
or if the organization otherwise ceases to qualify as a patient safety 
organization.
 ``(k) Reports on Strategies to Improve Patient Safety.--
 ``(1) Draft report.--Not later than the date that is 18 
 months after any National Patient Safety Database is 
 operational, the Secretary, in consultation with the Director, 
 shall prepare a draft report on effective strategies for 
 reducing medical errors and increasing patient safety. The 
 draft report shall include any measure determined appropriate 
 by the Secretary to encourage the appropriate use of such 
 strategies, including use in any federally funded programs. The 
 Secretary shall make the draft report available for public 
 comment and submit the draft report to the Institute of 
 Medicine for review.
 ``(2) Final report.--Not later than 1 year after the date 
 described in paragraph (1), the Secretary shall submit a final 
 report to the Congress that includes, in an appendix, any 
 findings by the Institute of Medicine concerning research on 
 the strategies discussed in the draft report and any 
 modifications made by the Secretary based on such findings.

``SEC. 923. NATIONAL PATIENT SAFETY DATABASE.

 ``(a) Authority.--
 ``(1) In general.--In conducting activities under this 
 part, the Secretary shall provide for the establishment and 
 maintenance of a database to receive relevant nonidentifiable 
 patient safety work product, and may designate entities to 
 collect relevant nonidentifiable patient safety work product 
 that is voluntarily reported by patient safety organizations 
 upon the request of the Secretary. Any database established or 
 designated under this paragraph may be referred to as a 
 `National Patient Safety Database'.
 ``(2) Use of information.--Information reported to any 
 National Patient Safety Database shall be used to analyze 
 national and regional statistics, including trends and patterns 
 of health care errors. The information resulting from such 
 analyses may be included in the annual quality reports prepared 
 under section 913(b)(2).
 ``(3) Advisory role.--The Secretary shall provide 
 scientific support to patient safety organizations, including 
 the dissemination of methodologies and evidence-based 
 information related to root causes and quality improvement.
 ``(b) Standards.--In establishing or designating a database under 
subsection (a)(1), the Secretary shall, in consultation with 
representatives of patient safety organizations, the provider 
community, and the health information technology industry, determine 
common formats for the voluntary reporting of nonidentifiable patient 
safety work product, including necessary elements, common and 
consistent definitions, and a standardized computer interface for the 
processing of the work product. To the extent practicable, such 
standards shall be consistent with the administrative simplification 
provisions of part C of title XI of the Social Security Act.
 ``(c) Certain Methodologies for Collection.--The Secretary shall 
ensure that the methodologies for the collection of nonidentifiable 
patient safety work product for any National Patient Safety Database 
include the methodologies developed or recommended by the Patient 
Safety Task Force of the Department of Health and Human Services.
 ``(d) Facilitation of Information Exchange.--To the extent 
practicable, the Secretary may facilitate the direct link of 
information between providers and patient safety organizations and 
between patient safety organizations and any National Patient Safety 
Database.
 ``(e) Restriction on Transfer.--Only nonidentifiable information 
may be transferred to any National Patient Safety Database.

``SEC. 924. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director, 
may--
 ``(1) provide technical assistance to patient safety 
 organizations, and to States with reporting systems for health 
 care errors; and
 ``(2) provide guidance on the type of data to be 
 voluntarily submitted to any National Patient Safety Database.
 ``(b) Annual Meetings.--Assistance provided under subsection (a) 
may include annual meetings for patient safety organizations to discuss 
methodology, communication, information collection, or privacy 
concerns.

``SEC. 925. CERTIFICATION OF PATIENT SAFETY ORGANIZATIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--Not later than 6 months after the date of 
enactment of the Patient Safety and Quality Improvement Act, the 
Secretary shall establish a process for certifying patient safety 
organizations.
 ``(b) Process.--The process established under subsection (a) shall 
include the following:
 ``(1) Certification of patient safety organizations by the 
 Secretary or by such other national or State governmental 
 organizations as the Secretary determines appropriate.
 ``(2) If the Secretary allows other governmental 
 organizations to certify patient safety organizations under 
 paragraph (1), the Secretary shall establish a process for 
 approving such organizations. Any such approved organization 
 shall conduct certifications and reviews in accordance with 
 this section.
 ``(3) A review of each certification under paragraph (1) 
 (including a review of compliance with each criterion in this 
 section and any related implementing standards as determined by 
 the Secretary through rulemaking) not less often than every 3 
 years, as determined by the Secretary.
 ``(4) Revocation of any such certification by the Secretary 
 or other such governmental organization that issued the 
 certification, upon a showing of cause.
 ``(c) Criteria.--A patient safety organization must meet the 
following criteria as conditions of certification:
 ``(1) The mission of the patient safety organization is to 
 conduct activities that are to improve patient safety and the 
 quality of health care delivery and is not in conflict of 
 interest with the providers that contract with the patient 
 safety organization.
 ``(2) The patient safety organization has appropriately 
 qualified staff, including licensed or certified medical 
 professionals.
 ``(3) The patient safety organization, within any 2 year 
 period, contracts with more than 1 provider for the purpose of 
 receiving and reviewing patient safety work product.
 ``(4) The patient safety organization is not a component of 
 a health insurer or other entity that offers a group health 
 plan or health insurance coverage.
 ``(5) The patient safety organization is managed, 
 controlled, and operated independently from any provider that 
 contracts with the patient safety organization for reporting 
 patient safety work product.
 ``(6) To the extent practical and appropriate, the patient 
 safety organization collects patient safety work product from 
 providers in a standardized manner that permits valid 
 comparisons of similar cases among similar providers.
 ``(d) Additional Criteria for Component Organizations.--If a 
patient safety organization is a component of another organization, the 
patient safety organization must, in addition to meeting the criteria 
described in subsection (c), meet the following criteria as conditions 
of certification:
 ``(1) The patient safety organization maintains patient 
 safety work product separately from the rest of the 
 organization, and establishes appropriate security measures to 
 maintain the confidentiality of the patient safety work 
 product.
 ``(2) The patient safety organization does not make an 
 unauthorized disclosure under this Act of patient safety work 
 product to the rest of the organization in breach of 
 confidentiality.
 ``(3) The mission of the patient safety organization does 
 not create a conflict of interest with the rest of the 
 organization.''.
 (b) Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 937 of the Public 
Health Service Act (as redesignated by subsection (a)) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(e) Patient Safety and Quality Improvement.--For the purpose of 
carrying out part C, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums 
as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2006 through 2010.''.

 Subtitle B--Liability Protection in Good-faith Reporting

SEC. 311. LIABILITY PROTECTION FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS IN GOOD-FAITH 
 REPORTING TO STATE MEDICAL BOARDS.

 (a) In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no 
health care provider providing information (including by making a 
report, filing charges, or presenting evidence) to a State medical 
board regarding the competence or professional conduct of a physician 
shall be held, by reason of having provided such information, to be 
liable in damages under any law of the United States or of any State 
(or political subdivision thereof) unless such information is false and 
the person providing the information knew that the information was 
false.
 (b) Attorney Fees.--If a health care provider establishes in a 
civil action that the health care provider is not liable in damages 
because of the application of subsection (a), the court shall award to 
the provider any attorney fees and costs incurred by the provider in 
establishing the application of subsection (a).
 (c) Definition.--In this section, the term ``State medical board'' 
means a State entity responsible for licensing physicians or a 
subdivision of such an entity.

 TITLE IV--INSURANCE REFORM

SEC. 401. UNIFORM STATE REQUIREMENTS REGARDING PROPOSED RATE INCREASES.

 (a) In General.--The Congress intends that each State have in 
effect laws or regulations providing that--
 (1) a provider of medical malpractice insurance in the 
 State may not implement any increase in the rate for such 
 insurance that would result in such rate increasing more than a 
 certain percentage, as specified in such laws or regulations, 
 within a certain period of time, as specified in such laws or 
 regulations, unless, before such increase takes effect--
 (A) the provider submits to an appropriate State 
 agency a description and justification of the rate 
 increase; and
 (B) such agency makes a determination that the 
 increase is justified;
 (2) any determination referred to in paragraph (1)(B) 
 regarding an increase in medical malpractice insurance rates is 
 made pursuant to an administrative hearing held by the 
 appropriate State agency; and
 (3) any individual or institution that is involved in the 
 provision of health care and is licensed by the State to 
 provide such care has standing, in any administrative 
 proceeding of the State regarding a proposed increase in the 
 rate for medical malpractice insurance (including a hearing 
 referred to in paragraph (2)), to challenge such increase.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall--
 (1) conduct and complete a survey of the laws and 
 regulations of the States to determine the extent to which the 
 States have in effects laws or regulations described in 
 subsection (a); and
 (2) submit a report to the Congress setting forth the 
 results of the survey, describing such laws and regulations of 
 the various States, and describing the extent of the uniformity 
 of such laws and regulations.
 (c) Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term ``State'' 
has the meaning given such term in section 105.
 (d) Effective Date.--This section shall take effect on the date of 
the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 402. REDUCTION IN PREMIUMS PAID BY PHYSICIANS FOR MEDICAL 
 MALPRACTICE INSURANCE COVERAGE.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, each medical malpractice liability insurance 
company shall--
 (1) develop a reasonable estimate of the annual amount of 
 financial savings that will be achieved by the company as a 
 result of section 101;
 (2) develop and implement a plan to annually dedicate at 
 least 50 percent of such annual savings to reduce the amount of 
 premiums that the company charges physicians for medical 
 malpractice liability coverage; and
 (3) submit to the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 (in this subsection referred to as the ``Secretary'') a written 
 certification that the company has complied with paragraphs (1) 
 and (2).
 (b) Reports.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act and annually thereafter, each medical malpractice 
liability insurance company shall submit to the Secretary a report that 
identifies the percentage by which the company has reduced medical 
malpractice coverage premiums relative to the date of the enactment of 
this Act.
 (c) Enforcement.--A medical malpractice liability insurance company 
that violates a provision of this section is liable to the United 
States for a civil penalty in an amount assessed by the Secretary, not 
to exceed $11,000 for each such violation. The provisions of paragraphs 
(3) through (5) of section 303(g) of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act apply to such a civil penalty to the same extent and in 
the same manner as such paragraphs apply to a civil penalty under such 
section.
 (d) Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term ``medical 
malpractice liability insurance company'' means an entity in the 
business of providing an insurance policy under which the entity makes 
payment in settlement (or partial settlement) of, or in satisfaction of 
a judgment in, a medical malpractice action or claim.

SEC. 403. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 Except as provided in section 401(d), this title shall take effect 
1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act.

 TITLE V--EXCLUSION OF PHARMACEUTICALS AND DEVICES FROM LIABILITY 
 REFORMS

SEC. 501. EXCLUSION OF PHARMACEUTICALS AND DEVICES.

 For purposes of title I and II of this Act, the manufacturer or 
distributor of a pharmaceutical or device is not a health care 
provider, and health care malpractice does not include responsibility 
based on products liability.
 <all>