S 471 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 471
To amend the Mineral Lands Leasing Act of 1920 to authorize the Secretary of
the Interior to lease, in an expeditious and environmentally sound manner,
the public lands within the Coastal Plain of the North Slope of Alaska for
oil and gas exploration, development, and production.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
February 28 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. MURKOWSKI (for himself and Mr. STEVENS) introduced the following bill;
which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Energy and Natural
Resources
A BILL
To amend the Mineral Lands Leasing Act of 1920 to authorize the Secretary of
the Interior to lease, in an expeditious and environmentally sound manner,
the public lands within the Coastal Plain of the North Slope of Alaska for
oil and gas exploration, development, and production.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act may be cited as the
 `Arctic Coastal Plain Public Lands Leasing Act of 1989'.
CONGRESSIONAL FINDINGS
 SEC. 2. As the basis for the declaration of policy and authorizations set
 forth in subsequent provisions of this Act, the Congress finds that--
 (a) the Nation's domestic crude oil production is in substantial decline
 and dependence upon unreliable foreign sources of oil is growing at an
 alarming rate;
 (b) production from the Prudhoe Bay oil fields on Alaska's North Slope,
 which now constitutes over 20 per centum of the Nation's total domestic
 crude oil production, will begin to decline rapidly in 1988;
 (c) in 1980, Congress directed the Secretary of the Interior to study
 the oil and gas potential and the fish and wildlife resources of the 1.5
 million acres of public land in the Coastal Plain;
 (d) reports prepared by the Department of the Interior and other Federal,
 State, and private groups clearly indicate that the public lands within
 the Coastal Plain constitute the most outstanding oil and gas prospect in
 the United States, onshore or offshore, with potential reserves in place
 estimated to be from 4.8 to 29.4 billion barrels of crude oil;
 (e) the results of eighteen years of operations at Prudhoe Bay provide
 compelling evidence that carefully planned and executed oil and gas
 exploration, development, production, and transportation on the public
 lands is compatible with the North Slope's fish and wildlife resources
 and the needs of subsistence users of those resources; and
 (f) the long, ten or more years, lead time required for development of
 one or more major new North Slope oil fields requires a prompt decision
 by Congress on the future use of the public lands within the Coastal Plain.
DECLARATION OF POLICY
 SEC. 3. (a) The Congress declares that it is in the national interest of
 the United States to:
 (1) permit exploration, development, production, and transportation of
 the oil and gas resources within the public lands of the Coastal Plain,
 which is--
 (A) located to the east of Prudhoe Bay, an area where intensive oil
 exploration, development and production has been conducted in an
 environmentally sound manner, and
 (B) served by an existing crude oil pipeline and tanker transportation
 system;
 (2) authorize an exploration and development program for the oil and gas
 resources of the public lands of the Coastal Plain which has the support
 of the State of Alaska, the North Slope Borough, the Village of Kaktovik,
 and other local governments in Alaska, and the Inupiat Eskimo people of
 the North Slope, and which will serve the vital interests of the Nation,
 including--
 (A) national security, by providing dependable new sources of domestic
 oil production outside of the control and influence of the Organization
 of Petroleum Exporting Countries;
 (B) the interests of American consumers, by expanding domestic sources
 of reasonably priced gasoline, diesel, jet fuel, heating oil, and other
 crude oil products; and
 (C) the national economy, by improving the balance of trade through
 reductions in foreign oil imports, by generating new economic activity,
 by creating new jobs, and by reducing the Federal deficit through increased
 tax, competitive bonus bid and royalty revenues.
 (b) The Congress hereby declares that it is the policy of the United
 States that--
 (1) exploration, development, production, and transportation of the oil and
 gas resources of the public lands within the Coastal Plain, the Nation's
 foremost prospect for the discovery of new giant and super giant oil fields,
 should be authorized and should proceed with dispatch; and
 (2) such activities should be conducted in a manner consistent with the
 protection of the fish and wildlife resources and environment and the
 needs of the area's subsistence users which utilize the public lands of
 the Coastal Plain.
COASTAL PLAIN
 SEC. 4. The Mineral Lands Leasing Act of 1920, 41 Stat. 437, as amended,
 is further amended by adding a new subchapter X at the end of chapter
 3A--Leases and Prospecting Permits (30 U.S.C. 181) to read as follows:
`SUBCHAPTER X--COASTAL PLAIN LEASING
`AUTHORIZATION FOR LEASING OF THE COASTAL PLAIN
 `SEC. 288. (a)(1) The Congress hereby authorizes and directs the Secretary of
 the Interior through whatever agency of the Department he deems appropriate
 Federal officers and agencies to take such actions as are necessary to
 establish and promptly implement a competitive oil and gas leasing program
 that will assure the expeditious exploration, development and production
 of the oil and gas resources of the public lands of the Coastal Plain.
 `(2) This authorization includes, incorporates and supplements the
 provisions of the Mineral Leasing Act of 1920 and other existing Federal
 laws on oil and gas leasing, exploration and development on public lands,
 and grants such new legislative authority as is necessary to enable the
 Secretary to authorize and permit all such activities as are required to
 achieve the expeditious exploration, development and production of the
 oil and gas resources within the public lands of the Coastal Plain. These
 authorizations include all activities associated with and required in the
 exploration, development, production and transportation of the oil and
 gas resources of the public lands within the Coastal Plain, and include,
 but are not limited to, the authorization and granting of rights-of-way,
 permits, leases, use permits and such other authorizations as are necessary
 to facilitate exploration, development, production and transportation of
 oil and gas resources on the public lands within the Coastal Plain.
 `(3) The Coastal Plain leasing program required by subsection (a) shall
 include the following elements:
 `(A) The first lease sale shall be conducted within twelve months of the
 date of enactment of this Act.
 `(B) The Secretary is authorized to grant to the highest responsible
 qualified bidder or bidders by competitive bidding, under regulations
 promulgated in advance, oil and gas leases on unleased public lands within
 the Coastal Plain. Such regulations may provide for the deposit of cash bids
 in an interest-bearing account until the Secretary announces his decision on
 whether to accept the bids, with the interest earned thereon to be paid to
 the Treasury as to bids that are accepted and to the unsuccessful bidders
 as to bids that are rejected. The bidding shall be conducted as determined
 by the Secretary pursuant to bidding systems included in section 205(A)(1)
 (A) through (H) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act, as amended,
 of 1978 (43 U.S.C. 1331).
 `(C) An oil and gas lease issued pursuant to this Act for public lands
 within the Coastal Plain shall be for a lease tract consisting of a compact
 area and not exceeding more than two thousand five hundred and sixty acres,
 as the Secretary may in his discretion determine.
 `(D) Each lease shall be issued for an initial period of up to ten years
 and shall be extended for so long thereafter as oil and gas is produced
 in paying quantities from the lease or unit area to which the lease
 is committed or as drilling or reworking operations as approved by the
 Secretary are conducted thereon.
 `(E) In the conduct of competitive lease sales under the authority provided
 by this Act, the Secretary shall seek to maximize the revenue paid to the
 Treasury, but in doing so shall make reasonable efforts to conduct lease
 sales in a manner which will enable independent oil and gas producers,
 acting alone or in combination with other independent producers, to have
 a competitive opportunity to successfully bid on leases granted under the
 authority of this Act.
 `(4) This Act shall be considered the primary land management authorization
 for all activities associated with exploration, development and production
 of oil and gas on public lands within the Coastal Plain. No land management
 review shall be required except as specifically authorized by this Act.
 `(5) Activities undertaken pursuant to this section shall include or provide
 for such conditions, restrictions, and prohibitions as the Secretary deems
 necessary or appropriate to mitigate reasonably foreseeable significant
 adverse effects on fish and wildlife and their habitat pursuant to subsection
 288(b) of this Act.
 `(6) The Secretary is authorized to permit, subject to reasonable rules
 and regulations, on public lands within the Coastal Plain all activities
 described in subsection 288(a) which are conducted by the owners of private
 lands within and/or adjacent to the public lands within the Coastal Plain.
 `(7) All receipts from sales, rentals, bonuses, and royalties on leases
 issued pursuant to this Act shall be deposited into the Treasury and
 allocated in accordance with applicable law.
`OTHER LEASING PROVISIONS AND CONSIDERATIONS
 `(b)(1) Prior to conducting a competitive oil and gas lease sale pursuant
 to section 288(a), the Secretary shall promulgate such stipulations, rules,
 and regulations as he determines are necessary and appropriate to ensure
 that oil and gas exploration, development, production, and transportation
 activities undertaken in the public lands within the Coastal Plain are
 conducted in a manner to achieve the reasonable protection of the fish
 and wildlife resources, environment and subsistence users which utilize
 the public lands within the Coastal Plain.
 `(2) The `Coastal Plain Resource Assessment' (April 1987) prepared by the
 Secretary pursuant to section 1002(h) of the Alaska National Interest
 Lands Conservation Act of 1980 (Public Law 96-487) and the legislative
 environmental impact statement incorporated into the Coastal Plain Resource
 Assessment pursuant to the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969
 (Public Law 91-190) shall satisfy all legal requirements under those laws
 with respect to any action taken to develop rules and regulations and
 procedures for a competitive oil and gas leasing program or to conduct
 particular lease sales on the public lands within the Coastal Plain. No
 further studies, reports, or assessments shall be required before the
 Secretary or other appropriate Federal officials may take such action.
 `(3) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to affect the applicability
 of the National Environmental Protection Act of 1969 to phases of oil and
 gas development, production, and transportation conducted subsequent to
 initial leasing and exploration. Consistent with the general authority of
 the Secretary as described in subsection 288(a) of this Act, all Federal
 and State environmental laws of general applicability to oil and gas
 operations and permitting shall continue to be applied.
`IMPACT AID
 `(c) The Secretary, after consulting with the Governor of Alaska and the
 North Slope Borough Assembly and Mayor, is authorized and directed to
 provide such impact aid, planning advice, and other appropriate assistance
 to communities on the North Slope and elsewhere in Alaska as is required
 to ensure the availability of public services needed to accommodate oil
 and gas exploration, development, production, and transportation on the
 public lands within the Coastal Plain.
`TRANSPORTATION ALTERNATIVES FOR CANADA'S BEAUFORT SEA AND MCKENZIE DELTA
DISCOVERIES
 `(d) The Secretary of State is authorized and encouraged to initiate
 discussions with the Canadian Government to determine whether it would serve
 the environmental and economic interests of the United States and Canada
 to explore the feasibility of engaging in mutual planning for the future
 development and transportation of the crude oil and natural gas resources
 previously discovered or projected to exist in the Arctic region under the
 respective jurisdiction of each country, both on shore and offshore. The
 subject matter of such discussions may include, but is not limited to,
 the exchange of environmental, fish and wildlife, and oil and gas related
 information; joint planning; the development of privately owned joint
 facilities for transport of crude oil or natural gas; the development of
 contingency plans to deal with any anticipated or associated environmental
 risks or problems; and the proposal of private Canadian companies for the
 transport of crude oil in tankers from offshore discoveries in Canadian
 waters along the Arctic coast line of the State of Alaska to a point west
 of Barrow, Alaska for transhipment to larger tankers.
`DEFINITIONS
 `(e) For purposes of this Section--
 `(1) The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of the Interior; and
 `(2) The term `Coastal Plain' means those public lands identified in section
 1002(b)(1) of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act of 1980
 (Public Law 96-487).'.