HR 872 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 872
To provide for certification and require the offering of qualified health
plans, to provide Federal assistance to States to establish a program of
assistance for low-income persons to purchase comprehensive health insurance
and a program for coverage of catastrophic health care expenses, and for
other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
February 6, 1989
Mr. SABO (for himself, Mr. VENTO, Ms. KAPTUR, Mrs. COLLINS, Mr. FAUNTROY,
Mr. MURPHY, and Mr. CROCKETT) introduced the following bill; which was
referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To provide for certification and require the offering of qualified health
plans, to provide Federal assistance to States to establish a program of
assistance for low-income persons to purchase comprehensive health insurance
and a program for coverage of catastrophic health care expenses, and for
other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 This Act may be cited as the `Comprehensive Health Care Improvement Act
 of 1989'.
TITLE I--QUALIFIED HEALTH INSURANCE PLANS
Part A--Definitions and Standards for Qualified Plans
Sec. 101. Definitions.
Sec. 102. Standards for qualified plans.
Sec. 103. Duties of Secretary.
Sec. 104. Use of term qualified plan and sale of plans of health coverage.
Part B--Requiring Offering of Certain Qualified Plans
Sec. 111. Requiring offering of plans.
Sec. 112. Effective date of part.
Part C--Offering of Comprehensive Health Insurance by States
Sec. 121. Definitions.
Sec. 122. Requiring offering as a condition for State receipt of medicaid
funds.
Sec. 123. Duties of commissioners of insurance.
Sec. 124. Establishment of comprehensive health associations in States.
Sec. 125. Minimum benefits and operation of comprehensive health insurance
plans.
Sec. 126. Administration of plans.
Sec. 127. Enrollment.
Sec. 128. Solicitation.
TITLE II--PROGRAM OF ASSISTANCE TO STATES FOR ASSISTING LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUALS
TO PURCHASE COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH INSURANCE
Sec. 201. Short title; effective date.
Sec. 202. Amendment to Social Security Act.
`TITLE XXI--GRANTS TO STATES FOR ASSISTANCE TO LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUALS IN
THE PURCHASE OF COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH INSURANCE
`Sec. 2101. Appropriation.
`Sec. 2102. States plans for comprehensive health insurance assistance to
low-income individuals.
`Sec. 2103. Payments to States.
`Sec. 2104. Operation of State plans.
`Sec. 2105. Penalties.'
TITLE III--PROGRAM OF ASSISTANCE TO STATES FOR ASSISTING INDIVIDUALS WHO
INCUR CATASTROPHIC EXPENSES FOR HEALTH CARE
Sec. 301. Short title; effective date.
Sec. 302. Amendment to Social Security Act.
`TITLE XXII--GRANTS TO STATES FOR ASSISTANCE TO INDIVIDUALS INCURRING
CATASTROPHIC EXPENSES FOR HEALTH CARE
`Sec. 2201. Appropriation.
`Sec. 2202. States plans for medical assistance for catastrophic illness.
`Sec. 2203. Payments to States.
`Sec. 2204. Operation of State plans.
`Sec. 2205. Definitions.
`Sec. 2206. Penalties.'
TITLE I--QUALIFIED HEALTH INSURANCE PLANS
Part A--Definitions and Standards for Qualified Plans
SEC. 101. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this title:
 (1) The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
 (2) The terms `commissioner' and `commissioner of insurance' mean, with
 respect to a State, the commissioner of insurance of the government of
 the State or such other State official, designated by the chief executive
 officer of the State, as may be approved by the Secretary.
 (3) The term `State' includes the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth
 of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Northern
 Mariana Islands.
 (4)(A) The term `plan of health coverage' means any plan or combination
 of plans of coverage, including combinations of self-insurance, individual
 accident and health insurance policies, group accident and health insurance
 policies, coverage under a nonprofit health service plan, or coverage
 under a health maintenance organization subscriber contract.
 (B) The term `qualified plan' means a plan of health coverage which has
 been reviewed and certified under this part.
 (5) The term `health maintenance organization' means an entity that meets
 the standards for such an organization under section 1301 of the Public
 Health Service Act.
 (6)(A) The term `self-insurance' means a plan of health coverage offered
 by a self insurer.
 (B) The term `self-insurer' means an employer or an employee welfare benefit
 fund or plan which directly or indirectly provides a plan of health coverage
 to its employees and administers the plan of health coverage itself or
 through an insurer, trust, or agency, except to the extent of accident and
 health insurance premium, subscriber contract charges or health maintenance
 organization contract charges, but does not include an employer which is
 engaged in the business of providing health care services to the public
 and which provides health care services directly to its employees at no
 charge to them.
 (C) The term `insurer' means a company offering or selling policies or
 contracts of accident and health insurance, but does not include a health
 maintenance organization.
 (D) The term `fraternal beneficiary association' means a corporation,
 society, order, or voluntary association without capital stock which sells
 health and accident insurance.
SEC. 102. STANDARDS FOR QUALIFIED PLANS.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary shall, in accordance with this part,
 establish standards for qualified plans and procedures for the review and
 certification of plans of health coverage as qualified plans.
 (b) CERTIFICATION OF `A' QUALIFIED PLANS- (1) A plan of health coverage
 shall be certified as an `A' qualified plan if it meets any applicable State
 requirements with respect to accident and health insurance plans or nonprofit
 health service plans and meets or exceeds the following minimum standards:
 (A) The minimum benefits for a covered individual are, subject to the other
 provisions of this subsection, equal to at least 80 percent of the covered
 expenses (described in paragraph (2)) in excess of an annual deductible
 which does not exceed $250 per person or $250 for each of 2 members of a
 covered family.
 (B) The coverage includes a limitation of $3,000 per person (and $6,000 for a
 covered family) on total annual out-of-pocket expenses for covered expenses.
 (C) The coverage is subject to a $1,000,000 maximum lifetime benefit under
 any policy.
 (D) The $3,000 and $6,000 limitations on total annual out-of-pocket
 expenses (under subparagraph (B)) and the $1,000,000 lifetime benefit
 (under subparagraph (C)) are not subject to change or substitution by use
 of an actuarially equivalent benefit.
 (2) For purposes of this section, covered expenses are the usual and
 customary charges for covered services (described in paragraph (3)) when
 prescribed by a physician or for services described in paragraph (3)(S)
 when prescribed by a chiropractor, but do not include excluded expenses
 (described in paragraph (4)).
 (3) For purposes of paragraph (2), covered services are the following
 services and articles:
 (A) Hospital services.
 (B) Professional services for the diagnosis or treatment of injuries,
 illnesses, or conditions (other than outpatient mental or dental care)
 which are rendered by a physician or at a physician's direction.
 (C) Drugs requiring a physician's prescription.
 (D) Services of a nursing home for not more than 120 days in year if the
 services would qualify as reimbursable services under title XVIII of the
 Social Security Act.
 (E) Services of a home health agency if the services would qualify as
 reimbursable services under title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
 (F) Use of radium or other radioactive materials.
 (G) Oxygen.
 (H) Anesthetics.
 (I) Prostheses, other than dental.
 (J) Rental or purchase, as appropriate, of durable medical equipment,
 but not including eyeglasses and hearing aids.
 (K) Diagnostic x-rays and laboratory tests.
 (L) Oral surgery for partially or completely un-erupted impacted teeth,
 for a tooth root without the extraction of the entire tooth, or for the
 gums and tissues of the mouth when not performed in connection with the
 extraction or repair of teeth.
 (M) Services of a physical therapist.
 (N) Transportation provided by licensed ambulance service to the nearest
 facility qualified to treat the condition.
 (O) Well baby care.
 (P) Physicians' services for routine checkups and annual physicals when
 prescribed by a physician.
 (Q) Multiphasic screening and other diagnostic testing, within such
 reasonable limits on the reimbursement required for such services as the
 Secretary shall prescribe.
 (R) A second opinion from a physician on all surgical procedures expected to
 cost a total of $500 or more in physician, laboratory, and hospital fees,
 but the coverage need not include the repetition of any diagnostic tests
 for such an opinion.
 (S) Professional services of a chiropractor.
 (4) For purposes of paragraph (2), excluded expenses are the following
 expenses for services and articles:
 (A) Any charge for care for injury or disease either (i) arising out of an
 injury in the course of employment and subject to a workers' compensation
 or similar law, (ii) for which benefits are payable without regard to fault
 under coverage statutorily required to be contained in any motor vehicle,
 or other liability insurance policy or equivalent self-insurance, or (iii)
 for which benefits are payable under another policy of accident and health
 insurance, title XVIII of the Social Security Act, or any other governmental
 program except as otherwise provided by law.
 (B) Any charge for treatment for cosmetic purposes other than surgery for
 the repair of an injury or birth defect.
 (C) Charges for care which is primarily for custodial or domiciliary
 purposes which would not qualify as eligible services under title XVIII
 of the Social Secu-rity Act.
 (D) Any charge for confinement in a private room to the extent it is in
 excess of the institution's charge for its most common semiprivate room,
 unless a private room is prescribed as medically necessary by a physician,
 except that if the institution does not have semiprivate rooms, its most
 common semiprivate room charge shall be considered to be 90 percent of
 its lowest private room charge.
 (E) That part of any charge for services or articles rendered or prescribed
 by a physician, dentist, or other health care personnel which exceeds the
 prevailing charge in the locality where the service is pro- vided.
 (F) Any charge for services or articles the provision of which is not
 within the scope of authorized practice of the institution or individual
 rendering the services or articles.
 (G) Any charge for more than 2 inpatient stays for treatment of substance
 for any person.
 (H) In the case of a disease or condition which was diagnosed within 90
 days before the effective date of coverage, charges for treatment of the
 disease or condition within the first 6 months of coverage.
 (5) A health maintenance organization which provides the services required
 by section 1301 of the Public Health Service Act is deemed to be providing
 an `A' qualified plan.
 (c) CERTIFICATION OF `B' QUALIFIED PLANS- A plan of health coverage shall
 be certified as a `B' qualified plan if it meets the minimum standards
 established by subsection (b), except that the annual deductible (described
 in subsection (b)(1)(A)) does not exceed $1,000 per person.
SEC. 103. DUTIES OF SECRETARY.
 (a) CERTIFICATION BY STATES- The Secretary shall, to the extent feasible,
 provide for the review and certification, by the Commissioner of each
 State, of qualified plans to be offered in the State, if he is provided
 adequate assurances that such review and certification will comply with
 the requirements of this Act.
 (b) GENERAL POLICY- The Secretary may--
 (1) formulate such general policies and promulgate such regulations as
 will carry out the provisions of this part;
 (2) define terms specified in section 102;
 (3) appoint advisory committees as necessary to carry out this part;
 (4) provide for coordination and consultation with commissioners of
 insurance and other State officials; and
 (5) undertake directly or (for any fiscal year to such extent or in such
 amounts as are provided in advance in appropriations Acts) through contracts
 with other entities studies or demonstration programs to develop awareness
 of the benefits provided under this title.
 (c) TIMELY DETERMINATION- Not later than 90 days after the date an insurer,
 fraternal beneficiary association, or employer applies to the Secretary
 for certification of a plan of health coverage as a qualified plan, the
 Secretary shall determine whether the plan is a qualified plan and, if so,
 what type of qualified plan it is.
SEC. 104. USE OF TERM QUALIFIED PLAN AND SALE OF PLANS OF HEALTH COVERAGE.
 (a) REGULATION- The sale of plans of health coverage are in and affect
 interstate commerce and in order to properly regulate such sales, it is
 necessary to regulate such sales in intrastate, as well as interstate,
 commerce.
 (b) PROHIBITION OF FALSE LABELING AND ADVERTISING- No entity may label,
 advertise, or otherwise describe for purposes of sale a plan of health
 coverage as--
 (1) a qualified plan, unless the plan is a qualified plan under this part
 and the plan specifies the particular type of qualified plan it is, or
 (2) a particular type of qualified plan, unless the plan has been certified
 under this part as meeting the standards under this part for a plan of
 that type.
 (c) REQUIRED LABELING- Every plan of health coverage sold or offered for
 sale shall be labelled as `qualified' or `nonqualified' on the front of
 the policy or evidence of the insurance. Each advertisement or promotion
 respecting a plan of health coverage made shall specify whether the plan is
 `qualified' or `nonqualified'.
 (d) ENFORCEMENT- Any entity that violates subsection (b) or (c) shall
 be treated, for purposes of the Federal Trade Commission Act, as having
 engaged in an unfair practice.
Part B--Requiring Offering of Certain Qualified Plans
SEC. 111. REQUIRING OFFERING OF PLANS.
 (a) REQUIREMENT- In accordance with regulations which the Secretary shall
 prescribe, each employer which during a calendar year employed an average
 number of employees of not less than 10, shall provide or make available
 to the employees a plan or combination of plans of health coverage which--
 (1) has been certified, under part A, as an `A' qualified plan or as a
 supplemental plan of health benefits which, when combined with the existing
 plan of health benefits, constitutes such a qualified plan;
 (2) is a qualified convertible plan (as defined in subsection (b)); and
 (3) provides for the option of coverage, in addition to an employee, of the
 employee's spouse and dependent children (as defined in subsection (f)(2)).
 (b) QUALIFIED CONVERTIBLE PLAN DEFINED- In this section, the term `qualified
 convertible plan' means a plan of health coverage--
 (1) which includes the right of each individual enrolled in the plan to
 continue coverage for a period of one year (at the group premium rate that
 applies to members continuing in the group) and thereafter to convert to
 an individual coverage qualified plan without the addition of underwriting
 restrictions if the individual insured leaves the group regardless of the
 reason for leaving the group, or upon cancellation or termination of the
 coverage for the group except where uninterrupted and continuous group
 coverage is otherwise provided to the group;
 (2) under which the individual may exercise his right to conversion within 30
 days after the date of leaving the group or within 30 days following the date
 he receives notice of cancellation or termination of coverage of the group
 and upon payment of premiums from the date of termination or cancellation;
 (3) under which due notice of cancellation or termination of coverage for
 a group is provided to each individual having coverage in the group by
 the insurer, self-insurer, or health maintenance organization canceling
 or terminating the coverage, except where reasonable evidence indicates
 that uninterrupted and continuous group coverage is otherwise provided to
 the group;
 (4) under which the employer agrees to provide the insurer or health
 maintenance organization, upon request, with a list of the names and
 addresses of covered individuals; and
 (5) which provides that, in the case of the death of the individual in whose
 name the contract was issued, every other individual then covered under the
 contract may elect, within the period specified in the contract, to continue
 his coverage under the same or a different contract without the addition of
 underwriting restrictions until he would have ceased to have been entitled
 to coverage had the individual in whose name the contract was issued lived.
 (c) ENFORCEMENT- (1) Any employer which knowingly does not comply with the
 requirements of subsection (a) shall be subject to civil penalty of not
 more than $10,000. If such noncompliance continues, a civil penalty may be
 assessed and collected under this subsection for each 30-day period such
 noncompliance continues. Such penalty may be assessed by the Secretary and
 collected in a civil action brought by the Attorney General in a United
 States district court.
 (2) In any proceeding by the Secretary to assess a civil penalty under
 this subsection, no penalty shall be assessed until the employer charged
 shall have been given notice and an opportunity to present its views
 on such charge. In determining the amount of the penalty, or the amount
 agreed upon in compromise, the Secretary shall consider the gravity of the
 noncompliance and the demonstrated good faith of the employer charged in
 attempting to achieve rapid compliance after notification by the Secretary
 of a noncompliance.
 (3) In any civil action brought to review the assessment of a civil penalty
 assessed under this subsection, the court shall, at the request of any party
 to such action, hold a trial de novo on the assessment of such civil penalty,
 and in any civil action to collect such a civil penalty, the court shall,
 at the request of any party to such action, hold a trial de novo on the
 assessment of such civil penalty unless in a prior civil action to review the
 assessment of such penalty the court held a trial de novo on such assessment.
 (d) ENFORCEMENT- Any employee whose employer has allegedly violated
 subsection (a) may bring an action in an appropriate court in a State or
 the United States to enjoin such violation.
 (e) SPECIAL RULES- (1) No employer shall be required to pay more for
 health benefits as a result of the application of this section than would
 otherwise be required by any prevailing collective-bargaining agreement
 or other legally enforceable contract for the provision of health benefits
 between the employer and its employees.
 (2) An individual conversion contract under a qualified convertible plan
 issued by a health maintenance organization shall not be treated as an
 individual enrollment contract with a health maintenance organization with
 respect to any limitation provided in any law respecting open enrollment
 periods of such organizations.
 (f) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section:
 (1) The term `employee' does not include an employee excluded from
 consideration under section 89 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 under
 subsection (h) of that section.
 (2) The term `dependent child' means, with respect to an individual, the
 individual's (A) unmarried child under the age of 19, (B) child under
 the age of 25 who is a student and who is financially dependent upon
 the individual, and (C) child of any age who is disabled and financially
 dependent upon the individual.
 (3) The term `health benefits' means benefits, offered to employees on
 an indemnity or prepaid basis, which pay the costs of or provide medical,
 surgical, or hospital care.
SEC. 112. EFFECTIVE DATE OF PART.
 This part shall apply to employment on or after January 1, 1990.
Part C--Offering of Comprehensive Health Insurance by States
SEC. 121. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this part:
 (1) The term `association' means, with respect to a State, the comprehensive
 health association established by the State pursuant to this part.
 (2) The term `writing carrier' means, with respect to a State, the insurer
 or insurers and health maintenance organization or organizations in the State
 selected by the association of the State and approved by the commissioner of
 insurance of the State to administer the comprehensive health insurance plan.
 (3) The term `comprehensive health insurance plan' means policies of
 insurance and contracts of health maintenance organization coverage offered
 by an association through the writing carrier in the State.
 (4) The term `health policy' means an insurance or nonprofit health service
 plan contract providing benefits for hospital, surgical, and medical care,
 but does not include coverage which is--
 (A) limited to disability or income protection coverage,
 (B) automobile medical payment coverage,
 (C) supplemental to liability insurance,
 (D) designed solely to provide payments on a per diem, fixed indemnity,
 or nonexpense incurred basis,
 (E) insurance on a debtor to provide indemnity for payments becoming due
 on a specific loan or other credit transaction while the debtor is disabled
 (as defined in the policy),
 (F) designed solely to provide dental or vision care,
 (G) accident and health insurance issued--
 (i) to a common carrier covering a group of persons who may become passengers
 on the common carrier,
 (ii) to an employer covering the employer's employees who are exposed to
 exceptional hazards incident to their employment,
 (iii) to an educational institution (or head thereof) covering its students
 or teachers,
 (iv) to a volunteer group, covering members of the group,
 (v) to a sports team or camp covering members of the team or campers, or
 (vi) any other substantially similar group (as determined by the Secretary);
 or
 (H) accident-only coverage issued by licensed and tested insurance agents
 or solicitors which provides reasonable benefits in relation to the cost
 of covered services,
except that the provisions of subparagraph (D) shall not apply to hospital
indemnity coverage which is sold by an insurer to an applicant who is not
then currently covered by a qualified plan.
SEC. 122. REQUIRING OFFERING AS A CONDITION FOR STATE RECEIPT OF MEDICAID
FUNDS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1902(a) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1396a(a)) is amended--
 (1) by striking out `and' at the end of paragraph (51);
 (2) by striking out the period at the end of paragraph (52) and inserting
 in lieu thereof `; and'; and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (52) the following new paragraph:
 `(53) provide (in the case of each of the 50 States, the District of
 Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico) for the establishment and
 operation of a comprehensive health association in the State and for a
 comprehensive health insurance plan in the State, in accordance with part
 C of title I of the Comprehensive Health Care Improvement Act of 1989.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- (1) The amendments made by subsection (a) shall (except
 as otherwise provided in paragraph (2)) apply to medical assistance provided,
 under a State plan approved under title XIX of the Social Security Act,
 on and after October 1, 1990.
 (2) In the case of a State plan for medical assistance under title XIX of
 the Social Security Act which the Secretary of Health and Human Services
 determines requires State legislation in order for the plan to meet
 the additional requirement imposed by the amendment made by subsection
 (a)(3), the State plan shall not be regarded as failing to comply with
 the requirements of such title solely on the basis of its failure to meet
 this additional requirement before the first day of the first calendar
 quarter beginning after the close of the first regular session of the
 State legislature that begins after the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 123. DUTIES OF COMMISSIONERS OF INSURANCE.
 Each State commissioner of insurance, consistent with any regulations the
 Secretary may promulgate to carry out this part--
 (1) may formulate general policies to advance the purposes of this title;
 (2) shall supervise the creation of the comprehensive health association
 in the State (within the limits described in section 124);
 (3) shall approve the selection of the writing carrier by the association in
 the State and approve the association's contract with the writing carrier,
 including the State plan coverage and premiums to be charged;
 (4) may appoint advisory committees with respect to implementation of
 this part;
 (5) shall conduct periodic audits to assure the general accuracy of the
 financial data submitted by the writing carrier and the association in
 the State;
 (6) shall contract with the Federal Government and may contract with any
 other unit of government to ensure coordination of the State plan of the
 association with other governmental assistance programs;
 (7) may undertake, directly or through contracts with other persons,
 studies or demonstration programs to develop awareness of the benefits
 provided under this Act, so that residents of the State may best avail
 themselves of the health care benefits provided here- under;
 (8) may contract with insurers and others for administrative services; and
 (9) may adopt, amend, suspend, and repeal rules as reasonably necessary
 to carry out and make effective the provisions and purposes of this part.
SEC. 124. ESTABLISHMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH ASSOCIATIONS IN STATES.
 (a) REQUIREMENT- Each State must provide for the establishment of a
 comprehensive health association with membership consisting of all insurers,
 fraternals beneficiary associations, other entities (such as Blue Cross/Blue
 Shield plans) offering health policies, and health maintenance organizations
 licensed or authorized to do business in the State. Each association must
 be exempt from taxation under the laws of the State and all property owned
 by the association must be exempt from State taxation.
 (b) BOARD OF DIRECTORS- The board of directors of each association for a
 State shall be made up of 7 individuals selected by participating members,
 subject to the approval of the commissioner of insurance of the State. To
 select the initial board of directors, and to initially organize each
 association, each commissioner shall give notice to all its members of the
 time and place of the organizational meeting. In determining voting rights at
 the organizational meeting each member shall be entitled to vote in person
 or proxy. The vote shall be a weighted vote based upon the member's cost of
 self-insurance, accident and health insurance premium, subscriber contract
 charges, or health maintenance contract payment derived from or on behalf
 of residents in the State in the previous calendar year, as determined
 by the commissioner. If the board of directors is not selected within
 60 days after notice of the organizational meeting, the commissioner may
 appoint the initial board. In approving or selecting members of the board,
 the commissioner shall consider, among other things, whether all types
 of members are fairly represented. Members of the board may be reimbursed
 from the money of the association for expenses incurred by them as members,
 but shall not otherwise be compensated by the association for their services.
 (c) MEMBERSHIP- All members of an association shall maintain their membership
 in the association as a condition of doing accident and health insurance
 or health maintenance organization business in the State. Each association
 in a State shall submit bylaws and operating rules to the commissioner
 for that State for approval.
 (d) REINSURANCE CONTRACTS- All members shall enter into a reinsurance
 contract with the association according to terms specified in section
 125(d). For members operating on the date of the enactment of this Act,
 the first such contract of reinsurance shall be executed on or before
 October 1, 1989, for a period of 1 year and shall be renewed annually
 thereafter. A company which ceases to do business within the State shall
 remain liable under the contract for the reinsurance contracted for during
 that calendar year.
 (e) EXEMPTION FROM ANTITRUST LAWS- In the performance of their duties as
 members of an association, the members shall be exempt from the application
 of Federal and State antitrust laws.
 (f) AUTHORITY- (1) Each association shall have the authority, under
 State law--
 (A) to exercise the powers granted to insurers under the laws of the State;
 (B) to sue or be sued;
 (C) to enter into contracts with insurers, similar associations in other
 States, or with other persons for the performance of administrative functions
 (including the functions provided for in paragraphs (2) and (3)); and
 (D) establish administrative and accounting procedures for the operation
 of the association.
 (2) Each association may provide for the reinsuring of risks incurred as
 a result of issuing qualified plans by members of the association. Each
 member which elects to reinsure its risks shall determine the categories
 of coverage it elects to reinsure in the association. These categories are--
 (A) individual qualified plans, excluding group conversions,
 (B) group conversions,
 (C) group qualified plans with fewer than 50 employees or members, and
 (D) major medical coverage.
A separate election may be made for each category of coverage. If a member
elects to reinsure their risks of a category of coverage, it must reinsure
the risk of the coverage of every life covered under every health policy
issued in that category. A member electing to reinsure risks of a category
of coverage shall enter into a contract with the association establishing
a reinsurance plan for the risks. This contract may include provision for
the pooling of members' risks reinsured through the association and it
may provide for assessment of each member reinsuring risks for losses and
operating and administrative expenses incurred, or estimated to be incurred,
in the operation of the reinsurance plan. This reinsurance plan shall be
approved by the commissioner of the State before it is effective. Members
electing to administer the risks which are reinsured in the association shall
comply with the benefit determination guidelines and accounting procedures
to be established by the association. The fee charged by the association
for the reinsurance of risks shall not be less than 110 percent of the total
anticipated expenses incurred by the association for the reinsurance.
 (3) The association may provide for the administration by the association
 of policies which are reinsured pursuant to paragraph (2). Each member
 electing to reinsure 1 or more categories of coverage in the association
 may elect to have the association administer the categories of coverage on
 the member's behalf. If a member elects to have the association administer
 the categories of coverage, it must do so for every life covered under every
 health policy issued in that category. The fee for the administration shall
 not be less than 110 percent of the total anticipated expenses incurred
 by the association for the administration.
SEC. 125. MINIMUM BENEFITS AND OPERATION OF COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH INSURANCE
PLANS.
 (a) REQUIRED POLICIES--Each association through its comprehensive health
 insurance plan shall offer policies which provide the benefits of an `A' and
 `B' qualified plans. It shall offer health maintenance organization contracts
 in those areas of the State where a health maintenance organization has
 agreed to make the coverage available and has been selected as a writing
 carrier.
 (b) ENTITLEMENT TO ENROLL- (1) Upon the certification, by an association in a
 State, of an individual under section 127(a), the individual is entitled to
 enroll in the comprehensive health insurance plan in the State by payment
 of the State plan premium to the writing carrier.
 (2) For the first 18 months of operation of each comprehensive health
 insurance plan in a State, the association for the State shall establish
 the following premiums (hereinafter in this part referred to as `State
 plan premiums') to be charged for membership in the comprehensive health
 insurance plan:
 (A) The premium for the `A' qualified plan and for the `B' qualified plan
 shall be the average of rates charged by the five insurers with the largest
 number of individuals in an `A' individual qualified plan of insurance or
 in a `B' individual qualified plan of insurance, respectively, in force
 in the State.
 (B) The charge for health maintenance organization coverage shall be based
 on generally accepted actuarial principles.
For subsequent enrollees or renewals of membership, the schedule of premiums
for membership in the comprehensive health insurance plan shall be designed
by each association to be self-supporting and based on generally accepted
actuarial principles; except that such premiums shall not exceed 105 percent
of the average premium of State group plans for State employees.
 (3) Any employer which has in its employ 1 or more individuals enrolled in
 the comprehensive health insurance plan may make all or any portion of the
 State plan premium payment to the State plan directly to the writing carrier.
 (c) LIMIT ON REFERRAL FEES- Not less than 87 1/2 percent of the State
 plan premiums paid to the writing carrier in any State may be used to pay
 claims, and not more than 12 1/2 percent of such premiums may be used
 for the payment of agent referral fees (as authorized by section 128(c))
 and for the payment of the writing carrier's direct and indirect expenses
 (as specified in section 126(g)).
 (d) USE OF SURPLUS- Any income in excess of the costs incurred by an
 association in providing reinsurance or administrative services pursuant
 to paragraphs (2) and (3) of section 124(f) shall be held at interest and
 used by the association to offset losses due to claims expenses of the
 State plan or allocated to reduce State plan premiums.
 (e) SHARING LOSSES- (1) Each member of an association and each entity in the
 State self-insuring for the provision of health care services shall share the
 losses due to claims expenses of the comprehensive health insurance plan's
 health insurance plan for plans issued or approved for issuance by the
 association, and shall share in the operating and administrative expenses
 incurred or estimated to be incurred by the association incident to the
 conduct of its affairs, pursuant to the terms of the individual reinsurance
 contracts executed by the association with each member in accordance
 with section 124(d). Deviations in the claim experience of the State plan
 from the premium payments allocated to the payment of benefits shall be
 the liability of association members and such self-insurers. Association
 members and such self-insurers shall share in the claims expense of the
 State plan and operating and adminstrative expenses of the association
 in an amount equal to the ratio of the member's or self-insurer's total
 cost of accident and health insurance premium, self-insurance, subscriber
 contract charges, or health maintenance organization contract charges
 received from or on behalf of residents of the State as divided into
 the total cost of accident and health insurance premium, self-insurance,
 subscriber contract charges, and health maintenance organization contract
 charges received by all association members and all self-insurers from or on
 behalf of residents of the State, as determined by the commissioner of the
 State. The reinsurance contract shall provide for an annual determination and
 assessment of each member's liability, if any, and for the liability of each
 self-insurer. Payment of the assessment shall be due within 30 days after
 the end of the association's fiscal year. Subject to the approval of the
 commissioner, the reinsurance contract may provide for interim assessments
 as may be necessary to assure the financial capability of the association
 in meeting the incurred or estimated claims expenses of the State plan
 and operating and administrative expenses of the association until the
 association's next annual fiscal year end assessment. Failure by a member
 to tender to the association the assessed reinsurance payment within 30
 days of the date of notification by the association shall be grounds for
 termination of the member's membership. Failure of a self-insurer to tender
 to the association the assessed reinsurance payment within 30 days of the
 date of notification by the association shall subject the self-insurer to
 appropriate penalties established by the State.
 (2) Net gains, if any, from the operation of a State plan by an association
 shall be held at interest and used by the association to offset future
 losses due to claims expenses of the State plan or allocated to reduce
 State plan premiums.
SEC. 126. ADMINISTRATION OF PLANS.
 (a) SUBMISSION OF POLICIES- Any member of an association in a State may
 submit to the commissioner for the State the policies of accident and health
 insurance or the health maintenance organization contracts which are being
 proposed to serve in the comprehensive health insurance plan. The time
 and manner of the submission shall be prescribed by rule of the commissioner.
 (b) SELECTION- Upon the approval, under State law, of the commissioner for
 a State of health policy forms and contracts submitted pursuant to State law
 by members of the association for the State, the association may select such
 policies and contract to be the comprehensive health insurance plan. This
 selection shall be based upon criteria including the member's proven ability
 to handle large group accident and health insurance cases, efficient claim
 paying capacity, and the estimate of total charges for administering the
 plan. Each association may select separate writing carriers for the two
 types of qualified plans and the health maintenance organization contract.
 (c) ADMINISTRATIVE AND CLAIMS FUNCTIONS- Each writing carrier shall
 perform all administrative and claims payment functions required by this
 section. Each writing carrier shall provide these services for a period of
 3 years, unless a request to terminate is approved by the commissioner for
 the State. The commissioner shall approve or deny such a request to terminate
 within 90 days of the date of its receipt of the request. A failure to make
 a final decision on a request to terminate within the specified period shall
 be deemed to be an approval. Six months before the date of the expiration
 of each 3 year period, the association shall invite submissions of health
 policy forms from members of the association, including the writing
 carrier. The association shall follow the provisions of subsection (b)
 in selecting a writing carrier for the subsequent 3 year period.
 (d) POLICY OF INSURANCE- Each writing carrier shall provide to all eligible
 persons enrolled in the comprehensive health insurance plan an individual
 health policy or certificate, setting forth a statement as to the insurance
 protection to which the individual is entitled, with whom claims are to be
 filed, and to whom benefits are payable. The health policy or certificate
 shall indicate that coverage was obtained through the association.
 (e) REPORT ON OPERATIONS- Each writing carrier in a State shall submit to
 the association and commissioner in the State on a monthly basis a report
 on the operation of the State comprehensive health insurance plan.
 (f) PAYMENT OF CLAIMS- All claims shall be paid by the writing carrier
 pursuant to the provisions of this part and shall indicate that the claim
 was paid by the State comprehensive health insurance plan. Each claim
 payment shall include information specifying the procedure to be followed
 in the event of a dispute over the amount of payment.
 (g) PAYMENT BY PLAN- Each writing carrier shall be reimbursed from the
 State plan premiums received for its direct and indirect expenses. Direct
 and indirect expenses shall include a pro rata reimbursement for that
 portion of the writing carrier's administrative, printing, claims
 administration, management, and building overhead expenses which are
 assignable to the maintenance and administration of the State comprehensive
 health insurance plan, but shall not include costs directly related to
 the original submission of health policy forms before selection as the
 writing carrier. Each association shall approve cost accounting methods to
 substantiate its writing carrier's cost reports consistent with generally
 accepted accounting principles.
 (h) AGENCY- Each writing carrier shall at all times when carrying out its
 duties under this section be considered an agent of the association and
 the commissioner of insurance with civil liability, subject to any State
 law provisions respecting limitation on the time period for the filing of
 actions against a State agency.
 (i) TAX EXEMPTION OF PREMIUMS- Premiums received by a writing carrier for
 the comprehensive health insurance plan are specifically exempted from
 any taxation under State law based on receipt of premiums.
SEC. 127. ENROLLMENT.
 (a) OPEN ENROLLMENT- The comprehensive health insurance plan for a State
 shall be open for enrollment by individuals residing in the State. Such
 an individual may enroll by submitting a certificate of eligibility to
 the writing carrier, which certificate may provide the following:
 (1) Name, address, age, and length of time at residence of the applicant.
 (2) Name, address, and age of any dependents (if any), if they are to
 be insured.
 (3) A designation of the coverage desired.
Such an individual may not purchase more than one health policy from a State
comprehensive health insurance plan.
 (b) REVIEW OF APPLICATION- Within 30 days of the date of receipt of a
 certificate described in subsection (a), the writing carrier shall either
 reject the application for failing to comply with the requirements in that
 subsection or forward to the individual a notice of acceptance and billing
 information. Insurance shall be effective immediately upon receipt of the
 first month's State plan premium, and shall be retroactive to the date of
 the application, if the applicant otherwise complies with the requirements
 of this part.
SEC. 128. SOLICITATION.
 (a) DISSEMINATING INFORMATION- Each association in a State, pursuant
 to a plan approved by the commissioner for the State, shall disseminate
 appropriate information to the residents of the State regarding the existence
 of the comprehensive health insurance plan and the means of enrollment. Means
 of dissemination may include use of the press, radio, and television,
 as well as publication in appropriate State offices and publications.
 (b) PUBLIC PARTICIPATION- Each association shall devise and implement means
 of maintaining public awareness of the provisions of this title and shall
 administer this part in a manner which facilitates public participation
 in the State plan.
 (c) AGENT'S REFERRAL FEES- Each writing carrier shall pay an agent's
 referral fee, in an amount to be determined by the association, to each
 insurance agent who refers an applicant to the State comprehensive health
 insurance plan, if the application is accepted. Selling or marketing of
 qualified State comprehensive health insurance plans shall not be limited
 to the writing carrier or its agents. The referral fees shall be paid by
 the writing carrier from money it receives as premiums for the plan.
 (d) NOTICE- The State shall provide that each insurer in the State which
 rejects or applies underwriting restrictions to an applicant for accident
 and health insurance shall notify the applicant of the existence of the
 State comprehensive health insurance plan, the requirements for being
 accepted in it, and the procedure for applying to it.
TITLE II--PROGRAM OF ASSISTANCE TO STATES FOR ASSISTING LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUALS
TO PURCHASE COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH INSURANCE
SEC. 201. SHORT TITLE; EFFECTIVE DATE.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This title may be cited as the `Comprehensive Health
 Insurance Assistance Act of 1989'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by section 202 shall apply to
 payments made, under a State plan approved under title XXI of the Social
 Security Act, on and after October 1, 1990.
SEC. 202. AMENDMENT TO SOCIAL SECURITY ACT.
 The Social Security Act is amended by adding after title XX the following
 new title:
`TITLE XXI--GRANTS TO STATES FOR ASSISTANCE TO LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUALS IN
THE PURCHASE OF COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH INSURANCE
`appropriation
 `SEC. 2101. For the purpose of enabling each State, as far as practicable
 under the conditions in such State, to provide assistance to low-income
 individuals in the purchase of comprehensive health insurance under this
 title, there is hereby authorized to be appropriated for each fiscal year
 $2,470,000,000. The sums made available under this section shall be used
 for making payments to States which have submitted, and had approved by
 the Secretary, State plans for comprehensive health insurance assistance
 to low-income individuals.
`state plans for comprehensive health insurance assistance to low-income
individuals
 `SEC. 2102. (a) In order to be approved by the Secretary under this title,
 a State plan for comprehensive health insurance assistance to low-income
 individuals must meet the following requirements:
`Statewide Scope and State Financial Participation
 `(1) The plan must provide--
 `(A) that it shall be in effect in all political subdivisions of the State,
 and, if administered by them, be mandatory upon them, and
 `(B) for financial participation by the State equal to not less than 40
 percent of the nonFederal share of the expenditures under the plan with
 respect to which payments under section 2103 are authorized by this title,
 and provide for financial participation by the State equal to all of such
 non-Federal share or provide for distribution of funds from Federal or
 State sources, for carrying out the State plan, on an equalization or
 other basis which will assure that the lack of adequate funds from local
 sources will not result in lowering the assistance available under the plan.
`Administration of Plan
 `(2) The plan must provide--
 `(A) for designation of an appropriate State agency (hereinafter in this
 title referred to as `the State agency') to administer the plan;
 `(B) such safeguards as may be necessary to restrict the use or disclosure
 of information concerning applicants and recipients to purposes directly
 connected with the administration of the plan; and
 `(C) that the State agency will make such reports, in such form and
 containing such information, as the Secretary may from time to time require,
 and comply with such provisions as the Secretary may from time to time
 find necessary to assure the correctness and verification of such reports.
`Provision of, and Applications for, Assistance
 `(3) The plan must provide--
 `(A) for making partial or full assistance available to low-income
 individuals, as determined by the State, for such individuals to purchase
 `A' qualified plans (as certified under title I of the Comprehensive Health
 Care Improvement Act of 1989);
 `(B) reasonable standards for determining eligibility for and the extent
 of assistance under the plan which are consistent with the objectives of
 this title and provide for reasonable evaluation of income and resources;
 `(C) that any individual wishing to make application for assistance under
 the plan shall have opportunity to do so and that such assistance shall
 be furnished with reasonable promptness to all eligible individuals; and
 `(D) for granting an opportunity for a fair hearing before the State agency
 to any individual whose claim for assistance under the plan is denied or
 is not acted upon with reasonable promptness.
 `(b) The Secretary shall approve any plan which fulfills the requirements
 specified in subsection (a), except that he shall not approve any plan
 which imposes as a condition for eligibility for assistance under the plan
 any citizenship requirement which excludes any citizen of the United States.
`payments to states
 `SEC. 2103. (a) From the sums appropriated therefor, the Secretary shall
 pay to each State which has a plan approved under this title, for each
 quarter, beginning with the quarter commencing October 1, 1990, subject
 to subsection (b), an amount equal to 50 percent of so much of the sums
 expended during such quarter as are attributable either to assistance
 under the plan to low-income individuals or to expenses found necessary
 by the Secretary for the proper and efficient administration of the plan.
 `(b) The amount of funds which the Secretary is otherwise obligated to pay
 a State under subsection (a) during a quarter may not exceed the product
 of $2.50 and the population of the State.
 `(c)(1) Before the beginning of each quarter, the Secretary shall estimate
 the amount to which a State will be entitled under this section for the
 quarter, such estimates to be based on (A) a report filed by the State
 containing its estimate of the total sum to be expended in such quarter
 in accordance with the provisions of this section, and stating the amount
 appropriated or made available by the State and its political subdivisions
 for such expenditures in such quarter, and if such amount is less than the
 State's proportionate share of the total sum of such estimated expenditures,
 the source or sources from which the difference is expected to be derived,
 and (B) such other investigation as the Secretary may find necessary.
 `(2) The Secretary shall then pay to the State, in such installments as
 he may determine, the amounts so estimated, reduced, or increased to the
 extent of any overpayment or underpayment which the Secretary determines
 was made under this section to such State for any prior quarter and
 with respect to which adjustment has not already been made under this
 subsection. Expenditures for which payments were made to the State under
 subsection (a) shall be treated as an overpayment to the extent that the
 State or local agency administering such plan has been reimbursed for such
 expenditures by a third party pursuant to the provisions of its plan.
 `(3) The pro rata share to which the United States is equitably entitled,
 as determined by the Secretary, of the net amount recovered during any
 quarter by the State or any political subdivision thereof with respect to
 assistance furnished under the State plan shall be considered an overpayment
 to be adjusted under this subsection.
 `(4) Upon the making of an estimate by the Secretary under this subsection,
 any appropriations available for payments under this section shall be
 deemed obligated.
`operation of state plans
 `SEC. 2104. If the Secretary, after reasonable notice and opportunity for
 hearing to the State, finds--
 `(1) that the plan has been so changed that it no longer complies with
 the provisions of section 2102; or
 `(2) that in the administration of the plan there is a failure to comply
 substantially with any such pro- vision;
the Secretary shall notify the State that further payments will not be made to
the State (or, in his discretion, that payments will be limited to categories
under or parts of the State plan not affected by such failure), until the
Secretary is satisfied that there will no longer be any such failure to
comply. Until he is so satisfied he shall make no further payments to such
State (or shall limit payments to categories under or parts of the State
plan not affected by such failure).
`penalties
 `SEC. 2105. Whoever--
 `(1) knowingly and willfully makes or causes to be made any false statement
 or representation of a material fact in any application for any assistance
 under a State plan approved under this title,
 `(2) at any time knowingly and willfully makes or causes to be made any
 false statement or representation of a material fact for use in determining
 rights to such assistance,
 `(3) having knowledge of the occurrence of any event affecting (A) his
 initial or continued right to any such assistance, or (B) the initial or
 continued right to any such assistance of any other individual in whose
 behalf he has applied for or is receiving such assistance, conceals or
 fails to disclose such event with an intent fraudulently to secure such
 assistance either in a greater amount or quantity than is due or when no
 such assistance is authorized, or
 `(4) having made application to receive any such assistance for the use
 and benefit of another and having received it, knowingly and willfully
 converts such assistance or any part thereof to a use other than for the
 use and benefit of such other person,
shall (A) in the case of such a statement, representation, concealment,
failure, or conversion by any person in connection with the sale, or offering
for sale (by that person), of qualified plans for which assistance is or
may be made under this title, be fined not more than $25,000 or imprisoned
for not more than 5 years, or both, or (B) in the case of such a statement,
representation, concealment, failure, or conversion by any other person,
be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned for not more than 1 year,
or both. In addition, in any case where an individual who is otherwise
eligible for assistance under a State plan approved under this title is
convicted of an offense under the preceding provisions of this section,
the State may at its option (notwithstanding any other provision of this
title or of such plan) limit, restrict, or suspend the eligibility of that
individual for such period (not exceeding 1 year) as it deems appropriate;
but the imposition of a limitation, restriction, or suspension with respect
to the eligibility of any individual under this sentence shall not affect
the eligibility of any other person for assistance under the plan, regardless
of the relationship between that individual and such other person.'.
TITLE III--PROGRAM OF ASSISTANCE TO STATES FOR ASSISTING INDIVIDUALS WHO
INCUR CATASTROPHIC EXPENSES FOR HEALTH CARE
SEC. 301. SHORT TITLE; EFFECTIVE DATE.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This title may be cited as the `Catastrophic Health Care
 Expenses Assistance Act of 1989'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by section 302 shall apply to
 payments made, under a State plan approved under title XXII of the Social
 Security Act, on and after October 1, 1990.
SEC. 302. AMENDMENT TO SOCIAL SECURITY ACT.
 The Social Security Act is amended by adding after title XXI, as added by
 section 201 of this Act, the following new title:
`TITLE XXII--GRANTS TO STATES FOR ASSISTANCE TO INDIVIDUALS INCURRING
CATASTROPHIC EXPENSES FOR HEALTH CARE
`appropriation
 `SEC. 2201. For the purpose of enabling each State, as far as practicable
 under the conditions in such State, to furnish medical assistance for
 catastrophic illness under this title, there is hereby authorized to be
 appropriated for each fiscal year $575,000,000. The sums made available
 under this section shall be used for making payments to States which have
 submitted, and had approved by the Secretary, State plans for medical
 assistance for catastrophic illness.
`state plans for medical assistance for catastrophic illness
 `SEC. 2202. (a) To be approved by the Secretary under this title, a State
 plan for medical assistance for catastrophic illness must meet the following
 requirements:
`Statewide Scope and State Financial Participation
 `(1) The plan must provide--
 `(A) that it shall be in effect in all political subdivisions of the State,
 and, if administered by them, be mandatory upon them, and
 `(B) for financial participation by the State equal to not less than 40
 percent of the non- Federal share of the expenditures under the plan with
 respect to which payments under section 2203 are authorized by this title,
 and provide for financial participation by the State equal to all of such
 non-Federal share or provide for distribution of funds from Federal or
 State sources, for carrying out the State plan, on an equalization or
 other basis which will assure that the lack of adequate funds from local
 sources will not result in lowering the assistance available under the plan.
`Administration of Plan
 `(2) The plan must provide--
 `(A) for designation of an appropriate State agency (hereinafter in this
 title referred to as `the State agency') to administer the plan;
 `(B) such safeguards as may be necessary to restrict the use or disclosure
 of information concerning applicants and recipients to purposes directly
 connected with the administration of the plan; and
 `(C) that the State agency will make such reports, in such form and
 containing such information, as the Secretary may from time to time require,
 and comply with such provisions as the Secretary may from time to time
 find necessary to assure the correctness and verification of such reports.
`Provision of, and Applications for, Assistance
 `(3) Subject to paragraph (4), the plan must provide for paying--
 `(A) at least 90 percent of all qualified expenses of an eligible individual
 and the individual's dependents in excess of the greater of--
 `(i) the sum of 30 percent of his household income under $25,000, plus
 40 percent of his household income between $25,000 and $40,000, plus
 50 percent of his household income in excess of $40,000 (or such lower
 respective percentages of such incomes, or of such higher incomes, as the
 State may establish), or
 `(ii) $3,000 (or such lower amount as the State may establish)
for the 12-consecutive-month period in which the applicant becomes an eligible
person; and
 `(B) 100 percent of all qualified nursing home expenses of an eligible
 individual and the individual's dependents in excess of 20 percent (or
 such lower percentage as the State may establish) of his household income.
The plan may not provide for charging any premiums, copayments, or deductibles,
except as provided in the previous sentence.
`Excess Charges and Utilization Review
 `(4)(A) A plan must provide such methods and procedures relating to the
 utilization of, and the payment for, services for which assistance is
 available under the plan as may be necessary to safeguard against unnecessary
 utilization of such services and to assure that payments are not in excess of
 reasonable charges consistent with efficiency, economy, and quality of care.
 `(B) A plan may provide that if the State agency determines that--
 `(i) the charge for a service is excessive and not reasonable, payment
 may be limited under the plan to the reasonable charge for the service, or
 `(ii) a health service provided to an individual was not medically necessary,
 the plan is not obligated to pay for the service.
In making either or both of the determinations described in clauses (i) and
(ii), a State agency may contract with utilization and quality control and
peer review organizations (with a contract under part B of title XI).
`Applications for Assistance
 `(5) The plan must provide--
 `(A) reasonable standards for determining eligibility for and the extent
 of assistance under the plan which are consistent with the objectives of
 this title and provide for reasonable evaluation of income and resources;
 `(B) that (i) any individual wishing to make application for assistance
 under the plan shall have opportunity to do so, (ii) each such application
 shall include a listing of expenses incurred (before the date of the
 application) for health services and shall designate the date on which
 the 12-consecutive-month period (described in section 2205(1)) began, and
 (iii) that such assistance shall be furnished with reasonable promptness
 to all eligible individuals; and
 `(C) for granting an opportunity for a fair hearing before the State agency
 to any individual whose claim for assistance under the plan is denied or
 is not acted upon with reasonable promptness.
`Payor of Last Resort and Collection of Other Insurance
 `(6) The plan must provide that--
 `(A) the State agency will take all reasonable measures to ascertain the
 legal liability of third parties to pay for care and services (available
 under the plan) arising out of injury, disease, or disability,
 `(B) where the State agency knows that a third party has such a legal
 liability such agency will treat such legal liability as a resource of
 the individual on whose behalf the assistance is made available under this
 title, and
 `(C) in any case where such a legal liability is found to exist after
 assistance has been made available on behalf of an eligible individual,
 the State agency will seek reimbursement for such assistance to the extent
 of such legal liability.
`Prohibition of Payment to Factors
 `(7) The plan must provide that no assistance under the plan for any
 service provided to an individual shall be made to anyone other than such
 individual or the person or institution providing such service, under an
 assignment or power of attorney or otherwise; except that--
 `(A) in the case of any service provided by a physician, dentist, or other
 individual practitioner, such payment may be made (i) to the employer of
 such physician, dentist, or other practitioner if such physician, dentist,
 or practitioner is required as a condition of his employment to turn over
 his fee for such service to his employer, or (ii) (where the service
 was provided in a hospital, clinic, or other facility) to the facility
 in which the service was provided if there is a contractual arrangement
 between such physician, dentist, or practitioner and such facility under
 which such facility submits the bill for such service; and
 `(B) nothing in this paragraph shall be construed (i) to prevent the
 making of such a payment in accordance with an assignment from the person
 or institution providing the service involved if such assignment is made
 to a governmental agency or entity or is established by or pursuant to
 the order of a court of competent jurisdiction, or (ii) to preclude an
 agent of such person or institution from receiving any such payment if
 (but only if) such agent does so pursuant to an agency agreement under
 which the compensation to be paid to the agent for his services for or in
 connection with the billing or collection of payments due such person or
 institution under the plan is unrelated (directly or indirectly) to the
 amount of such payments or the billings therefor, and is not dependent
 upon the actual collection of any such payment.
 `(b) The Secretary shall approve any plan which fulfills the requirements
 specified in subsection (a), except that he shall not approve any plan
 which imposes as a condition for eligibility for assistance under the plan
 any citizenship requirement which excludes any citizen of the United States.
`payments to states
 `SEC. 2203. (a) From the sums appropriated therefor, the Secretary shall
 pay to each State which has a plan approved under this title, for each
 quarter, beginning with the quarter commencing October 1, 1990, subject to
 subsections (b) and (c), an amount equal to 50 percent of so much of the
 sums expended during such quarter as are attributable either to payments
 made to eligible individuals under the plan or to expenses found necessary
 by the Secretary for the proper and efficient administration of the plan.
 `(b) The amount of funds which the Secretary is otherwise obligated to pay
 a State under subsection (a) during a quarter may not exceed the product
 of $0.625 and the population of the State.
 `(c) No payment may be made under this title to a State with respect
 to expenses for which obligations have been made to the extent that,
 in accordance with regulations established by the Secretary--
 `(1)(A) the charges on which the expenses are based are not reasonable, or
 `(B) if the expenses were for inpatient hospital services, the amount exceeds
 the hospital's customary charges with respect to such services or (if such
 services are furnished under the plan by a public institution free of charge
 or at nominal charges to the public) exceeds an amount determined on the
 basis of those items (specified in regulations prescribed by the Secretary)
 included in the determination of such payment which the Secretary finds
 will provide fair compensation to such institution for such services; or
 `(2) the expenses were for health services which were not medically
 necessary; or
 `(3) expenses were for services provided by a provider or other person
 during any period of time during which payment may not be made under title
 XVIII with respect to services furnished by that provider or person solely
 by reason of a determination by the Secretary under section 1862(d)(1)
 or under clause (D), (E), or (F) of section 1866(b)(2), or by reason of
 noncompliance with a request made by the Secretary under clause (C)(ii)
 of such section 1866(b)(2) or under section 1902(a)(38); or
 `(4) if the expenses were for services provided by a hospital or skilled
 nursing facility, such hospital or skilled nursing facility does not have
 in effect a utilization review plan which meets the requirements imposed
 by section 1861(k) for purposes of title XVIII; and if such hospital or
 skilled nursing facility has in effect such a utilization review plan
 for purposes of title XVIII, such plan shall serve as the plan required
 by this subsection (with the same standards and procedures and the same
 review committee or group) as a condition of payment under this title
 to such hospital or facility, except that the Secretary is authorized to
 waive the requirements of this paragraph if the State agency demonstrates
 to his satisfaction that it has in operation utilization review procedures
 which are superior in their effectiveness to the procedures required under
 section 1861(k); or
 `(5) a private insurer (as defined by the Secretary by regulation) would
 have been obligated to provide such assistance but for a provision of
 its insurance contract which has the effect of limiting or excluding such
 obligation because the individual is eligible for or is provided assistance
 under the plan.
 `(d)(1) Before the beginning of each quarter, the Secretary shall estimate
 the amount to which a State will be entitled under this section for the
 quarter, such estimates to be based on (A) a report filed by the State
 containing its estimate of the total sum to be expended in such quarter
 in accordance with the provisions of this section, and stating the amount
 appropriated or made available by the State and its political subdivisions
 for such expenditures in such quarter, and if such amount is less than the
 State's proportionate share of the total sum of such estimated expenditures,
 the source or sources from which the difference is expected to be derived,
 and (B) such other investigation as the Secretary may find necessary.
 `(2) The Secretary shall then pay to the State, in such installments as
 he may determine, the amounts so estimated, reduced, or increased to the
 extent of any overpayment or underpayment which the Secretary determines
 was made under this section to such State for any prior quarter and
 with respect to which adjustment has not already been made under this
 subsection. Expenditures for which payments were made to the State under
 subsection (a) shall be treated as an overpayment to the extent that the
 State or local agency administering such plan has been reimbursed for such
 expenditures by a third party pursuant to the provisions of its plan.
 `(3) The pro rata share to which the United States is equitably entitled,
 as determined by the Secretary, of the net amount recovered during any
 quarter by the State or any political subdivision thereof with respect to
 assistance furnished under the State plan shall be considered an overpayment
 to be adjusted under this subsection.
 `(4) Upon the making of an estimate by the Secretary under this subsection,
 any appropriations available for payments under this section shall be
 deemed obligated.
`operation of state plans
 `SEC. 2204. If the Secretary, after reasonable notice and opportunity for
 hearing to the State, finds--
 `(1) that the plan has been so changed that it no longer complies with
 the provisions of section 2202; or
 `(2) that in the administration of the plan there is a failure to comply
 substantially with any such provision;
the Secretary shall notify the State that further payments will not be made to
the State (or, in his discretion, that payments will be limited to categories
under or parts of the State plan not affected by such failure), until the
Secretary is satisfied that there will no longer be any such failure to
comply. Until he is so satisfied he shall make no further payments to such
State (or shall limit payments to categories under or parts of the State
plan not affected by such failure).
`definitions
 `SEC. 2205. For purposes of this title:
 `(1) The term `eligible individual' means, with respect to a State, any
 individual who is a resident of the State and who, while residing in the
 State, incurs an obligation to pay qualified expenses for himself and any
 dependents in any 12-consecutive-month period exceeding the greater of--
 `(A) 30 percent of his household income up to $25,000, plus 40 percent of
 his household income between $25,000 and $40,000, plus 50 percent of his
 household income in excess of $40,000 (or such lower respective percentages
 of such incomes, or of such higher incomes, as the State may establish), or
 `(B) $3,000 (or such lower amount as the State may establish).
 `(2) The term `qualified expense' means any charge incurred after October 1,
 1990, for a health service--
 `(A) which is a covered expense under section 102(b)(2) of the Comprehensive
 Health Care Improvement Act of 1989, and
 `(B) for which no third party is liable.
 `(3) The term `dependents' means, with respect to an individual--
 `(A) the individual's spouse; and
 `(B) any of the individual's (i) unmarried children under the age of 19
 years, (ii) children under the age of 25 who are students and financially
 dependent upon the individual, or (iii) children of any age who are disabled
 and financially dependent upon the individual.
 `(4) The term `household income' means, with respect to an individual,
 the sum of items specified in subparagraph (A), less the items specified
 in subparagraph (B), of the individual and all his dependents 23 years
 of age or older for the calendar year preceding the year in which the
 individual's application is filed under this title:
 `(A) Items included in income:
 `(i) Gross income (as defined in section 61(a) of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986).
 `(ii) Any pension or annuity (including railroad retirement benefits, all
 payments received under this Act, supplemental security income, and veterans
 disability pensions) which was not exclusively funded by the individual or
 spouse, or which was funded exclusively by the individual or spouse and
 which funding payments were excluded from gross income (for purposes of
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) in the years when the payments were made.
 `(iii) Nontaxable interest received from the State or Federal Government
 or any instrumentality or political subdivision thereof.
 `(iv) Worker's compensation.
 `(v) Unemployment benefits.
 `(vi) Nontaxable strike benefits.
 `(vii) Gross amounts of payments received in the nature of disability
 income or sick pay as a result of accident, sickness, or other disability,
 whether funded through insurance or otherwise.
 `(B) Items not included in income:
 `(i) Amounts excluded from income under sections 101(a), 102, 117, 121,
 127, and 129 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 `(ii) The amount of any pension or annuity which was exclusively funded by
 the individual or spouse and which funding payments were not excluded from
 adjusted gross income (for purposes of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986)
 in the years when the payments were made.
 `(iii) Gifts from nongovernmental sources.
 `(iv) Surplus food or other relief in kind supplied by a government agency.
 `(6) The term `third party' means any person other than the eligible
 individual or his dependents.
`penalties
 `SEC. 2206. (a) Whoever--
 `(1) knowingly and willfully makes or causes to be made any false statement
 or representation of a material fact in any application for any assistance
 under a State plan approved under this title,
 `(2) at any time knowingly and willfully makes or causes to be made any
 false statement or representation of a material fact for use in determining
 rights to such assistance,
 `(3) having knowledge of the occurrence of any event affecting (A) his
 initial or continued right to any such assistance, or (B) the initial or
 continued right to any such assistance of any other individual in whose
 behalf he has applied for or is receiving such assistance, conceals or
 fails to disclose such event with an intent fraudulently to secure such
 assistance either in a greater amount or quantity than is due or when no
 such assistance is authorized, or
 `(4) having made application to receive any such assistance for the use
 and benefit of another and having received it, knowingly and willfully
 converts such assistance or any part thereof to a use other than for the
 use and benefit of such other person,
shall (A) in the case of such a statement, representation, concealment,
failure, or conversion by any person in connection with the furnishing
(by that person) of services for which assistance is or may be provided
under this title, be guilty of a felony and upon conviction thereof fined
not more than $25,000 or imprisoned for not more than 5 years or both, or
(B) in the case of such a statement, representation, concealment, failure,
or conversion by any other person, be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned for not more
than 1 year, or both. In addition, in any case where an individual who is
otherwise eligible for assistance under a State plan approved under this title
is convicted of an offense under the preceding provisions of this section,
the State may at its option (notwithstanding any other provision of this
title or of such plan) limit, restrict, or suspend the eligibility of that
individual for such period (not exceeding 1 year) as it deems appropriate;
but the imposition of a limitation, restriction, or suspension with respect
to the eligibility of any individual under this sentence shall not affect
the eligibility of any other person for assistance under the plan, regardless
of the relationship between that individual and such other person.
 `(b)(1) Whoever solicits or receives any remuneration (including any
 kickback, bribe, or rebate) directly or indirectly, overtly or covertly,
 in cash or in kind--
 `(A) in return for referring an individual to a person for the furnishing
 or arranging for the furnishing of any item or service for which payment
 may be made in whole or in part under this title, or
 `(B) in return for purchasing, leasing, ordering, or arranging for or
 recommending purchasing, leasing, or ordering any good, facility, service,
 or item for which payment may be made in whole or in part under this title,
shall be guilty of a felony and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not
more than $25,000 or imprisoned for not more than 5 years, or both.
 `(2) Whoever offers or pays any remuneration (including any kickback,
 bribe, or rebate) directly or indirectly, overtly or covertly, in cash or
 in kind to any person to induce such person--
 `(A) to refer an individual to a person for the furnishing or arranging
 for the furnishing of any item or service for which payment may be made
 in whole or in part under this title, or
 `(B) to purchase, lease, order, or arrange for or recommend purchasing,
 leasing, or ordering any good, facility, service, or item for which payment
 may be made in whole or in part under this title,
shall be guilty of a felony and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not
more than $25,000 or imprisoned for not more than 5 years, or both.
 `(3) Paragraphs (1) and (2) shall not apply to--
 (A) a discount or other reduction in price obtained by a provider of
 services or other entity under this title if the reduction in price is
 properly disclosed and appropriately reflected in the costs claimed or
 charges made by the provider or entity under this title;
 `(B) any amount paid by an employer to an employee (who has a bona fide
 employment relationship with such employer) for employment in the provision
 of covered items or services; and
 `(C) any amount paid by a vendor of goods or services to a person authorized
 to act as a purchasing agent for a group of individuals or entities who
 are furnishing services reimbursed under this title if--
 `(i) the person has a written contract, with each such individual or entity,
 which specifies the amount to be paid the person, which amount may be a
 fixed amount or a fixed percentage of the value of the purchases made by
 each such individual or entity under the contract, and
 `(ii) in the case of an entity that is a provider of services, the person
 discloses (in such form and manner as the Secretary requires) to the
 entity and, upon request, to the Secretary the amount received from each
 such vendor with respect to purchases made by or on behalf of the entity.'.