HR 3789 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3789
To amend the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972 to
establish liability for removal costs and damages that directly result from
ocean dumping.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
November 14, 1991
Mr. STUDDS introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Merchant Marine and Fisheries
A BILL
To amend the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972 to
establish liability for removal costs and damages that directly result from
ocean dumping.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That the Marine Protection,
 Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972 is amended by adding at the end the
 following new title:
`TITLE V--LIABILITY FOR OCEAN DUMPING
`SEC. 501. SHORT TITLE.
 `This title may be cited as the `Ocean Dumping Liability Act'.
`SEC. 502. LIABILITY FOR OCEAN DUMPING.
 `(a) LIABILITY-
 `(1) JOINT, SEVERAL, AND STRICT LIABILITY- Notwithstanding another law
 and subject to the provisions of this title, each person who--
 `(A) dumps material into ocean waters of the United States;
 `(B) transports material from the United States for the purpose of dumping
 described in subparagraph (A);
 `(C) dumps material into ocean waters (other than waters described in
 subparagraph (A))--
 `(i) that is transported from the United States; or
 `(ii) from a vessel that is documented in the United States;
 `(D) owns or operates a vessel--
 `(i) from which material is dumped in a manner described in subparagraph
 (A) or (C); or
 `(ii) which provides transportation described in subparagraph (B); or
 `(E) owns material that is--
 `(i) dumped into ocean waters of the United States;
 `(ii) transported from the United States and dumped into ocean waters; or
 `(iii) dumped into ocean waters from a vessel that is documented in the
 United States;
is jointly, severally, and strictly liable for the removal costs and damages
specified in subsection (b) that directly result from that dumping.
 `(b) COVERED REMOVAL COSTS AND DAMAGES-
 `(1) REMOVAL COSTS- The removal costs referred to in subsection (a) are
 costs for removal actions taken by any person which do not conflict with
 Federal or applicable State law.
 `(2) DAMAGES- The damages referred to in subsection (a) are the following:
 `(A) NATURAL RESOURCES- Damages for injury to, destruction of, or loss
 of natural resources resulting from a dumping of material, including the
 reasonable costs of assessing the injury, destruction, or loss, which shall
 be recoverable in accordance with section 505 by a United States trustee,
 a State trustee, or an Indian tribe trustee.
 `(B) REAL OR PERSONAL PROPERTY- Damages for injury to, or economic losses
 from the destruction of, real or personal property resulting from a dumping
 of material, which shall be recoverable by a claimant who owns or leases
 that property.
 `(C) REVENUES- Damages equal to the net loss of taxes, royalties, rents,
 fees, or net profit shares due to the injury, destruction, or loss of
 real property, personal property, or natural resources resulting from a
 dumping of material, which shall be recoverable by the Government of the
 United States, a State, or a political subdivision thereof.
 `(D) PROFITS AND EARNING CAPACITY- Damages equal to the loss of profits
 or impairment of earning capacity due to the injury, destruction, or loss
 of real property, personal property, or natural resources resulting from
 a dumping of material, which shall be recoverable by any claimant.
`SEC. 503. DEFENSES TO LIABILITY.
 `(a) COMPLETE DEFENSES- There is no liability for any person under section
 502 if it is established that the dumping--
 `(1) was permitted or otherwise authorized by Federal, State, or local
 law; or
 `(2) resulted from an act of God, an act of war, civil war, hostilities,
 or insurrection.
 `(b) DEFENSES AS TO PARTICULAR CLAIMANTS- There is no liability for a
 dumping under section 2 to a person to the extent that the dumping is
 caused by the negligence of that person.
`SEC. 504. LIMITS ON LIABILITY.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the
 total of the liability of a person under section 2 and any removal costs
 incurred by, or on behalf of, the person, with respect to each dumping,
 shall not exceed--
 `(1) for a vessel, the greater of--
 `(A) $1,200 per gross ton; or
 `(B)(i) in the case of a vessel greater than 3,000 gross tons, $10,000,000;
 or
 `(ii) in the case of a vessel of 3,000 gross tons or less, $2,000,000; and
 `(b) PROXIMATE CAUSE- Subsection (a) does not apply to the liability of
 a person for a dumping if the dumping is proximately caused by--
 `(1) gross negligence or willful misconduct of; or
 `(2) the violation of an applicable Federal safety, construction, or
 operating regulation by;
the person, or an agent or employee of the person.
`SEC. 505. NATURAL RESOURCES LIABILITY.
 `(a) LIABILITY- In the case of an injury to, destruction of, or loss of
 natural resources, liability under this title shall be--
 `(1) to the United States Government for natural resources belonging to,
 managed by, controlled by, or appertaining to the United States;
 `(2) to a State for natural resources belonging to, managed by, controlled
 by, or appertaining to that State or any political subdivision thereof;
 `(3) to an Indian tribe for natural resources belonging to, managed by,
 controlled by, or appertaining to that Indian tribe.
 `(b) DESIGNATION OF TRUSTEES-
 `(1) FEDERAL TRUSTEES- The President shall designate the Federal officials
 who shall act under this title on behalf of the public as trustees for
 natural resources belonging to, managed by, controlled by, or appertaining
 to the United States.
 `(2) STATE TRUSTEES- The Governor of each State shall designate State and
 local officials who may act under this title on behalf of the public as
 trustees for natural resources belonging to, managed by, controlled by,
 or appertaining to the State or local governments in that State, and shall
 notify the President of the designation.
 `(3) INDIAN TRIBE TRUSTEES- The governing body of any Indian tribe shall
 designate tribal officials who may act under this title on behalf of
 the tribe or its members as trustees for natural resources belonging to,
 managed by, controlled by, or appertaining to that Indian tribe, and shall
 notify the President of the designation.
 `(c) FUNCTIONS OF TRUSTEES-
 `(1) FEDERAL TRUSTEES- The Federal officials designated under subsection
 (b)(1)--
 `(A) shall assess damages for injury to, destruction of, or loss of the
 natural resources under their trusteeship;
 `(B) may, upon request of and reimbursement from a State or Indian tribe,
 and at the discretion of the Federal officials, assess damages to the
 natural resources under the trusteeship of the State or tribe; and
 `(C) shall develop and implement a plan for the restoration, rehabilitation,
 replacement, or acquisition of the equivalent, of the natural resources
 under their trusteeship.
 `(2) STATE OR INDIAN TRIBE TRUSTEES- The officials designated under
 subsections (b) (2) and (3)--
 `(A) shall assess damages to the natural resources under their trusteeship;
 and
 `(B) shall develop and implement a plan for the restoration, rehabilitation,
 replacement, or acquisition of the equivalent of, the natural resources
 under their trusteeship.
 `(3) NOTICE AND OPPORTUNITY TO BE HEARD- Plans for restoration,
 rehabilitation, replacement, or acquisition of natural resources shall be
 developed and implemented under this section only after adequate public
 notice, opportunity for a hearing, and consideration of all public comments.
 `(d) MEASURE OF DAMAGES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The measure of damages in any action under this section
 for injury to, destruction of, or loss of natural resources is--
 `(A) the cost of restoring, rehabilitating, replacing, or acquiring the
 equivalent of, the damaged natural resources; plus
 `(B) the diminution in value of those natural resources pending restoration.
 `(2) NO DOUBLE RECOVERY- There shall be no double recovery under this title
 for natural resource damages, including the costs of damage assessment or
 restoration, rehabilitation, replacement, or acquisition.
 `(e) USE OF RECOVERED SUMS- Sums recovered under this title by a Federal,
 State, or Indian tribe trustee for damages to natural resources shall
 be retained by the trustee, without further appropriation, for use only
 to reimburse or pay costs incurred by the trustee under subsection (c)
 with respect to the damaged natural resources.
`SEC. 506. INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENTS.
 `(a) AGREEMENTS NOT PROHIBITED- Nothing in this title shall prohibit any
 agreement to insure, hold harmless, or indemnify a party to such agreement
 for any liability under this title.
 `(b) LIABILITY NOT TRANSFERRED- No indemnification, hold harmless,
 or similar agreement or conveyance shall be effective to transfer the
 liability imposed under this title from a person who may be liable under
 this title for a dumping to any other person.
 `(c) RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER CAUSES OF ACTION- Nothing in this title,
 including subsection (b), shall bar a cause of action that a person subject
 to liability under this title, or a guarantor, has or would have, by reason
 of subrogation or otherwise, against any other person.
`SEC. 507. VENUE; SAVINGS; LIMITATIONS.
 `(a) VENUE- Venue for an action under this title shall lie in any district
 in which the dumping, transportation, injury, or damages occurred, or
 in which the defendant resides, may be found, has its principal office,
 or has appointed an agent for services of process.
 `(b) SAVINGS PROVISION- Nothing in this title shall affect any cause of
 action which arose before the date of enactment of this title.
 `(c) PERIOD OF LIMITATIONS-
 `(1) DAMAGES- Except as provided in paragraphs (3) and (4), an action
 for damages under this title shall be barred unless the action is brought
 within 3 years after the date on which the loss and the connection of the
 loss with the dumping in question are reasonable discoverable with the
 exercise of due care.
 `(2) REMOVAL COSTS- Except as provided in paragraphs (3) and (4), an action
 for recovery of removal costs under this title shall be barred unless
 the action is commenced within 3 years after the date of the completion
 of the removal. An action may be commenced under section 502 for recovery
 of removal costs at any time after those costs are incurred.
 `(3) ACTIONS FOR CONTRIBUTION- An action for contribution under this title
 shall be barred unless the action is brought within 3 years after--
 `(A) the date of the issuance of a judgment in any action under this title
 for recovery of the removal costs or damages for which contribution is
 sought; or
 `(B) the date of entry of a judicially approved settlement with respect
 to those removal costs or damages.
 `(4) SUBROGATION- An action based on rights subrogated pursuant to this
 title by reason of payment of a claim may not be commenced under this
 title unless that action is commenced within 3 years after the date of
 payment of that claim.
`SEC. 508. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAW.
 `(a) PRESERVATION OF STATE AUTHORITIES- Notwithstanding any other provision,
 nothing in this title shall--
 `(1) be construed or interpreted as preempting any State or political
 subdivision thereof from imposing any additional liability with respect
 to dumping within such State; or
 `(2) affect or modify in any way the obligations or liabilities of any person
 under the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
 Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980; the Federal Water Pollution
 Control Act; the Oil Pollution Act; or State law, including common law.
 `(b) NO PREEMPTION OF PENALTIES- Nothing in this title shall affect the
 authority of the United States or any State or political subdivision thereof
 to impose, or to determine the amount of, any fine or penalty for any
 violation of law relating to dumping or transportation covered by this title.
 `(c) LIMITATION OF LIABILITY ACT- The Act of March 3, 1851 (46
 App. U.S.C. 181 et seq.), shall not apply to removal costs and damages
 that directly result from the dumping of material.'.