S 2806 IS
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2806
To establish a program to ensure nondiscriminatory compliance with
environmental, health, and safety laws and to ensure equal protection of
the public health.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
June 3 (legislative day, MARCH 26), 1992
Mr. GORE introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Environment and Public Works
A BILL
To establish a program to ensure nondiscriminatory compliance with
environmental, health, and safety laws and to ensure equal protection of
the public health.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Environmental Justice Act of 1992'.
SEC. 2. PURPOSES AND POLICIES.
 The purposes of this Act are--
 (1) to require the collection of data on environmental health effects so
 that impacts on different individuals or groups can be understood;
 (2) to identify those areas which are subject to the highest loadings of
 toxic chemicals, through all media;
 (3) to assess the health effects that may be caused by emissions in those
 areas of highest impact;
 (4) to ensure that groups or individuals residing within those areas
 of highest impact have the opportunity and the resources to participate
 in the technical process which will determine the possible existence of
 adverse health impacts;
 (5) to require that actions be taken by authorized Federal agencies to
 curtail those activities found to be having significant adverse impacts
 on human health in those areas of highest impact; and
 (6) to ensure that significant adverse health impacts that may be associated
 with environmental pollution in the United States are not distributed
 inequitably.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 For the purposes of this Act:
 (1) ADMINISTRATOR- The term `Administrator' means the Administrator of
 the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
 (2) ENVIRONMENTAL HIGH IMPACT AREAS- The term `Environmental High Impact
 Area' means any of the 100 counties with the highest total weight of toxic
 chemicals present during the course of the most recent 5-year period for
 which data is available, as calculated pursuant to section 4.
 (3) SECRETARY- The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Health and
 Human Services.
 (4) TOXIC CHEMICALS- The term `toxic chemicals' includes all hazardous
 substances as defined in section 101(14) of the Comprehensive Environmental
 Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601(14);
 any pollutant for which air quality standards have been issued pursuant to
 the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401 et seq.); any pollutant for which water
 quality standards have been issued pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution
 Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.); all materials registered pursuant to
 the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (7 U.S.C. 136 et
 seq.); and all substances and chemicals subject to reporting obligations
 pursuant to the Emergency Planning and Community Right-To-Know Act of 1986
 (42 U.S.C. 11001 et seq.).
 (5) TOXIC CHEMICAL FACILITIES- The term `toxic chemical facilities'
 includes all facilities (including Federal facilities) subject to a permit,
 inspection or review, or registration requirement pursuant to the authority
 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.); the Clean Air
 Act (42 U.S.C. 7401 et seq.); the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.); the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide
 Act (7 U.S.C. 136 et seq.); and or which are subject to the requirements
 concerning material safety data sheets for hazardous chemicals under the
 Occupational and Safety and Health Act of 1970 (15 U.S.C. 651 et seq.),
 and any facility subject to reporting requirements under the Emergency
 Planning and Community Right-To-Know Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11001 et seq.).
SEC. 4. IDENTIFICATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL HIGH IMPACT AREAS.
 (a) PUBLICATION OF LIST- Within 9 months after the date of enactment of
 this Act, the Administrator shall publish a list, in rank order, of the
 total weight of toxic chemicals present in each county in the United States
 during the most recent 5-year period for which data are available. The 100
 counties with the highest total weight shall be designated as Environmental
 High Impact Areas.
 (b) COMPILATION OF LIST- In compiling the list under subsection (a),
 the Administrator shall--
 (1) calculate, with the best available data, the total weight of toxic
 chemicals present in each county by --
 (A) multiplying the total volume of each substance containing toxic chemicals
 (whether waste, process or other material) by the concentration of toxic
 chemicals contained in the substances (expressed in terms of a relative
 weight of the substance); and
 (B) adjusting the weights calculated under subparagraph (A) to account
 for the relative toxicity of the toxic chemicals;
 (2) consider and utilize all appropriate data compiled pursuant to any
 environmental regulatory authority and other sources, including available
 data on lead-based paint and the existence of pollutants from mobile
 sources; and
 (3) distinguish between toxic chemicals that are--
 (A) in a contained, controlled environment such as barrels, factories,
 warehouses, or lined landfills for any period of time during the 5-year
 period; and
 (B) released into the air, water, soil or ground water of the area during
 the 5-year period as a result of authorized or unauthorized activities.
 (c) METHODS- Within 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act,
 the Administrator shall publish for public comment, the methods to be
 used to calculate the total weight of toxic chemicals in waste, process,
 or other materials, including the assumptions to be used when the precise
 concentrations of toxic chemicals are not known and the criteria used to
 account for relative toxicity, as required by subsection (b)(2).
 (d) REVISION AND REPUBLICATION- The Administrator shall revise and republish
 the list described in subsection (a) by the date that is 5 years after the
 date of initial publication, and not less frequently than every 5 years
 thereafter, using data compiled for the applicable 5-year period.
SEC. 5. MANDATORY INSPECTIONS.
 To ensure that facilities with the highest potential for release of
 toxic chemicals into the environment are operating in compliance with all
 applicable environmental, health and safety standards, the Administrator,
 and the Secretary of Labor, acting through the Assistant Secretary for
 Occupational Safety and Health, shall conduct compliance inspections or
 reviews of all toxic chemical facilities in Environmental High Impact
 Areas subject to the jurisdiction of such individuals within 2 years after
 the date of enactment of this Act, and not less frequently than every 2
 years thereafter.
SEC. 6. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subject to appropriations, and in accordance with rules
 promulgated by the Secretary in consultation with the Administrator, the
 Secretary may award a grant to any individual or group of individuals who
 may be affected by a release or threatened release from any toxic chemical
 facility in an Environmental High Impact Area.
 (b) GRANT REQUIREMENTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- A grant awarded under this section shall--
 (A) be designed to facilitate access by representatives of Environmental
 High Impact Areas to the activities that involve public participation
 under this Act and any other related law;
 (B) be used to obtain technical assistance relating to the inspection
 and review authorities described in section 5 and the study described in
 section 8; and
 (C) be in an amount not to exceed $50,000.
 (2) COST-SHARING- Each grant recipient shall be required, as a condition
 of the grant, to pay a non-Federal share equal to 20 percent of the
 grant amount, unless the grant recipient demonstrates financial need to
 the satisfaction of the Secretary. Not more than one grant may be made
 with respect to each Environmental High Impact Area for the period of a
 grant (as determined by the Secretary). At the end of the grant period,
 a grant may be renewed if the Administrator determines that the renewal
 is necessary to facilitate public participation.
SEC. 7. FUNDING.
 Within one year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator
 shall promulgate regulations establishing a system of user fees or
 assessments on toxic chemical facilities in Environmental High Impact
 Areas that shall be placed in a special fund to fully fund the community
 grant program established under section 6. There shall be transferred from
 such special fund to the Secretary such amounts as are necessary to carry
 out the community grant program. In establishing the fees or assessments,
 the Administrator shall take into account the volume adjustments provided
 in section 4(b).
SEC. 8. STUDY BY THE SECRETARY.
 Within 24 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary,
 in consultation with the Administrator, the Secretary of Labor, and the
 Commissioners of the United States Commission on Civil Rights, shall issue
 for public comment a report identifying the nature and extent, if any,
 of acute and chronic impacts on human health in Environmental High Impact
 Areas, as compared to other counties. Such impacts shall include incidents
 of cancer, birth deformities, infant mortality rates, and respiratory
 diseases. The report shall be coordinated by the Administrator of the
 Agency for Toxic Substances Disease Registry of the Department of Health
 and Human Services, and in coordinating the report, the Administrator of
 the Agency for Toxic Substances Disease Registry shall seek to--
 (1) isolate the impacts of environmental pollution;
 (2) segregate the effects of other factors such as health care availability
 or substance abuse;
 (3) rank the relative risks posed by the toxic chemicals present in
 Environmental High Impact Areas and by the varied sources of toxic chemicals,
 both individually and cumulatively;
 (4) take into account the need to remedy the impacts of pollution in high
 population density areas;
 (5) evaluate the levels below which release of toxic chemicals, either
 individually or cumulatively, must be reduced to avoid adverse impacts on
 human health; and
 (6) determine the impacts of uncontrolled releases.
SEC. 9. LEGISLATIVE RESPONSE.
 If the report under section 8 identifies significant adverse impacts of
 environmental pollution on human health in Environmental High Impact Areas
 as a group, the President shall submit to Congress within one year after
 publication of the report, proposed legislation to remedy and prevent such
 impacts. Such legislation shall include--
 (1) expansion of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-To-Know
 Act of 1986 to require additional facilities or chemicals to be subject
 to reporting requirements under such Act, or a reduction in threshold
 quantities of chemicals that trigger reporting requirements under such Act;
 (2) a means to redress regulatory loopholes (such as recycling and industrial
 wastes exempt from regulation under subtitle C of the Solid Waste Disposal
 Act (42 U.S.C. 6921 et seq.) and wastes subject to reductions in regulatory
 requirements); and
 (3) measures such as taxes on uncontrolled or controlled emissions, or
 restrictions on toxic chemical releasing activities within an Environmental
 High Impact Area to induce source reduction in such area, regardless of
 whether facilities are in compliance with other existing laws.
SEC. 10. MORATORIUM.
 (a) IN GENERAL- If the report under section 8 identifies significant adverse
 impacts of environmental pollution on human health in Environmental High
 Impact Areas, there shall be a moratorium on the siting or permitting of
 any new toxic chemical facility in any Environmental High Impact Area
 demonstrated to emit toxic chemicals in quantities determined to cause
 significant adverse impacts on human health.
 (b) EXCEPTION- A new toxic chemical facility may be sited or receive a
 permit in an Environmental High Impact Area during this period only if--
 (1) the need for the activity is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
 Secretary; and
 (2) the owner or operator of the facility demonstrates that the facility
 will minimize uncontrolled releases into the environment.
 (c) DURATION- With respect to any Environmental High Impact Area, a
 moratorium under this section shall continue in effect until such time
 as the Administrator determines, on the petition of any interested party,
 that the health-based levels identified pursuant to section 8(5) have been
 attained at the Environmental High Impact Area.