S 676 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 676
Relating to global atmospheric and environmental preservation.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
MARCH 17 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. BAUCUS (for himself, Mr. DURENBERGER, and Mr. LIEBERMAN) introduced
the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on
Environment and Public Works
A BILL
Relating to global atmospheric and environmental preservation.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Global Environmental Protection Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress, recognizing the profound, irreversible and potentially
 catastrophic impacts of humanity's activities on the global atmosphere
 and the world's environment, and the inability of science to predict
 with certainty the consequences for humanity of any such changes, hereby
 declares that each person has a responsibility and obligation to avoid
 contamination of the atmosphere.
TITLE I--ELIMINATION AND REGULATION OF GLOBAL CHANGE POLLUTANTS
PART A--CHLOROFLUOROCARBONS AND RELATED CHEMICALS
SEC. 101. SHORT TITLE.
 This title may be cited as the `Global Stratospheric Ozone and Climate
 Preservation Act of 1989'.
SEC. 102. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) the best available scientific evidence shows that manufactured
 substances, including chlorofluorocarbons, are polluting the atmosphere
 and destroying stratospheric ozone, as well as contributing to global
 climate change, and other atmospheric modifications;
 (2) no level of stratospheric ozone depletion or global climate change
 caused by human activities can be deemed safe;
 (3) stratospheric ozone depletion will lead to increased incidence of
 solar ultraviolet radiation at the surface of the Earth;
 (4) increased incidence of solar ultraviolet radiation will cause increased
 rates of disease in humans (including skin cancer), threaten food crops,
 and otherwise damage the natural environment;
 (5) stratospheric ozone depletion and global climate change from continued
 emissions of chlorofluorocarbons and other halogenated carbons with ozone
 depleting potential, and emissions of other gases, imperil human health
 and the environment worldwide;
 (6) in order to stabilize and eventually reduce concentrations of chlorine
 and bromine in the stratosphere, to conserve the stratospheric ozone layer
 (an exhaustible natural resource), and to reduce the extent of global
 climate change--
 (A) emissions of chlorofluorocarbons and other substances covered by
 this title, including halogenated carbons with ozone depleting potential,
 should be terminated rapidly, and
 (B) it is necessary to control international trade in substances covered
 by this title and products containing or made with processes that use
 such substances;
 (7) the highest priority must be given to developing and deploying safe
 substitutes to replace ozone depleting substances within 4 years; and
 (8) the United States needs to develop and deploy safe substitutes to
 replace ozone depleting substances in order to demonstrate to the world
 its commitment to protect the stratosphere.
SEC. 103. OBJECTIVES AND NATIONAL GOAL.
 (a) The objectives of this title are to restore and maintain the chemical
 and physical integrity of the Earth's atmosphere and to protect human
 health and the global environment from all known and potential dangers
 due to atmospheric or climatic modification, including stratospheric ozone
 depletion, that is or may be related to the chlorofluorocarbons or other
 substances covered by this title by--
 (1) reducing significantly the production and emission into the atmosphere
 of pollutants caused by human activities;
 (2) promoting the rapid development and deployment of alternatives to the use
 of the chlorofluorocarbons and other substances covered by this title; and
 (3) promoting additional scientific research on atmospheric or climatic
 modification, including stratospheric ozone depletion, and on the known
 and potential adverse effects therefrom on human health and the global
 environment.
 (b) In order to achieve the objectives of this title, it is the national goal
 to eliminate atmospheric emissions of manufactured substances with ozone
 depleting potential, including chlorofluorocarbons and other halogenated
 carbons with ozone depleting potential, and to reduce significantly
 emissions of other gases caused by human activities that are likely to
 affect adversely the global climate.
SEC. 104. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this title, the term--
 (1) `Administrator' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
 Agency;
 (2) `household appliances' means noncommercial personal effects, including
 air-conditioners, refrigerators, and motor vehicles;
 (3) `import' means to land on, bring into, or introduce into, or attempt to
 land on, bring into, or introduce into, any place subject to the jurisdiction
 of the United States, whether or not such landing, bringing, or introduction
 constitutes an importation within the meaning of the customs laws of the
 United States;
 (4) `manufactured substances' means any organic or inorganic chemical
 substances of a particular molecular identity, or any mixture, that has
 been manufactured for commercial purposes;
 (5) `medical purposes' means medical devices and diagnostic products (A)
 for which no safe substitute has been developed and (B) which, after notice
 and opportunity for public comment, has been approved and determined to
 be essential by the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration,
 in consultation with the Administrator;
 (6) `person' means an individual, corporation (including a government
 corporation), partnership, firm, joint stock company, trust, association,
 or any other private entity, or any officer, employee, agent, department,
 or instrumentality of the Federal Government, of any State or political
 subdivision thereof (including any interstate body), or of any foreign
 government (including any international instrumentality); and
 (7) `substances covered by this title' means those substances which are known
 or may reasonably be anticipated to cause or contribute to atmospheric or
 climatic modification, including stratospheric ozone depletion, and are
 listed under subsections (a) or (b) of section 105.
SEC. 105. LISTING OF REGULATED SUBSTANCES.
 (a) Within 60 days after the date of the enactment of this title into
 law, the Administrator shall publish a priority list, to be designated as
 number 1, of manufactured substances which are known or may reasonably be
 anticipated to cause or contribute to atmospheric or climatic modification,
 including stratospheric ozone depletion. The initial list shall include
 chlorofluorocarbon-11, chlorofluorocarbon-12, chlorofluorocarbon-113,
 chlorofluorocarbon-114, chlorofluorocarbon-115, halon-1211, and halon-1301.
 (b) Simultaneously with publication of such priority lists, the Administrator
 shall create a list of other manufactured substances which, in the judgment
 of the Administrator, meet the criteria set forth in the first sentence
 of subsection (a). The list of other substances shall be subject to
 the limitations on ozone depletion potential under section 109 of this
 title and shall include chlorofluorocarbon-22, carbon tetrachloride,
 methyl chloroform, and methylene chloride. At least annually thereafter,
 the Administrator shall publish a proposal to add to such list each other
 manufactured substance which, in the judgment of the Administrator, meets
 the criteria set forth in the first sentence of subsection (a). Within 180
 days of any such proposal, after allowing an opportunity for public comment,
 the Administrator shall promulgate a regulation adding each such substance
 to the list, unless the Administrator determines that such substance clearly
 does not meet the criteria set forth in the first sentence of subsection (a).
 (c) Simultaneously with publication of the list or additions thereto under
 this section, and at least annually thereafter, the Administrator shall
 assign to each listed substance a numerical value representing the ozone
 depletion potential of such substance, on a mass (per kilogram) basis,
 as compared with chlorofluorocarbon-11. The numerical value shall, for
 the purposes of section 9, constitute the ozone depletion factor of each
 such substance. Until the Administrator promulgates regulations under this
 subsection, the following ozone depletion factors shall apply:
Ozone
depleting
Substance
factor
chlorofluorocarbon-11
1.0
chlorofluorocarbon-12
1.0
chlorofluorocarbon-22
0.05
chlorofluorocarbon-113
0.78
halon-1211
2.69
halon-1301
11.43
SEC. 106. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) Within 90 days after the date of the enactment of this title into law,
 each person producing a substance listed pursuant to subsections (a) and (b)
 of section 105 shall file a report with the Administrator setting forth the
 amount of the substance that was produced by such person during calendar
 year 1986. Not later than December 31, 1989, and annually thereafter,
 each producer shall file a report with the Administrator setting forth
 the production levels of such substance in each successive 12-month period
 until such producer ceases production of the substance. Each such report
 shall be signed and attested by a responsible corporate officer.
 (b) Within 90 days of the date on which substance is placed on the list
 under subsection (c) of section 105, each person shall file a report
 with the Administrator setting forth the amount of the substance that
 was produced by such person during the 12 months preceding the date of
 listing. Not less than annually thereafter, each producer shall file a
 report with the Administrator setting forth the production levels of such
 substance in each successive 12-month period until such producer ceases
 production of the substance. Each such report shall be signed and attested
 by a responsible corporate officer.
SEC. 107. PRODUCTION PHASEOUT.
 (a) Effective January 1, 1989, it shall be unlawful for any person to
 produce a substance listed pursuant to subsection (a) of section 105 in
 annual quantities greater than that produced by such person during calendar
 year 1986.
 (b) Effective January 1, 1993, it shall be unlawful for any person to
 produce a substance listed pursuant to subsection (a) of section 105 in
 annual quantities greater than 80 per centum of that produced by such
 person during calendar year 1986.
 (c) Effective January 1, 1998, it shall be unlawful for any person to
 produce a substance listed pursuant to subsection (a) of section 105 in
 annual quantities greater than 50 per centum of that produced by such
 person during calendar year 1986.
 (d) Effective January 1, 1999, it shall be unlawful for any person to
 produce a substance listed pursuant to subsection (a) of section 105 in
 annual quantities greater than 25 per centum of that produced by such
 person during calendar year 1986.
 (e) Effective January 1, 2000, it shall be unlawful for any person to
 produce or release a substance listed pursuant to subsection (a) or (b)
 of section 105 for any use other than medical purposes.
SEC. 108. LIMITATION ON USE.
 Effective January 1, 1994, it shall be unlawful to introduce into interstate
 commerce or to use a substance listed under subsection (a) of section
 105 except for medical purposes approved by the Commissioner of the Food
 and Drug Administration, in consultation with the Administrator, in any
 newly manufactured good, except for a period not to exceed 24 months for
 insulating foam purposes.
SEC. 109. LIMITATION ON OZONE DEPLETION POTENTIAL.
 (a) Effective January 1, 2010, it shall be unlawful for any person to
 produce substances covered by subsection (b) of section 105 in annual
 quantities that, based upon the ozone depletion factor assigned to each
 such substance under subsection (c) of section 105, yield a total ozone
 depletion or greenhouse warming potential greater than 5 per centum of
 that produced by such substances listed in subsection (a) of section 105
 during calendar year 1986.
 (b) The Administrator shall promulgate regulations, after notice and
 opportunity for public comment, which require each producer to reduce its
 production of--
 (1) a substance listed under subsection (a) of section 105 more rapidly
 than the schedule provided under this title; or
 (2) a substance listed under subsection (b) of section 105 on a specific
 schedule not otherwise provided for in this title,
if the Administrator determines that such revised or specific schedule (A)
based on new information regarding the harmful effects on the stratosphere
or climate which may be associated with a listed substance, is necessary to
protect human health and the environment, or (B) based on the availability of
substitutes for a listed substance, a substitute is attainable. Any person may
petition the Administrator to issue such regulations. The Administrator shall
issue such regulations within 180 days after receipt of any such petition,
unless the Administrator denies the petition.
SEC. 110. PRODUCTION PHASEOUT EXCEPTION FOR NATIONAL SECURITY.
 The President may issue such orders regarding production and use of
 halon-1211 and halon-1301 at any specified site or facility as may be
 necessary to protect the national security interests of the United States if
 the President personally finds that adequate substitutes are not available
 and that the production and use of such substance is necessary to protect
 such national security interests. Such orders may include, where necessary
 to protect such interests, an exemption from any requirement contained
 in this title. The President shall notify the Congress within 30 days
 of the issuance of an order under this paragraph providing for any such
 exemption. Such notification shall include a statement of the reasons for
 the granting of the exemption. An exemption under this paragraph shall be
 for a specified period which may not exceed 1 year. Additional exemptions
 may be granted, each upon the President's issuance of a new order under
 this paragraph. Each such additional exemption shall be for a specified
 period which may not exceed 1 year. No exemption shall be granted under
 this paragraph due to lack of appropriated funds unless the President
 shall have specifically requested such funds as a part of the budgetary
 process and the Congress shall have failed to make them available.
SEC. 111. CERTIFICATION OF EQUIVALENT PROGRAMS.
 (a) Effective 12 months after the date on which a substance is placed on
 the priority list pursuant to section 105, it shall be unlawful for any
 person to import such substance, any product containing such substance, or
 any product manufactured with a process that uses such substance unless the
 Administrator, in consultation with the Secretary of State, has published
 a decision, after notice and opportunity for public comment, certifying
 that the nations in which such substance or product was manufactured and
 from which such substance or product is imported have established and are
 fully implementing programs that require reduced production of such listed
 substance, and limit production of other substances covered by this title,
 on a schedule and in a manner that is at least as stringent as the reduction
 scheduled for, and limitations on, domestic production which apply under
 this title. The prohibition on the import of any product manufactured with
 a process that uses a substance listed under subsection (a) of section 105
 shall include, after notice and opportunity for public comment, any product
 which the Administrator has reason to believe may have been manufactured
 with a process that uses such substance. The Administrator's decision
 that a product may have been manufactured with a process that uses such
 substance shall constitute a rebuttable presumption.
 (b) The Administrator shall not certify any national program under subsection
 (a) unless it is determined that--
 (1) the nation has adopted legislation or regulations which give the
 reduction schedule for each listed substance the force of law; and
 (2) the legislation or regulations include reporting requirements and
 enforcement provisions no less stringent that those specified in this
 title, and that the information contained in such reports is available to
 the Administrator and the Secretary of State.
 (c) At least annually, the Administrator, in consultation with the Secretary
 of State, shall review each certification made under this section and
 shall revoke such certification, after notice and opportunity for public
 comment, unless it is determined that the conditions of subsections (a)
 and (b) remain satisfied and that the reduction schedule for each listed
 substance is in fact being carried out in such nations. Any such revocation
 shall take effect 180 days after notice of the revocation has been published.
 (d) Any person who imports a substance covered by this title or a product
 containing such substance shall, for the purposes of section 107 (production
 phaseout for priority list) and section 109 (limitation on ozone depletion
 potential), shall be deemed to have produced an equivalent amount of such
 substance on the date of such importation.
SEC. 112. LABELING.
 Effective 90 days after the date on which a substance is placed on a list
 maintained under subsection (a) or (b) of section 105, no container in
 which such substance is stored or transported, no product containing such
 substance, and no product manufactured with a process that uses a listed
 substance shall be introduced into interstate commerce unless it bears a
 label stating either of the following, as appropriate:
 (1) `Contains (insert name of listed substance) a substance which harms
 public health and environment by destroying ozone in the upper atmosphere
 and by disrupting the climate'.
 (2) `Manufactured with (insert name of listed substance), a substance
 which harms public health and environment by destroying ozone in the upper
 atmosphere and by disrupting the climate'.
The Administrator shall issue regulations to implement the labeling
requirements of this section within 6 months after enactment of this
section into law, after notice and opportunity for public comment. Such
regulations shall require all containers and products which are subject to
this section and introduced or reintroduced into commerce later than 90 days
after promulgation of such regulations to bear the appropriate label. Unless
and until such regulations have been promulgated and become effective, the
required label shall be permanently affixed on the face of such product,
with the lettering and background in contrasting colors and the letters
themselves not less than two inches in height (or 20 percent of the height of
the product which is less than four inches in height). Neither the labeling
requirement nor any other provision of the Global Climate Protection Act of
1987 shall constitute, in whole or part, a defense to liability or a cause
for reduction in damages in any suit, whether civil or criminal, brought
under any law, whether Federal or State, other than a suit for failure to
comply with the labeling requirements of this section.
SEC. 113. LIMITATIONS ON USE AND DISPOSAL.
 (a) The Administrator shall, not later than July 1, 1991, promulgate
 regulations establishing standards and requirements regarding the use of
 substances covered by this Act. Such regulations shall include requirements
 that reduce the use and emission of such substances to the lowest achievable
 level and may include requirements to use alternative substances (including
 substances which are not covered by this Act), minimize use of substances
 covered by this Act, or maximize the recapture and recycling of substances
 covered by this Act.
 (b) The Administrator shall promulgate regulations establishing standards
 and requirements regarding the use of any manufactured substance that may,
 either directly as a radiatively important trace gas or indirectly as a
 substance that reduces the energy efficiency of products which incorporate
 or use such substance, exacerbate the problem of human induced global
 climate change.
 (c) The Administrator shall, before January 1, 1994, promulgate regulations
 establishing standards and requirements for the recapture, recycling,
 and safe disposal of substances covered by this Act. Such regulations
 shall include requirements that--
 (1) substances covered by this Act that are contained in bulk in appliances,
 machines or other goods (including but not limited to refrigerators and
 air-conditioners) shall be removed from each such appliance, machine or
 other good prior to the disposal of such item;
 (2) any appliance, machine or other good containing a substance covered
 by this Act in bulk shall not be manufactured or distributed in commerce
 unless it is equipped with a servicing aperture which will allow the
 recapture of such substance during service and repair of such item; and
 (3) any product in which a substance covered by this Act is incorporated
 so as to constitute an inherent element of such product, including but
 not limited to rigid and soft foams, shall be disposed of in a manner that
 prevents the release of such substance into the environment.
 (d) Effective January 1, 1993, it shall be unlawful for any person to
 knowingly vent into the atmosphere or otherwise knowingly use, release,
 or dispose of any substance covered by this Act (other than halon-1211,
 halon-1301, and halon-2402) in a fashion which permits such substance
 to enter the environment. Releases associated with the approved use of
 medical devices and diagnostic products for medical purposes and de minimus
 releases associated with good-faith attempts to recapture and recycle or
 safely dispose of any substance covered by this Act shall not be covered
 by the preceding sentence. The first sentence of this subsection shall not
 apply to releases associated with the servicing or repair of equipment
 which contains substances covered by this Act but does not include a
 servicing aperture which allows the recapture of such substances if,
 during the first servicing or repair after the effective date of this Act,
 such servicing aperture or other similar features are installed.
PART B--CARBON DIOXIDE
SEC. 114. SHORT TITLE.
 This part may be cited as the Act to Reduce and Stabilize Atmospheric
 Concentrations of Carbon Dioxide.
SEC. 115. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) there is widespread agreement, and no credible scientific dispute, that
 increases in atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide will increase
 the temperature of the planet;
 (2) current emissions of carbon dioxide are approximately 70 times as
 great as those a century ago;
 (3) average concentrations of carbon dioxide in the absence of major
 contributions from human activity have ranged between 180 and 280 parts
 per million;
 (4) the current concentration of carbon dioxide is approximately 380 parts
 per million;
 (5) concentrations of carbon dioxide because of human activity are increasing
 at the rate of about 4 percent per decade;
 (6) there has already been an observed increase in globally-averaged
 temperature of 0.7 degrees centigrade during the last century;
 (7) increases in North Atlantic ocean temperatures of 0.2 to 0.3 degrees
 centigrade have been measured;
 (8) ocean water levels have increased;
 (9) the years 1981, 1983, 1987, and 1988, are the hottest on record;
 (10) elevated temperatures and drought are now prevailing in many of the
 world's agricultural areas;
 (11) all of these changes are consistent with predictions that increases
 in carbon dioxide will lead to global temperature increases;
 (12) further temperature increases of as much as 4 degrees centigrade will
 be experienced by the year 2030 if concentrations of carbon dioxide and
 other trace gases continue to accelerate at current rates;
 (13) even with stringent and immediate controls, global average temperatures
 are predicted to increase 1.0 to 2.5 degrees centigrade;
 (14) scientists are unable to state with certainty whether the global
 environment will respond predictably to further temperature increases,
 especially if they occur in combination with other alterations in the
 atmosphere and oceans;
 (15) probably consequences of further warming will include, but cannot
 with certainty be said to be limited to, the following:
 (A) sea level rise of between 1 and 4 feet, accompanied by widespread
 flooding, estuary destruction, and increased frequency of extreme storm
 events such as cyclones;
 (B) disappearance of many tree and plant species in areas where they now
 predominate; and
 (C) widespread and endemic drought in many areas of the world which now
 supply the bulk of humanity's foods;
 (16) to minimize further climate destruction and mitigate that which is
 already inevitable will require that atmospheric concentrations of carbon
 dioxide be stabilized;
 (17) the level of carbon dioxide emission reductions necessary to achieve
 atmospheric stabilization is uncertain, but has been estimated by some to
 be 50 percent or more;
 (18) given the uncertainty of the response of the global environment to
 further temperature increases, the prudent policy is to strive to minimize
 carbon dioxide emissions through all possible means rather than establish
 an arbitrary goal;
 (19) between 20 and 25 percent of the worldwide emissions of carbon dioxide
 originate in the United States;
 (20) technologies and practices exist which could reduce carbon dioxide
 emissions substantially;
 (21) the adoption of these technologies and practices would increase the
 efficiency and competitiveness of the United States business and industrial
 sector, decrease the Nation's dependence on foreign supplies of fuel,
 protect the agricultural sector, preserve the natural environment, and
 simultaneously achieve reductions in other chemicals which cause acid rain,
 ground level ozone, and fine particle pollution; and
 (22) therefore, the United States can protect the global environment
 directly by reducing emissions of carbon dioxide emissions and indirectly
 protect such environment by demonstrating the technologies and practices
 which can be applied elsewhere.
SEC. 116. STATIONARY SOURCE CONTROLS.
 (a) Not later than January 1, 1990, the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency shall revise the standards under section 111(b) of the
 Clean Air Act to require a standard for carbon dioxide emissions applicable
 to nonutility stationary sources, expressed in terms of emissions of such
 pollutant per unit or product output.
 (b) Standards pursuant to the requirements of subsection (a) shall be
 established for each class or category of stationary sources which is more
 than a minimal emitter of carbon dioxide. Not later than January 1, 1992,
 the Administrator shall promulgate standards applicable to--
 (1) cement kilns, which standards shall require, not later than January
 1, 2000, an emission rate equivalent to a reduction in carbon dioxide
 emissions per unit of production of not less than 25 percent from 1988
 average levels unless the Administrator determines that such a requirement
 is technologically infeasible;
 (2) iron and steel manufacturing operations, which standards shall require,
 not later than January 1, 2000, an emission rate equivalent to a reduction
 in carbon dioxide emissions per unit of production of not less than 25
 percent from 1988 average levels unless the Administrator determines that
 such a requirement is technologically infeasible;
 (3) pulp and paper mills, which standards shall require, not later than
 January 1, 2000, an emission rate equivalent to a reduction in carbon
 dioxide emissions per unit of production of not less than 25 percent
 from 1988 average levels unless the Administrator determines that such a
 requirement is technologically infeasible; and
 (4) synthetic fiber plants, which standards shall require, not later than
 January 1, 2000, an emission rate equivalent to a reduction in carbon
 dioxide emissions per unit of production of not less than 35 percent
 from 1988 average levels unless the Administrator determines that such a
 requirement is technologically infeasible.
SEC. 117. MOBILE SOURCE CONTROLS.
 (a) The Clean Air Act is amended as follows:
 (1) in section 202(a)(3)(A)(i), by inserting before the period at the end
 of the first sentence, the following: `and, for emissions of carbon dioxide,
 during and after model year 1990';
 (2) in section 202(a)(3)(A)(ii) by striking out the period at the end
 of clause (II) and inserting in lieu thereof a comma and the word `and',
 and by adding at the end thereof the following new clause:
 `(III) 1990 in the case of carbon dioxide shall contain standards which
 require a reduction of at least 10 percent in 1990; at least 25 percent
 in 1995; at least 50 percent in 2000; and at least 75 percent in 2010.'; and
 (3) inserting immediately after section 202(b)(1)(B) the following new
 language:
 `The regulations under subsection (a) applicable to emissions of carbon
 dioxide from light-duty vehicles and engines shall provide that emissions
 of carbon dioxide may not exceed--
 `(I) 360 grams of carbon dioxide per vehicle mile from light-duty vehicles
 and engines manufactured during and after model year 1990;
 `(II) 300 grams per mile for light-duty vehicles and engines manufactured
 during and after model year 1995;
 `(III) 200 grams per mile for light-duty vehicles and engines manufactured
 during and after model year 2000; and
 `(IV) 100 grams per mile for light-duty vehicles and engines manufactured
 during and after model year 2010.'.
SEC. 118. RESIDENTIAL CONTROLS.
 (a) Not later than January 1, 1991, the Administrator shall promulgate
 regulations identifying the best available residential control technology
 available for central furnaces, air conditioners, and hot water heaters
 designed and sold for installation in single-family dwellings. For
 purposes of this section, `best available residential control technology'
 means that technology which achieves in a unit which is commercially
 available the maximum degree of reduction of emissions of carbon dioxide,
 whether directly through combustion or indirectly through consumption of
 electrical energy. Unless and until such regulations are promulgated and
 become effective, the best available control technology shall be deemed
 to be as follows:
 (1) for furnaces, that which achieves an AFUE of .90 for oil, an AFUE of
 .95 for gas and a COP of 2.6 for electric heat pumps;
 (2) for central air conditioners, that which achieves an Energy Efficiency
 Rating of not less than 15.0; and
 (3) for hot water heaters, that which achieves an EF of 64 for gas and 96
 for electricity.
 (b) Each new single-family dwelling for which a building permit is issued
 on or after January 1, 1992, which is equipped with a central furnace,
 central air conditioner or hot water heater, shall be equipped only with
 one which meets or exceeds the emission limitation achieved by the best
 available residential control technology.
 (c) Effective January 1, 1993, each replacement central furnace, central
 air conditioner, or hot water heater installed in a single-family dwelling
 shall meet or exceed the emissions limit achieved by the best available
 residential control technology.
 (d) Not later than January 1, 1990, the Secretary of the Treasury shall
 recommend to the Congress means of encouraging the replacement of central
 furnaces, air conditioners, and water heaters and otherwise minimizing the
 emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases from residential
 units through a system of tax or other incentives.
PART C--METHANE
SEC. 126. SHORT TITLE.
 This part may be cited as the `Methane Emission Elimination Act'.
SEC. 127. METHANE SOURCE IDENTIFICATION AND ASSESSMENT.
 (a) Not later than January 1, 1992, the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency, in consultation with the Administrators of the National
 Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the National Aeronautics and
 Space Administration, shall submit to the Congress a report on the following:
 (1) the contribution of methane to global climate change;
 (2) the sources and sinks of methane;
 (3) the methods of controlling emissions of methane; and
 (4) the relationship between emissions of methane and concentrations of
 other trace gases, including the hydroxyl radical.
 (b) The Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by--
 (1) inserting in section 4001 immediately before `are environmentally'
 the following: `minimize emissions and other releases to the environment
 and which otherwise';
 (2) in section 4002(c)(1) striking the words `reasonable protection of
 ambient air quality' and substituting `and the minimization of emissions
 and other releases to the environment of pollutants including, but not
 limited to, methane or other harmful gases or materials';
 (3) in section 4003(a) adding a new paragraph (7) as follows:
 `(7) The plan shall provide for methods (including prohibitions on the
 nature of materials which are disposed), practices, or technologies which
 minimize emissions of methane and other gases, both during operation and
 after closure.'; and
 (4) in section 4007(a) inserting immediately before the period at the end
 of the second sentence the following: `, provided that the Administrator
 determines that such plan satisfies the requirements of paragraph (7)
 of section 4003. Plans which fail to satisfy such requirements shall
 be disapproved'.
 (c) Not later than January 1, 1992, the Administrator shall promulgate
 regulations implementing the requirements of this section and requiring
 State plans developed under subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act to
 be amended and either approved or disapproved by July 1, 1993. Any plan
 not affirmatively approved by such date shall be deemed disapproved for
 purposes of the Solid Waste Disposal Act. Amended plans shall require all
 facilities constructed after January 1, 1993, subject to subtitle D to be
 designed, constructed, and operated so as to minimize emissions of methane
 and shall require all existing facilities to be modified prior to January
 1, 1993, and thereafter operated so as to minimize emissions of methane
 and other pollutants.
 (d) Effective January 1, 1994, mass releases of methane, whether through
 intentional venting of wells or otherwise, and flaring of methane are
 prohibited.
PART D--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SEC. 128. FEDERAL ENFORCEMENT.
 (a)(1) Whenever on the basis of any information the Administrator determines
 that any person has violated or is in violation of any requirement of this
 title, the Administrator may issue an order assessing a civil penalty for
 any past or current violation, requiring compliance immediately or within
 a specified time period, or both, or the Administrator may commence a
 civil action in the United States district court in the district in which
 the violation occurred for appropriate relief, including a temporary or
 permanent injunction.
 (2) Any order issued pursuant to this subsection may include a suspension or
 revocation of any permit issued by the Administrator and shall state with
 reasonable specificity the nature of the violation. Any penalty assessed
 in the order shall not exceed $25,000 per day of noncompliance for each
 violation of a requirement of this Act. In assessing such a penalty, the
 Administrator shall take into account the seriousness of the violation
 and any good faith efforts to comply with applicable requirements.
 (b) Any order issued under this section shall become final unless, no
 later than 30 days after the order is served, the person or persons named
 therein request a public hearing. Upon such request the Administrator
 shall promptly conduct a public hearing. In connection with any proceeding
 under this section the Administrator may issue subpoenas for the attendance
 and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant papers, books,
 and documents, and may promulgate rules for discovery procedures.
 (c) If a violator fails to take corrective action within the time specified
 in a compliance order, the Administrator may assess a civil penalty of not
 more than $25,000 for each day of continued noncompliance with the order and
 the Administrator may suspend or revoke any permit issued to the violator.
 (d) Any person who--
 (1) knowingly exceeds the production limits under section 107 (production
 phaseout for initial list) or section 109 (limitation on ozone depletion
 potential);
 (2) knowingly introduces into interstate commerce a substance that was
 produced in violation of section 107 or section 109;
 (3) knowingly imports a substance listed under section 105, a product
 containing such substance, or a product manufactured with a process
 that uses such substance, in violation of section 111 (certification of
 equivalent programs);
 (4) knowingly introduces into interstate commerce a substance or product
 in violation of section 108 (limitation on use) or section 112 (labeling);
 (5) knowingly omits material information or makes any false material
 statement or representation in any application, record, report, permit,
 or other document filed, maintained, or used for purposes of compliance
 with this title; or
 (6) knowingly produces, transports, distributes, or uses any substance
 listed under section 105, a product containing such substance, or a product
 manufactured with a process that uses such substance, and who knowingly
 destroys, alters, conceals, or fails to file any record, application,
 report, or other document required to be maintained or filed for purposes
 of compliance with this title
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine in accordance with title 18
of the United States Code, for each day of violation, or imprisoned not to
exceed 2 years, or both. If conviction is for a violation committed after a
first conviction of such person under this paragraph, the maximum punishment
under the respective paragraph shall be doubled with respect to both fine
and imprisonment.
 (e) Any person who violates any requirement of this title shall be liable
 to the United States for a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $25,000
 for each such violation.
 (f) Each day of violation of any requirement of this title shall, for
 purposes of this section, constitute a separate violation. In addition, for
 purposes of section 107 (production phaseout for initial list), section 108
 (limitation on use), section 109 (limitation on ozone depletion potential),
 and paragraphs (1), (2), (3), and (4) of subsection (d) of this section,
 the production, introduction into commerce, or importation of each 100
 pounds of a substance listed under section 105 that is in excess of the
 production limits under section 107 or section 109 shall constitute a
 separate violation.
SEC. 129. JUDICIAL REVIEW OF FINAL REGULATIONS AND CERTAIN PETITIONS.
 Any judicial review of any final action of the Administrator pursuant to
 this title shall be in accordance with sections 701 through 706 of title
 5 of the United States Code, except that--
 (1) a petition for review of any final action of the Administrator may be
 filed by any interested person in the Circuit Court of Appeals of the United
 States for the Federal judicial district in which such person resides or
 transacts business, and such petition shall be filed within 90 days from
 the date of such promulgation or denial or after such date if such petition
 is for review based solely on grounds arising after such ninetieth day;
 action of the Administrator with respect to which review could have been
 obtained under this subsection shall not be subject to judicial review in
 civil or criminal proceedings for enforcement; and
 (2) if a party seeking review under this Act applies to the court for
 leave to adduce additional evidence, and shows to the satisfaction of
 the court that the information is material and that there were reasonable
 grounds for the failure to adduce such evidence in the proceeding before
 the Administrator, the court may order such additional evidence (and
 evidence in rebuttal thereof) to be taken before the Administrator, and
 to be adduced upon the hearing in such manner and upon such terms and
 conditions as the court may deem proper; the Administrator may modify
 administrative findings as to the facts, or make new findings, by reason
 of the additional evidence so taken, and shall file with the court such
 modified or new findings and the Administrator's recommendation, if any,
 for the modification or setting aside of the original administrative order,
 with the return of such additional evidence.
SEC. 130. CITIZEN SUITS.
 (a) Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, any
 person may commence a civil action on his own behalf--
 (1) against any person (including (a) the United States, and (b) any
 other governmental instrumentality or agency, to the extent permitted
 by the eleventh amendment to the Constitution) who is alleged to be in
 violation of any permit, regulation, condition, requirement, prohibition,
 or order which has become effective pursuant to this title; or
 (2) against the Administrator where there is alleged a failure of the
 Administrator to perform any act or duty under this title which is not
 discretionary with the Administrator.
Any action under paragraph (a)(1) of this subsection shall be brought in the
district court for the district in which the alleged violation occurred. Any
action brought under paragraph (a)(2) of this subsection may be brought in
the district court for the district in which the alleged violation occurred or
the District Court of the District of Columbia. The district court shall have
jurisdiction, without regard to the amount in controversy or the citizenship
of the parties, to enforce the permit, regulation, condition, requirement,
prohibition, or order, referred to in paragraph (1), to order such person
to take such other action as may be necessary, or both, or to order the
Administrator to perform the act or duty referred to in paragraph (2),
as the case may be, and to apply any appropriate civil penalties.
 (b) No action may be commenced under subsection (a)(1) of this section--
 (1) prior to 60 days after the plaintiff has given notice of the violation
 to--
 (A) the Administrator; and
 (B) to any alleged violator of such permit, regulation, condition,
 requirement, prohibition, or order; or
 (2) if the Administrator has commenced and is diligently prosecuting a civil
 or criminal action in a court of the United States to require compliance
 with such permit, regulation, condition, requirement, prohibition, or order.
In any action under subsection (a)(1), any person may intervene as a matter
of right. Any action respecting a violation under this Act may be brought
under this section only in the judicial district in which such alleged
violation occurs.
 (c) No action may be commenced under paragraph (a)(2) of this section prior
 to 60 days after the plaintiff has given notice to the Administrator that
 he will commence such action. Notice under this subsection shall be given
 in such manner as the Administrator shall prescribe by regulation.
 (d) In any action under this section the Administrator, if not a party,
 may intervene as a matter of right.
 (e) The court, in issuing any final order in any action brought pursuant
 to this section or section 125, may award costs of litigation (including
 reasonable attorney and expert witness fees) to the prevailing or
 substantially prevailing party, whenever the court determines such an
 award is appropriate. The court may, if a temporary restraining order or
 preliminary injunction is sought, require the filing of a bond or equivalent
 security in accordance with the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
 (f) Nothing in this section, or this title, shall restrict any right which
 any person (or class of persons) may have under any statute or common law
 to seek enforcement of any standard or requirement or to seek any other
 relief (including relief against the Administrator).
SEC. 131. SEPARABILITY.
 If any provision of this title, or the application of any provision of
 this title to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the application
 of such provision to other persons or circumstances, and the remainder of
 this title, shall not be affected thereby.
SEC. 132. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS.
 (a) Nothing in this title shall be construed to diminish the authority of
 the Administrator under the Clean Air Act, the Resource Conservation and
 Recovery Act or the Toxic Substances Control Act, or any other law, or to
 affect the authority of any other department, agency, or instrumentality of
 the United States under any provision of law to promulgate or enforce any
 requirement respecting the control of any substance, practice, process,
 or activity for purposes of protecting the stratosphere or ozone in the
 stratosphere, or the global environment.
 (b) Nothing in this Act shall preclude or deny any State or political
 subdivision thereof from adopting or enforcing any requirement respecting
 the control of any substance, practice, process, or activity for purposes
 of protecting the stratosphere or ozone in the stratosphere or the global
 environment.
SEC. 133. AUTHORITY OF ADMINISTRATOR.
 The Administrator is authorized to prescribe such regulations as are
 necessary to carry out this Act.
TITLE II--GLOBAL CHANGE ADJUSTMENT AND MITIGATION
SEC. 201. SHORT TITLE.
 This title may be cited as the `Environmental Adjustment Act of 1989'.
SEC. 202. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) there has been an observed increase in global average temperatures of
 0.7 degree centigrade in the last century;
 (2) regardless of any action taken by humanity, there will be further
 global average temperature increases of up to 1 degree centigrade;
 (3) such temperature increases will manifest themselves in widespread
 alterations of the current environment;
 (4) such changes may include, but will almost certainly not be limited to,
 the following:
 (A) a rise in the level of oceans, bays, sounds, and other bodies of water,
 with ensuing destruction of natural and manmade structures;
 (B) shifts in patterns of rainfall and soil moisture, resulting in marked
 changes in agricultural productivity;
 (C) changes in the distribution and seasonal availability of fresh water
 resources, including the exhaustion of surface and ground water supplies;
 (D) increased political instability, with the potential for international
 conflict; and
 (E) accelerated extinction of plant and animal species, including many
 now classified as endangered;
 (5) the adverse effects of some such changes can be mitigated through
 proper long-range planning, analysis and, most importantly, action; and
 (6) substantial resources can be saved through the adoption of a program
 to systematically identify the impacts of proposed actions on global
 environmental change and the effects of such changes on the natural
 environment and engineered structures and systems.
SEC. 203. AMENDMENT TO THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT WITH REGARD TO
GREENHOUSE GASES.
 The National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 is amended by adding at the
 end thereof a new title as follows:
`TITLE III--GLOBAL PROTECTION
`Subtitle A--Atmospheric Protection
`SEC. 301. SHORT TITLE.
 `This subtitle may be cited as the `Atmospheric Protection Act of 1989'.
`SEC. 302. FINDINGS.
 `The Congress, recognizing the profound and irreversible and potentially
 catastrophic impacts of humanity's activities on the global atmosphere
 and the world's environment, and the inability of science to predict
 with certainty the consequences for humanity of any such changes, hereby
 declares that each person has a responsibility and obligation to avoid
 contamination of the atmosphere.
`SEC. 303. INTERPRETATION.
 `The Congress authorizes and directs that, to the fullest extent possible:
 (1) the policies, regulations, and public laws of the United States
 shall be interpreted and administered in accordance with the policies set
 forth in this Act, and (2) all agencies of the Federal Government shall,
 with respect to pollutants, substances, products or practices which may
 contribute to global climate change, stratospheric ozone depletion or
 trace gas modification of the atmosphere--
 `(A) utilize a systematic, interdisciplinary approach which will insure
 the integrated use of the natural and social sciences and the environmental
 design arts in planning and in decisionmaking which may have an impact on
 man's environment;
 `(B) identify and develop methods and procedures, in consultation with
 the Council on Environmental Quality established by subchapter II of this
 chapter, which will assure that environmental contamination is minimized;
 `(C) include in every recommendation on report or proposals for legislation
 and other major actions significantly affecting the quality of the human
 environment, a detailed statement by the responsible official on--
 `(i) the environmental impact of the proposed action,
 `(ii) any adverse environmental effects which cannot be avoided should
 the proposal be implemented,
 `(iii) alternatives to the proposed action,
 `(iv) the relationship between local short-term uses of man's environment
 and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term productivity, and
 `(v) any irreversible and irretrievable commitments of resources which
 would be involved in the proposed action should it be implemented.
Such pollutants and substances shall include, at a minimum, the following:
carbon dioxide, oxides of nitrogen, chlorofluorocarbons, halons, methyl
chloroform, carbon tetrachloride and methane. Prior to making any detailed
statement, the responsible Federal official shall consult with and obtain
the comments of any Federal agency which has jurisdiction by law or special
expertise with respect to any environmental impact involved. Copies of
such statement and the comments and views of the appropriate Federal,
State, and local agencies, which are authorized to develop and enforce
environmental standards, shall be made available to the President, the
Council on Environmental Quality and to the public as provided by section
552 of title 5, United States Code, and shall accompany the proposal through
the existing agency review processes;
 `(D) study, develop, describe and select appropriate alternatives which
 recognize and minimize the environmental impacts of such proposed action;
 `(E) make available to States, counties, municipalities, institutions,
 and individuals, advice and information useful in restoring, maintaining,
 and enhancing the quality of the environment;
 `(F) initiate and utilize ecological information in the planning and
 development of resource-oriented projects; and
 `(G) assist the Council on Environmental Quality established by subchapter
 II of this chapter.'.
TITLE III--INTERNATIONAL FINANCING
SEC. 301. NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY-INTERNATIONAL FINANCING.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) the United States plays a significant role in determining the projects,
 policies, and lending practices of international financial institutions,
 devoting more financial resources to such institutions than any other nation;
 (2) such institutions have failed in some cases to assess the environmental
 consequences of their actions, resulting at times in deforestation,
 desertification, erosion, water pollution, water-borne disease, and other
 manifestations of unsustainable development;
 (3) while such institutions are making some progress in their environmental
 performance, assessment of projects for environmental consequences is not
 always consistent, timely, or publicly accessible;
 (4) consistent, timely assessment and public scrutiny of the environmental
 and social impacts of proposed international financial projects are
 essential to ensure sustainable development;
 (5) models for the conduct of such assessments exist in various forms,
 including, but not limited to--
 (A) the National Environmental Policy Act, its regulations, and its history
 in the courts of the United States;
 (B) the goals and principles of Environmental Impact Assessment adopted
 by the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme in
 June 1987; and
 (C) the measures required to facilitate the environmental impact assessment
 of development assistance projects and programs recommended by the Council
 of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development at its 649th
 Meeting in October 1986;
 (6) methods and procedures for environmental impact assessment should be
 adopted and utilized by borrowing countries or international financial
 institutions themselves, and cannot be imposed unilaterally by the United
 States; and
 (7) the United States should encourage, to the extent possible, environmental
 impact assessment of the international financial activities in which it
 participates, with the goal of adoption by borrowing countries of their
 own procedures for assessing environmental impacts and alternatives.
SEC. 302. ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL ACTIVITIES.
 Title I of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4332)
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
 `SEC. 106. (a) Effective July 1, 1991, at least 120 days prior to a vote
 of the United States on a proposed action significantly affecting the
 quality of the human environment by an institution listed in section 22 of
 the Export-Import Bank Act Amendments of 1986, the official responsible for
 casting such vote shall request of the institution a detailed statement which
 meets the criteria set forth pursuant to subsection (b). All information
 received as a result of such request shall accompany the proposal through
 agency review processes, and shall be made available to borrower and donor
 countries and to the public.
 `(b) The Council on Environmental Quality shall establish criteria for
 environmental impact assessment of international financial activities,
 sufficient to facilitate the consideration of environmental impacts
 in lending decisions. Such criteria shall include the solicitation of
 public comments, review of alternatives, and any other criteria found
 to be internationally recognized as an element of adequate environmental
 impact assessment.
 `(c) The responsible official identified in subsection (a) shall not be
 required to verify the accuracy of the content of documents obtained under
 this section, except as necessary to identify:
 `(1) minimum criteria which are not met; and
 `(2) information pertinent to environmental impact assessment absent from
 the statement, but available to the responsible official through means
 other than the institution proposing the action.
A statement of findings under this subsection should accompany the proposed
action through agency review processes, and shall be made available to
borrower and donor countries and to the public.'.
SEC. 303. COOPERATION AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.
 (a) Within 1 month after the date of enactment of this Act, and as necessary
 thereafter, officials charged with requesting a statement under section
 305 of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 shall--
 (1) inform the management of the institutions listed in section 22 of the
 Export-Import Bank Act Amendments of 1986 of the expected nature of such
 statements; and
 (2) begin negotiations with institution management and representatives of
 other institution members, within the framework of international agreements,
 as necessary to facilitate the conduct of environmental impact assessments.
 (b) The Secretary of the Treasury, assisted by the Secretary of State,
 the Secretary of the Interior, the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency, the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality,
 the Administrator of the Agency for International Development, the
 Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
 and representatives of other interested agencies, shall, in cooperation
 with institutions referenced in paragraph (1) of subsection (a), make
 available upon the request of such institutions the appropriate United
 States Government personnel to assist in the following areas:
 (1) the training of institution staff in environmental impact assessment
 procedures;
 (2) the provision of long- and short-term advisers on environmental issues;
 (3) participation in preparing environmental studies for projects with
 potentially significant environmental impacts; and
 (4) the preparation of documents for public release, and the development
 of procedures to provide for the inclusion of interested nongovernmental
 organizations in the environmental review process;
and shall encourage other institution member countries to provide similar
assistance.
 (c) The Secretary of the Treasury shall also take steps with both donor
 and borrower nations to expand international consensus on the importance
 of environmental issues and to focus efforts on the need for reform,
 with particular emphasis on developing greater agreement on standards for
 projects that may affect ecosystems such as, but not limited to, tropical
 moist forests, wetlands, savannas, and other areas, and on securing greater
 support for programs and policies that encourage energy efficiency and
 conservation and integrated pest management.
SEC. 304. PROGRESS REPORT TO CONGRESS.
 (a) The Secretary of the Treasury shall prepare and submit to the Committee
 on Environment and Public Works in the Senate, and the Committee on Merchant
 Marine and Fisheries in the House of Representatives, a detailed report, not
 later than 12 months after enactment of this Act, including an evaluation
 of the progress achieved by each international financial institution in
 adopting and implementing procedures for systematically assessing the
 environmental impacts of institution activities, and in the implementation
 of section 306 of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969. The report
 shall be made available to borrower and donor countries and to the public.
 (b) Not later than March 1, 1992, and again not later than January 1,
 1993, the Council on Environmental Quality shall submit an interim progress
 report, and a detailed report respectively, to the Committee on Environment
 and Public Works in the Senate, and the Committee on Merchant Marine and
 Fisheries in the House of Representatives, on the efficacy of efforts by
 the United States to encourage consistent, timely environmental impact
 assessment within international financial institutions. The report shall
 be made available to borrower and donor countries and to the public.
SEC. 305. INVENTORY AND REVIEW OF FEDERAL FACILITIES, HOLDINGS AND ACTIVITIES.
 (a)(1) Not later than January 1, 1991, the President shall direct each
 department, agency and other instrumentality of the United States to
 undertake a systematic and comprehensive survey of all Federal lands and
 structures to ascertain their vulnerability to changes associated with
 changes in the global environment. To the maximum extent practicable,
 such survey shall include the lands and structures of State and local
 government and Indian tribes as well. Such survey shall include, but not
 be limited to, the following:
 (A) public highways, bridges, tunnels, and other transportation structures;
 (B) ports, waterways, locks and dams;
 (C) public buildings and monuments;
 (D) publicly owned treatment works;
 (E) national parks, forests, wilderness areas, wildlife refuges, marine
 sanctuaries, and all other comparable facilities; and
 (F) national defense facilities, including but not limited to military
 bases and reservations, whether located in the United States or elsewhere.
 (2) Not later than January 1, 1993, the President shall submit a report to
 the Congress containing the results of the survey required by this section
 and recommending both generic and site-specific actions and policies to--
 (A) preclude further public or private investment in areas susceptible to
 loss or damage due to global environmental change; and
 (B) minimize and mitigate the loss or damage due to the global environmental
 change which is likely to occur.
SEC. 306. GROUND WATER PROTECTION AND RECHARGE.
 (a) The Congress finds that--
 (1) a consequence of global climate change may be the exhaustion of ground
 and surface water resources essential to the maintenance of agricultural
 productivity, the loss of which could jeopardize the national economy
 and security;
 (2) existing knowledge and technology of artificial recharge of ground
 water is inadequate to meet existing and anticipated future water resource
 problems and to take advantage of possible water resource opportunities; and
 (3) a program to support and assure the study and development of artificial
 ground water recharge techniques is essential.
 (b) The Secretary of the Army (hereinafter in this section referred to as
 the `Secretary') acting through the Chief of Engineers, is authorized to
 undertake a program of research, development, and demonstration of artificial
 ground water recharge techniques. The purpose of such program shall be to--
 (1) demonstrate the usefulness of artificial ground water recharge as a
 method for improving ground water quantity and for preventing degradation
 of, or improving ground water quality;
 (2) determine the economic viability of artificial ground water recharge
 as a method of augmenting existing water supplies and improving ground
 water quality on a local or regional basis; and
 (3) develop new and more efficient techniques for the transfer of surface
 water to existing or potential water bearing underground strata.
 (c) In order to advance the purpose of this section, the Secretary shall,
 at different locations throughout the United States, design, construct, and
 operate and maintain projects to demonstrate different artificial ground
 water recharge techniques. To the maximum extent feasible, such locations
 shall be chosen to reflect a variety of geological, physical, and chemical
 conditions affecting ground water quality and quantity. In selecting such
 locations, and carrying out such work, the Secretary shall consult and
 coordinate with appropriate State and local governmental agencies.
 (d) In order to prevent any unnecessary duplication of effort, and in order
 to fully utilize the available expertise of other agencies and departments
 of the United States, the Secretary, in carrying out subsection (b) of this
 section, shall consult and coordinate with the United States Geological
 Survey, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Bureau of Reclamation,
 and other appropriate agencies and departments of the United States.
 (e) To the extent possible, activities undertaken pursuant to subsection
 (b) of this section shall utilize existing or authorized Corps of Engineers
 water resources projects, programs, facilities, and personnel.
 (f) Not later than May 30, 1993, the Secretary shall transmit to the
 Committee on Public Works and Transportation of the House of Representatives
 and the Committee on Environment and Public Works in the Senate, a final
 report describing the results of activities undertaken pursuant to this
 section. Not later than 30 months after the date of enactment of this Act,
 the Secretary shall transmit to such Committees of Congress a brief report
 describing the progress of such activities.
 (g) For purposes of this section, the term--
 (1) `artificial ground water recharge' shall include but not be limited
 to techniques to supplement or otherwise affect ground water supplies such
 as wells, pits, ponds, spreading basins, or gravel chains; and
 (2) `non-Federal sponsor' shall mean a State, city, county, or any other
 entity which derives its powers from a State constitution, or was created
 pursuant to an Act of a State legislature.
 (h) This section shall be known as the `Ground Water Recharge Research
 and Demonstration Act'.
TITLE IV--INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
SEC. 401. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) complete elimination of chlorofluorocarbons and related chemicals which
 are destroying the Earth's protective ozone layer and adding to global
 temperature increases requires concerted international agreement and action;
 (2) the most effective controls on emissions of carbon dioxide, hydrocarbons,
 oxides of nitrogen, methane and other trace gases which are increasing global
 temperatures will require concerted international agreement and action;
 (3) international agreements to address some aspects of these global
 threats are already underway and include--
 (A) an international protocol to reduce production and use of
 chlorofluorocarbons;
 (B) an international agreement to reduce emissions and trans-boundary
 transport of oxides of sulfur; and
 (C) an international agreement to reduce emissions and trans-boundary
 transport of oxides of nitrogen; and
 (4) in the absence of such international cooperation and agreement,
 the interests of the United States will be directly and substantially
 threatened due to--
 (A) damage to the domestic environment;
 (B) damage to the national economy;
 (C) increased international tension; and
 (D) increased danger of international armed conflict.
SEC. 402. INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION.
 (a) The President is hereby directed to request that the United Nations
 promptly establish a temporary new agency to be headed by the director of
 the United Nations Environmental Program, to--
 (1) coordinate international efforts to minimize and mitigate the effects
 of unavoidable environmental alterations; and
 (2) provide financial, technical and other assistance to developing
 nations to facilitate improvements in their domestic standards of living
 while minimizing or eliminating contributions to global, continental and
 sub-continental scale environmental damages.
 (b) The President is hereby directed to request that the United Nations
 establish a temporary program of forestation to--
 (1) assist and encourage nations in halting activities which are resulting
 in destruction of the world's forests; and
 (2) undertake a global program of reforestation.
 (c) The President is hereby directed to instruct the United States
 representatives to bilateral and multilateral organizations other than the
 United Nations to review the activities of such organizations to assure that
 their actions and programs are consistent with the goals and objectives
 of this Act and, where necessary, to persuade such organizations to adopt
 programs to implement the goals and objectives of this Act.
SEC. 403. NATIONAL GOAL.
 It is hereby established as a national goal of the United States to derive
 50 percent of the national supply of energy from nonpolluting technologies
 and practices by the year 2000 and 100 percent by the year 2050.
TITLE V--DEVELOPMENT OF NONPOLLUTING ENERGY SOURCES
SEC. 501. NATIONAL NEW ENERGY DEVELOPMENT INSTITUTE.
 (a) The Administrator is authorized to charter a national organization on
 energy production standards and practices. The organization shall be called
 the National New Energy Development Institute (hereinafter referred to as
 the `institute'). The institute shall be incorporated in the District of
 Columbia and shall have a board of directors of not less than 11 members
 which shall be representative of the interests of energy manufacturing
 industries, utilities, industries and commercial concerns which are major
 users of energy. The board may also include representatives of the public
 interest, persons with expertise in energy development, and elected or
 appointed officials of State utility commissions. The Administrator shall
 grant (or deny) a charter on the basis of a prospectus or other proposal
 from a prospective board of directors.
 (b) It shall be the purpose of the institute to encourage and promote the use
 of energy efficient technologies which, with due regard for the cost, will--
 (1) minimize the quantity of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases
 which enters the atmosphere;
 (2) minimize the consumption of scarce resources;
 (3) meet the needs of both developed and lesser developed economies;
 (4) insure that United States industry can remain competitive both
 domestically and internationally; and
 (5) assure that human health and the environment (include impacts on global
 climate) will not be adversely affected.
 (c)(1) The institute shall have power to receive, purchase, hold, sell and
 convey real property; to sue and be sued, complain and defend in courts
 of law and equity within the jurisdiction of the United States; to make,
 adopt and amend a constitution, bylaws, rules, and regulations for the
 conduct of its business; and to provide for the election of its officers
 and to define their duties: Provided, That such constitution, bylaws,
 rules and regulations are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
 section or any other law of the United States or of any States thereof.
 (2) All powers necessary to govern, direct and manage the institute,
 including the power to--
 (A) establish energy technology standards,
 (B) identify and promote the use of these technologies both domestically
 and internationally,
 (C) appoint and replace members of the board, and
 (D) hire personnel, enter into contracts and otherwise conduct all business
 necessary and appropriate to carry out the purposes of the institute,
 shall be vested in the board of directors.
 (d) The institute shall establish industry energy technology standards
 which address the design, application, efficiency, and other standards of
 performance deemed appropriate to protect the global climate which shall
 further the purposes of subsection (b) when implemented on a voluntary
 basis by entities in the energy industry.
 (e) In deciding whether to grant or extend a charter under this section,
 the Administrator shall take into account any information with respect
 to the following criteria as evidenced in the prospectus prepared and
 presented by the prospective board of the institute:
 (1) the ability of the board to work with the energy industry and its
 commercial clients to assure implementation of the standards established
 under subsection (d) to the fullest extent practicable;
 (2) the expertise available to the board in energy management practices
 and the measures necessary to protect public health and the environment
 (including global climate) from any adverse effects which may result from
 such practices; and
 (3) financial support for the programs of the board committed to the board
 or through its affiliate organizations to carry out the programs of the
 institute.
 (f) The board shall conduct its business in open meetings (subject to the
 requirements for privacy in personnel matters and review of confidential
 business information) and shall, to the maximum extent practicable, seek
 public comment and participation in the development of its programs.
 (g) The initial charter of the institute shall extend for a period of
 not more than 4 years with an option for continuous renewal at 7-year
 intervals thereafter. The Administrator may establish a term of shorter
 duration or may grant a charter on specified conditions of performance,
 if it is necessary and appropriate to secure the purposes of this section.
 (h)(1) The Administrator is authorized to make grants to the institute in
 an amount not to exceed $1,000,000 in any fiscal year.
 (2) There are authorized to be appropriated $2,500,000 for the fiscal year
 ending September 30, 1990, and $1,000,000 for each succeeding fiscal year
 through September 30, 1994, to carry out the purposes of subsection (e)(3)
 and $1,000,000 for each fiscal year during the period ending prior to October
 1, 1994, to carry out the provisions of paragraph (1) of this subsection.