B37 4-19-89 [update]
HR 2051 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2051
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to prescribe certain
requirements with respect to the labeling of food products.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
April 18, 1989
Mr. MOAKLEY (for himself and Mr. TRAFICANT) introduced the following bill;
which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to prescribe certain
requirements with respect to the labeling of food products.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Food Labeling and Heart Disease Reduction
 Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that:
 (1) Health authorities have reached a consensus that Americans should
 modify their diets in order to reduce their risk of serious chronic
 illnesses including cardiovascular diseases, including advice by--
 (A) the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of Health and Human
 Services that Americans should avoid too much fat, saturated fat, dietary
 cholesterol, and sodium,
 (B) the Surgeon General of the United States that most Americans should
 reduce consumption of fat (especially saturated fat), dietary cholesterol,
 and sodium,
 (C) the National Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences that
 Americans should reduce total fat intake to 30 percent or less of calories,
 saturated fat to less than 10 percent of calories, dietary cholesterol
 to less than 300 milligrams daily, and limit daily salt intake to 6 grams
 (2.4 grams sodium), and
 (D) the National Institutes of Health that Americans should lower consumption
 of total fat, saturated fat, and dietary cholesterol in order to lower blood
 cholesterol levels, in order to reduce the risk of coronary heart disease.
 (2) Current food labeling practices and regulations do not enable Americans
 to follow the authoritative diet and health recommendations because--
 (A) nearly half of processed, packaged foods regulated by the Food and
 Drug Administration lack nutrition labeling,
 (B) even where it exists, current nutrition labeling does not provide
 information about several nutrients that these recommendations highlight,
 (C) current labeling uses terms and formats that many consumers find
 difficult to understand and use, and
 (D) many labels bear nutrition and health claims that may mislead the
 consumer because they omit information that is critical to evaluating
 the claims.
SEC. 3. LABEL REQUIREMENTS.
 Section 403 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 343)
 is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(q) If it contains fat, cholesterol, or sodium unless its labeling states--
 `(1) the percentage of calories from fat per serving of the food,
 `(2) the amount of total fat per serving of the food and the amounts which
 are saturated, polyunsaturated, or monounsaturated,
 `(3) the amount of sodium per serving of the food, and
 `(4) the amount of cholesterol per serving of the food.
The statements specified in paragraphs (1) through (4) shall be presented
in such a manner as to enable consumers to readily observe and comprehend
the required disclosures and to understand the relative significance of each
nutritional content disclosure in the context of the total daily diet.'.
SEC. 4. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 The amendment made by section 3 shall take effect 1 year after the date
 of the enactment of this Act.