S 2114 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 2114
To amend the Social Security Act to provide access to health care benefits
for all Americans, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
November 26 (legislative day, NOVEMBER 23), 1991
Mr. PACKWOOD introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Finance
A BILL
To amend the Social Security Act to provide access to health care benefits
for all Americans, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Comprehensive Health
 Insurance Plan of 1991' (to be known as CHIP of 1991).
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents of this Act is as follows:
Section 1. Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--EMPLOYER-PROVIDED HEALTH INSURANCE
Sec. 101. Employers required to offer basic health plans to employees and
families.
Sec. 102. Tax penalties on noncomplying employers and insurers.
TITLE II--HEALTH CARE COVERAGE FOR INDIVIDUALS NOT OTHERWISE COVERED UNDER
QUALIFIED EMPLOYER PLANS OR MEDICARE
Sec. 201. Expanded medicaid health care coverage of individuals not otherwise
covered by qualified employer plans or medicare.
Sec. 202. Permitting buy-in to medicare for certain uninsured individuals.
TITLE III--HEALTH CARE ACCESS--TAX PROVISIONS
Sec. 301. Refundable credit for small business health care costs.
Sec. 302. Health insurance credit doubled to assist low-income employees.
Sec. 303. Repeal of EITC interactions.
Sec. 304. Deductibility for self-employed individuals.
TITLE IV--ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS AND REPORT
Sec. 401. Development and application of uniform administrative procedures.
Sec. 402. Additional funding for outcomes research and practice guidelines.
Sec. 403. Annual report on health care.
TITLE I--EMPLOYER-PROVIDED HEALTH INSURANCE
SEC. 101. EMPLOYERS REQUIRED TO OFFER BASIC HEALTH PLANS TO EMPLOYEES AND
FAMILIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Social Security Act is amended by adding at the end
 the following new title:
`TITLE XXI--EMPLOYER-PROVIDED HEALTH PLANS
`Part A--Requirement to Offer Basic Health Plans to Employees and Families
`Subpart 1--General Requirements and Definitions
`Sec. 2101. Application to employees.
`Sec. 2102. Treatment of all family members as a unit.
`Sec. 2103. Definitions relating to employment and employees.
`Sec. 2104. Definitions relating to families.
`Sec. 2105. Application of requirement to employers.
`Subpart 2--Qualified Employer Plans
`Sec. 2111. Certification of qualified employer plans.
`Sec. 2112. Definitions relating to qualified employer plans.
`Subpart 3--Requirements for Qualified Employer Plans
`Sec. 2121. Basic benefits.
`Sec. 2122. Timing of enrollment; period of coverage; employer plan cards.
`Sec. 2123. Limits on exclusions and coverage standards for basic benefits.
`Sec. 2124. Employee premiums and cost-sharing.
`Sec. 2125. Coordination and portability of health coverage under qualified
employer plans.
`Sec. 2126. Use of uniform claims forms.
`Subpart 4--General Protections
`Sec. 2131. Consumer protections.
`Sec. 2132. Preemption of certain State requirements.
`Part B--Small Employer Purchasing Groups
`Sec. 2141. Grants to small employer purchasing groups.
`Sec. 2142. Rules of operation.
`Sec. 2143. Freedom of contract.
`Sec. 2144. Small employer defined.
`Part C--Small Employer Health Insurance Reform
`Sec. 2151. General requirements for health insurance plans issued to small
employers.
`Sec. 2152. Rating practices.
`Sec. 2153. Stricter State standards permitted.
`Part A--Requirement to Offer Basic Health Plans to Employees and Families
`Subpart 1--General Requirements and Definitions
`SEC. 2101. APPLICATION TO EMPLOYEES.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- Except as provided in succeeding subsections of this
 section, each employer shall, in accordance with this part, offer to each
 of its eligible employees a qualified employer plan. Such offer--
 `(1) shall include at least--
 `(A) 1 basic health plan, and
 `(B) 1 basic coordinated care plan (if the employer is located in the
 service area of such a plan), and
 `(2) may include 1 or more--
 `(A) enhanced health plans, or
 `(B) enhanced coordinated care plans.
 `(b) MULTIPLE EMPLOYERS-
 `(1) GENERAL RULE- Except as provided in paragraph (2), in the case of an
 individual who is an eligible employee of more than 1 employer, if more
 than 1 such employer offers the employee enrollment under a qualified
 employer plan, the individual shall elect (in a manner specified by the
 Secretary) the qualified employer plan under which the individual (and
 the individual's family) will be enrolled.
 `(2) ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURE DEVELOPED BY THE SECRETARY- Paragraph (1) shall
 not apply if the Secretary develops a procedure to require an individual who
 is an eligible employee of more than 1 employer to enroll in the qualified
 employer plan of the employer for which the individual reasonably expects
 to work the most hours.
 `(3) BOTH ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEES- In the case of married individuals who are
 both eligible employees of 1 or more employers, rules established by the
 Secretary based on the rules under paragraph (1) or (2) shall apply.
 `(4) OTHER EMPLOYER'S OBLIGATIONS- An employer who is not elected under
 paragraph (1) nor identified under paragraph (2) is not obligated to
 offer the employee (and family members) a qualified employer plan and may
 not charge the individual any premiums for coverage under such qualified
 employer plan.
 `(c) TREATMENT OF EMPLOYEES UNDER COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT- The
 requirements of this part shall not apply to eligible employees of an
 employer subject to a collective bargaining agreement between representatives
 of the employees and the employer if--
 `(1) there is evidence health benefits of the employees were the subject
 of good faith bargaining, and
 `(2) the agreement does not provide that this part shall apply.
 `(d) NONAPPLICATION TO RESIDENTS OF PUERTO RICO AND TERRITORIES- The
 provisions of this title shall not apply with respect to an employee who
 is not a resident of one of the 50 States or the District of Columbia.
`SEC. 2102. TREATMENT OF ALL FAMILY MEMBERS AS A UNIT.
 `The offer of enrollment of an individual in a qualified employer plan
 required under section 2101(a) shall include enrollment of the family of
 the individual.
`SEC. 2103. DEFINITIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYMENT AND EMPLOYEES.
 `(a) EMPLOYMENT, ETC- In this title--
 `(1) Employment-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the term
 `employment' has the meaning given such term by section 3121(b) of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 `(B) TREATMENT OF FEDERAL EMPLOYMENT- In applying subparagraph (A), the term
 `employment' shall not be considered to include service performed in the
 employ of the United States if, in connection with the performance of such
 service (or the service of a family member), the individual is provided
 medical and dental benefits under chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code.
 `(3) EMPLOYEE; EMPLOYER- The terms `employee' and `employer' have the same
 meanings as such terms have for purposes of chapter 21 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986.
 `(b) DEFINITIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES- In this title:
 `(1) ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEE- The term `eligible employee' means, with respect
 to an employer, an employee who is reasonably expected to perform for that
 employer on a weekly basis at least 25 hours of service and on a yearly
 basis at least 16 weeks of service.
 `(2) TREATMENT OF CONSULTANTS AND CONTRACTORS- The term `eligible employee'
 includes an individual who is a consultant or contractor of an employer
 if the Secretary determines that the consulting arrangement or contract
 was entered into to avoid the requirements of this title.
 `(3) EXCLUSION OF FOREIGN EMPLOYMENT- The term `eligible employee' does
 not include an individual--
 `(A) who is not a citizen or resident of the United States with respect
 to service performed outside the United States, or
 `(B) who is a citizen or resident of the United States with respect to
 services performed outside the United States for an employer other than an
 American employer (as defined in section 3121(h) of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986).
`SEC. 2104. DEFINITIONS RELATING TO FAMILIES.
 `In this title:
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), the terms `family'
 and `family member' mean an individual, the individual's spouse, and the
 dependents of the individual (as defined under section 152 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986).
 `(2) TREATMENT OF FAMILIES WITH MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES FOR COVERAGE PURPOSES-
 In the case of a family with a medicare beneficiary, if coverage is provided
 to family members other than on the basis of employment of a family member,
 the beneficiary shall not be treated under this title as a member of the
 family for purposes of determining eligibility for coverage but shall be
 treated as a separate individual.
 `(3) SPOUSE- The term `spouse' means, with respect to an individual,
 the individual to which the individual is married.
 `(4) MARITAL STATUS- Marital status shall be determined in accordance with
 section 7703 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
`SEC. 2105. APPLICATION OF REQUIREMENT TO EMPLOYERS.
 `The requirements of this part apply as of January 1, 1993.
`Subpart 2--Qualified Employer Plans
`SEC. 2111. CERTIFICATION OF QUALIFIED EMPLOYER PLANS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- An employer plan shall be treated as a qualified employer
 plan if, upon application, it is certified as meeting the requirements of
 each section of subpart 3 of this part by the State in which such plan
 is located, or, in the absence of State procedures or in the case of a
 self-insured plan, by the Secretary.
 `(b) CERTIFICATION PROCEDURES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each State and the Secretary shall establish, not later
 than October 1, 1992, or the date specified by paragraph (2), procedures
 for the certification and periodic review and recertification of plans as
 qualified employer plans.
 `(2) EXCEPTION TO EFFECTIVE DATE OF PROCEDURES- In the case of a State--
 `(A) requiring State legislation (other than legislation appropriating
 funds) in order to establish the procedures described in paragraph (1), and
 `(B) having a legislature which does not meet in 1992 in a legislative
 session in which such legislation may be considered,
 the date specified in this paragraph is the first day of the first calendar
 quarter beginning after the close of the first regular legislative session
 of the State legislature that begins on or after January 1, 1993. For
 purposes of the previous sentence, in the case of a State that has a
 2-year legislative session, each year of such session shall be deemed to
 be a separate regular legislative session of the State legislature.
 `(c) TERMINATION OF CERTIFICATION- A State or the Secretary, as appropriate,
 shall terminate the certification of a plan as a qualified employer plan
 if the State or Secretary determines that the plan no longer meets the
 requirements for certification. Before effecting a termination, the State
 or Secretary shall provide the plan notice and opportunity for a hearing
 on the proposed termination.
`SEC. 2112. DEFINITIONS RELATING TO QUALIFIED EMPLOYER PLANS.
 `For purposes of this title:
 `(1) EMPLOYER PLAN- The term `employer plan' means any health plan offered
 by an employer to its employee, but does not include any of the following:
 `(A) Accident only insurance, disability only insurance, or long-term care
 only insurance.
 `(B) Coverage issued as a supplement to liability insurance.
 `(C) Workmen's compensation or similar insurance.
 `(D) Automobile medical-payment insurance.
 `(2) BASIC HEALTH PLANS; BASIC COORDINATED CARE PLANS- The terms `basic
 health plan' and `basic coordinated care plan' mean a health plan and a
 coordinated care plan, respectively, which only provide the basic benefits
 required under section 2121.
 `(3) ENHANCED HEALTH PLANS; ENHANCED COORDINATED CARE PLANS- The terms
 `enhanced health plan' and `enhanced coordinated care plan' mean
 a health plan and a coordinated care plan, respectively, which, in
 addition to providing the basic benefits required under section 2121,
 provide supplemental benefits. The terms `enhanced health plan' and
 `enhanced coordinated care plan' do not include plans which only provide
 supplemental benefits.
 `(4) HEALTH PLAN- The term `health plan' means any plan which is a hospital
 or medical service policy or certificate, hospital or medical service
 plan contract, or health maintenance organization group contract and, in
 States which have distinct licensure requirements, a multiple employer
 welfare arrangement.
 `(5) COORDINATED CARE PLAN-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Until such time as the definition provided by the Secretary
 under subparagraph (G) takes effect, the term `coordinated care plan'
 means a plan operated by a coordinated care entity that provides for the
 financing and delivery of health care services to individuals enrolled in
 such plan through--
 `(i) arrangements with participating providers to furnish health care
 services;
 `(ii) explicit standards for the selection of participating providers;
 `(iii) organizational arrangements for ongoing quality assurance and
 utilization review programs;
 `(iv) financial incentives for individuals enrolled in the plan to use
 the participating providers and procedures provided for by the plan; and
 `(v) a care coordinator responsible for guiding individuals enrolled in
 the plan to appropriate health care services in cost-effective settings.
 `(B) COORDINATED CARE ENTITY- The term `coordinated care entity' includes
 a licensed insurance company, hospital or medical service plan, health
 maintenance organization, an employer, or employee organization, or a
 coordinate care contractor, that operates a coordinated care plan.
 `(C) COORDINATED CARE CONTRACTOR- The term `coordinated care contractor'
 means an individual or entity that--
 `(i) establishes, operates, or maintains a network of participating
 providers;
 `(ii) conducts or arranges for a qualified utilization review program; and
 `(iii) contracts with an insurance company, a hospital or medical service
 plan, an employer, an employee organization, or any other entity providing
 coverage for health care services to operate a coordinated care plan.
 `(D) PARTICIPATING PROVIDER- The term `participating provider' means a
 physician, hospital, pharmacy, laboratory, or other appropriately licensed
 or certified provider of health care services or supplies, that has entered
 into an agreement with a coordinated care entity to provide such services
 or supplies to a patient enrolled in a coordinated care plan.
 `(E) CARE COORDINATOR- The term `care coordinator' means a physician, nurse
 practitioner, or other participating provider as determined by the Secretary.
 `(F) QUALIFIED UTILIZATION REVIEW PROGRAM-
 `(ii) IN GENERAL- The term `qualified utilization review program' means a
 utilization review program that the Secretary certifies, upon application
 by the program, as meeting the requirements of this title.
 `(ii) UTILIZATION REVIEW PROGRAM- The term `utilization review program'
 means a system of reviewing the medical necessity, appropriateness, or
 quality of health care services and supplies provided under a coordinated
 care plan using specified guidelines. Such a system may include preadmission
 certification, the application of practice guidelines, continued stay
 review, discharge planning, preauthorization of ambulatory procedures,
 and retrospective review.
 `(G) DEFINITION BY SECRETARY- The Secretary shall develop, not later
 than January 1, 1995, a definition for the term `coordinated care plan'
 for purposes of this title, including such requirements for financial
 participation and risk sharing as the Secretary deems appropriate.
`Subpart 3--Requirements for Qualified Employer Plans
`SEC. 2121. BASIC BENEFITS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The requirements of this section are met if an employer
 plan provides for basic benefits described in subsection (b) and meets
 the requirements of subsection (c).
 `(b) SCOPE OF BASIC BENEFITS-
 `(1) GENERAL BENEFITS- Except as provided in succeeding paragraphs of this
 subsection, the benefits provided to an eligible employee by a qualified
 employer plan shall consist of the same benefits as described in title
 XVIII to an individual entitled to benefits under part A, and enrolled
 under part B, of title XVIII.
 `(2) ADDITIONAL BENEFITS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to periodicity schedules established by the
 Secretary, additional benefits shall be provided to an eligible employee
 by a qualified employer plan for the following items and services:
 `(i) Newborn and well-baby care.
 `(ii) Well-child care, including routine office visits, and routine
 laboratory tests, for individuals who have not attained age 7.
 `(iii) Cancer screening, including pap smears, mammograms, colorectal and
 prostate screening, and other tests as specified by the Secretary.
 `(iv) Routine immunizations (including the vaccine itself).
 `(v) Preventive and routine dental services for individuals who have not
 attained the age of 18.
 `(vi) Eyeglasses and hearing aids, and routine examinations therefor for
 individuals who have not attained the age of 18.
 `(vii) Outpatient prescription drugs, biologicals, and insulin (within
 the meaning of section 1927(k)).
 `(viii) Family planning services.
 `(B) PERIODICITY SCHEDULES- The Secretary, in consultation with appropriate
 medical experts, shall establish schedules of periodicity which reflect the
 general, appropriate frequency with which services listed in subparagraph
 (A) (other than clause (vii) thereof) should be provided.
 `(3) BENEFITS UNDER STATE STANDARDS- A State may implement a standard which
 further limits the basic benefits required to be provided by qualified
 employer plans under the preceding paragraphs of this subsection, but in
 no event shall the State implement a standard that limits basic benefits
 beyond the amount, duration, and scope of benefits provided under the
 State plan under title XIX, as in effect on or after January 1, 1993.
 `(c) MAINTENANCE OF EFFORTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall, by regulation, provide rules similar
 to the rules of section 420(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
 to insure that any large employer shall maintain any benefits offered to
 the employees of such employer on January 1, 1993, which are in addition
 to the benefits required under subsection (b) for an additional 2 years
 after the such date.
 `(2) LARGE EMPLOYER- For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `large employer'
 means, with respect to a calendar year, an employer that normally employs
 100 or more eligible employees on a typical business day.
`SEC. 2122. TIMING OF ENROLLMENT; PERIOD OF COVERAGE; EMPLOYER PLAN CARDS.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- The requirements of this section are met if an employer
 plan meets the requirements of subsections (b), (c), and (d).
 `(b) TIMING OF ENROLLMENT- The requirements of this subsection are met
 if an employer plan provides that:
 `(1) ENROLLMENT UPON EMPLOYMENT- Enrollment under the plan shall occur not
 later than the date on which the employment, for which such enrollment is
 required under this part, commences.
 `(2) OPEN SEASON ONLY ONCE EVERY 2 YEARS- Except in the case of a change in
 family, employment, or residence status for which coverage may be changed
 under subsection (c)(2), a currently enrolled eligible employee may change
 or modify coverage only once during any 2-year period.
 `(c) PERIOD OF COVERAGE- The requirements of this subsection are met if
 an employer plan provides that:
 `(1) BEGINNING OF COVERAGE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- In the case of an individual enrolled under such plan,
 the benefits under the plan shall first become available for services
 furnished beginning on the first day of the month of enrollment.
 `(B) TREATMENT OF ADDITIONS OF DEPENDENTS- Any dependent added during the
 period of coverage under such plan shall, as of the date of the addition,
 be automatically enrolled and covered for benefits under the plan.
 `(2) STANDARDS TO REFLECT OTHER CHANGES IN FAMILY, EMPLOYMENT STATUS,
 AND RESIDENCE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Under standards established by the Secretary consistent
 with this paragraph, appropriate changes in coverage shall be provided to
 take into account--
 `(i) changes in family composition or status resulting from marriage,
 divorce (or legal separation), and deletions of dependents,
 `(ii) changes in employment status, including termination, and
 `(iii) in the case of a coordinated care plan, changes in residence outside
 a plan's service area.
 `(B) MONTHLY CHANGES- Such standards shall be designed--
 `(i) to effect a change in enrollment (or status of enrollment) as of
 the last day of the first month following the date of the event causing
 the change,
 `(ii) to prevent any periods of noncoverage under any qualified employer
 plans, and
 `(iii) to provide, in the case of a change of family status such as marriage,
 divorce, or legal separation, for accounting and crediting of cost-sharing
 among family members in an equitable and administrable manner.
 `(d) EMPLOYER PLAN CARDS- The requirements of this subsection are met if
 in conjunction with enrollment of individuals under an employer plan, such
 plan provides for the issuance of a card which may be used for purposes
 of identification of such enrollment and the processing of claims for
 benefits under the plan. The Secretary shall specify the information to
 be included on the card.
`SEC. 2123. LIMITS ON EXCLUSIONS AND COVERAGE STANDARDS FOR BASIC BENEFITS.
 `The requirements of this section are met if an employer plan--
 `(1) does not deny, limit, or condition the coverage under the plan with
 respect to basic benefits based on the health status, claims experience,
 receipt of health care, medical history, or lack of evidence of insurability,
 of an individual, and
 `(2) does not provide for exclusions from coverage for basic benefits that
 are more restrictive than the exclusions for such benefits under this part.
`SEC. 2124. EMPLOYEE PREMIUMS AND COST-SHARING.
 `(a) ENROLLEE PREMIUMS AND COST-SHARING PERMITTED- The requirements of
 this section are met if an employer plan provides for--
 `(1) premiums, and
 `(2) except as provided in subsection (e), cost-sharing amounts,
that comply with the provisions of subsections (b) and (c), respectively.
 `(b) PROVISIONS RELATING TO PREMIUMS-
 `(1) LIMITATION ON PREMIUMS-
 `(A) MONTHLY PREMIUM LIMITED TO 20 PERCENT OF ACTUARIAL RATE-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- A qualified employer plan may not require an eligible
 employee to pay a premium the amount of which on a monthly basis exceeds
 20 percent (30 percent in the case of an eligible employee with a family
 member enrolled under the plan) of the monthly actuarial rate (as defined
 under clause (ii)).
 `(ii) MONTHLY ACTUARIAL RATE DEFINED- For purposes of this section, the
 term `monthly actuarial rate' means, with respect to a qualified employer
 plan in a plan year, the average monthly per enrollee amount that the plan
 estimates, for enrollees under the plan during the year, would be necessary
 to pay for the total benefits required during the year under the plan,
 including administrative costs for the provision of such benefits and an
 appropriate amount for a contingency margin.
 `(2) LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT OF PREMIUMS- An eligible employee enrolled under
 a qualified employer plan is liable for payment of premiums required under
 that plan in accordance with this subsection.
 `(3) WITHHOLDING PERMITTED- No provision of State law shall prevent an
 employer of an eligible employee enrolled under a qualified employer plan
 from withholding the amount of any premium due by the employee under this
 subsection from the wages paid the employee.
 `(4) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this section shall be construed--
 `(A) as preventing an employer from paying part or all of the employee
 premium for basic benefits or supplemental benefits, or
 `(B) subject to subsection (f)(2), from requiring an eligible employee to
 pay for all or part of the premium for supplemental benefits.
 `(5) NONDISCRIMINATION IN PREMIUM AMOUNTS- Under a qualified employer
 plan, no eligible employee may be charged a different premium for the same
 coverage of basic benefits.
 `(c) PROVISIONS RELATING TO COST-SHARING-
 `(1) LIMITATION ON DEDUCTIBLES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as permitted under subparagraph (B), a qualified
 employer plan may not require a deductible amount for benefits provided with
 respect to any plan year beginning in a calendar year before 1994 that is--
 `(i) in the case of a basic health plan--
 `(I) with respect to any eligible employee with no family member enrolled
 under such plan, less than $200 or more than $400; and
 `(II) with respect to any eligible employee with a family member enrolled
 under such plan, less than $400 or more than $800; and
 `(ii) in the case of a basic coordinated care plan--
 `(I) with respect to any eligible employee with no family member enrolled
 under such plan, more than $100 ($400 with respect to items and services
 provided outside the network); and
 `(II) with respect to any eligible employee with a family member enrolled
 under such plan, more than $200 ($800 with respect to items and services
 provided outside the network).
 `(B) DRUG DEDUCTIBLE- A qualified employer plan may provide for a separate
 deductible amount for the provision of outpatient prescription drugs,
 biologicals, and insulin not greater than 2 times the limitation amount
 under subparagraph (A) applicable to the eligible employee.
 `(2) LIMITATION ON COPAYMENTS AND COINSURANCE- A qualified employer plan
 may not require the payment of any copayment or coinsurance for an item
 or service--
 `(A) in an amount that is--
 `(i) in the case of a basic health plan, less than 20 percent, or more than
 25 percent, of the amount payable for the item or service under the plan; and
 `(ii) in the case of a basic coordinated care plan, more than 20 percent
 of the amount payable for the item or service under the plan; or
 `(B) after an eligible employee and family covered under the plan have
 incurred out-of-pocket expenses under the plan that are equal to the
 out-of-pocket limit (as defined in paragraph (3)) for a plan year.
 `(3) LIMITATION ON OUT-OF-POCKET EXPENSES-
 `(A) OUT-OF-POCKET EXPENSES DEFINED- As used in this section, the term
 `out-of-pocket expenses' means, with respect to an eligible employee in
 a plan year, amounts payable under the plan as deductibles, copayments,
 and coinsurance with respect to items and services provided under the
 plan and furnished in the plan year on behalf of the employee and family
 members covered under the plan.
 `(B) OUT-OF-POCKET LIMIT DEFINED- As used in this section, the term
 `out-of-pocket limit' means, in the case of a basic health plan or basic
 coordinated care plan, for a plan year beginning in a calendar year before
 1994, an amount that is--
 `(i) with respect to any eligible employee with no family member enrolled
 under such plan, not less than $1,000 nor more than $5,000; and
 `(ii) with respect to any eligible employee with a family member enrolled
 under such plan, not less than $2,000 nor more than $5,000.
 `(d) ADJUSTMENTS TO LIMITATIONS-
 `(1) INFLATION ADJUSTMENTS- For each calendar year after 1993, the dollar
 amounts described in paragraphs (1)(A) and (3)(B) of subsection (c) for
 the preceding calendar year shall be increased by the percentage increase
 in the wage index, as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, for
 the 12-month period ending on September 30 of such preceding calendar year.
 `(2) APPLICATION ON BASIS OF FAMILY STATUS- Except as provided by the
 Secretary, a qualified employer plan may, with respect to basic benefits,
 provide for premiums, deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance to be applied,
 and the monthly actuarial rate described in subsection (b)(1)(A)(ii) to
 be estimated, on the basis of the number of family members of an eligible
 employee.
 `(e) COST CONTAINMENT ARRANGEMENTS IN LIEU OF COST-SHARING AMOUNTS- A
 qualified employer plan shall be permitted to provide for lower employee
 cost-sharing amounts if the plan contains such cost containment arrangements
 as described by the Secretary.
 `(f) TREATMENT OF SUPPLEMENTAL COVERAGE-
 `(1) GENERAL RULE- Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing
 a qualified employer plan from providing for deductibles, coinsurance,
 and copayments or other restrictions with respect to supplemental benefits
 that are different from those permitted with respect to basic benefits.
 `(2) EXCEPTION FOR NON-OPTIONAL SUPPLEMENTAL BENEFITS- If a qualified
 employer plan is an enhanced health plan or an enhanced coordinated care
 plan and the eligible employee may not elect to forego the supplemental
 benefits, the plan--
 `(A) may not impose a premium, for such basic and supplemental benefits,
 that exceeds the premiums that may be imposed for the basic benefits, and
 `(B) shall assure that cost-sharing is not imposed with respect to basic
 benefits once the cost-sharing limit has been reached in a year with
 respect to all benefits.
`SEC. 2125. COORDINATION AND PORTABILITY OF HEALTH COVERAGE UNDER QUALIFIED
EMPLOYER PLANS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The requirements of this section are met if an employer
 plan meets the requirements of subsections (b) and (c).
 `(b) REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO COORDINATION- The requirements of this
 subsection are met if an employer plan provides for coordination of--
 `(1) enrollment and termination of enrollment among the qualified employer
 plans, the State plan under section 1902(a)(10)(G), and the program under
 title XVIII, and
 `(2) application of deductibles and limitations on cost-sharing among
 such plans,
in accordance with standards established by the Secretary consistent with
this part.
 `(c) REQUIREMENT OF NOTICES WITH RESPECT TO TERMINATION OF COVERAGE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The requirements of this subsection are met if an employer
 plan provides notice at the time an individual's coverage under the plan
 is terminated. Such notice shall be provided (in a form and manner and at
 a time specified by the Secretary) to--
 `(A) the individual (or in the case of a dependent, the eligible employee),
 and
 `(B) the State agency administering the State plan under section
 1902(a)(10)(G).
 `(2) NOTICES OF TERMINATION- Each notice of termination under paragraph
 (1) shall include--
 `(A) the effective date of the termination,
 `(B) the names and other identifying information of family members whose
 coverage is affected by the termination, and
 `(C) in the case of notice to the State, sufficient information to facilitate
 enrollment of the individuals affected under the State plan under section
 1902(a)(10)(G).
`SEC. 2126. USE OF UNIFORM CLAIMS FORMS.
 `The requirements of this section are met if an employer plan provides for
 submission of claims using uniform claims forms developed by the Secretary.
`Subpart 4--General Protections
`SEC. 2131. CONSUMER PROTECTIONS.
 `(a) COORDINATION AMONG PLANS- The Secretary shall provide for such standards
 as may be necessary to provide for the allocation of responsibility
 among qualified employer plans (including the State plan under section
 1902(a)(10)(G) and the program under title XVIII) in the case of--
 `(1) an inpatient hospital stay, or
 `(2) a single payment amount made for other services provided over a period
 of time,
that begins during the period of coverage under one qualified employer plan
and ends during a period of coverage under another qualified employer plan.
 `(b) PROTECTION AGAINST PROVIDER CLAIMS- In the case of a failure of a
 qualified employer plan to make payments with respect to basic benefits, an
 individual who is enrolled under the plan is not liable to any health care
 provider or practitioner with respect to the provision of such benefits
 for payments in excess of the amount for which the enrollee would have
 been liable if the plan were to have made payments in a timely manner.
`SEC. 2132. PREEMPTION OF CERTAIN STATE REQUIREMENTS.
 `(a) BENEFIT AND COVERAGE RULES- Effective as of January 1, 1993, no State
 shall establish or enforce any law or regulation that--
 `(1) requires the offering, as part of a qualified employer plan which
 is a basic health plan or a basic coordinated care plan, of any services,
 category of care, or services of any class or type of provider other than
 the basic benefits required to be provided under section 2121,
 `(2) specifies the individuals to be covered under such a qualified employer
 plan or the duration of such coverage, or
 `(3) requires a right of conversion from such a qualified employer plan
 to an individual basic health plan or basic coordinated care plan.
 `(b) COORDINATED CARE PLANS AND UTILIZATION REVIEW PROGRAMS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Effective as of January 1, 1993, with respect to any
 qualified employer plan which is a coordinated care plan, no requirement
 of any State law or regulation shall--
 `(A) prohibit or limit such coordinated care plan from including financial
 incentives for enrollees to use the services of participating providers;
 `(B) prohibit or limit such coordinated care plan from restricting coverage
 of services to those--
 `(i) provided by a participating provider; or
 `(ii) authorized by a designated participating provider;
 `(C) subject to paragraph (2)--
 `(i) restrict the amount of payment made by such coordinated care plan to
 participating providers for services provided to enrollees; or
 `(ii) restrict the ability of such coordinated care plan to pay participating
 providers for services provided to enrollees on a per-enrollee basis;
 `(D) prohibit or limit such coordinated care plan from restricting the
 location, number, type, or professional qualifications of participating
 providers;
 `(E) prohibit or limit such coordinated care plan from requiring that
 services be authorized by a primary care physician selected by the enrollee
 from a list of available participating providers;
 `(F) prohibit or limit the use of utilization review procedures or criteria
 by a qualified utilization review program or such coordinated care plan;
 `(G) require a qualified utilization review program or such coordinated
 care plan to make public utilization review procedures or criteria;
 `(H) prohibit or limit a qualified utilization review program or such
 coordinated care plan from determining the location or hours of operation
 of a utilization review, provided that emergency services furnished during
 the hours in which the utilization review program is not open are not
 subject to utilization review;
 `(I) require a qualified utilization review program or such coordinated
 care plan to pay providers for the expenses associated with responding to
 requests for information needed to conduct utilization review;
 `(J) restrict the amount of payment made to a qualified utilization review
 program or such coordinated care plan for the conduct of utilization review;
 `(K) restrict access by a qualified utilization review program or such
 coordinated care plan to medical information or personnel required to
 conduct utilization review;
 `(L) define utilization review as the practice of medicine or another
 health care profession; or
 `(M) require that utilization review be conducted--
 `(i) by a resident of the State in which the treatment is to be offered
 or by an individual licensed in such State, or
 `(ii) by a physician in any particular specialty or with any board certified
 specialty of the same medical specialty as the provider whose services
 are being rendered.
 `(2) EXCEPTIONS TO CERTAIN REQUIREMENTS-
 `(A) SUBPARAGRAPH (C)- Subparagraph (C) of paragraph (1) shall not
 apply where the amount of payments with respect to a block of services
 or providers is established under a statewide system applicable to all
 non-Federal payers with respect to such services or providers.
 `(B) SUBPARAGRAPHS (L) AND (M)- Nothing in subparagraphs (L) or (M)
 of paragraph (1) shall be construed as prohibiting a State from
 `(i) requiring that utilization review be conducted by a licensed health
 care professional, or
 `(ii) requiring that any appeal from such a review be made by a licensed
 physician or by a licensed physician in any particular specialty or with
 any board certified specialty of the same medical specialty as the provider
 whose services are being rendered.
 `(c) STATE DEFINED- In this section, the term `State' means the 50 States
 and the District of Columbia.
`Part B--Small Employer Purchasing Groups
`SEC. 2141. GRANTS TO SMALL EMPLOYER PURCHASING GROUPS.
 `(a) GRANT AUTHORITY- The Secretary may award grants to qualified small
 employer purchasing groups to assist such groups in paying the expenditures
 associated with the formation and initial operations of such groups.
 `(b) APPLICATION- To be eligible to receive a grant under this section,
 a qualified small employer purchasing group shall request such a grant as
 part of an application submitted by such group to the Secretary at such
 time, in such form, and containing such information, as the Secretary may
 require, including certification that such entity complies with all rules
 established by the State in which such entity is located, or in the absence
 of such rules, any rules established by the Secretary.
 `(c) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to award grants
 under this section, such sums as may be necessary.
`SEC. 2142. RULES OF OPERATION.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT OF RULES- Each State shall establish, not later than
 October 1, 1992, or the date specified by subsection (c), rules governing
 the approval of the operation of an entity as a small employer purchasing
 group in such State. Such rules shall require that--
 `(1) the entity is administered solely under the authority and control of
 its member employers;
 `(2) the membership of the entity consists solely of small employers (except
 that an employer member of the group may retain its membership in the group
 if, after the State determines that the entity meets the requirements of
 this subsection, the employer member ceases to be a small employer);
 `(3) with respect to the State in which its members are located, the entity
 consists of not fewer than 10 employers;
 `(4) the employer plans with respect to the employer members of the entity
 comply with applicable State laws and part A of this title;
 `(5) each small employer in the geographic area covered by the program of
 the entity may become a member employer of the entity;
 `(6) each enrollee in the program of the entity may enroll with any
 participating carrier that offers qualified employer plans in the geographic
 area in which the enrollee resides;
 `(7) such entity will be a private, profit or nonprofit entity; and
 `(8) the entity file an application for approval with the State.
 `(b) APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL- Each entity desiring approval to operate as
 a small employer purchasing group in any State shall submit an application
 to such State. Such application shall describe--
 `(1) the details of the group program and the participation requirements
 for small employers;
 `(2) the program goals for reducing the price of health insurance for
 small employers and increasing insurance coverage among employees of small
 employers and their dependents;
 `(3) the approaches proposed for enlisting participation by insurers and
 small employers; and
 `(4) relevant financial information, including plan sponsor fees, the
 procedure for the collection by the group of employer and employee premiums
 from employers, and the use of prepayment of premiums or other mechanisms
 to assure that premium payments will be made for coverage.
 `(c) EXCEPTION TO EFFECTIVE DATE OF RULES- In the case of a State--
 `(1) requiring State legislation (other than legislation appropriating
 funds) in order to establish the rules described in subsection (a), and
 `(2) having a legislature which does not meet in 1992 in a legislative
 session in which such legislation may be considered,
the date specified in this subsection is the first day of the first calendar
quarter beginning after the close of the first regular legislative session of
the State legislature that begins on or after January 1, 1993. For purposes of
the previous sentence, in the case of a State that has a 2-year legislative
session, each year of such session shall be deemed to be a separate regular
legislative session of the State legislature.
 `(d) ABSENCE OF STATE ACTION- In the absence of any State action to establish
 rules described in subsection (a) by the date specified in such subsection,
 the Secretary shall promulgate rules, including application forms, for
 the approval of entities to operate as small employer purchasing groups
 in such State.
`SEC. 2143. FREEDOM OF CONTRACT.
 `Nothing in this subpart shall be construed to prohibit a participating
 carrier from offering health care insurance coverage to small employers that
 are not participating in the program of a small employer purchasing group.
`SEC. 2144. SMALL EMPLOYER DEFINED.
 `In this title, the term `small employer' means, with respect to a calendar
 year, an employer that normally employs less than 100 eligible employees
 on a typical business day. For the purposes of this paragraph, the term
 `employee' includes a self-employed individual.
`Part C--Small Employer Health Insurance Reform
`SEC. 2151. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR HEALTH INSURANCE PLANS ISSUED TO SMALL
EMPLOYERS.
 `(a) REGISTRATION WITH APPLICABLE REGULATORY AUTHORITY- Each insurer
 shall register, not later than January 1, 1993, with the commissioner or
 superintendent of insurance or other authority responsible for regulation
 of health insurance for each State in which it issues or offers basic
 health plans or basic coordinated care plans to small employers.
 `(b) GUARANTEED ELIGIBILITY- No insurer may exclude from coverage any
 eligible employee, or the spouse or any dependent of the eligible employee,
 to whom coverage is made available by a small employer.
 `(c) GUARANTEED AVAILABILITY-
 `(1) STATE STANDARD-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- An insurer that offers a basic health plan or a basic
 coordinated care plan to small employers located in a State must meet--
 `(i) the availability standard of the State which requires that any insurer
 offering a basic health plan or a basic coordinated care plan to a small
 employer in the State offer the same plan to all other small employers in
 the State, or
 `(ii) if determined by the State to be in the best interests of the insured
 in such State, any other standard which insures such availability.
 `(B) ADOPTION OF STANDARDS-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Each State shall adopt a standard described in subparagraph
 (A) not later than January 1, 1993, or the date specified in clause (ii).
 `(ii) EXCEPTION TO EFFECTIVE DATE OF STANDARDS- In the case of a State--
 `(I) requiring State legislation (other than legislation appropriating
 funds) in order to adopt a standard described in subparagraph (A), and
 `(II) having a legislature which does not meet in 1992 in a legislative
 session in which such legislation may be considered,
the date specified in this clause is the first day of the first calendar
quarter beginning after the close of the first regular legislative session of
the State legislature that begins on or after January 1, 1993. For purposes of
the previous sentence, in the case of a State that has a 2-year legislative
session, each year of such session shall be deemed to be a separate regular
legislative session of the State legislature.
 `(iii) ABSENCE OF STATE ACTION- In the absence of any State action to
 adopt a standard described in subparagraph (A) by the date specified in
 such subsection, the Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of the
 Treasury, shall develop requirements with respect to guaranteed availability
 to apply with respect to insurers located in such State.
 `(2) TREATMENT OF COORDINATED CARE ENTITIES-
 `(A) GEOGRAPHIC LIMITATIONS- A coordinated care entity may deny coverage
 under a basic coordinated care plan to a small employer whose employees
 are located outside the service area of the entity, but only if such denial
 is applied uniformly without regard to health status or insurability.
 `(B) SIZE LIMITS- A coordinated care entity may apply to the commissioner or
 superintendent of insurance or other authority responsible for regulation of
 health insurance for a State to cease enrolling new small employer groups in
 basic coordinated care plans (or in a geographic area served by such plans)
 if it can demonstrate that its financial or administrative capacity to
 serve previously enrolled groups and individuals (and additional individuals
 who will be expected to enroll because of affiliation with such previously
 enrolled groups) will be impaired if it is required to enroll new groups.
 `(3) GROUNDS FOR REFUSAL TO RENEW- An insurer may refuse to renew, or may
 terminate, a basic health plan or a basic coordinated care plan under this
 part only for--
 `(A) nonpayment of premiums,
 `(B) fraud or misrepresentation, or
 `(C) failure to maintain minimum participation rates.
 `(d) GUARANTEED RENEWABILITY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- An insurer shall ensure that a basic health plan or a
 basic coordinated care plan issued to a small employer be renewed, at the
 option of the small employer, unless the plan is terminated for a reason
 specified in paragraph (2) or in subsection (c)(3).
 `(2) TERMINATION OF SMALL EMPLOYER BUSINESS- An insurer is not required
 to renew a basic health plan or a basic coordinated care plan with respect
 to a small employer if the insurer--
 `(A) elects not to renew all of its basic health plans and basic coordinated
 care plans issued to small employers in a State; and
 `(B) provides notice to the commissioner or superintendent of insurance
 or other authority responsible for regulation of health insurance for such
 State and to each small employer covered under a plan of such termination
 at least 180 days before the date of expiration of the plan.
In the case of such a termination, the insurer may not provide for issuance of
any health insurance plan to a small employer in the State during the 5-year
period beginning on the date of termination of the last plan not so renewed.
 `(e) BASIC COORDINATED CARE OPTION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), if an insurer offers
 a basic coordinated care plan in a State or a geographic area within a State
 to employers that are not small employers, the insurer must offer such basic
 coordinated care plan to small employers in the State or geographic area.
 `(2) SIZE LIMITS- An insurer may cease enrolling new small employer groups
 in a basic coordinated care plan if it ceases to enroll any new employer
 groups in such plan.
`SEC. 2152. RATING PRACTICES.
 `(a) LIMITATIONS ON EXPERIENCE RATING-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), in establishing
 premium rates for basic health plans and basic coordinated care plans
 offered to small employers in a State, an insurer may use experience ratings.
 `(2) TOTAL CLAIMS EXCEEDING $10,000- An insurer offering basic health plans
 and basic coordinated care plans to small employers in a State must apply
 the amount by which total claims for the calendar year on a per employee
 basis exceed $10,000 across all small employer blocks of business of such
 insurer in such State.
 `(3) NONDISCRIMINATION- Each State shall promulgate such rules as are
 necessary to insure that rating practices of insurers in such State do
 not treat similarly situated employees differently.
 `(b) PUBLICATION OF RATES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Not later than April 1 of each year beginning with calendar
 year 1993, each insurer which issues or offers basic health plans and basic
 coordinated care plans to small employers in a State shall provide to the
 commissioner or superintendent of insurance or other authority responsible
 for regulation of health insurance for such State the average rates for
 such basic health plans and for such basic coordinated care plans charged
 by such issuer to small employer blocks of business in such State for the
 previous calendar year.
 `(2) PUBLICATION- Not later than July 1 of each year, each State shall
 publish a schedule of the average rates provided under paragraph (1).
 `(c) BLOCK OF BUSINESS DEFINED- In this section:
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), the term `block of
 business' means, with respect to an insurer, all of the small employers
 with either basic health plans or basic coordinated care plans issued by
 the insurer (as shown on the records of the insurer).
 `(2) DISTINCT GROUPS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to subparagraph (B), a distinct group of small
 employers with either basic health plans or basic coordinated care plans
 issued by an insurer may be treated as a block of business by such insurer
 if all of the plans in such group--
 `(i) are marketed and sold through individuals and organizations that do not
 participate in the marketing or sale of other distinct groups by the insurer,
 `(ii) have been acquired from another insurer as a distinct group, or
 `(iii) are provided through an association with membership of not less than
 10 small employers that has been formed for purposes other than obtaining
 health insurance.
 `(B) EXCEPTION ALLOWED- Except as provided in paragraph (3), an insurer
 may not establish more than one distinct group of small employers for each
 category specified in subparagraph (A).
 `(3) SPECIAL RULE- An insurer may establish up to 2 groups under
 each category in paragraph (1) or (2) to account for differences in
 characteristics (other than differences in plan benefits) of basic health
 plans and basic coordinated care plans that are expected to produce
 substantial variation in health care costs.
`SEC. 2153. STRICTER STATE STANDARDS PERMITTED.
 `Nothing in this subpart shall be construed as preventing any State from
 imposing--
 `(1) stricter requirements than those imposed by section 2151(d) and 2152, or
 `(2) requirements in addition to those imposed by this subpart,
on insurers which issue or offer basic health plans or basic coordinated
care plans to small employers.'.
SEC. 102. TAX PENALTIES ON NONCOMPLYING EMPLOYERS AND INSURERS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Chapter 43 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating
 to taxes on qualified pension plans, etc.) is amended by adding at the
 end thereof the following new sections:
`SEC. 4980C. FAILURE TO OFFER TO ENROLL ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEES IN QUALIFIED
EMPLOYER PLANS.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- There is hereby imposed a tax on the failure of any
 person to offer to enroll any eligible employee in a qualified employer
 plan under part A of title XXI of the Social Security Act.
 `(b) AMOUNT OF TAX-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The amount of the tax imposed by subsection (a) on any
 failure with respect to an eligible employee shall be $50 for each day in
 the noncompliance period with respect to such failure.
 `(2) NONCOMPLIANCE PERIOD- For purposes of this section, the term
 `noncompliance period' means, with respect to any failure, the period--
 `(A) beginning on the date such failure first occurs, and
 `(B) ending on the date such failure is corrected.
 `(3) CORRECTION- A failure of a person to offer to enroll any eligible
 employee in a qualified employer plan under part A of title XXI of the
 Social Security Act with respect to any eligible employee shall be treated
 as corrected if--
 `(A) such failure is retroactively undone to the extent possible, and
 `(B) the eligible employee is placed in a financial position which is as
 good as such employee would have been in had such failure not occurred.
For purposes of applying subparagraph (B), the eligible employee shall be
treated as if the employee had elected the most favorable coverage in light
of the expenses incurred since the failure first occurred.
 `(c) LIMITATIONS ON AMOUNT OF TAX-
 `(1) TAX NOT TO APPLY WHERE FAILURE NOT DISCOVERED EXERCISING REASONABLE
 DILIGENCE- No tax shall be imposed by subsection (a) on any failure during
 any period for which it is established to the satisfaction of the Secretary
 that none of the persons referred to in subsection (d) knew, or exercising
 reasonable diligence would have known, that such failure existed.
 `(2) TAX NOT TO APPLY TO FAILURES CORRECTED WITHIN 30 DAYS- No tax shall
 be imposed by subsection (a) on any failure if--
 `(A) such failure was due to reasonable cause and not to willful neglect, and
 `(B) such failure is corrected during the 30-day period beginning on
 the first date any of the persons referred to in subsection (d) knew, or
 exercising reasonable diligence would have known, that such failure existed.
 `(3) WAIVER BY SECRETARY- In the case of a failure which is due to reasonable
 cause and not to willful neglect, the Secretary may waive part or all of
 the tax imposed by subsection (a) to the extent that the payment of such
 tax would be excessive relative to the failure involved.
 `(d) LIABILITY FOR TAX-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the
 following shall be liable for the tax imposed by subsection (a) on a failure:
 `(A) In the case of a qualified employer plan other than a multiemployer
 plan, the employer.
 `(B) In the case of a multiemployer plan, the plan.
 `(C) Each person who is responsible (other than in a capacity as an employee)
 for administering or providing benefits under the qualified employer plan
 and whose act or failure to act caused (in whole or in part) the failure.
 `(2) SPECIAL RULES FOR PERSONS DESCRIBED IN PARAGRAPH (1)(C)- A person
 described in subparagraph (C) (and not in subparagraphs (A) and (B))
 of paragraph (1) shall be liable for the tax imposed by subsection (a)
 on any failure only if such person assumed (under a legally enforceable
 written agreement) responsibility for the performance of the act to which
 the failure relates.
 `(e) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section, the terms `eligible employee'
 and `qualified employer plan' have the meanings given such terms by sections
 2103(b)(1) and 2111 of the Social Security Act, respectively.
`SEC. 4980D. FAILURE TO SATISFY CERTAIN STANDARDS FOR SMALL EMPLOYER HEALTH
INSURANCE COVERAGE.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- In the case of any person issuing a qualified employer
 plan to a small employer, there is hereby imposed a tax on the failure
 of such person to meet at any time during any taxable year the applicable
 requirements of part C of title XXI of the Social Security Act. The Secretary
 of Health and Human Services shall determine whether any person meets the
 requirements of such part.
 `(b) AMOUNT OF TAX-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The amount of tax imposed by subsection (a) by reason of
 1 or more failures during a taxable year shall be equal to 25 percent of
 the gross premiums received during such taxable year with respect to all
 qualified employer plans issued to small employers by the person on whom
 such tax is imposed.
 `(2) CONTROLLED GROUPS- For purposes of paragraph (1)--
 `(A) CONTROLLED GROUP OF CORPORATIONS- All corporations which are
 members of the same controlled group of corporations shall be treated as 1
 person. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term `controlled group
 of corporations' has the meaning given to such term by section 1563(a),
 except that--
 `(i) `more than 50 percent' shall be substituted for `at least 80 percent'
 each place it appears in section 1563(a)(1), and
 `(ii) the determination shall be made without regard to subsections (a)(4)
 and (e)(3)(C) of section 1563.
 `(B) PARTNERSHIPS, PROPRIETORSHIPS, ETC., WHICH ARE UNDER COMMON CONTROL-
 Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary, all trades or business
 (whether or not incorporated) which are under common control shall be
 treated as 1 person. The regulations prescribed under this subparagraph
 shall be based on principles similar to the principles which apply in the
 case of subparagraph (A).
 `(c) LIMITATION ON TAX-
 `(1) TAX NOT TO APPLY WHERE FAILURE NOT DISCOVERED EXERCISING REASONABLE
 DILIGENCE- No tax shall be imposed by subsection (a) with respect to any
 failure for which it is established to the satisfaction of the Secretary
 that the person on whom the tax is imposed did not know, and exercising
 reasonable diligence would not have known, that such failure existed.
 `(2) TAX NOT TO APPLY WHERE FAILURES CORRECTED WITHIN 30 DAYS- No tax
 shall be imposed by subsection (a) with respect to any failure if--
 `(A) such failure was due to reasonable cause and not to willful neglect, and
 `(B) such failure is corrected during the 30-day period beginning on the
 1st date any of the persons on whom the tax is imposed knew, or exercising
 reasonable diligence would have known, that such failure existed.
 `(3) WAIVER BY SECRETARY- In the case of a failure which is due to reasonable
 cause and not to willful neglect, the Secretary may waive part or all of
 the tax imposed by subsection (a) to the extent that the payment of such
 tax would be excessive relative to the failure involved.
 `(d) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) QUALIFIED EMPLOYER PLAN; SMALL EMPLOYER- The terms `qualified employer
 plan' and `small employer' have the meanings given such terms by sections
 2111 and 2144 of the Social Security Act, respectively.
 `(2) PERSON- The term `person' means any person that offers a qualified
 employer plan to a small employer, including a licensed insurance company, a
 prepaid hospital or medical service plan, a health maintenance organization,
 or in States which have distinct insurance licensure requirements, a
 multiple employer welfare arrangement.'.
 (c) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for such chapter 43 is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new items:
`Sec. 4980C. Failure to offer to enroll eligible employees in qualified
employer plans.
`Sec. 4980D. Failure to satisfy certain standards for small employer health
insurance coverage.'.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall take effect
 on or after January 1, 1993.
TITLE II--HEALTH CARE COVERAGE FOR INDIVIDUALS NOT OTHERWISE COVERED UNDER
QUALIFIED EMPLOYER PLANS OR MEDICARE
SEC. 201. EXPANDED MEDICAID HEALTH CARE COVERAGE OF INDIVIDUALS NOT OTHERWISE
COVERED BY QUALIFIED EMPLOYER PLANS OR MEDICARE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1902(a)(10) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of subparagraph (E);
 (2) by inserting `and' at the end of subparagraph (F); and
 (3) by inserting after subparagraph (F) the following new subparagraph:
 `(G) subject to section 1916(g), for making medical assistance available,
 including at least the care and services listed in paragraphs (1) through
 (5), (17), and (21), to uninsured individuals described in section 1905(t);'.
 (b) UNINSURED INDIVIDUALS DEFINED- Section 1905 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d)
 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(t) The term `uninsured individual' means an individual--
 `(1) who is not otherwise eligible under this title or title XVIII of
 this Act;
 `(2) who is not eligible for coverage under a qualified employer plan
 (described in part A of title XXI of this Act); and
 `(3) whose income (as determined under section 1612 for purposes of the
 supplemental security income program) does not exceed 240 percent of the
 official poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget
 and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget
 Reconciliation Act of 1981) applicable to a family of the size involved.'.
 (c) LONG-TERM CARE COVERAGE EXCEPTED- Section 1902(a)(10) of such Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)) as amended by subsection (a), is amended in the
 matter following subparagraph (G)--
 (1) by striking `; and (XI)' and inserting `(XI)';
 (2) by striking `, and (XI)' and inserting `(XII)'; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new clause: `and (XIII) the medical
 assistance made available to an individual described in section 1905(t)
 who is eligible for medical assistance only because of subparagraph (G)
 shall not include medical assistance for long-term care services (as
 determined by the Secretary);'.
 (d) STATE FLEXIBILITY IN PROVIDING BENEFITS AND COVERAGE- Title XIX of
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) is amended--
 (1) in section 1902(a)(10) (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)) as amended by subsection
 (c)--
 (A) by striking `and (XIII)' and inserting `(XIII)'; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new clause: `and (XIV) the medical
 assistance made available to an individual described in section 1905(t)
 may be made available to such individuals without regard to the requirements
 of paragraph (1) or subparagraph (B) of this paragraph;'; and
 (2) in section 1905(a)(22) (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)(22)), by striking `medical
 care' and inserting `medical care (including, at the option of a State,
 payment of premiums for enrollment of individuals described in subsection
 (t) in private insurance plans or coordinated care plans (as defined in
 section 2112(5) of title XXI of this Act) or other insurance plans as
 approved by the Secretary)'.
 (f) PREMIUMS AND COST SHARING- Section 1916 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396o)
 is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b), by striking `(A) or (E)' and inserting `(A), (E)
 or (G)'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(g) The State plan shall provide that in the case of uninsured individuals
 described in section 1905(t)--
 `(1) whose family income (as determined under paragraph (3) of that section)
 does not exceed 100 percent of the official poverty line referred to in
 that paragraph, there may be imposed premiums, deductibles or other cost
 sharing with respect to such individuals as long as such requirements are
 nominal in amount (as determined by the Secretary); and
 `(2) whose family income (as determined under paragraph (3) of that section)
 is greater than 100 percent of the official poverty line referred to in
 that paragraph, there may be imposed premiums, deductibles or other cost
 sharing with respect to such individuals on a sliding-scale basis based
 on the individuals' level of income as long as such requirements do not
 exceed the limitations for such requirements specified in section 2124 of
 part A of title XXI of this Act.'.
 (g) INCREASE IN FEDERAL PAYMENT TO STATES ENROLLING INDIVIDUALS IN
 COORDINATED CARE PLANS- Section 1905(b) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(b)) is
 amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: `Notwithstanding the
 first sentence of this subsection, the Federal medical assistance percentage
 shall be increased by 5 percent with respect to amounts expended as medical
 assistance with respect to individuals described in section 1905(t) who
 are enrolled in coordinated care plans (as defined in section 2112(5)
 of title XXI of this Act).'.
 (h) EFFECTIVE DATE- (1) The amendments made by this section apply (except
 as provided under paragraph (2)) to payments under title XIX of the Social
 Security Act for calendar quarters beginning on or after January 1, 1993,
 without regard to whether or not final regulations to carry out such
 amendments have been promulgated by such date.
 (2) In the case of a State plan for medical assistance under title XIX of
 the Social Security Act which the Secretary of Health and Human Services
 determines requires State legislation (other than legislation authorizing
 or appropriating funds) in order for the plan to meet the additional
 requirements imposed by the amendments made by subsection (a), the State
 plan shall not be regarded as failing to comply with the requirements
 of such title solely on the basis of its failure to meet this additional
 requirement before the first day of the first calendar quarter beginning
 after the close of the first regular session of the State legislature that
 begins after the date of the enactment of this Act. For purposes of the
 previous sentence, in the case of a state that has a 2-year legislative
 session, each year of such session shall be deemed to be a separate regular
 session of the State legislature.
SEC. 202. PERMITTING BUY-IN TO MEDICARE FOR CERTAIN UNINSURED INDIVIDUALS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1818(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395i-2(a)(1)) is amended by inserting `(A)' after `(1)' and by
 adding at the end `or (B) has attained the age of 55 but has not attained
 the age of 65 and is not otherwise eligible under a qualified employer
 plan described in part A of title XXI of this Act,'.
 (b) BUY-IN UNDER PART A THROUGH PAYMENT OF PREMIUMS OF FULL BENEFIT COSTS-
 Section 1818(d) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-2(d)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by inserting `and individuals described in subsection
 (a)(1)(B)' after `individuals age 65 and over'; and
 (2) in paragraph (3), by inserting `and individuals described in subsection
 (a)(1)(B)' after `individuals age 65 and over'.
 (c) BUY-IN UNDER PART B THROUGH PAYMENT OF PREMIUMS OF FULL BENEFIT COSTS-
 Section 1839(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i(a)) is amended by adding at
 the end the following new paragraph:
 `(5) The Secretary shall, during September of 1992, and of each year
 thereafter, determine and promulgate the monthly actuarial rate which shall
 be applicable for the succeeding calendar year for individuals described
 in section 1818(a)(1)(B). Such actuarial rate shall be the amount the
 Secretary estimates to be necessary so that the aggregate amount for such
 calendar year with respect to such individuals and enrollees age 65 and older
 will equal 100 percent of the total of the benefits and administrative
 costs which the Secretary estimates will be payable from the Federal
 Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund for services performed and
 related administrative costs incurred in such calendar year with respect
 to such individuals and such enrollees. In calculating the actuarial rate,
 the Secretary shall include an appropriate amount for a contingency margin.
 Any amount determined under the preceding sentence which is not a multiple
 of $1 shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $1, or, if a multiple
 of 50 cents but not a multiple of $1, to the next higher multiple of $1.'.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 coverage under parts A and B for months beginning on or after January
 1, 1993.
TITLE III--HEALTH CARE ACCESS--TAX PROVISIONS
SEC. 301. REFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR SMALL BUSINESS HEALTH CARE COSTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to refundable credits) is amended
 by redesignating section 35 as section 36 and by inserting after section
 34 the following new section:
`SEC. 35. CREDIT FOR SMALL BUSINESS HEALTH CARE COSTS.
 `(a) ALLOWANCE OF CREDIT- In the case of an eligible small employer, there
 shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this subtitle for
 the taxable year an amount equal to 50 percent of the qualified health
 care costs paid by such employer during the taxable year.
 `(b) DEFINITIONS AND SPECIAL RULES- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) QUALIFIED HEALTH CARE COSTS- The term `qualified health care costs'
 means the excess of--
 `(A) the amounts paid by the eligible small employer for health care
 coverage or benefits of its eligible employees for the taxable year, over
 `(B) 5 percent of the wages paid or incurred with respect to such employees
 for such taxable year.
 `(2) ELIGIBLE SMALL EMPLOYER-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `eligible small employer' means any person--
 `(i) which, on an average business day during the preceding taxable year,
 had more than 1 but less than 100 eligible employees, and
 `(ii) at least 50 percent of the eligible employees of which during the
 taxable year received health care coverage.
 `(B) AGGREGATION RULES- All members of the same controlled group of
 corporations (within the meaning of section 52(a)) and all persons under
 common control (within the meaning of section 52(b)) shall be treated as
 1 person.
 `(3) ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEE- The term `eligible employee' means an employee who--
 `(A) with respect to an eligible small employer, is reasonably expected to
 perform for that employer on a weekly basis at least 25 hours of service
 and on a yearly basis at least 16 weeks of service, and
 `(B) does not have any health care coverage or benefits other than that
 provided by the eligible small employer.
The term `eligible employee' shall not include a self-employed individual
as defined in section 401(c)(1).
 `(4) WAGES- The term `wages' has the meaning given such term by section
 3121(a) (determined without regard to dollar limitation contained in
 such section).
 `(c) COORDINATION WITH ADVANCE PAYMENTS OF CREDIT- Rules similar to the
 rules of subsection (g) of section 32 shall apply to any credit to which
 this section applies.
 `(d) REGULATIONS- The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may
 be necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.'.
 (b) ADVANCE PAYMENT OF CREDIT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Chapter 77 of such Code is amended by inserting after
 section 7523 the following new section:
`SEC. 7524. ADVANCE PAYMENT OF CREDIT FOR SMALL BUSINESS HEALTH CARE COSTS.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- The Secretary of the Treasury shall make advance payments
 of refunds to which eligible taxpayers are entitled by reason of section 35.
 `(b) ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER- For purposes of this section, the term `eligible
 taxpayer' means, with respect to any taxable year, any taxpayer if the
 taxpayer furnishes, at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may
 prescribe, to the Secretary such information as the Secretary may require
 in order to--
 `(1) determine whether the taxpayer will be entitled to a refund by reason
 of section 35 for the taxable year, and
 `(2) estimate the amount of qualified health care costs of the taxpayer
 for such taxable year.
 `(c) EMPLOYMENT TAX PAYMENTS OFFSET IN LIEU OF DIRECT PAYMENTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- An eligible taxpayer may, in lieu of receiving payments
 under subsection (a) from the Secretary, reduce such taxpayer's employment
 tax payments by an amount equal to the payments under subsection (a).
 `(2) EMPLOYMENT TAX PAYMENTS- For purposes of this subsection, the term
 `employment tax payments' means payments made of--
 `(A) amounts required to be deducted and withheld under section 3401
 (relating to wage withholding),
 `(B) amounts required to be deducted under section 3102 (relating to FICA
 employee taxes), and
 `(C) amounts of taxes imposed under section 3111 (relating to FICA employer
 taxes).
 `(3) TREATMENT OF REDUCED PAYMENTS- For purposes of this title, any reduction
 of an eligible taxpayer's employment tax payments shall be treated as if
 such taxpayer had paid to the Secretary, on the day on which wages are
 paid to such taxpayer's employees, an amount equal to such reduction.'.
 (c) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- Paragraph (2) of section 1324(b) of title 31,
 United States Code, is amended by inserting before the period `or from
 section 35 of such Code'.
 (d) CLERICAL AMENDMENTS-
 (1) The table sections for subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter
 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 35 and
 inserting the following:
`Sec. 35. Credit for small business health care costs.
`Sec. 36. Overpayments of tax.'.
 (2) The table sections for chapter 77 of such Code is amended by inserting
 after the item relating to section 7523 the following new item:
`Sec. 7524. Advance payment of credit for small business health care costs.'.
 (e) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1992.
SEC. 302. HEALTH INSURANCE CREDIT DOUBLED TO ASSIST LOW-INCOME EMPLOYEES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subparagraph (A) of section 32(b)(2) of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to health insurance credit) is amended--
 (1) by striking `6 percent' in clause (i) and inserting `12 percent', and
 (2) by striking `4.285 percent' in clause (ii) and inserting `8.57 percent'.
 (b) ADVANCE REFUNDING OF CREDIT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subsection (a) of section 3507 of such Code (relating to
 advance payment of earned income credit) is amended by striking `equal
 to such employee's earned income advance amount.' and inserting `equal to
 the sum of such employee's--
 `(1) earned income advance amount, plus
 `(2) health insurance advance amount.'
 (2) ELIGIBILITY CERTIFICATE- Section 3507(b) of such Code (relating to
 earned income eligibility certificate) is amended by striking `and at the
 end of paragraph (2), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3)
 and inserting `, and', and by inserting after paragraph (3) the following
 new paragraph:
 `(4) estimates the amount of health insurance costs (within the meaning
 of section 32(b)(2)(B)) of the employee for the taxable year.'
 (3) HEALTH INSURANCE ADVANCE AMOUNT- Section 3507 of such Code is amended
 by redesignating subsections (d) and (e) as subsections (e) and (f),
 respectively, and by inserting after subsection (c) the following new
 subsection:
 `(d) HEALTH INSURANCE ADVANCE AMOUNT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this title, the term `health insurance
 advance amount' means, with respect to any payroll period, the amount
 determined--
 `(A) on the basis of the employee's wages from the employer for such period,
 `(B) on the basis of the employee's estimated health insurance costs
 included in the earned income eligibility certificate, and
 `(C) in accordance with tables provided by the Secretary.
 `(2) ADVANCE AMOUNT TABLES- The tables referred to in paragraph (1)(C)
 shall be similar in form to the tables prescribed under section 3402 and,
 to the maximum extent feasible, shall be coordinated with such tables and
 the tables prescribed under subsection (c).'
 (4) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (A) Section 3507(e) of such Code (as so redesignated) is amended--
 (i) by striking `earned income advance payments' in paragraph (2) and
 inserting `advance payments under subsection (a)', and
 (ii) by inserting `and health insurance advance amounts' after `amounts'
 in paragraph (3).
 (B) Section 7524(c)(2) of such Code (as added by section 301) is amended
 by striking `section 3507(d)(2)(B)' and inserting `section 3507(e)(2)(B)'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1992.
SEC. 303. REPEAL OF EITC INTERACTIONS.
 (a) REPEAL OF INTERACTION WITH MEDICAL EXPENSE DEDUCTION- Section 213
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to medical, dental, etc.,
 expenses) is amended by striking subsection (f).
 (b) REPEAL OF INTERACTION WITH DEDUCTION FOR HEALTH INSURANCE COSTS OF
 SELF-EMPLOYED- Paragraph (3) of section 162(l) of such Code is amended to
 read as follows:
 `(3) COORDINATION WITH MEDICAL DEDUCTION- Any amount paid by a taxpayer for
 insurance to which paragraph (1) applies shall not be taken into account
 in computing the amount allowable to the taxpayer as a deduction under
 section 213(a).'
 (c) REPEAL OF INTERACTION WITH DEPENDENT CARE CREDIT- Subparagraph (D)
 of section 32(b)(1) of such Code is amended by striking the last sentence.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1992.
SEC. 304. DEDUCTIBILITY FOR SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Paragraph (1) of section 162(l) of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (relating to special rules for health insurance costs of
 self-employed individuals) is amended by striking out `25 percent of'.
 (b) DEDUCTION MADE PERMANENT- Section 162(l) of such Code is amended by
 striking out paragraph (6).
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1992.
TITLE IV--ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS AND REPORT
SEC. 401. DEVELOPMENT AND APPLICATION OF UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.
 Part A of title XI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1101 et seq.) is
 amended by adding at the end the following new section:
`UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
 `SEC. 1144. The Secretary shall to the extent practicable, by no later than
 January 1, 1994, develop and implement a universal health identification
 card, uniform claims form and reporting standards to be utilized under
 titles XVIII, XIX, and XXI of this Act.'.
SEC. 402. ADDITIONAL FUNDING FOR OUTCOMES RESEARCH AND PRACTICE GUIDELINES.
 (a) EXTENSION AND EXPANSION OF INITIAL GUIDELINES AND STANDARDS-
 Subparagraph (A) of section 1142(a)(3) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1320b-12(a)(3)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `January 1, 1991' and inserting `January 1, 1993', and
 (2) by striking clause (i)(I) and inserting the following:
 `(i)(I) account for a significant portion of national health expenditures
 (including expenditures under titles XVIII and XIX); and'.
 (b) AMENDMENTS TO THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT- Section 1142(i) of the Social
 Security Act is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), to read as follows:
 `(1) IN GENERAL- There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out
 this section--
 `(A) $175,000,000 for fiscal year 1992;
 `(B) $225,000,000 for fiscal year 1993; and
 `(C) $275,000,000 for fiscal year 1994.'; and
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking out `70 percent' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `50 percent'.
SEC. 403. ANNUAL REPORT ON HEALTH CARE.
 The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall not later than January
 15 of each year beginning with calendar year 1994, submit a report to the
 Committee on Finance of the Senate and the Committee on Ways and Means
 and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives
 providing information (including recommendations to address problems
 identified) with respect to--
 (1) access to health care services including the effects on access of--
 (A) patterns of utilization;
 (B) supply and distribution of services and providers; and
 (C) demographic changes;
 (2) sources of significantly changing health care costs;
 (3) the effects on costs of--
 (A) utilization by service, region, provider type and payer;
 (B) supplies, labor, capital, and new and emerging technology;
 (C) State and private efforts to contain such costs; and
 (D) outcomes research and practice guidelines; and
 (4) such other matters as the Secretary may consider appropriate.