S 5 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 5
To grant employees family and temporary medical leave under certain
circumstances, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
January 14 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1991
Mr. DODD (for himself, Mr. KENNEDY, Mr. PACKWOOD, Mr. MITCHELL, Mr. JEFFORDS,
Ms. MIKULSKI, Mr. HATFIELD, Mr. METZENBAUM, Mr. D'AMATO, Mr. DECONCINI,
Mr. PELL, Mr. SIMON, Mr. ADAMS, Mr. BRADLEY, Mr. MOYNIHAN, Mr. KERRY,
Mr. INOUYE, Mr. BURDICK, Mr. BIDEN, Mr. ROCKEFELLER, Mr. GORE, Mr. WIRTH,
Mr. LIEBERMAN, Mr. LAUTENBERG, Mr. REID, Mr. SARBANES, Mr. AKAKA, Mr. BINGAMAN,
Mr. CRANSTON, Mr. DASCHLE, Mr. EXON, Mr. HARKIN, Mr. RIEGLE, and Mr. BRYAN)
introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the
Committee on Labor and Human Resources
A BILL
To grant employees family and temporary medical leave under certain
circumstances, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Family and Medical Leave
 Act of 1991'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS-
Section 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings and purposes.
TITLE I--GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR LEAVE
Sec. 101. Definitions.
Sec. 102. Leave requirement.
Sec. 103. Certification.
Sec. 104. Employment and benefits protection.
Sec. 105. Prohibited acts.
Sec. 106. Administrative enforcement.
Sec. 107. Enforcement by civil action.
Sec. 108. Investigative authority.
Sec. 109. Relief.
Sec. 110. Special rules concerning employees of local educational agencies
and private elementary and secondary schools.
Sec. 111. Notice.
Sec. 112. Regulations.
TITLE II--LEAVE FOR CIVIL SERVICE EMPLOYEES
Sec. 201. Leave requirement.
TITLE III--COMMISSION ON LEAVE
Sec. 301. Establishment.
Sec. 302. Duties.
Sec. 303. Membership.
Sec. 304. Compensation.
Sec. 305. Powers.
Sec. 306. Termination.
TITLE IV--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sec. 401. Effect on other laws.
Sec. 402. Effect on existing employment benefits.
Sec. 403. Encouragement of more generous leave policies.
Sec. 404. Effective dates.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
 (a) FINDINGS- Congress finds that--
 (1) the number of single-parent households and two-parent households in
 which the single parent or both parents work is increasing significantly;
 (2) it is important for the development of children and the family unit
 that fathers and mothers be able to participate in early childrearing and
 the care of family members who have serious health conditions;
 (3) the lack of employment policies to accommodate working parents can
 force individuals to choose between job security and parenting;
 (4) there is inadequate job security for employees who have serious health
 conditions that prevent them from working for temporary periods;
 (5) due to the nature of the roles of men and women in our society,
 the primary responsibility for family caretaking often falls on women,
 and such responsibility affects the working lives of women more than it
 affects the working lives of men; and
 (6) employment standards that apply to one gender only have serious potential
 for encouraging employers to discriminate against employees and applicants
 for employment who are of that gender.
 (b) PURPOSES- It is the purpose of this Act--
 (1) to balance the demands of the workplace with the needs of families,
 to promote the stability and economic security of families, and to promote
 national interests in preserving family integrity;
 (2) to entitle employees to take reasonable leave for medical reasons,
 for the birth or adoption of a child, and for the care of a child, spouse,
 or parent who has a serious health condition;
 (3) to accomplish the purposes described in paragraphs (1) and (2) in a
 manner that accommodates the legitimate interests of employers;
 (4) to accomplish the purposes described in paragraphs (1) and (2) in a
 manner that, consistent with the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth
 Amendment, minimizes the potential for employment discrimination on the
 basis of sex by ensuring generally that leave is available for eligible
 medical reasons (including maternity-related disability) and for compelling
 family reasons, on a gender-neutral basis; and
 (5) to promote the goal of equal employment opportunity for women and men,
 pursuant to such clause.
TITLE I--GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR LEAVE
SEC. 101. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this title:
 (1) COMMERCE- The terms `commerce' and `industry or activity affecting
 commerce' mean any activity, business, or industry in commerce or in which
 a labor dispute would hinder or obstruct commerce or the free flow of
 commerce, and include `commerce' and any `industry affecting commerce',
 as defined in paragraphs (3) and (1), respectively, of section 120 of
 the Labor Management Relations Act, 1947 (29 U.S.C. 142 (3) and (1)).
 (2) ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEE-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The term `eligible employee' means any `employee', as defined
 in section 3(e) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 203(e)),
 who has been employed by the employer with respect to whom leave is sought
 under section 102 for at least--
 (i) 1,000 hours of service during the previous 12-month period; and
 (ii) 12 months.
 (B) EXCLUSIONS- The term `eligible employee' does not include--
 (i) any Federal officer or employee covered under subchapter V of chapter
 63 of title 5, United States Code (as added by title II); or
 (ii) any employee of an employer who is employed at a worksite at which such
 employer employs less than 50 employees if the total number of employees
 employed by that employer within 75 miles of that worksite is less than 50.
 (3) EMPLOY; STATE- The terms `employ' and `State' have the same meanings
 given such terms in subsections (g) and (c), respectively, of section 3
 of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 203(g) and (c)).
 (4) EMPLOYEE- The term `employee' means any individual employed by an
 employer.
 (5) EMPLOYER-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The term `employer'--
 (i) means any person engaged in commerce or in any industry or activity
 affecting commerce who employs 50 or more employees for each working day
 during each of 20 or more calendar workweeks in the current or preceding
 calendar year;
 (ii) includes--
 (I) any person who acts, directly or indirectly, in the interest of an
 employer to any of the employees of such employer; and
 (II) any successor in interest of an employer; and
 (iii) includes any `public agency', as defined in section 3(x) of the Fair
 Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 203(x)).
 (B) PUBLIC AGENCY- For purposes of subparagraph (A)(iii), a public agency
 shall be considered to be a person engaged in commerce or in an industry
 or activity affecting commerce.
 (6) EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS- The term `employment benefits' means all benefits
 provided or made available to employees by an employer, including group
 life insurance, health insurance, disability insurance, sick leave,
 annual leave, educational benefits, and pensions, regardless of whether
 such benefits are provided by a policy or practice of an employer or
 through an `employee welfare benefit plan', as defined in section 3(3)
 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(1)).
 (7) HEALTH CARE PROVIDER- The term `health care provider' means--
 (A) a doctor of medicine or osteopathy that is legally authorized to
 practice medicine and surgery by the State in which the doctor performs
 such function or action; or
 (B) any other person determined by the Secretary to be capable of providing
 health care services.
 (8) PARENT- The term `parent' means the biological parent of the child or
 an individual who stood in loco parentis to a child when the child was a
 son or daughter.
 (9) PERSON- The term `person' has the same meaning given such term in
 section 3(a) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 203(a)).
 (10) REDUCED LEAVE SCHEDULE- The term `reduced leave schedule' means leave
 scheduled for fewer than the usual number of hours per workweek, or hours
 per workday, of an employee.
 (11) SECRETARY- The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Labor.
 (12) SERIOUS HEALTH CONDITION- The term `serious health condition' means an
 illness, injury, impairment, or physical or mental condition that involves--
 (A) inpatient care in a hospital, hospice, or residential medical care
 facility; or
 (B) continuing treatment or continuing supervision by a health care provider.
 (13) SON OR DAUGHTER- The term `son or daughter' means a biological, adopted,
 or foster child, a stepchild, a legal ward, or a child of a person standing
 in loco parentis, who is--
 (A) under 18 years of age; or
 (B) 18 years of age or older and incapable of self-care because of a mental
 or physical disability.
SEC. 102. LEAVE REQUIREMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) ENTITLEMENT TO LEAVE- Subject to section 103, an eligible employee
 shall be entitled to 12 workweeks of leave during any 12-month period--
 (A) because of the birth of a son or daughter of the employee;
 (B) because of the placement of a son or daughter with the employee for
 adoption or foster care;
 (C) to care for the son, daughter, spouse, or parent of the employee who
 has a serious health condition; or
 (D) because of a serious health condition that makes the employee unable
 to perform the functions of the position of such employee.
 (2) EXPIRATION OF ENTITLEMENT- The entitlement to leave under subparagraphs
 (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) shall expire at the end of the 12-month period
 beginning on the date of the birth or placement involved.
 (3) INTERMITTENT LEAVE- Leave under subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph
 (1) shall not be taken by an employee intermittently unless the employee
 and the employer of the employee agree otherwise. Subject to subsection
 (e), leave under subparagraph (C) or (D) of paragraph (1) may be taken
 intermittently when medically necessary.
 (b) REDUCED LEAVE- On agreement between the employer and the employee,
 leave under subsection (a) may be taken on a reduced leave schedule. Such
 reduced leave schedule shall not result in a reduction in the total amount
 of leave to which such employee is entitled.
 (c) UNPAID LEAVE PERMITTED- Except as provided in subsection (d), leave
 under subsection (a) may consist of unpaid leave.
 (d) RELATIONSHIP TO PAID LEAVE-
 (1) UNPAID LEAVE- If an employer provides paid leave for fewer than 12
 workweeks, the additional weeks of leave necessary to attain the 12 workweeks
 of leave required under this title may be provided without compensation.
 (2) SUBSTITUTION OF PAID LEAVE-
 (A) IN GENERAL- An eligible employee may elect, or an employer may require
 the employee, to substitute any of the accrued paid vacation leave, personal
 leave, or family leave of the employee for leave provided under subparagraph
 (A), (B), or (C) of subsection (a)(1) for any part of the 12-week period
 of such leave under such subparagraphs.
 (B) HEALTH CONDITION- An eligible employee may elect, or an employer may
 require the employee, to substitute any of the accrued paid vacation leave,
 personal leave, or medical or sick leave of the employee for leave provided
 under paragraph (1)(D) of subsection (a) for any part of the 12-week period
 of such leave under such paragraph, except that nothing in this Act shall
 require an employer to provide paid sick leave or paid medical leave in
 any situation in which such employer would not normally provide any such
 paid leave.
 (e) FORESEEABLE LEAVE-
 (1) REQUIREMENT OF NOTICE- In any case in which the necessity for leave
 under subparagraph (A) or (B) of subsection (a)(1) is foreseeable based
 on an expected birth or adoption, the eligible employee shall provide the
 employer with prior notice of such expected birth or adoption in a manner
 that is reasonable and practicable.
 (2) DUTIES OF EMPLOYEE- In any case in which the necessity for leave
 under subparagraph (C) or (D) of subsection (a)(1) is foreseeable based
 on planned medical treatment or supervision, the employee--
 (A) shall make a reasonable effort to schedule the treatment or supervision
 so as not to disrupt unduly the operations of the employer, subject to
 the approval of the health care provider of the employee or the health
 care provider of the son, daughter, spouse, or parent of the employee; and
 (B) shall provide the employer with prior notice of the treatment or
 supervision in a manner that is reasonable and practicable.
 (f) SPOUSES EMPLOYED BY THE SAME EMPLOYER- In any case in which a husband
 and wife entitled to leave under subsection (a) are employed by the same
 employer, the aggregate number of workweeks of leave to which both may
 be entitled may be limited to 12 workweeks during any 12-month period,
 if such leave is taken--
 (1) under subparagraph (A) or (B) of subsection (a)(1); or
 (2) to care for a sick parent under subparagraph (C) of such subsection.
SEC. 103. CERTIFICATION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- An employer may require that a claim for leave under
 subparagraph (C) or (D) of section 102(a)(1) be supported by a certification
 issued by the health care provider of the eligible employee or of the son,
 daughter, spouse, or parent of the employee, as appropriate. The employee
 shall provide a copy of such certification to the employer.
 (b) SUFFICIENT CERTIFICATION- Certification provided under subsection (a)
 shall be sufficient if it states--
 (1) the date on which the serious health condition commenced;
 (2) the probable duration of the condition;
 (3) the appropriate medical facts within the knowledge of the health care
 provider regarding the condition; and
 (4)(A) for purposes of leave under section 102(a)(1)(C), an estimate of the
 amount of time that the eligible employee is needed to care for the son,
 daughter, spouse, or parent; and
 (B) for purposes of leave under section 102(a)(1)(D), a statement that the
 employee is unable to perform the functions of the position of the employee.
 (c) SECOND OPINION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- In any case in which the employer has reason to doubt the
 validity of the certification provided under subsection (a) for leave under
 subparagraph (C) or (D) of section 102(a)(1), the employer may require, at
 the expense of the employer, that the eligible employee obtain the opinion
 of a second health care provider designated or approved by the employer
 concerning any information certified under subsection (b) for such leave.
 (2) LIMITATION- A health care provider designated or approved under paragraph
 (1) shall not be employed on a regular basis by the employer.
 (d) RESOLUTION OF CONFLICTING OPINIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- In any case in which the second opinion described in
 subsection (c) differs from the opinion in the original certification
 provided under subsection (a), the employer may require, at the expense of
 the employer, that the employee obtain the opinion of a third health care
 provider designated or approved jointly by the employer and the employee
 concerning the information certified under subsection (b).
 (2) FINALITY- The opinion of the third health care provider concerning
 the information certified under subsection (b) shall be considered to be
 final and shall be binding on the employer and the employee.
 (e) SUBSEQUENT RECERTIFICATION- The employer may require that the eligible
 employee obtain subsequent recertifications on a reasonable basis.
SEC. 104. EMPLOYMENT AND BENEFITS PROTECTION.
 (a) RESTORATION TO POSITION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Any eligible employee who takes leave under section 102
 for the intended purpose of the leave shall be entitled, on return from
 such leave--
 (A) to be restored by the employer to the position of employment held by
 the employee when the leave commenced; or
 (B) to be restored to an equivalent position with equivalent employment
 benefits, pay, and other terms and conditions of employment.
 (2) LOSS OF BENEFITS- The taking of leave under section 102 shall not
 result in the loss of any employment benefit accrued prior to the date on
 which the leave commenced.
 (3) LIMITATIONS- Except as provided in subsection (b), nothing in this
 section shall be construed to entitle any restored employee to--
 (A) the accrual of any seniority or employment benefits during any period
 of leave; or
 (B) any right, benefit, or position of employment other than that to which
 the employee was entitled to on the date the leave was commenced.
 (4) CERTIFICATION- As a condition of restoration under paragraph (1),
 the employer may have a policy that requires each employee to receive
 certification from the health care provider of the employee that the employee
 is able to resume work, except that nothing in this paragraph shall supersede
 a valid State or local law or a collective bargaining agreement that governs
 the return to work of employees taking leave under section 102(a)(1)(D).
 (5) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit
 an employer from requiring an employee on leave under section 102 to
 periodically report to the employer on the status and intention of the
 employee to return to work.
 (b) MAINTENANCE OF HEALTH BENEFITS- During any period that an eligible
 employee takes leave under section 102, the employer shall maintain coverage
 under any `group health plan' (as defined in section [5000(b)(1)] of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986) for the duration of such leave at the level
 and under the conditions coverage would have been provided if the employee
 had continued in employment continuously from the date the employee commenced
 the leave until the date the employee is restored under subsection (a).
SEC. 105. PROHIBITED ACTS.
 (a) INTERFERENCE WITH RIGHTS-
 (1) EXERCISE OF RIGHTS- It shall be unlawful for any employer to interfere
 with, restrain, or deny the exercise of or the attempt to exercise, any
 right provided under this title.
 (2) DISCRIMINATION- It shall be unlawful for any employer to discharge or
 in any other manner discriminate against any individual for opposing any
 practice made unlawful by this title.
 (b) INTERFERENCE WITH PROCEEDINGS OR INQUIRIES- It shall be unlawful for
 any person to discharge or in any other manner discriminate against any
 individual because such individual--
 (1) has filed any charge, or has instituted or caused to be instituted
 any proceeding, under or related to this title;
 (2) has given, or is about to give, any information in connection with
 any inquiry or proceeding relating to any right provided under this title; or
 (3) has testified, or is about to testify in any inquiry or proceeding
 relating to any right provided under this title.
SEC. 106. ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall issue such rules and regulations as
 are necessary to carry out this section, including rules and regulations
 concerning notice of foreseeable leave, service of complaints, notice of
 hearings, answers and amendments to complaints, and copies of orders and
 records of proceedings.
 (b) CHARGES-
 (1) FILING- Any person (including a class or organization, on behalf of
 any person) alleging an act that violates any provision of this title may
 file a charge respecting such violation with the Secretary. Charges shall
 be in such form and contain such information as the Secretary shall require
 by regulation.
 (2) NOTIFICATION- Not more than 10 days after the Secretary receives notice
 of a charge under paragraph (1), the Secretary--
 (A) shall serve a notice of the charge on the person charged with the
 violation; and
 (B) shall inform such person and the charging party as to the rights and
 procedures provided under this title.
 (3) TIME OF FILING- A charge shall not be filed more than 1 year after
 the date of the last event constituting the alleged violation.
 (4) SETTLEMENT PRIOR TO DETERMINATION BY SECRETARY- The charging party and
 the person charged with the violation under this section may enter into a
 settlement agreement concerning the violation alleged in the charge before
 any determination is reached by the Secretary under subsection (c). Such
 an agreement shall be effective unless the Secretary determines, not later
 than 30 days after the notice of the proposed agreement is received, that
 the agreement is not generally consistent with the purposes of this title.
 (c) INVESTIGATION AND COMPLAINT ON NOTICE OF A CHARGE-
 (1) INVESTIGATION- Not later than 60 days after the Secretary receives any
 charge respecting a violation of this title, the Secretary shall investigate
 the charge and issue a complaint based on the charge or dismiss the charge.
 (2) DISMISSAL- If, after conducting an investigation under paragraph (1),
 the Secretary determines that there is no reasonable basis for the charge
 that is being investigated, the Secretary shall dismiss the charge and
 promptly notify the charging party and the respondent as to the dismissal.
 (3) COMPLAINT BASED ON CHARGE- If, after conducting an investigation under
 paragraph (1), the Secretary determines that there is a reasonable basis
 for the charge, the Secretary shall issue a complaint based on the charge
 and promptly notify the charging party and the respondent as to the issuance.
 (4) SETTLEMENT WITH SECRETARY- On the issuance of a complaint under paragraph
 (3), the Secretary and the respondent may enter into a settlement agreement
 concerning a violation alleged in the complaint. Any such settlement shall
 not be entered into over the objection of the charging party, unless the
 Secretary determines that the settlement provides a full remedy for the
 charging party.
 (5) CIVIL ACTIONS- If, at the end of the 60-day period referred to in
 paragraph (1), the Secretary--
 (A) has not made a determination under paragraph (2) or (3);
 (B) has dismissed the charge under paragraph (2); or
 (C) has disapproved a settlement agreement under subsection (b)(4) or has not
 entered into a settlement agreement under paragraph (4) of this subsection;
the charging party may elect to bring a civil action under section 107. Such
election shall bar further administrative action by the Secretary with
respect to the violation alleged in the charge.
 (6) Complaint and relief on initiative of secretary-
 (A) COMPLAINT- The Secretary may issue and serve a complaint alleging a
 violation of this title on the basis of information and evidence gathered
 as a result of an investigation initiated by the Secretary pursuant to
 section 108.
 (B) RELIEF- On the issuance of a complaint under subparagraph (A), the
 Secretary may petition the United States district court for the district in
 which the violation is alleged to have occurred, or in which the respondent
 resides or transacts business, for appropriate temporary relief or a
 restraining order. On the filing of any such petition, the court shall
 cause notice of the petition to be served on the respondent, and the court
 shall have jurisdiction to grant to the Secretary such temporary relief
 or restraining order as the court determines just and proper.
 (d) RIGHTS OF PARTIES-
 (1) SERVICE OF COMPLAINT- In any case in which a complaint is issued under
 subsection (c), the Secretary shall, not later than 10 days after the date
 on which the complaint is issued, cause to be served on the respondent a
 copy of the complaint.
 (2) PARTIES TO COMPLAINT- Any person filing a charge alleging a violation of
 this title may elect to be a party to any complaint filed by the Secretary
 alleging such violation. Such election must be made prior to the commencement
 of a hearing.
 (3) CIVIL ACTION- The failure of the Secretary to comply in a timely
 manner with any obligation assigned to the Secretary under this title
 shall entitle the charging party to elect, at the time of such failure,
 to bring a civil action under section 107.
 (e) CONDUCT OF HEARING-
 (1) PROSECUTION BY SECRETARY- The Secretary shall have the duty to prosecute
 any complaint issued under subsection (c).
 (2) HEARING- An administrative law judge shall conduct a hearing on the
 record with respect to any complaint issued under this title. The hearing
 shall be commenced not later than 60 days after the issuance of such
 complaint, unless the judge, in the discretion of the judge, determines
 that the purposes of this Act would best be furthered by commencement of
 the action after the expiration of such period.
 (f) FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- After a hearing conducted under this section, the
 administrative law judge shall promptly make findings of fact and
 conclusions of law, and, if appropriate, issue an order for relief as
 provided in section 109.
 (2) NOTIFICATION CONCERNING DELAY- The administrative law judge shall
 inform the parties, in writing, of the reason for any delay in making
 such findings and conclusions if such findings and conclusions are not
 made within 60 days after the conclusion of such hearing.
 (g) FINALITY OF DECISION; REVIEW-
 (1) FINALITY- The decision and order of the administrative law judge under
 this section shall become the final decision and order of the Secretary
 unless, on appeal by an aggrieved party taken not later than 30 days after
 the entry of the order, the Secretary modifies or vacates the decision,
 in which case the decision of the Secretary shall be the final decision.
 (2) REVIEW- Not later than 60 days after the entry of the final order of
 the Secretary under paragraph (1), any person aggrieved by such final order
 may seek a review of such order in the United States court of appeals for
 the circuit in which the violation is alleged to have occurred or in which
 the employer resides or transacts business.
 (3) JURISDICTION- On the filing of the record of an order under this
 subsection with the court, the jurisdiction of the court shall be exclusive
 and the judgment of the court shall be final, except that the judgment
 shall be subject to review by the Supreme Court of the United States on
 writ of certiorari or certification as provided in section 1254 of title
 28, United States Code.
 (h) COURT ENFORCEMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS-
 (1) POWER OF SECRETARY- If an order of the Secretary is not appealed under
 subsection (g)(2), the Secretary may petition the United States district
 court for the district in which the violation is alleged to have occurred,
 or in which the respondent resides or transacts business, for the enforcement
 of the order of the Secretary, by filing in such court a written petition
 praying that such order be enforced.
 (2) JURISDICTION- On the filing of a petition under paragraph (1), the
 court shall have jurisdiction to make and enter a decree enforcing the
 order of the Secretary. In such a proceeding, the order of the Secretary
 shall not be subject to review.
 (3) DECREE OF ENFORCEMENT- If, on appeal of an order under subsection
 (g)(2), the United States court of appeals does not reverse or modify such
 order, such court shall have the jurisdiction to make and enter a decree
 enforcing the order of the Secretary.
SEC. 107. ENFORCEMENT BY CIVIL ACTION.
 (a) RIGHT TO BRING CIVIL ACTION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subject to the limitations contained in this section,
 an eligible employee or any person, including a class or organization
 on behalf of any eligible employee, or the Secretary may bring a civil
 action against any employer (including any State employer) to enforce the
 provisions of this title in any appropriate court of the United States or
 in any State court of competent jurisdiction.
 (2) NO CHARGE FILED- Subject to paragraph (3), a civil action may be
 commenced under this subsection without regard to whether a charge has
 been filed under section 106(b).
 (3) LIMITATIONS- No civil action may be commenced under paragraph (1)
 if the Secretary--
 (A) has approved a settlement agreement or has failed to disapprove a
 settlement agreement under section 106(b)(4) or 106(c)(4), as appropriate,
 if such action is based on a violation alleged in the charge and resolved
 by the agreement; or
 (B) has issued a complaint under section 106(c)(3) or 106(c)(6), if such
 action is based upon a violation alleged in the complaint.
 (4) ENFORCEMENT OF SETTLEMENT AGREEMENTS- Notwithstanding paragraph (3)(A),
 a civil action may be commenced to enforce the terms of any such settlement
 agreement.
 (5) Timing of commencement of civil action-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), no civil action
 may be commenced later than 1 year after the date of the last event that
 constitutes the alleged violation.
 (B) EXCEPTION- In any case in which--
 (i) a timely charge is filed under section 106(b); and
 (ii) the failure of the Secretary to issue a complaint or enter into
 a settlement agreement based on the charge (as provided under section
 106(c)(4)) occurs later than 11 months after the date on which any alleged
 violation occurred;
the charging party may commence a civil action not later than 60 days after
the date of such failure.
 (6) AGENCIES- The Secretary shall not bring a civil action against any
 agency of the United States.
 (7) EXCLUSIVE JURISDICTION ON COMPLAINT- On the filing of a complaint
 with the court under this subsection, the jurisdiction of the court shall
 be exclusive.
 (b) VENUE- An action brought under subsection (a) in a district court of
 the United States may be brought--
 (1) in any appropriate judicial district under section 1391 of title 28,
 United States Code; or
 (2) in the judicial district in the State in which--
 (A) the employment records relevant to such violation are maintained and
 administered; or
 (B) the aggrieved person worked or would have worked but for the alleged
 violation.
 (c) NOTIFICATION OF THE SECRETARY; RIGHT TO INTERVENE- A copy of the
 complaint in any action by an eligible employee under subsection (a) shall be
 served on the Secretary by certified mail. The Secretary shall have the right
 to intervene in a civil action brought by an employee under subsection (a).
 (d) ATTORNEYS FOR THE SECRETARY- In any civil action under subsection
 (a), attorneys appointed by the Secretary may appear for and represent
 the Secretary, except that the Attorney General and the Solicitor General
 shall conduct any litigation in the Supreme Court.
SEC. 108. INVESTIGATIVE AUTHORITY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- To ensure compliance with the provisions of this title,
 or any regulation or order issued under this title, the Secretary shall
 have, subject to subsection (c), the investigative authority provided under
 section 11(a) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 211(a)).
 (b) OBLIGATION TO KEEP AND PRESERVE RECORDS- Any employer shall keep
 and preserve records in accordance with section 11(c) of the Fair Labor
 Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 211(c)) and in accordance with regulations
 issued by the Secretary.
 (c) REQUIRED SUBMISSIONS GENERALLY LIMITED TO AN ANNUAL BASIS- The
 Secretary shall not under the authority of this section require any
 employer or any plan, fund, or program to submit to the Secretary any
 books or records more than once during any 12-month period, unless the
 Secretary has reasonable cause to believe there may exist a violation
 of this title or any regulation or order issued pursuant to this title,
 or is investigating a charge pursuant to section 106.
 (d) SUBPOENA POWERS, ETC- For the purposes of any investigation provided for
 in this section, the Secretary shall have the subpoena authority provided
 for under section 9 of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 209).
SEC. 109. RELIEF.
 (a) Injunctive Relief-
 (1) CEASE AND DESIST- On finding a violation under section 106, the
 administrative law judge shall issue an order requiring such person to
 cease and desist from any act or practice that violates this title.
 (2) INJUNCTIONS- In any civil action brought under section 107, the court
 may grant as relief against any employer (including any State employer)
 any permanent or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order, or
 other equitable relief as the court determines appropriate.
 (b) MONETARY DAMAGES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Any employer (including any State employer) that violates
 any provision of this title shall be liable to the injured party in an
 amount equal to--
 (A) any wages, salary, employment benefits, or other compensation denied
 or lost to such eligible employee by reason of the violation, plus interest
 on the total monetary damages calculated at the prevailing rate; and
 (B) an additional amount equal to the greater of--
 (i) the amount determined under subparagraph (A), as liquidated damages; or
 (ii) consequential damages, not to exceed 3 times the amount determined
 under such subparagraph.
 (2) GOOD FAITH- If an employer who has violated this title proves to the
 satisfaction of the administrative law judge or the court that the act or
 omission that violated this title was in good faith and that the employer
 had reasonable grounds for believing that the act or omission was not a
 violation of this title, such judge or the court may, in the discretion
 of the judge or court, reduce the amount of the liability provided for
 under this subsection to the amount determined under paragraph (1)(A).
 (c) ATTORNEY'S FEES- A prevailing party in an action described under this
 section (other than the United States) may be awarded a reasonable attorney's
 fee as part of the costs, in addition to any relief awarded. The United
 States shall be liable for costs in the same manner as a private person.
 (d) LIMITATION- Damages awarded under subsection (b) shall not accrue from
 a date that is later than 2 years prior to the date on which a charge is
 filed under section 106(b) or a civil action is brought under section 107.
SEC. 110. SPECIAL RULES CONCERNING EMPLOYEES OF LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this section, the rights
 (including the rights under section 104, which shall extend throughout
 the period of leave of any employee under this section), remedies, and
 procedures under this Act shall apply to--
 (1) any `local educational agency' (as defined in section 1471(12) of
 the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 2891(12)))
 and its employees; and
 (2) any private elementary and secondary school and its employees.
 (b) LEAVE DOES NOT VIOLATE CERTAIN OTHER FEDERAL LAWS- A local educational
 agency and a private elementary and secondary school shall not be in
 violation of the Education of the Handicapped Act (20 U.S.C. 1400 et seq.),
 section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), or title
 VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.), solely as
 a result of an eligible employee of such agency or school exercising the
 rights of such employee under this Act.
 (c) INTERMITTENT LEAVE FOR INSTRUCTIONAL EMPLOYEES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (2), in any case in which an employee
 employed principally in an instructional capacity by any such educational
 agency or school seeks to take leave under subparagraph (C) or (D) of
 section 102(a)(1) that is foreseeable based on planned medical treatment or
 supervision and the employee would be on leave for greater than 20 percent of
 the total number of working days in the period during which the leave would
 extend, the agency or school may require that such employee elect either--
 (A) to take leave for periods of a particular duration, not to exceed the
 duration of the planned medical treatment or supervision; or
 (B) to transfer temporarily to an available alternative position offered
 by the employer for which the employee is qualified, and that--
 (i) has equivalent pay and benefits; and
 (ii) better accommodates recurring periods of leave than the regular
 employment position of the employee.
 (2) APPLICATION- The elections described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of
 paragraph (1) shall apply only with respect to an employee who complies
 with section 102(e)(2).
 (d) RULES APPLICABLE TO PERIODS NEAR THE CONCLUSION OF AN ACADEMIC TERM-
 The following rules shall apply with respect to periods of leave near
 the conclusion of an academic term in the case of any employee employed
 principally in an instructional capacity by any such educational agency
 or school:
 (1) LEAVE MORE THAN 5 WEEKS PRIOR TO END OF TERM- If the employee begins
 leave under section 102 more than 5 weeks prior to the end of the academic
 term, the agency or school may require the employee to continue taking
 leave until the end of such term, if--
 (A) the leave is of at least 3 weeks duration; and
 (B) the return to employment would occur during the 3-week period before
 the end of such term.
 (2) LEAVE LESS THAN 5 WEEKS PRIOR TO END OF TERM- If the employee begins
 leave under subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) of section 102(a)(1) during the
 period that commences 5 weeks prior to the end of the academic term, the
 agency or school may require the employee to continue taking leave until
 the end of such term, if--
 (A) the leave is of greater than 2 weeks duration; and
 (B) the return to employment would occur during the 2-week period before
 the end of such term.
 (3) LEAVE LESS THAN 3 WEEKS PRIOR TO END OF TERM- If the employee begins
 leave under paragraph (A), (B), or (C) of section 102(a)(1) during the
 period that commences 3 weeks prior to the end of the academic term and
 the duration of the leave is greater than 5 working days, the agency or
 school may require the employee to continue to take leave until the end
 of such term.
 (e) RESTORATION TO EQUIVALENT EMPLOYMENT POSITION- For purposes of
 determinations under section 104(a)(1)(B) (relating to the restoration of
 an employee to an equivalent position), in the case of a local educational
 agency or a private elementary and secondary school, such determination shall
 be made on the basis of established school board policies and practices,
 private school policies and practices, and collective bargaining agreements.
 (f) REDUCTION OF THE AMOUNT OF LIABILITY- If a local educational agency or
 a private elementary and secondary school that has violated title I proves
 to the satisfaction of the administrative law judge or the court that
 the agency, school, or department had reasonable grounds for believing
 that the underlying act or omission was not a violation of such title,
 such judge or court may, in the discretion of the judge or court, reduce
 the amount of the liability provided for under section 109(b)(1) to the
 amount determined under subparagraph (A) of such section.
SEC. 111. NOTICE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each employer shall post and keep posted, in conspicuous
 places on the premises of the employer where notices to employees and
 applicants for employment are customarily posted, a notice, to be prepared
 or approved by the Secretary, setting forth excerpts from, or summaries of,
 the pertinent provisions of this title and information pertaining to the
 filing of a charge.
 (b) PENALTY- Any employer that willfully violates this section shall be
 assessed a civil money penalty not to exceed $100 for each separate offense.
SEC. 112. REGULATIONS.
 Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this title, the
 Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as are necessary to carry out
 this title (including regulations under section 106(a)).
TITLE II--LEAVE FOR CIVIL SERVICE EMPLOYEES
SEC. 201. LEAVE REQUIREMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- (1) Chapter 63 of title 5, United States Code, is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new subchapter:
`SUBCHAPTER V--FAMILY LEAVE
`Sec. 6381. Definitions
 `For purposes of this subchapter:
 `(1) The term `employee' means--
 `(A) an `employee', as defined by section 6301(2) of this title (excluding
 an individual employed by the government of the District of Columbia); and
 `(B) an individual described in clause (v) or (ix) of such section;
who has been employed for at least 12 months and completed at least 1,000
hours of service during the previous 12-month period.
 `(2) The term `serious health condition' means an illness, injury,
 impairment, or physical or mental condition that involves--
 `(A) inpatient care in a hospital, hospice, or residential medical care
 facility; or
 `(B) continuing treatment, or continuing supervision, by a health care
 provider.
 `(3) The term `son or daughter' means a biological, adopted, or foster
 child, a stepchild, a legal ward, or a child of a person standing in loco
 parentis, who is--
 `(A) under 18 years of age; or
 `(B) 18 years of age or older and incapable of self-care because of a
 mental or physical disability.
 `(4) The term `parent' means the biological parent of the child or an
 individual who stood in loco parentis to a child when the child was a son
 or daughter.
`Sec. 6382. Leave requirement
 `(a)(1) An employee shall be entitled, subject to section 6383, to 12
 workweeks of leave during any 12-month period--
 `(A) because of the birth of a son or daughter of the employee;
 `(B) because of the placement of a son or daughter with the employee for
 adoption or foster care;
 `(C) in order to care for the son, daughter, spouse, or parent of the
 employee who has a serious health condition; or
 `(D) because of a serious health condition that makes the employee unable
 to perform the functions of the position of such employee.
 `(2) The entitlement to leave under subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph
 (1) for a birth or placement of a son or daughter shall expire at the end
 of the 12-month period beginning on the date of such birth or placement.
 `(3) Leave under subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1) shall not be taken
 by an employee intermittently unless the employee and the employing agency
 agree otherwise. Leave under subparagraph (C) or (D) of paragraph (1) may
 be taken intermittently when medically necessary, subject to subsection (e).
 `(b) On agreement between the employing agency and the employee, leave under
 this section may be taken on a reduced leave schedule. Such reduced leave
 schedule shall not result in a reduction in the total amount of leave to
 which the employee is entitled.
 `(c) Except as provided in subsection (d), leave granted under subsection
 (a) may consist of unpaid leave.
 `(d)(1) If an employing agency provides paid leave for fewer than 12
 workweeks, the additional weeks of leave necessary to attain the 12 workweeks
 of leave required under this title may be provided without compensation.
 `(2)(A) An employee may elect, or an employing agency may require the
 employee, to substitute for leave under subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) of
 subsection (a)(1) any of the accrued paid vacation leave, personal leave,
 or family leave of the employee for any part of the 12-week period of such
 leave under such paragraph.
 `(B) An employee may elect, or an employing agency may require the employee,
 to substitute for leave under paragraph (1)(D) of subsection (a) any of
 the accrued paid vacation leave, personal leave, or medical or sick leave
 of the employee for any part of the 12-week period of such leave under
 such paragraph, except that nothing in this Act shall require an employing
 agency to provide paid sick leave or paid medical leave in any situation in
 which such employing agency would not normally provide any such paid leave.
 `(e)(1) In any case in which the necessity for leave under subparagraph
 (A) or (B) of subsection (a)(1) is foreseeable based on an expected birth
 or adoption, the employee shall provide the employing agency with prior
 notice of such expected birth or adoption in a manner that is reasonable
 and practicable.
 `(2) In any case in which the necessity for leave under subparagraph (C) or
 (D) of subsection (a)(1) is foreseeable based on planned medical treatment
 or supervision, the employee--
 `(A) shall make a reasonable effort to schedule the treatment or supervision
 so as not to disrupt unduly the operations of the employing agency, subject
 to the approval of the health care provider of the employee or the health
 care provider of the son, daughter, spouse or parent of the employee; and
 `(B) shall provide the employing agency with prior notice of the treatment
 or supervision in a manner that is reasonable and practicable.
`Sec. 6383. Certification
 `(a) An employing agency may require that a claim for leave under
 subparagraph (C) or (D) of section 6382(a)(1), be supported by certification
 issued by the health care provider of the employee or of the son, daughter,
 spouse, or parent of the employer, as appropriate. The employee shall
 provide a copy of such certification to the employing agency.
 `(b) A certification under subsection (a) shall be sufficient if it states--
 `(1) the date on which the serious health condition commenced;
 `(2) the probable duration of the condition;
 `(3) the appropriate medical facts within the knowledge of the provider
 regarding the condition; and
 `(4)(A) for purposes of leave under section 6382(a)(1)(C), an estimate of
 the amount of time that the eligible employee is needed to care for the son,
 daughter, spouse, or parent; and
 `(B) for purposes of leave under section 6382(a)(1)(D), a statement that
 the employee is unable to perform the functions of the employee's position.
 `(c)(1) In any case in which the employing agency has reason to doubt
 the validity of the certification provided under subsection (a) for leave
 under subparagraph (C) or (D) of section 6382(a)(1), the employing agency
 may require, at the expense of the agency, that the employee obtain the
 opinion of a second health care provider designated or approved by the
 employing agency concerning any information certified under subsection
 (b) for such leave.
 `(2) Any health care provider designated or approved under paragraph (1)
 shall not be employed on a regular basis by the employing agency.
 `(d)(1) In any case in which the second opinion described in subsection
 (c) differs from the original certification provided under subsection (a),
 the employing agency may require, at the expense of the agency, that the
 employee obtain the opinion of a third health care provider designated or
 approved jointly by the employing agency and the employee concerning the
 information certified under subsection (b).
 `(2) The opinion of the third health care provider concerning the information
 certified under subsection (b) shall be considered to be final and shall
 be binding on the employing agency and the employee.
 `(e) The employing agency may require that the employee obtain subsequent
 recertifications on a reasonable basis.
`Sec. 6384. Job protection
 `(a) Any employee who takes leave under section 6382 for the intended
 purpose of the leave shall be entitled, upon return from such leave--
 `(1) to be restored by the employing agency to the position of employment
 held by the employee when the leave commenced; or
 `(2) to be restored to an equivalent position with equivalent employment
 benefits, pay, and other terms and conditions of employment.
 `(b) The taking of leave under section 6382 shall not result in the loss
 of any employment benefit accrued prior to the date on which the leave
 commenced.
 `(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed to entitle any restored
 employee to--
 `(1) the accrual of any seniority or employment benefits during any period
 of leave; or
 `(2) any right, benefit, or position of employment other than that to
 which the employee was entitled to on the date the leave was commenced.
 `(d) As a condition to restoration under subsection (a), the employing agency
 may have a policy that requires each employee to receive certification
 from the health care provider of the employee that the employee is able
 to resume work.
 `(e) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit an employing
 agency from requiring an employee on leave under section 6382 to periodically
 report to the employing agency on the status and intention of the employee
 to return to work.
`Sec. 6385. Prohibition of coercion
 `(a) An employee shall not directly or indirectly intimidate, threaten, or
 coerce, or attempt to intimidate, threaten, or coerce, any other employee
 for the purpose of interfering with the exercise of the rights of the
 employee under this subchapter.
 `(b) For the purpose of this section, `intimidate, threaten, or coerce'
 includes promising to confer or conferring any benefit (such as appointment,
 promotion, or compensation), or taking or threatening to take any reprisal
 (such as deprivation of appointment, promotion, or compensation).
`Sec. 6386. Health insurance
 `An employee enrolled in a health benefits plan under chapter 89 who is
 placed in a leave status under section 6382 may elect to continue the health
 benefits enrollment of the employee while in leave status and arrange to pay
 into the Employees Health Benefits Fund (described in section 8909) through
 the employing agency of the employee, the appropriate employee contributions.
`Sec. 6387. Regulations
 `The Office of Personnel Management shall prescribe regulations necessary
 for the administration of this subchapter. The regulations prescribed
 under this subchapter shall be consistent with the regulations prescribed
 by the Secretary of Labor under title I of the Family and Medical Leave
 Act of 1991.'.
 (2) The table of contents for chapter 63 of title 5, United States Code,
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following:
`SUBCHAPTER V--FAMILY LEAVE AND TEMPORARY MEDICAL LEAVE
`6381. Definitions.
`6382. Leave requirement.
`6383. Certification.
`6384. Job protection.
`6385. Prohibition of coercion.
`6386. Health insurance.
`6387. Regulations.'.
 (b) EMPLOYEES PAID FROM NONAPPROPRIATED FUNDS- Section 2105(c)(1) of title
 5, United States Code, is amended by striking out `53' and inserting in
 lieu thereof `53, subchapter V of chapter 63,'.
TITLE III--COMMISSION ON LEAVE
SEC. 301. ESTABLISHMENT.
 There is established a commission to be known as the Commission on Leave
 (hereinafter referred to in this title as the `Commission').
SEC. 302. DUTIES.
 The Commission shall--
 (1) conduct a comprehensive study of--
 (A) existing and proposed policies relating to leave;
 (B) the potential costs, benefits, and impact on productivity of such
 policies on employers; and
 (C) alternative and equivalent State enforcement of this Act with respect
 to employees described in section 110(a); and
 (2) not later than 2 years after the date on which the Commission first
 meets, prepare and submit, to the appropriate Committees of Congress, a
 report that may include legislative recommendations concerning coverage
 of businesses that employ fewer than 50 employees and alternative and
 equivalent State enforcement of this Act with respect to employees described
 in section 110(a).
SEC. 303. MEMBERSHIP.
 (a) COMPOSITION-
 (1) APPOINTMENTS- The Commission shall be composed of 12 voting members
 and 2 ex officio members to be appointed not later than 60 days after the
 date of the enactment of this Act as follows:
 (A) SENATORS- One Senator shall be appointed by the majority leader of
 the Senate, and one Senator shall be appointed by the minority leader of
 the Senate.
 (B) MEMBERS OF HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES- One member of the House
 of Representatives shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of
 Representatives, and one Member of the House of Representatives shall be
 appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
 (C) ADDITIONAL MEMBERS-
 (i) APPOINTMENT- Two members each shall be appointed by--
 (I) the Speaker of the House of Representatives;
 (II) the majority leader of the Senate;
 (III) the minority leader of the House of Representatives; and
 (IV) the minority leader of the Senate.
 (ii) EXPERTISE- Such members shall be appointed by virtue of demonstrated
 expertise in relevant family, temporary disability, and labor-management
 issues and shall include representatives of employers.
 (2) EX OFFICIO MEMBERS- The Secretary of Health and Human Services and
 the Secretary of Labor shall serve on the Commission as nonvoting ex
 officio members.
 (b) VACANCIES- Any vacancy on the Commission shall be filled in the manner
 in which the original appointment was made.
 (c) CHAIRPERSON AND VICE CHAIRPERSON- The Commission shall elect a
 chairperson and a vice chairperson from among the members of the Commission.
 (d) QUORUM- Eight members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for
 all purposes, except that a lesser number may constitute a quorum for the
 purpose of holding hearings.
SEC. 304. COMPENSATION.
 (a) PAY- Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
 (b) TRAVEL EXPENSES- Members of the Commission shall be allowed reasonable
 travel expenses, including a per diem allowance, in accordance with
 section 5703 of title 5, United States Code, when performing duties of
 the Commission.
SEC. 305. POWERS.
 (a) MEETINGS- The Commission shall first meet not later than 30 days after
 the date on which all members are appointed, and the Commission shall meet
 thereafter on the call of the chairperson or a majority of the members.
 (b) HEARINGS AND SESSIONS- The Commission may hold such hearings, sit
 and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such
 evidence as the Commission considers appropriate. The Commission may
 administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
 (c) ACCESS TO INFORMATION- The Commission may secure directly from any
 Federal agency information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act. On
 the request of the chairperson or vice chairperson of the Commission,
 the head of such agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
 (d) EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR- The Commission may appoint an Executive Director
 from the personnel of any Federal agency to assist the Commission in
 carrying out the duties of the Commission.
 (e) USE OF FACILITIES AND SERVICES- Upon the request of the Commission,
 the head of any Federal agency may make available to the Commission any
 of the facilities and services of such agency.
 (f) PERSONNEL FROM OTHER AGENCIES- On the request of the Commission, the
 head of any Federal agency may detail any of the personnel of such agency
 to assist the Commission in carrying out the duties of the Commission.
SEC. 306. TERMINATION.
 The Commission shall terminate 30 days after the date of the submission
 of the report of the Commission to Congress.
TITLE IV--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SEC. 401. EFFECT ON OTHER LAWS.
 (a) FEDERAL AND STATE ANTI-DISCRIMINATION LAWS- Nothing in this Act or
 any amendment made by this Act shall be construed to modify or affect
 any Federal or State law prohibiting discrimination on the basis of race,
 religion, color, national origin, sex, age, or handicapped status.
 (b) STATE AND LOCAL LAWS- Nothing in this Act or any amendment made by
 this Act shall be construed to supersede any provision of any State and
 local law that provides greater employee leave rights than the rights
 established under this Act or any amendment made by this Act.
SEC. 402. EFFECT ON EXISTING EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS.
 (a) MORE PROTECTIVE- Nothing in this Act or any amendment made by this Act
 shall be construed to diminish the obligation of an employer to comply with
 any collective bargaining agreement or any employment benefit program or
 plan that provides greater family and medical leave rights to employees
 than the rights provided under this Act or any amendment made by this Act.
 (b) LESS PROTECTIVE- The rights provided to employees under this Act or
 any amendment made by this Act shall not be diminished by any collective
 bargaining agreement or any employment benefit program or plan.
SEC. 403. ENCOURAGEMENT OF MORE GENEROUS LEAVE POLICIES.
 Nothing in this Act or any amendment made by this Act shall be construed
 to discourage employers from adopting or retaining leave policies more
 generous than any policies that comply with the requirements under this
 Act or any amendment made by this Act.
SEC. 404. EFFECTIVE DATES.
 (a) TITLE III- Title III shall take effect on the date of the enactment
 of this Act.
 (b) OTHER TITLES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), titles I and II and this
 title shall take effect 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS- In the case of a collective bargaining
 agreement in effect on the effective date prescribed by paragraph (1),
 title I shall apply on the earlier of--
 (A) the date of the termination of such agreement; or
 (B) the date that occurs 12 months after the date of the enactment of
 this Act.
SEC. 405. REGULATIONS.
 The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as are necessary to carry
 out this title not latter than 60 days after the date of the enactment of
 this Act.