B37 5-3-89 (Update)
S 907 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 907
To provide access to basic banking services.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
May 3 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. METZENBAUM introduced the following bill; which was read twice and
referred to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
A BILL
To provide access to basic banking services.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Basic Banking Services Access Act of 1989.'
SEC. 2. BASIC FINANCIAL SERVICES ACCOUNT.
 (a) BASIC FINANCIAL SERVICES ACCOUNT REQUIRED- Each depository institution
 shall offer a basic financial services account which--
 (1) may be used to obtain, at the election of the customer, basic transaction
 services; and
 (2) meets the requirements of this section.
 (b) ACCOUNT REGISTRATION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System shall
 prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to establish the customer
 registration program required to open a basic financial services account
 under subsection (a).
 (2) MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS- Regulations prescribed by the Board under
 paragraph (1) of this subsection shall contain, at a minimum, the following
 requirements:
 (A) Each depository institution shall provide for registration in all of
 its offices staffed by individuals employed by such depository institution.
 (B) Registration shall be by means of an application containing the
 application date, and the name, address, date of birth, and handwritten
 signature of the applicant as well as other information the Board reasonably
 determines to be necessary to facilitate registration of customers obtaining
 basic transaction services pursuant to this section.
 (C) At the time of account registration, an applicant may be required
 to present an identification card in such form as the Board may require,
 which includes the signature and a photograph of such customer.
 (D) The applicant shall be provided a copy of the completed account
 registration evidencing the fact that the registration has been received
 and filed with the depository institution within 15 days of such filing.
 (3) REJECTION FOR INTENTIONAL MATERIAL MISREPRESENTATION- If the depository
 institution determines that an intentional material misrepresentation has
 been made in the information provided to open a basic financial services
 account, the depository institution may reject such registration.
 (c) REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL BASIC FINANCIAL SERVICES ACCOUNTS- No account
 offered by a depository institution meets the requirement of this section
 with respect to basic financial services accounts if such account--
 (1) requires other account relationships with such depository institution; or
 (2) requires the individual to meet any prerequisite which discriminates
 against low-income individuals in order to open such account.
 (d) ACCOUNTS PROVIDING BASIC TRANSACTION SERVICES- A basic financial
 services account offered by a depository institution meets the requirements
 of this section with respect to providing basic transaction services if
 it is an account--
 (1) which is available for such purpose only to individuals (or to members,
 in the case of a credit union) who have $1,000 or less on deposit at such
 depository institution;
 (2) which the maintenance fee, if any, that includes all service charges
 and fees for routine transactions, does not exceed the minimal, reasonable
 amount as established by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
 based on data submitted from actual time studies and as a reflection of net,
 processing costs;
 (3) which does not have a minimum opening or minimum balance requirement
 of more than $25;
 (4) which, in the case of any depository institution which offers transaction
 accounts (as defined in section 19(b)(1)(C) of the Federal Reserve Act) in
 the ordinary course of business, permits checks, share drafts, negotiable
 orders of withdrawal, or similar instruments to be drawn on the account
 for purposes of making payments or other transfers to third parties;
 (5) which permits not less than 10 withdrawals per month (including
 withdrawals described in paragraph (4)), whether by check, share draft,
 negotiable order of withdrawal, or other means;
 (6) for which the depository institution is required to provide--
 (A) a detailed monthly statement listing all transactions for the month
 involved; or
 (B) a passbook in which the depository institution enters all transactions
 for such account;
 (7) which does not require the individual to exclusively use automated
 teller machines or other nonteller services for such purpose;
 (8) with respect to which, at the election of the individual, the depository
 institution may allow regularly recurring payments to the individual to
 be made by the payor to the depository institution for direct deposit into
 the account of such individual; and
 (9) which may be closed after notice to the individual by reason of the
 occurrence of--
 (A) overdrafts with respect to the account of such individual on 3 separate
 and distinct occasions within any 6-month period; or
 (B) a pattern of fraudulent activity involving the account of such
 individual.
 (e) INFORMATION ON ACCOUNTS- Upon request of any individual, a depository
 institution shall provide such individual with a written summary describing
 the account offered by such depository institution which meets the
 requirements of subsection (a).
SEC. 3. POSTING OF NOTICES.
 (a) NOTICE REQUIRED- Each depository institution shall post a conspicuous
 notice in the appropriate area of each location where deposits are accepted
 that informs account holders and potential account holders that basic
 financial services accounts which provide basic transaction services are
 available pursuant to this Act.
 (b) CONTENTS OF NOTICE- Any notice required under subsection (a) shall
 clearly explain the material features and limitations of basic financial
 services accounts, including basic transaction services, so that customers
 can reasonably be expected to understand the terms of the account offered.
SEC. 4. ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.
 (a) ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT- Compliance with the requirements imposed
 under this Act and regulations prescribed by the Board under section 6
 shall be enforced under--
 (1) section 8 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act--
 (A) by the Comptroller of the Currency with respect to national banks;
 (B) by the Board with respect to member banks of the Federal Reserve System
 (other than national banks); and
 (C) by the Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
 with respect to depository institutions insured by the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation (other than national banks and member banks of the
 Federal Reserve System);
 (2) section 5(d) of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933, section 407 of
 the National Housing Act, and sections 6(i) and 17 of the Federal Home
 Loan Bank Act, by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board (acting directly or
 through the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation) with respect
 to any depository institution which is subject to any provision of such
 sections; and
 (3) the Federal Credit Union Act, by the National Credit Union Administration
 Board with respect to any insured credit union.
 (b) ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT POWERS-
 (1) VIOLATION OF THIS ACT TREATED AS VIOLATION OF OTHER ACTS- For purposes
 of the exercise by any Federal depository institutions regulatory agency
 of any of such agency's powers under any Act referred to in subsection
 (a), a violation of--
 (A) a requirement imposed under this Act shall be deemed to be a violation
 of a requirement imposed under that Act; and
 (B) any regulation prescribed by the Board under section 6 shall be deemed
 to be a violation of a regulation prescribed by such agency under such Act.
 (2) ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY UNDER OTHER ACTS- In addition to any Federal
 depository institutions regulatory agency's powers under any provision
 of law referred to in subsection (a), each such agency may exercise, for
 purposes of enforcing compliance with any requirement imposed under this
 Act, any other authority conferred on such agency by any other law.
SEC. 5. CIVIL LIABILITY.
 (a) CIVIL LIABILITY- Except as otherwise provided in this section, any
 depository institution which fails to comply with any requirement imposed
 under this Act or any regulation prescribed under this Act with respect
 to any person is liable to such person in an amount equal to the sum of--
 (1) any actual damage sustained by such person as a result of the failure;
 (2)(A) in the case of an individual action, such additional amount as the
 court may allow, except that the liability under this subparagraph shall
 not be less than $100 nor greater than $1,000; or
 (B) in the case of a class action, such amount as the court may allow,
 except that--
 (i) as to each member of the class, no minimum recovery shall be applicable;
 and
 (ii) the total recovery under this subparagraph in any class action or
 series of class actions arising out of the same failure to comply by the
 same depository institution shall not be more than the lesser of $500,000
 or 1 percent of the net worth of the depository institution involved; and
 (3) in the case of any successful action to enforce any liability under
 paragraph (1) or (2), the costs of the action, together with a reasonable
 attorney's fee as determined by the court.
 (b) CLASS ACTION AWARDS- In determining the total amount of an award in
 a class action, the court shall consider, among other relevant factors--
 (1) the amount of any actual damages awarded;
 (2) the frequency and persistence of failures of compliance;
 (3) the resources of the depository institution;
 (4) the number of persons adversely affected; and
 (5) the extent to which the failure of compliance was intentional.
 (c) BONA FIDE ERRORS-
 (1) GENERAL RULE- A depository institution may not be held liable in
 any action brought under this section for a violation of this Act if the
 depository institution demonstrates by a preponderance of the evidence
 that the violation was not intentional and resulted from a bona fide error,
 notwithstanding the maintenance of procedures reasonably adapted to avoid
 any such error.
 (2) EXAMPLES- Examples of a bona fide error include clerical, calculation,
 computer malfunction and programming, and printing errors. An error of
 legal judgment with respect to a depository institution's obligation under
 this Act is not a bona fide error.
 (d) JURISDICTION- Any action under this section may be brought in any United
 States district court, or in any other court of competent jurisdiction,
 within one year after the date of the occurrence of the violation involved.
 (e) RELIANCE ON BOARD RULINGS- No provision of this section imposing any
 liability shall apply to any act done or omitted in good faith in conformity
 with any rule, regulation, or interpretation thereof by the Board, or in
 conformity with any interpretation or approval by an official or employee
 of the Federal Reserve System duly authorized by the Board to issue such
 interpretation or approval under procedures prescribed by the Board,
 notwithstanding, the fact that after such act or omission has occurred,
 such rule, regulation, interpretation, or approval is amended, rescinded,
 or determined by judicial or other authority to be invalid for any reason.
 (f) NOTIFICATION OF AND ADJUSTMENT FOR ERRORS- A depository institution
 shall not be liable under this section or section 4 for any failure to comply
 with any requirement imposed under this Act with respect to any account if--
 (1) before--
 (A) the end of the 60-day period beginning on the date on which the
 depository institution discovered the failure to comply;
 (B) any action is instituted against the depository institution by the
 account holder under this section with respect to such failure to comply; and
 (C) any written notice of such failure to comply is received by the
 depository institution from the account holder,
the depository institution notifies the account holder of the failure of
such institution to comply with such requirement; and
 (2) the depository institution makes such adjustments as may be necessary
 with respect to such account to ensure that--
 (A) the account holder will not be liable for any amount in excess of the
 amount actually disclosed with respect to any fee or charge;
 (B) the account holder will not be liable for any fee or charge imposed
 under any condition not actually disclosed; and
 (C) interest on amounts in such account will accrue at the annual percentage
 yield, and under the conditions, actually disclosed (and credit will be
 provided for interest already accrued at a different annual percentage
 yield and under different conditions than the yield or conditions disclosed).
 (g) MULTIPLE INTERESTS IN 1 ACCOUNT- If more than 1 person holds an interest
 in any account--
 (1) the minimum and maximum amounts of liability under subsection (a)(2)(A)
 for any failure to comply with the requirements of this Act shall apply
 with respect to such account; and
 (2) the court shall determine the manner in which the amount of any such
 liability with respect to such account shall be distributed among such
 persons.
 (h) CONTINUING FAILURE TO DISCLOSE-
 (1) CERTAIN CONTINUING FAILURES TREATED AS 1 VIOLATION- Except as provided
 in paragraph (2), the continuing failure of any depository institution to
 disclose any particular term required to be disclosed under this Act with
 respect to a particular account shall be treated as a single violation for
 purposes of determining the amount of any liability of such institution
 under subsection (a) for such failure to disclose.
 (2) SUBSEQUENT FAILURE TO DISCLOSE- The continuing failure of any depository
 institution to disclose any particular term required to be disclosed
 under this Act with respect to a particular account after judgment has
 been rendered in favor of the account holder in connection with a prior
 failure to disclose such term shall be treated as a subsequent violation
 for purposes of determining liability under subsection (a).
SEC. 6. REGULATIONS.
 The Board shall prescribe such regulations as such agency may determine
 to be appropriate to carry out the provisions of this Act.
SEC. 7. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this Act--
 (1) APPROPRIATE FEDERAL DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS REGULATORY AGENCY- The term
 `appropriate Federal depository institutions regulatory banking agency'
 means--
 (A) the Comptroller of the Currency with respect to national banks;
 (B) the Board with respect to member banks of the Federal Reserve System
 (other than national banks);
 (C) the Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation with
 respect to federally insured depository institutions described in clause
 (i), (ii), or (iii) of section 19(b)(1)(A) of the Federal Reserve Act
 (other than national banks and member banks of the Federal Reserve System);
 (D) the Federal Home Loan Bank Board with respect to federally insured
 depository institutions described in clause (v) or (vi) of section
 19(b)(1)(A) of such Act; and
 (E) the National Credit Union Administration Board with respect to
 federally insured depository institutions described in clause (iv) of
 section 19(b)(1)(A) of such Act.
 (2) BOARD- The term `Board' means the Board of Governors of the Federal
 Reserve System.
 (3) DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION- The term `depository institution' means any
 federally insured depository institution described in clauses (i) through
 (vi) of section 19(b)(1)(A) of the Federal Reserve Act.
 (4) STATE- The term `State' has the meaning given to such term in section
 3(a) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
SEC. 8. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 This Act shall take effect on the expiration of the date which is 90 days
 after the date of the enactment of this Act.