S 1883 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1883
To amend the Public Health Service Act to establish a center for tobacco
products, to inform the public concerning the hazards of tobacco use, to
disclose and restrict additives to such products, and to require labeling of
such products to provide information concerning such products to the public,
and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
November 15 (legislative day, NOVEMBER 6), 1989
Mr. KENNEDY introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources
A BILL
To amend the Public Health Service Act to establish a center for tobacco
products, to inform the public concerning the hazards of tobacco use, to
disclose and restrict additives to such products, and to require labeling of
such products to provide information concerning such products to the public,
and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Tobacco Product Education and Health Protection
 Act of 1990'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
 (a) FINDINGS- Congress finds that--
 (1) despite a steady decline in tobacco consumption, 52,000,000 Americans
 still use tobacco products annually;
 (2) tobacco use causes nearly 400,000 deaths each year in the United States,
 the equivalent of over 1,000 deaths a day;
 (3) tobacco use is the most important cause of death and illness in the
 United States today, causing one sixth of all deaths annually;
 (4) in 1985, the private and public sectors in the United States spent
 approximately $22,000,000,000 on smoking-related illnesses and absorbed
 $43,000,000,000 in economic losses from such illnesses;
 (5) 50 percent of all smokers begin using tobacco by the age of 14, and
 90 percent of all smokers begin using tobacco before the age of 20;
 (6) nicotine-containing tobacco products are addictive;
 (7) most young people initiate tobacco use and become addicted before
 they are sufficiently informed or mature enough to make an informed choice
 concerning such use;
 (8) the tobacco industry contributes significantly to the experimentation
 with tobacco and the initiation of regular tobacco use by children and
 young adults through its' advertising and promotion practices;
 (9) in 1986 the tobacco industry spent $2,400,000,000 on the advertising
 and promotion of tobacco products, ranking such products among the most
 heavily advertised and promoted products in the United States;
 (10) the tobacco industry claims that the purpose of advertising is to
 influence consumer brand selection, but only 10 percent of tobacco users
 switch brands each year;
 (11) convincing evidence demonstrates that advertising is predominantly
 directed at market expansion;
 (12) the tobacco industry must attract 6,000 new smokers daily to replace
 those who stop smoking or die of smoking-related diseases and other causes,
 or quit;
 (13) tobacco product advertising and promotion are intended to capture
 the youth market and seek to do so through advertisements that suggest a
 strong association between smoking and physical fitness, attractiveness,
 success, adventure, and independence and are designed to have the greatest
 impact on minors, who are more vulnerable to image-based advertising;
 (14) serious gaps in knowledge about the harmful effects of tobacco products
 use persist in both minors and the adult population, with surveys showing
 that large numbers of citizens are unaware that smoking causes lung cancer,
 heart disease and still births in pregnancy;
 (15) education is effective in preventing and halting the use of tobacco
 products;
 (16) the proportion of smokers among the most educated adults is less
 than half that among the least educated adults, blue-collar workers,
 high school drop-outs and minorities;
 (17) among those individuals with the least amount of education who have
 the highest prevalence of smoking are young citizens, blue-collar workers,
 high school drop-outs and minorities;
 (18) the total resources of the major voluntary organizations that sponsor
 educational activities on smoking have never exceeded 2 percent of tobacco
 industry expenditures for the promotion of tobacco;
 (19) children and teenagers should be informed about the dangers of smoking
 and be discouraged from initiating the use of tobacco products;
 (20) the American public and groups with the highest prevalence of tobacco
 use should be informed about the dangers of tobacco products;
 (21) although most States prohibit sales of tobacco products to minors,
 these laws are not enforced;
 (22) in recent years, there have been efforts in some States to improve the
 enforcement of existing laws which prohibit the sale of tobacco products
 to minors;
 (23) a program of Federal assistance will encourage and enable States to
 provide more effective enforcement of their existing laws particularly on
 the sale of tobacco products to minors; and
 (24) as part of such lack of regulation, no Federal agency requires public
 disclosure or restricts the use of numerous additives in tobacco products.
 (b) PURPOSES- It is the purpose of this Act to--
 (1) help educate young citizens to prevent initiation and encourage
 cessation of tobacco use;
 (2) inform the public about the harmful effects of tobacco products;
 (3) support State efforts to improve educational programs for the prevention
 and cessation of tobacco use;
 (4) strengthen laws limiting the sale of tobacco products to minors;
 (5) establish Federal regulatory authority over tobacco products and
 additives in such products;
 (6) ensure the disclosure of accurate information to the public; and
 (7) analyze additives and determine the risk of such additives to individual
 health.
SEC. 3. CENTER FOR TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
 The Public Health Service Act is amended by inserting after title VIII
 (42 U.S.C. 296k et seq.) the following new title:
`TITLE IX--CENTER FOR TOBACCO PRODUCTS
`Subtitle A--Center for Tobacco Products
`SEC. 901. ESTABLISHMENT OF CENTER.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- In assuming the responsibility of the Secretary to
 the American public to promote and protect the health of the public,
 the Secretary shall establish within the Public Health Service, at the
 Centers For Disease Control, a Center for Tobacco Products.
 `(b) PURPOSE- It shall be the purpose of the Center to--
 `(1) educate the public concerning the health consequences of using tobacco
 products and provide outreach services to youth;
 `(2) support research efforts concerning patterns of tobacco use and
 cessation;
 `(3) inform the public regarding constituents of, and additives to,
 tobacco products;
 `(4) restrict the use of additives that represent a significant health
 risk to the public;
 `(5) provide assistance to States to enhance their efforts to enforce
 existing State laws concerning the sale of tobacco products within the
 State to minors; and
 `(6) coordinate the education and research activities of the Federal
 government with regard to tobacco products.
`SEC. 902. FUNCTIONS OF CENTER.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Center shall perform functions that shall include--
 `(1) determining the existence of all additives contained in tobacco
 products to ascertain the number, type, and amount of all such additives
 to disclose such to the public and to determine whether such additives
 represent a significant added health risk to consumers of such products;
 `(2) presenting information to the public through labels or package
 inserts concerning--
 `(A) the harmful tobacco smoke constituents; and
 `(B) the additives contained in tobacco products;
 `(3) conducting reviews of the effectiveness of information required to
 be contained in rotating warning labels and the undertaking of research
 directed towards improving the effectiveness of such labels;
 `(4) the establishment of a program to award incentive grants to States
 to promote better enforcement of State laws concerning the sale of tobacco
 products to minors; and
 `(5) the establishment of a program to assist 10 selected model States
 that request assistance and desire to improve their enforcement of State
 laws concerning the sale of tobacco products within the State to minors.
 `(b) OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS- In carrying out paragraphs (3),
 (4) and (5) of section 901(b) and sections 941 through 946, the Center
 shall establish an Office of Regulatory Affairs that shall administer the
 enforcement authorities and provisions of this title and coordinate its
 work with other offices and agencies of the Federal government.
 `(c) CONTRACTS- The Center may enter into contracts with agencies within
 and outside of the Public Health Service in the exercise of its functions.
 `(d) AUTHORITY OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 to carry out this section, $50,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, and such sums
 as may be necessary in each of the fiscal years 1992 and 1993.
`SEC. 903. EDUCATIONAL AND RESEARCH ACTIVITIES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Center shall carry out educational and research
 activities that shall include--
 `(1) the preparation and distribution of materials to educate the public
 concerning the health effects of using tobacco products;
 `(2) the preparation of public service announcements and the preparation
 and conduct of paid advertising campaigns to inform targeted populations,
 including youth and the general population, of the health effects of using
 tobacco products and the opportunities for prevention and cessation of
 such use;
 `(3) coordinating with film makers, broadcast media managers, and others
 regarding the impact of the media on tobacco use behavior;
 `(4) research on patterns of tobacco product use, initiation and cessation,
 and effective methods for disseminating such information; and
 `(5) plans to effectively provide outreach services to high risk groups
 and youth with such information.
 `(b) FEDERAL INTERAGENCY COMMITTEE ON SMOKING AND HEALTH-
 `(1) TRANSFER OF FUNCTIONS- The functions and duties of the Federal
 Interagency Committee on Smoking and Health shall be transferred to and
 be the responsibility of the Center.
 `(2) COORDINATION- The Center, acting through the Federal Interagency
 Committee on Smoking and Health, shall coordinate educational and research
 activities with other Federal agencies and seek to minimize duplication
 of tobacco related activity.'.
SEC. 4. SMOKING EDUCATION AND INFORMATION.
 Section 3 of the Comprehensive Smoking Education Act (15 U.S.C. 1341)
 is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (5), by striking out `and' after the semicolon;
 (2) in paragraph (6), by striking out the period and inserting in lieu
 thereof `; and'; and
 (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(7) establish a comprehensive outreach program to inform individuals
 under the age of 18 about the health consequences of smoking.'.
SEC. 5. ANTI-SMOKING PROGRAMS.
 Title IX of the Public Health Service Act (as added by section (3)) is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subtitle:
`Subtitle B--Anti-Smoking Programs
`CHAPTER 1--PUBLIC INFORMATION CAMPAIGNS
`SEC. 911. GRANTS FOR PUBLIC INFORMATION CAMPAIGNS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Center shall make grants to, or enter into contracts
 with entities that meet the requirements of subsection (b) to conduct
 public information campaigns concerning the use of tobacco products.
 `(b) ENTITIES- Entities eligible to receive grants under this section shall--
 `(1) be public, private or nonprofit private entities; and
 `(2) provide public information campaigns regarding tobacco use and health,
 through the use of--
 `(A) public service announcements;
 `(B) paid advertising messages; and
 `(C) counter advertising to provide the public with information to counter
 the messages in tobacco advertisements that promote tobacco use;
that are designed for television, radio and print media, billboards, and
public transit advertising that shall warn youth and other individuals,
specifically those in the groups of highest tobacco use, concerning the
health and safety risks of tobacco use.
`SEC. 912. GRANT APPLICATION.
 `(a) REQUIREMENT- No grant or contract shall be made or entered into under
 this chapter unless an application that meets the requirements of subsection
 (b) has been submitted to, and approved by, the Center.
 `(b) CONTENTS- An application submitted under subsection (a) shall provide
 such agreements, assurances, and information, be in such form and submitted
 in such manner as the Center shall prescribe, and shall contain--
 `(1) a complete description of the plan of the applicant for the development
 of a public information campaign that shall include advertising, and--
 `(A) shall focus on specific tobacco uses (such as persuasional programs
 to deter nontobacco users, especially youth, from using tobacco products
 and the cessation of the use of tobacco products by tobacco users, as well
 as the type of tobacco use);
 `(B) an identification of the specific audiences that shall be targeted
 which shall include those communities and groups with the highest prevalence
 of tobacco use and high health risks from tobacco use, specifically, to
 include youth, school dropouts, minorities, blue collar workers, pregnant
 women, and low and no income individuals;
 `(C) an identification of the media to be used in the campaign;
 `(D) an identification of the geographic distribution of the campaign;
 `(E) an identification of the type and scope of the intended activities
 of the campaign;
 `(F) plans to test market the development plan with a relevant population
 group and geographic area and an assurance that effectiveness criteria
 will be implemented prior to the completion of the final plan;
 `(G) an evaluation component to measure the effectiveness of the campaign;
 and
 `(H) such other information as the Center may require; and
 `(2) a complete description of the kind, amount, distribution, and timing
 of advertising and such other information as the Center may require, and an
 assurance that the media organizations with which such advertisements are
 placed will not lower the current frequency of public service announcements.
`SEC. 913. GRANT ACTIVITIES AND CRITERIA.
 `(a) ACTIVITIES- Grants made under this chapter shall be used for the
 development of a public information campaign that may include public
 service announcements, paid advertisements for television, radio, and
 print media as well as billboards, public transit advertising, and any
 other mode of advertising that the Center determines to be appropriate to
 meet the requirements of section 912, and such activities shall--
 `(1) focus on seeking to discourage the initiation of use of tobacco
 products by youth and nonusers; and
 `(2) encourage cessation of tobacco use by those who currently use tobacco
 products;
with a focus on the specific groups identified in subsection (b).
 `(b) CRITERIA- The Center shall include in the criteria used for awarding
 grants under this chapter evidence that the applicant--
 `(1) will conduct activities that target communities and groups with the
 highest prevalence of tobacco use and the highest health risk from tobacco
 use, specifically youth, school dropouts, pregnant women, minorities,
 blue collar workers, and low and no income people.
 `(2) has a record of high quality campaigns of a comparable type; and
 `(3) has a record of high quality campaigns that target the population
 groups specified in paragraph (1).
 `(c) PREFERENCE- In awarding grants or contracts under this chapter,
 the Center shall give a preference to those applicants that will conduct
 activities that will most likely encompass an audience that includes a
 high concentration of the groups identified in subsection (b)(1).
 `(d) TARGETING- In awarding grants or contracts under this chapter,
 the Center shall attempt to award such grants and contracts so that all
 target groups identified in subsection (b)(1) are reached with diverse
 media. Single contracts or grants shall not require that all groups are
 targeted or that all media must be used.
`SEC. 914. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 `There are authorized to be appropriated to make grants under this chapter,
 $50,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, and such sums as may be necessary in
 each of the fiscal years 1992 and 1993.
`CHAPTER 2--STATE LEADERSHIP IN ANTI-TOBACCO USE INTERVENTION
`SEC. 915. GRANT PROGRAM.
 `The Center shall award grants to States and, in consultation with State
 health authorities, to political subdivisions of States, to assist such
 States in meeting the costs of improving State leadership concerning
 activities that--
 `(1) will prevent the initial use of tobacco products by minors; and
 `(2) encourage the cessation of the use of tobacco products;
among the youth and other residents of the State, with particular attention
directed towards those individuals in groups who are at the highest risk
and suffer the highest prevalence of tobacco use, including school dropouts,
minorities, low-income individuals, pregnant women and blue collar workers.
`SEC. 916. APPLICATIONS.
 `(a) REQUIREMENT- No grant shall be awarded under this chapter unless
 an application that meets the requirements of subsection (b) has been
 submitted to, and approved by, the Center.
 `(b) CONTENTS- An application submitted under subsection (a) shall be
 in such form, be submitted in such manner as the Center shall prescribe,
 and shall contain--
 `(1) a complete description of the type of programs that will be established
 or assisted by or through the applicant, that shall include--
 `(A) a statement of the goals and objectives of such programs or activities
 that are consistent with the purpose of section 915;
 `(B) a description of the activities that the State shall develop to
 establish an ongoing anti-tobacco initiative within the State Department of
 Health that shall involve the coordination, by such Department of Health,
 of such initiative with existing anti-tobacco use programs;
 `(C) an assurance that the activities developed pursuant to subparagraph
 (B) will involve a concentration of effort by the State to change tobacco
 use behavior in groups identified in section 915, that shall include one
 or more of the activities described under section 917; and
 `(D) a timetable for implementation or completion of the proposed activities;
 `(2) an assurance by the State that it will make an ongoing commitment
 to support the anti-tobacco initiative described in paragraph (1)(B)
 subsequent to the termination of the grant period;
 `(3) an assurance satisfactory to the Center that the programs established
 or assisted with funds under a grant awarded under this subpart will be
 established or assisted in a manner consistent with the State health plan
 in effect under section 1524(c); and
 `(4) such other information as the Secretary may by regulation prescribe.
`SEC. 917. GRANT ACTIVITIES AND CRITERIA.
 `(a) NUMBER OF GRANTS- The Center shall award grants to at least 10 but
 not more than 20 States.
 `(b) USE OF GRANT- Grants awarded under this chapter shall be used--
 `(1) for activities that promote and enforce a minimum age that is at
 least 18 years for the purchase of tobacco products;
 `(2) for activities that will enhance the ability of the State Department
 of Health to implement comprehensive planning, and intervention activities
 for anti- tobacco use;
 `(3) to assist in the provision of training and technical assistance by
 appropriate Federal government entities to enhance the development of
 State leadership capabilities in anti-tobacco use;
 `(4) for education, training, and clinical skills improvement activities to
 educate teachers, community workers, and health professionals (including
 physicians, dentists, and allied health personnel) in anti-tobacco use
 intervention strategies; and
 `(5) for the collection of information and data to support State legislative
 efforts concerning anti-tobacco use.
 `(c) CRITERIA- The Center shall include in the criteria used for awarding
 grants under this chapter--
 `(1) evidence that the applicant has made efforts to discourage smoking
 and other tobacco use among the youth residing in such applicant's State;
 `(2) evidence that the applicant has made efforts to enforce the law
 concerning the minimum age requirements for the purchase of tobacco products,
 `(3) evidence of the need of the applicant for the assistance that is
 requested by the applicant, as reflected in the prevalence of the use of
 tobacco within the applicant's State, especially among the populations
 that are described under section 915;
 `(4) evidence of the need of the applicant for the assistance that
 is requested by the applicant, as reflected in the necessity for the
 development of Statewide expertise in the planning of, and intervention in,
 anti-tobacco use situations;
 `(5) the potential for the success of proposed activities that will be
 established or assisted under the grant;
 `(6) evidence of cooperative arrangements that the applicant has, or will
 enter into with other entities that will participate in the activities
 established or assisted under the grant; and
 `(7) evidence that the applicant intends to concentrate its efforts on
 the populations identified under section 915.
`SEC. 918. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 `There are authorized to be appropriated to make grants under this chapter,
 $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, $7,500,000 for fiscal year 1992, and
 $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1993.
`SEC. 919. INCENTIVE GRANTS TO STATES TO LIMIT YOUTH ACCESS TO TOBACCO
PRODUCTS.
 `(a) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATION- There is authorized to be appropriated
 $50,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, and such sums as may be necessary in
 each of the fiscal years 1992 and 1993 to enable the Secretary of Health
 and Human Services to make incentive grants to States.
 `(b) LEGISLATIVE REQUIREMENT- To receive a grant under this section,
 a State shall enact legislation that--
 `(A) prohibits the sale of a tobacco product to a minor;
 `(B) improves the enforcement of such an existing prohibition; and
 `(C) prohibits the sale of a tobacco product in a vending machine unless
 the presence of minors is not allowed on the premises where such machine
 is located.
 `(c) CRITERIA FOR INCENTIVE GRANT AWARD- To receive a grant under this
 section a State shall--
 `(1) certify that the legislative requirements of subsection (b) have
 been met;
 `(2) provide a description of such legislative changes to the Center;
 `(3) provide a plan for the implementation of such legislative changes to
 the Center; and
 `(4) describe the intended use of the grant funds.
 `(d) PURPOSE OF GRANTS- Funds made available under a grant under this
 section may be used for--
 `(1) the dissemination of information regarding the changes in State law
 required under this section;
 `(2) planning, establishing, and implementing State procedures to implement
 such changes;
 `(3) education concerning the need for such changes;
 `(4) other purposes as determined appropriate by the Center.
 `(e) DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS- Funds shall be distributed under this section
 so that no State shall receive more than $2,000,000 in each fiscal year
 under this section.
 `(f) ENFORCEMENT AND COMPLIANCE-
 `(1) BY STATE- A State receiving a grant under subsection (a) shall ensure
 that the legislation referred to in subsection (b) is effectively enforced
 to achieve substantial compliance, as determined by the Assistant Secretary
 for Health of the Department of Health and Human Services, or the designee
 of such Assistant Secretary.
 `(2) REGULATIONS- The Assistant Secretary or designee referred to in
 paragraph (1) shall promulgate regulations necessary to implement this
 section.
 `(g) ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS- A State receiving a grant under subsection
 (a) may place restrictions on the sale or distribution of tobacco products
 to minors in addition to the requirements referred to in subsection (b).
`SEC. 920. MODEL STATE PROGRAM.
 `(a) CENTER FOR TOBACCO PRODUCTS- The Center for Tobacco Products established
 under subtitle A shall provide assistance to not more than 10 States that
 desire to limit or prohibit the sale of tobacco products to minors who
 are under the age of 18.
 `(b) NUMBER OF MODEL STATES- The Center shall designate not more than
 10 States as model States for the purpose of providing assistance under
 subsection (a).
 `(c) CRITERIA FOR MODEL STATE DESIGNATION- To be designated as a model
 State under subsection (b), a State shall--
 `(1) have in effect a law that prohibits the sale of tobacco products to
 individuals under the age of 18;
 `(2) seek to improve the enforcement of the law referred to in paragraph
 (1); and
 `(3) have in effect a law or regulation that is intended to reduce the
 use of, or access to, cigarette vending machines by minors who are under
 the age of 18.
 `(d) APPLICATION FOR MODEL STATE DESIGNATION- To be eligible to be
 designated as a model State under subsection (b), a State shall submit an
 application that shall include a designation of a lead agency that will
 work in conjunction with the Center. Such agency shall--
 `(1) have experience in matters that affect the public health;
 `(2) have expertise regarding the health effects and use of tobacco products;
 `(3) provide direct services or referrals for services for smoking cessation;
 `(4) administer activities intended to prevent the initiation of use
 of tobacco products by minors who are under the age of 18 and other
 individuals; and
 `(5) have a lead office or department that will be chiefly responsible
 for such functions.
 `(e) STATE ASSURANCES- To be eligible to be designated as a model State
 under subsection (b), a State shall provide assurances that it will--
 `(1) provide personnel sufficient to staff the lead office or department
 referred to in subsection (d)(5);
 `(2) establish a mechanism for the reporting of citizen or other complaints
 to the designated office or department concerning retailers that sell tobacco
 products to minors who are under the age of 18 in defiance of State law;
 `(3) establish a program to make the public aware of the office or department
 referred to in subsection (d)(5) and a mechanism for reporting complaints
 regarding retailers who sell tobacco products to minors who are under the
 age of 18 in defiance of State law;
 `(4) seek to further restrict the access of minors who are under the age
 of 18 to vending machines that sell tobacco products;
 `(5) establish a procedure by which the lead State agency may make a finding
 or a presumption that a retailer or distributor has a pattern or practice
 of selling tobacco products to minors in defiance of State law; and
 `(6) establish a procedure for lead State agencies to report findings or
 presumptions under paragraph (5) to the Center and for requesting assistance
 from the Center.
 `(f) ASSISTANCE TO MODEL STATES- The Center shall provide States designated
 as model States with--
 `(1) printed materials for distribution to retailers concerning the
 illegality of the sale of tobacco products to minors;
 `(2) support for, and assistance in, the planning of meetings, conferences,
 and conventions to educate retailers concerning the health hazards associated
 with tobacco products, the addictive nature of tobacco products, and State
 laws that prohibit the sale of tobacco products to minors;
 `(3) assistance in the development of reporting systems to identify specific
 retailers and retail chains that consistently sell tobacco products to
 minors in defiance of State law;
 `(4) assistance in the development of notification systems to make specific
 retailers aware that such retailers are acting consistently in defiance
 of State law; and
 `(5) notices to be distributed to retailers concerning the awareness of
 Federal authorities of the retailers continued sale of tobacco products
 to minors in defiance of State law.
`CHAPTER 3--ANTI-TOBACCO USE INTERVENTION IN THE WORKPLACE
`SEC. 921. PURPOSE.
 `The Center shall provide funds under this chapter to attempt to reduce the
 incidence of smoking and other tobacco use among workers with the highest
 prevalence of smoking through demonstration grants to public and private
 entities, including unions and other organizations.
`SEC. 922. GRANTS.
 `The Center, shall make grants to assist in meeting the costs of activities
 that will prevent the initiation, and encourage the cessation, of the use
 of tobacco products among workers and their families, especially those
 individuals with the highest prevalence of tobacco use.
`SEC. 923. APPLICATION.
 `(a) REQUIREMENT- No grant may be made under this chapter unless an
 application therefor has been submitted to, and approved by, the Center.
 `(b) CONTENTS- An application submitted under subsection (a) shall be in
 such form and submitted in such manner as the Center shall by regulation
 prescribe, and shall contain
 `(1) a complete description of the type of the program that is to be provided
 by or through a grant awarded under under this chapter, that shall include--
 `(A) a statement of goals and objectives of the program that shall be
 consistent with the purpose of this title;
 `(B) a description of the activities to be carried out with the assistance
 provided under the grant that are designed to establish an ongoing
 anti-tobacco program that may include working cooperatively with existing
 anti-tobacco programs in the community or State;
 `(C) an assurance that activities conducted under subparagraph (B) will
 show a concentration of effort to change tobacco use behavior in those
 groups identified in section 922 and will include one or more of the
 activities described in section 924; and
 `(D) a timetable for the proposed activities;
 `(2) such agreements, assurances, and information as the Center determines
 to be necessary to carry out this section.
 `(3) an assurance by the applicant of its ongoing commitments to support
 the anti-tobacco use activities after the grant period has expired;
 `(4) such other information as the Secretary may by regulation prescribe.
`SEC. 924. GRANT ACTIVITIES AND CRITERIA.
 `(a) ACTIVITIES- Assistance provided through a grant awarded under this
 chapter shall be used for--
 `(1) education and other intervention strategies to promote the cessation
 of tobacco use among workers who have the highest prevalence of tobacco use;
 `(2) anti-smoking programs that are designed to assist workers in making
 a behavior change to cease using tobacco products;
 `(3) education and other intervention strategies that will serve to prevent
 initiation of smoking and other tobacco use among children of workers who
 have the highest prevalence of tobacco use;
 `(4) activities to provide family members with education concerning the
 health consequences of tobacco use;
 `(5) the development of audio visual or print materials that will facilitate
 any of the activities described in this subsection when such appropriate
 audio or visual materials are not otherwise available; and
 `(6) training and education to develop the expertise of a health educator
 or other personnel who will perform the activities described in this
 subsection for workers and their families.
 `(b) CRITERIA- The Center shall include in the criteria for awarding of
 grants under this chapter--
 `(1) the potential for success of the proposed plan of the applicant;
 `(2) evidence of any cooperative arrangements with other entities that
 will participate in the proposed plan;
 `(3) evidence of the intent of the applicant to concentrate efforts toward
 blue collar workers and other groups identified in section 922;
 `(4) evidence that the activity is implemented with the cooperation of
 the employer; and
 `(5) any other criteria as the Center shall specify.
`SEC. 925. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 `There are authorized to be appropriated to make grants under this chapter,
 $5,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1991 through 1993.'.
SEC. 6. DRUG-FREE SCHOOLS AND COMMUNITIES ACT OF 1986.
 (a) STATE PROGRAMS- Section 5122(a)(1) of the Drug-Free Schools and
 Communities Act of 1986 (hereafter in this section referred to as the
 `Act') is amended by striking `drug' and inserting `drug, tobacco'.
 (b) STATE APPLICATIONS- Section 5123(b)(7) of the Act is amended by striking
 `drug' and inserting `drug, tobacco, and alcohol'.
 (c) LOCAL DRUG ABUSE EDUCATION PREVENTION PROGRAMS- Section 5125 of the
 Act is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a) by striking `drug and alcohol abuse prevention'
 and inserting `drug, tobacco, and alcohol abuse prevention';
 (2) in subsection (a)(9) by striking `drug' and inserting `drug, tobacco';
 (3) in subsection (a)(11) by striking `drug' and inserting `drug,
 tobacco'; and
 (4) in subsection (a)(12) by striking `drug' and inserting `drug, tobacco'.
 (d) LOCAL APPLICATIONS- Section 5126(a)(2) of the Act is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (B) by striking `drug' and inserting `drug, tobacco';
 (2) in subparagraph (E) by--
 (A) striking `applicants drug' and inserting `applicants drug, tobacco';
 (B) striking `and' at the end of clause (i);
 (C) inserting `and' at the end of clause (ii); and
 (D) inserting at the end thereof the following new clause (iii):
 `(iii) how it will discourage use of tobacco products by students;'; and
 (3) in subparagraph (I) by striking `conduct drug' and inserting `conduct
 drug, tobacco'.
 (e) FEDERAL ACTIVITIES- Section 5132(b) of the Act is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1) by inserting `and for dissemination pursuant to section
 3 of the Comprehensive Smoking Education Act of 1984' at the end thereof; and
 (2) in paragraph (2) by striking `drug' and inserting `drug and tobacco'.
 (f) DEFINITIONS- Section 5141(b)(1) of the Act is amended by striking
 `alcohol' and inserting `alcohol and tobacco,'.
SEC. 7. NATIONAL COMMISSION ON DRUG-FREE SCHOOLS.
 Section 5051(i) of the Anti Drug Abuse Act of 1988 (20 U.S.C. 3172 note)
 is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) by inserting `, including anti-tobacco education' after `program'
 in subparagraph (A);
 (B) by inserting `or tobacco products' after `drugs' in subparagraph (C); and
 (C) by inserting `and tobacco' after `drug' in subparagraph (D); and
 (2) in paragraph (3), by inserting `and smoke-free' after `drug-free'.
SEC. 8. TOBACCO EDUCATION AND INFORMATION REGARDING CIGARETTE SMOKING.
 Subtitle B of title IX of the Public Health Service Act (as added by
 section 5) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following:
`CHAPTER 4--TOBACCO USE AND EDUCATION IN SCHOOLS
`SEC. 926. INCENTIVE GRANTS TO ESTABLISH SMOKE FREE SCHOOLS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- There is authorized to be appropriated $25,000,000 for
 fiscal year 1991, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal
 years 1992 and 1993 to enable the Secretary of Education to make incentive
 grants, to be distributed in accordance with part F of title IV of the
 Augustas F. Hawkins, Robert T. Stafford Elementary and Secondary School
 Improvement Amendments of 1988 with respect to the Secretary's fund for
 innovation and education.
 `(b) LEGISLATIVE REQUIREMENT- To receive a grant under this section,
 a State shall enact legislation that--
 `(1) creates smoke-free elementary and secondary school buildings and
 grounds;
 `(2) prohibits smoking by minors in school buildings and on school grounds
 and school buses;
 `(3) requires schools to establish smoking areas for adults that are separate
 from students, and to ensure adequate safeguards exist to protect students
 from exposure to passive smoke; and
 `(4) provides technical assistance to schools and other assistance to
 implement the provision of this section.
 `(c) ENFORCEMENT AND COMPLIANCE-
 `(1) BY STATE- A State receiving a grant under subsection (a) shall
 ensure that the legislation referred to in subsection (b) is effectively
 enforced to achieve substantial compliance, as determined by the Secretary
 of Education in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
 `(2) REGULATIONS- The Secretary of Education, in consultation with the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services shall promulgate regulations
 necessary to implement this section.
 `(d) ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS- A State receiving a grant under subsection (a)
 may place restrictions on the use of tobacco products in schools in addition
 to the requirements referred to in subsection (a). A State receiving funds
 under this section shall provide assistance under this section only to
 schools that are subject to State laws of the type described in subsection
 (b).
`CHAPTER 5--INFORMATION AND PROMOTION REGARDING CIGARETTE SMOKING
`SEC. 927. DEFINITIONS.
 `As used in this chapter:
 `(1) COMMITTEE- The term `Committee' means the committee established
 under section 928(c), or the committee established under section 3(b)
 of the Comprehensive Smoking Education Act (15 U.S.C. 1341(b)) as such
 section existed before the date of enactment of this section.
 `(2) UNITED STATES- The term `United States', when used in a geographical
 sense, includes the several States, the District of Columbia, the
 Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa,
 Wake Island, Midway Islands, Kingman Reef, Johnston Island, and the
 installations of the Armed Forces.
`SEC. 928. SMOKING RESEARCH, EDUCATION, AND INFORMATION IN GENERAL.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM- The Secretary shall establish and carry out
 a program to inform the public of any dangers to human health presented
 by cigarette smoking.
 `(b) ADMINISTRATION OF PROGRAM- In carrying out the program established
 under subsection (a), the Secretary shall--
 `(1) conduct and support research on the effects of cigarette smoking and
 of passive smoke on human health and develop materials for informing the
 public of such effect;
 `(2) coordinate all research and educational programs and other activities
 within the Department of Health and Human Services that relate to the effect
 of cigarette smoking and passive smoke on human health and coordinate,
 through the Interagency Committee on Smoking and Health (established under
 subsection (c)), such activities with similar activities of other Federal
 agencies and of private agencies;
 `(3) establish and maintain a liaison with appropriate private entities,
 other Federal agencies, and State and local public agencies concerning
 activities relating to the effect of cigarette smoking and passive smoke
 on human health;
 `(4) collect, analyze, and disseminate (through publications, bibliographies,
 and otherwise) information, studies, and other data relating to the effect of
 cigarette smoking and passive smoke on human health, and develop standards,
 criteria, and methodologies for improved information programs related to
 smoking and health;
 `(5) compile and make available information on State and local laws relating
 to the use and consumption of cigarettes; and
 `(6) undertake any other additional information and research activities that
 the Secretary determines necessary and appropriate to carry out this section.
 `(c) COMMITTEE-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT- To carry out the activities described in paragraphs
 (2) and (3) of subsection (b), the Secretary shall establish an Interagency
 Committee on Smoking and Health.
 `(2) COMPOSITION- The Committee established under paragraph (1) shall be
 composed of--
 `(A) members appointed by the Secretary from appropriate institutes and
 agencies of the Department, that may include the National Cancer Institute,
 the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, the National Institute of
 Child Health and Human Development, the National Institute on Drug Abuse,
 and Health Resources and Services Administration, and the Centers for
 Disease Control;
 `(B) at least one member appointed from the Federal Trade Commission, the
 Department of Education, the Department of Labor, and any other Federal
 agency designated by the Secretary, the appointment of whom shall be made
 by the head of the entity from which the member is appointed; and
 `(C) five members appointed by the Secretary from physicians and scientists
 who represent private entities involved informing the public about the
 health effects of smoking.
 `(3) CHAIRPERSON- The Secretary shall designate the chairperson of the
 Committee established under paragraph (1).
 `(4) EXPENSES- While away from their homes or regular places of business in
 the performance of services for the Committee established under paragraph
 (1), members of such Committee shall be allowed travel expenses, including
 per diem in lieu of subsistence, in the manner provided by sections 5702
 and 5703 of title 5 of the United States Code.
 `(5) OTHER INFORMATION- The Secretary shall make available to the Committee
 established under paragraph (1) such staff, information, and other assistance
 as it may require to carry out its activities effectively.
 `(d) REPORT- Not later than January 1, 1990, and biennially thereafter,
 the Secretary shall prepare and submit, to the appropriate Committees of
 Congress, a report that shall contain--
 `(1) an overview and assessment of Federal activities undertaken to inform
 the public of the health consequences of smoking and passive smoke and
 the extent of public knowledge of such consequences;
 `(2) a description of the activities of the Secretary and the Committee
 under subsection (a);
 `(3) information regarding the activities of the private sector taken in
 response to the effects of smoking on health; and
 `(4) such recommendations as the Secretary may consider appropriate.
`SEC. 928. PUBLIC EDUCATION REGARDING SMOKELESS TOBACCO.
 `(a) DEFINITION- As used in this section and section 929, the term `smokeless
 tobacco' means any finely cut, ground, powdered, or leaf tobacco that is
 intended to be placed in the oral cavity.
 `(b) DEVELOPMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall establish and carry out a program to
 inform the public of any dangers to human health resulting from the use
 of smokeless tobacco products.
 `(2) DUTIES OF SECRETARY- In carrying out the program established under
 paragraph (1) the Secretary shall--
 `(A) develop educational programs and materials and public service
 announcements respecting the dangers to human health from the use of
 smokeless tobacco;
 `(B) make such programs, materials, and announcements available to States,
 local governments, school systems, the media, and such other entities as
 the Secretary determines appropriate to further the purposes of this part;
 `(C) conduct and support research on the effect of smokeless tobacco
 and health.
 `(3) CONSULTATION- In developing programs, materials, and announcements under
 paragraph (2), the Secretary shall consult with the Secretary of Education,
 medical and public health entities, consumer groups, representatives of
 manufacturers of smokeless tobacco products, and other appropriate entities.
 `(c) ASSISTANCE- The Secretary may provide technical assistance and make
 grants to States--
 `(1) to assist in the development of educational programs and materials
 and public service announcements respecting the dangers to human health
 from the use of smokeless tobacco;
 `(2) to assist in the distribution of such programs, materials, and
 announcements through the States; and
 `(3) to establish 18 as the minimum age for the purchase of smokeless
 tobacco.
`SEC. 929. REPORTS.
 `Not later than January 1, 1990, and biennially thereafter, the Secretary
 shall prepare and submit, to the appropriate Committees of Congress,
 a report containing--
 `(1) a description of the effects of health education efforts on the use
 of smokeless tobacco products;
 `(2) a description of the use by the public of smokeless tobacco products;
 `(3) an evaluation of the health effects of smokeless tobacco products
 and the identification of areas appropriate for further research; and
 `(4) such recommendations for legislation and administrative action as
 the Secretary considers appropriate.
`CHAPTER 6--GENERAL PROVISIONS
`SEC. 935. DEFINITIONS.
 `As used in this subtitle:
 `(1) RECIPIENT- The term `recipient' means any entity or individual that
 has received a grant under this subtitle.
 `(2) TOBACCO USE- The term `tobacco use' means the use of any tobacco
 product that is used through smoking, inhalation, or mastication, and such
 term shall include the use of nasal and oral snuff.
 `(3) UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT- The term `units of local government'
 shall include Federally recognized Indian tribes.
`SEC. 936. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
 `(a) AMOUNT AND METHOD OF PAYMENT-
 `(1) AMOUNT- The Secretary shall determine the amount of a grant awarded
 under this title.
 `(2) METHOD- Payments under grants awarded under this subtitle may be
 made in advance, on the basis of estimates, or by way of reimbursement,
 with necessary adjustments because of underpayments or overpayments, and
 in such installments and on such terms and conditions as the Secretary
 determines necessary to carry out the purposes of such grants.
 `(b) MAINTENANCE OF EFFORT- No grant shall be made under this subtitle unless
 the Secretary determines that there is satisfactory assurance that Federal
 funds made available under such a grant for any period will be so used as
 to supplement and, to the extent practical, increase the level of State,
 local, and other non-Federal funds that would, in the absence of such Federal
 funds, be made available for the program for which the grant is to be made
 and will in no event supplant such State, local and other non-Federal funds.
 `(c) SUPPLIES, EQUIPMENT, AND EMPLOYEE DETAIL-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary, at the request of a recipient of a grant
 under this subtitle, may reduce the amount of such a grant by--
 `(A) the fair market value of any supplies or equipment furnished to the
 recipient by the Secretary;
 `(B) the amount of pay, allowances, and travel expenses incurred by any
 officer or employee of the Federal government when such officer or employee
 has been detailed to the recipient;
 `(C) the amount of any other costs incurred in connection with the detail
 of an officer or employee as described in subparagraph (B);
when the furnishing of such supplies or equipment or the detail of such
an officer or employee is for the convenience, and at the request, of such
recipient and for the purpose of carrying out activities under the grant.
 `(2) USE OF AMOUNT OF REDUCTION- The amount by which any grant awarded
 under this subtitle is reduced under this subsection shall be available for
 payment by the Secretary of the costs incurred in furnishing the supplies
 or equipment, or in detailing the personnel, on which the reduction of
 such grant is based, and such amount shall be considered as part of the
 grant that has been paid to the recipient.
 `(d) RECORDS- Each recipient of a grant under this subtitle shall keep
 such records as the Secretary determines appropriate, including records
 that fully disclose--
 `(1) the amount and disposition by such recipient of the proceeds of
 such grant;
 `(2) the total cost of the activity for which such grant was made;
 `(3) the amount of the cost of the activity for which such grant was made
 that has been received from other sources; and
 `(4) such other records as will facilitate an effective audit.
 `(e) AUDIT AND EXAMINATION OF RECORDS- The Secretary and the Comptroller
 General of the United States shall have access to any books, documents,
 papers, and records of the recipient of a grant under this part, for the
 purpose of conducting audits and examinations of such recipient that are
 pertinent to such grant.
`Subtitle C--General Provisions
`SEC. 941. PROHIBITED ACTS.
 `The following acts and the causing thereof are prohibited:
 `(1) ADULTERATION OR MISBRANDING- The adulteration or misbranding of any
 tobacco product.
 `(2) ADULTERATION OR MISBRANDING IN A TERRITORY- The adulteration or
 misbranding within any Territory of any tobacco product.
 `(3) TRADE SECRET- The using by any person to the advantage of such person,
 or revealing, other than to the Secretary or officers or employees of
 the Department, or to the courts when relevant in any judicial proceeding
 under this title, any information acquired under authority of this title
 concerning any method or process that as a trade secret is entitled to
 protection. This paragraph shall not be construed to prohibit disclosure
 of information to Congress.
 `(4) MISREPRESENTATION OF COMPLIANCE WITH TITLE- The using, on the labeling
 of any tobacco product of any representation or suggestion that approval
 of an application with respect to such product is in effect under this title.
 `(5) REFERENCES- The using, in labeling, of any reference to any report
 or analysis furnished in compliance with this title.
 `(6) COPIES OF MATERIAL- The failure of the manufacturer of a tobacco
 product to maintain for transmittal, or to transmit, to any individual
 who makes a written request for information as to such product, true and
 correct copies of all printed matter that are required to be included
 in any package of a tobacco product or such other printed matter as is
 approved by the Secretary. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed
 to exempt any person from any labeling requirement imposed by or under
 other provisions of this title.
 `(7) REPORTS, RECORDS, REQUIREMENTS- The failure to make the reports
 required, the failure to retain the records required, or the failure to
 meet the requirements prescribed, under this title.
`SEC. 942. INJUNCTIONS AND PENALTIES.
 `(a) INJUNCTION PROCEEDINGS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The district courts of the United States shall have
 jurisdiction, for cause shown, and subject to the provisions of section 381
 (relating to notice to opposite party) of title 28, United States Code,
 to restrain violations of section 941.
 `(2) VIOLATIONS- In case of violation of an injunction or restraining
 order issued under this section, which also constitutes a violation of this
 title, trial shall be by the court, or, upon demand of the accused, by a
 jury. Such trial shall be conducted in accordance with the practice and
 procedure applicable in the case of proceedings subject to the provisions
 of Rule 42(b), Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.
 `(b) PENALTIES-
 `(1) FINE AND IMPRISONMENT- Any person who violates a provision of section
 941 shall be imprisoned for not more than 1 year or fined in a manner
 consistent with the Criminal Fine Enforcement Act of 1984, or both.
 `(2) SUBSEQUENT VIOLATIONS- Notwithstanding the paragraph (1), if any person
 commits such a violation after a prior conviction of such person under
 this section has become final, or commits such a violation intentional to
 defraud or mislead, such person shall be imprisoned for not more than 3
 years or fined in a manner consistent with the Criminal Fine Enforcement
 Act of 1984, or both.
 `(c) DENIAL OF DELIVERY- With regard to a model State designated as such
 under section 920, any retailer for whom a State makes a finding that such
 retailer is selling tobacco products to minors in violation of State law
 may be denied delivery of tobacco products by all distributors of such
 products within that State for a period not to exceed 60 days, if such
 retailer has been notified that such a finding has been made. Such 60 day
 period shall begin on the date that such retailer is notified by the State
 of such finding.
`SEC. 943. SEIZURE.
 `(a) TIME FOR INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS-
 `(1) INTRODUCTION TO INTERSTATE COMMERCE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Any tobacco product that is adulterated or misbranded may
 be proceeded against on libel of information and condemned in any district
 court of the United States or United States court of a Territory within
 the jurisdiction of which the product is found.
 `(B) REMOVAL-
 `(i) STIPULATION- Any proceeding pending or instituted under subparagraph
 (A) shall, on application of the claimant, seasonably made, be removed
 for trial to any district agreed on by stipulation between the parties.
 `(ii) FAILURE TO STIPULATE WITHIN REASONABLE TIME- In the case of a failure
 to stipulate within a reasonable time under clause (i), the claimant may
 apply to the court of the district in which the seizure has been made,
 and such court (after giving the United States attorney for such district
 reasonable notice and opportunity to be heard) shall by order, unless good
 cause to the contrary is shown, specify a district of reasonable proximity
 to the claimant's principal place of business to which the case shall be
 removed for trial.
 `(2) MODEL STATES- In the case of tobacco products, within a State that has
 been designated a model State by the Center, where sale of such products is
 in violation of State law, and where there is a finding that a retailer
 is, or has been, engaged in a pattern or practice of sale to minors,
 the Secretary--
 `(A) may place a temporary ban on the shipping of tobacco products to such
 retailer by distributors in that State, or the tobacco products of such
 retailer may be seized by the Secretary in accordance with section 943;
 `(B) shall inform the appropriate distributor in that State that supplies
 the tobacco products to such retailer, that a temporary ban exists on the
 shipping of such products to such retailer, and the distributor shall not
 continue to distribute to such retailer, or the Secretary may seize such
 products from the distributor;
 `(C) shall notify the retailer described in subparagraph (B) and its
 distributor of the impending penalties to be applied under this subsection
 and the date on which such penalties may be implemented;
 `(D) shall, not later than 60 days after the notification and implementation
 of the penalties as provided for in this section, provide the penalized
 retailer with the opportunity for an informal hearing; and
 `(E) may assess additional penalties or impose a further forfeiture, as
 provided in this section, to a penalized retailer or distributor if such
 retailer or distributor violates the bar on shipping to such retailer as
 provided for in subparagraphs (A) and (B).
 `(b) PROCEDURE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The tobacco product, equipment, or other thing proceeded
 against under this section shall be liable to seizure by process pursuant
 to the libel, and the procedure in cases under this section shall conform,
 as nearly as possible, to the procedure in admiralty, except that on the
 demand of either party any issue of fact joined in any such case shall be
 tried by jury.
 `(2) CONSOLIDATION-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- When libel for condemnation proceedings under this
 section, involving the same claimant and the same issues of adulteration
 or misbranding, are pending in two or more jurisdictions, such pending
 proceedings, on application of the claimant seasonably made to the court
 of one such jurisdiction, shall be consolidated for trial by order of such
 court, and be tried in--
 `(i) any district selected by the claimant where one of such proceedings
 is pending; or
 `(ii) a district agreed on by stipulation between the parties.
 `(B) OTHER PLACE OF JURISDICTION- If no order for consolidation is made
 under subparagraph (A) within a reasonable time, the claimant may apply
 to the court of one such jurisdiction, and such court (after providing
 the United States attorney for such district with reasonable notice and an
 opportunity to be heard) shall by order, unless good cause to the contrary
 is shown, specify a district of reasonable proximity to the principal
 place of business of the claimant, in which all such pending proceedings
 shall be consolidated for trial and tried.
 `(C) FIXED TRIAL DATE AND NOTIFICATION- Orders of consolidation under this
 paragraph shall not apply so as to require the removal of any case in which
 the date for trial has been fixed. The court granting such order shall
 give prompt notification thereof to the other courts having jurisdiction
 of the cases covered thereby.
 `(c) DISPOSAL OF CONDEMNED PROPERTY-
 `(1) METHOD- Any tobacco product condemned under this section shall, after
 the entry of the condemnation decree, be disposed of by destruction or sale
 as the court may, in accordance with the provisions of this section, direct
 and if such products are sold the proceeds from such sale, less the legal
 costs and charges, shall be paid into the Treasury of the United States.
 `(2) LIMITATION-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Tobacco products shall not be sold under decrees issued
 under this section contrary to the provisions of this title or the laws
 of the jurisdiction in which such products are sold.
 `(B) EXCEPTION- After the entry of the decree of condemnation and on the
 payment of the costs of such proceedings and the execution of a good and
 sufficient bond conditioned on such tobacco products not being sold or
 disposed of contrary to the provisions of this title or the laws of any
 State or Territory in which sold, the court may, by order, direct that
 such product be delivered to the owner thereof to be destroyed or brought
 into compliance with the provisions of this title under the supervision
 of an officer or employee duly designated by the Secretary.
 `(C) EXPENSES- The expenses of any supervision under subparagraph (B) shall
 be paid by the person obtaining release of the tobacco product under bond.
 `(d) EXPENSES- When a decree of condemnation is entered against the tobacco
 product under this section, court costs and fees, and storage and other
 proper expenses, shall be awarded against the person, if any, intervening
 as claimant of the product.
 `(e) DUTIES AND POWERS OF COURT- In the case of removal for trial of any
 case as provided by this section--
 `(1) the clerk of the court from which removal is made shall promptly
 transmit to the court in which the case is to be tried all records in the
 case necessary in order that such court may exercise jurisdiction; and
 `(2) the court to which such case was removed shall have the powers and
 be subject to the duties for purposes of such case, which the court from
 which removal was made would have had, or to which such court would have
 been subject, if such case had not been removed.
`SEC. 944. HEARING BEFORE REPORT OF CRIMINAL VIOLATION.
 `Prior to the reporting of any violation of this title by the Secretary to
 any United States attorney for the institution of a criminal proceeding,
 the person against whom such proceeding is contemplated shall be given
 appropriate notice and an opportunity to present such person's views,
 either orally or in writing, with regard to such contemplated proceeding.
`SEC. 945. REPORT OF MINOR VIOLATIONS.
 `Nothing in this title shall be construed as requiring the Secretary to
 report for prosecution, or for the institution of libel or injunction
 proceedings, for minor violations of this title whenever such person
 believes that the public interest will be adequately served by a suitable
 written notice or warning.
`SEC. 946. PROCEEDINGS IN NAME OF UNITED STATES; PROVISION AS TO SUBPOENAS.
 `All proceedings for the enforcement, or to restrain violations, of
 this title shall be by and in the name of the United States. Subpoenas
 for witnesses who are required to attend a court of the United States,
 in any district, may run into any other district in any such proceeding.
`Subtitle D--Misbranded and Adulterated Tobacco Products
`SEC. 951. MISBRANDED TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- A tobacco product shall be considered to be misbranded
 for not disclosing certain information to the public--
 `(1) if the manufacturer, importer, or packager of the product does not
 provide the Center with the list of tobacco additives contained in the
 product by brand name for education of the public in accordance with
 section 953(a) or (b); or
 `(2) if it does not disclose to the public, tar, nicotine, carbon monoxide,
 and other harmful constituents in the tobacco and tobacco smoke, and
 smokeless tobacco, as required under section 954.
 `(b) ADDITIONAL INFORMATION CLARIFICATION AND MODIFICATIONS-
 `(1) ADDITIONAL INFORMATION- Nothing in this title the Federal Cigarette
 Labeling and Advertising Act (15 U.S.C. 1333 et seq.), or the Comprehensive
 Smokeless Tobacco Health Education Act of 1986 (15 U.S.C. 4401 et seq.) shall
 prohibit a manufacturer of tobacco products from providing consumers
 with information concerning tobacco product constituents, tobacco smoke,
 and the adverse effects of tobacco use in addition to the information
 that such manufacturers are required to provide pursuant to this chapter
 and the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act (15 U.S.C. 1333 et
 seq.) and the Comprehensive Smokeless Tobacco Health Education Act of 1986
 (15 U.S.C. 4401 et seq.).
 `(2) EFFECT ON LIABILITY LAW- Nothing in this title shall relieve any
 person from liability at common law or under State statutory law to any
 other person.
`SEC. 952. ADULTERATED TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
 `A tobacco product shall be considered to be adulterated--
 `(1) if the level of any tobacco additive contained in the product is in
 violation of a requirement under section 953(b);
 `(2) if the nicotine, tar, carbon monoxide, or other harmful constituent
 level has not been established under section 954;
 `(3) if it contains any additive or any substance that is considered to
 be poisonous or render it significantly injurious to health;
 `(4) if it contains in whole or in part any filthy, putrid, or decomposed
 substance; or
 `(5) if it has been prepared, packed, or held under unsanitary conditions
 where it may have become contaminated with filth or where it may have been
 rendered more injurious to health.
`SEC. 953. TOBACCO ADDITIVES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, import,
 or package, any tobacco product unless such person has provided to the
 Center a complete list of each tobacco additive used in the manufacture
 of each tobacco product brand name and the quantity of such additive.
 `(b) DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS-
 `(1) PRESCRIPTION- The Secretary shall by regulation prescribe disclosure
 requirements for information on packages of tobacco products or in package
 inserts that are provided with such products, or by any other means so that
 the public will be adequately informed of the tobacco additives contained
 in any brand or variety of tobacco products.
 `(2) REDUCTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS ON USE OF ADDITIVES- If the Center
 determines that any tobacco additive in a tobacco product, either by itself
 or in conjunction with any other additive, presents unnecessary increased
 risks to health, the Center may require that such levels of the tobacco
 additive in the tobacco product be reduced or that it be prohibited from use.
`SEC. 954. NICOTINE, TAR, CARBON MONOXIDE, AND OTHER CONSTITUENTS.
 (a) LISTING OF BRANDS- It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture,
 import, or package any tobacco product unless such person has provided
 the Center with a complete list of all brands of such tobacco products
 that includes the levels of the tar, nicotine, carbon monoxide, and other
 constituent (as determined by the Center) for each brand as determined by
 the manufacturer, importer, or their representatives. Data necessary to
 verify such levels shall be made available to the Center on the request
 of the Center.
`SEC. 955. REPEAL OF FEDERAL PREEMPTION ON STATE REGULATION OF LOCAL
ADVERTISERS
 `Nothing in this subtitle, section 5 of the Federal Cigarette Labeling and
 Advertising Act (15 U.S.C. 1332, et seq.), or the Comprehensive Smokeless
 Tobacco Health Education Act (15 U.S.C. 4401 et seq.) shall prevent any State
 or local government from enacting additional restrictions on the advertising,
 promotion, sale, or distribution of tobacco products to persons under
 the age of 18, or on the placement or location of advertising for tobacco
 products that is displayed solely within the geographic area governed by
 the applicable State or local government, such as advertising on billboards
 or on transit vehicles, as long as the restrictions are consistent with and
 no less restrictive than the requirements of this subtitle and Federal law.
`SEC. 956. EXAMINATIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
 `(a) AUTHORITY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Center is authorized to conduct examinations and
 investigations for the purposes of this title through officers and employees
 of the Department or through any health officer or employee of any State,
 Territory, or political subdivision thereof, duly commissioned by the
 Secretary as an officer of the Department.
 `(2) PUERTO RICO AND THE TERRITORIES- In the case of tobacco products packed
 in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or a Territory the Center shall attempt
 to make inspection of such products at the first point of entry within
 the United States, when in the opinion of the Center and with due regard
 to the enforcement of all the provisions of this title, the facilities at
 the disposal of the Center will permit of such inspection.
 `(3) DEFINITION- As used in this subsection the term `United States'
 means the States and the District of Columbia.
 `(b) SAMPLES- Where a sample of a tobacco product is collected for analysis
 under this title the Center shall, on request, provide a part of such
 official sample for examination or analysis by any person named on the
 label of the product, or the owner thereof, or the attorney or agent of such
 persons, except that the Secretary may, by regulation, make such reasonable
 exceptions from, and impose such reasonable terms and conditions relating
 to, the operation of this subsection as the Secretary finds necessary for
 the proper administration of the provisions of this title.
 `(c) INSPECTION OF RECORDS- For purposes of enforcement of this title,
 records of any department or independent establishment in the executive
 branch of the Federal government shall be open to inspection by any
 official of the Department of Health and Human Services duly authorized
 by the Center to make such inspection.
`SEC. 957. NONTOBACCO NICOTINE CONTAINING PRODUCTS.
 `Any product that contains nicotine but that is not a tobacco product
 as defined in section 961, shall be considered to be a drug under
 section 201(g)(1)(C) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21
 U.S.C. 321(g)(1)(C)).
`Subtitle E--Miscellaneous Provisions
`SEC. 961. DEFINITIONS.
 `As used in this title:
 `(1) ADVERTISEMENT- The term `advertisement' means--
 `(A) all newspaper and magazine advertisements and advertising inserts,
 billboards, posters, signs, decals, banners, matchbook advertising,
 point-of-purchase display material (except price information), and all
 other printed or other material used for promoting the sale or consumption
 of tobacco products to consumers; and
 `(B) any other means used to promote the purchase of tobacco products.
 `(2) CENTER- The term `Center' means the Center for Tobacco Products
 Control and Education established under section 901.
 `(3) CONSTITUENT- The term `constituent' means any element of a tobacco
 product that is not an additive.
 `(4) DEPARTMENT- The term `Department' means the Department of Health and
 Human Services.
 `(5) IMMEDIATE CONTAINER- The term `immediate container' does not include
 package liners.
 `(6) INFORMAL HEARING- The term `informal hearing' means a hearing which
 is not subject to section 554, 556, or 557 of title 5 of the United States
 Code and which provides that--
 `(A) the presiding officer in the hearing shall be designated by the
 Secretary from officers and employees of the Department who have not
 participated in any action of the Secretary that is the subject of the
 hearing and who are not directly responsible to an officer or employee of
 the Department who has participated in any such action;
 `(B) each party to the hearing shall have the right at all times to be
 advised and accompanied by an attorney;
 `(C) prior to the hearing, each party to the hearing shall be given
 reasonable notice of the matters to be considered at the hearing, including
 a comprehensive statement of the basis for the action taken or proposed
 by the Secretary that is the subject of the hearing and a general summary
 of the information that will be presented by the Secretary at the hearing
 in support of such action;
 `(D) at the hearing the parties to the hearing shall have the right to
 hear a full and complete statement of the action of the Secretary that
 is the subject of the hearing together with the information and reasons
 supporting such action, to conduct reasonable questioning, and to present
 any oral or written information relevant to such action, including the
 calling of witnesses;
 `(E) the presiding officer in such hearing shall prepare a written report
 of the hearing to which shall be attached all written material presented
 at the hearing;
 `(F) the participants in the hearing shall be given the opportunity to review
 and correct or supplement the presiding officer's report of the hearing; and
 `(G) the Secretary may require the hearing to be transcribed, or a party
 to the hearing shall have the right to have the hearing transcribed at
 such party's expense. Any transcription of a hearing shall be included in
 the presiding officer's report of the hearing.
 `(7) LABEL- The term `label' means a display of written, printed, or
 graphic matter on the immediate container of any tobacco product, the
 outside container or wrapper, if such exists, of the retail package of
 such product, or is easily legible through the outside container or wrapper.
 `(8) LABELING- `The term `labeling' means all labels and other written,
 printed, or graphic matter--
 `(A) on any tobacco product or any of its containers or wrappers; or
 `(B) accompanying such products.
 `(9) MINOR- The term `minor' means any individual who is under the age of
 18 years.
 `(10) PERSON- The term `person' includes individual, partnership,
 corporation, and association.
 `(11) PROMOTION- The term `promotion' means any marketing communication
 method that informs, persuades or reminds consumers of a tobacco product
 or the attributes, image, or brand name of such product or, motivates
 consumers to sample or try that product.
 `(12) SECRETARY- The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Health and
 Human Services.
 `(13) STATE- The term `State' means any State or Territory of the United
 States, the District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
 `(14) TAR- The term `tar' means mainstream total particulate matter minus
 nicotine and water.
 `(15) TOBACCO ADDITIVE- The term `tobacco additive' means any ingredient
 that is added to a tobacco product in the process of manufacturing or
 producing a tobacco product.
 `(16) TOBACCO PRODUCT- The term `tobacco product' means cigarettes, cigars,
 little cigars, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, snuff, and chewing tobacco,
 and other products that contain tobacco that are intended for human use.
`SEC. 962. CONSTRUCTION.
 `Nothing in this title shall be construed to repeal any requirement of the
 Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act (15 U.S.C. 1331 et seq.),
 and the Comprehensive Smokeless Tobacco Health Education Act (15 U.S.C. 4401
 et seq.).'.
SEC. 9. TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS.
 (a) COMPREHENSIVE SMOKING EDUCATION ACT- Section 2 of the Comprehensive
 Smoking Education Act (15 U.S.C. 1331) is repealed.
 (b) COMPREHENSIVE SMOKELESS TOBACCO HEALTH EDUCATION ACT OF 1986- Sections
 2, 4, 5, and 8 of the Comprehensive Smokeless Tobacco Health Education
 Act of 1986 (15 U.S.C. 4401, 4403, 4404, and 4407) are repealed.
SEC. 10. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
 (a) CONFIDENTIALITY- Section 7(b) of the Federal Cigarette Labeling and
 Advertising Act (15 U.S.C. 1335a(b)) is amended by striking out paragraph
 (2).
 (b) WARNING LABELS- Section 4(a) of the Federal Cigarette Labeling and
 Advertising Act (15 U.S.C. 1333(a)) is amended by striking out `SURGEON
 GENERAL'S WARNING: Cigarette Smoke Contains Carbon Monoxide,' each place
 such occurs in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3), and inserting in lieu thereof
 the following: `SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Smoking is Addictive. Once you
 start you may not be able to stop.'.
SEC. 11. CONSTRUCTION.
 Nothing in this Act, or an amendment made by this Act, shall be construed to
 limit, restrict, expand, or otherwise affect the authority of the Federal
 Trade Commission.