[Congressional Bills 115th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 3404 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

<DOC>

115th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 S. 3404

 To impose a moratorium on large agribusiness, food and beverage 
 manufacturing, and grocery retail mergers, and to establish a 
 commission to review large agriculture, food and beverage 
 manufacturing, and grocery retail mergers, concentration, and market 
 power.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 August 28, 2018

 Mr. Booker introduced the following bill; which was read twice and 
 referred to the Committee on the Judiciary

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To impose a moratorium on large agribusiness, food and beverage 
 manufacturing, and grocery retail mergers, and to establish a 
 commission to review large agriculture, food and beverage 
 manufacturing, and grocery retail mergers, concentration, and market 
 power.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Food and Agribusiness Merger 
Moratorium and Antitrust Review Act of 2018''.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS.

 Congress finds the following:
 (1) Concentration in the food and agricultural economy, 
 including mergers, acquisitions, and other combinations and 
 alliances among suppliers, packers, integrators, other food 
 processors, distributors, and retailers has been accelerating 
 at a rapid pace since the 1980s, and particularly since the 
 2007 through 2009 recession.
 (2) The trend toward greater concentration in food and 
 agriculture has important and far reaching implications not 
 only for family farmers, but also for the food we eat, the 
 communities we live in, and the integrity of the natural 
 environment upon which we all depend.
 (3) In the past three decades, the top 4 largest pork 
 packers have seized control of 71 percent of the market, up 
 from 36 percent. Over the same period, the top 4 beef packers 
 have expanded their market share from 32 percent to 85 percent. 
 The top 4 flour millers have increased their market share from 
 40 percent to 64 percent. The market share of the top 4 soybean 
 crushers has jumped from 54 percent to 79 percent, and the top 
 4 wet corn processors control of the market has increased from 
 63 percent to 86 percent.
 (4) Today the top 4 sheep, poultry, and fluid milk 
 processors now control 57 percent, 53 percent, and 50 percent 
 of the market, respectively.
 (5) The top 4 grain companies today control nearly 90 
 percent of the global grain trade.
 (6) During the past 2 years there has been a wave of 
 consolidation among global seed and crop-chemical firms, 3 
 companies now control nearly \2/3\ of the world's commodity 
 crop seeds. Those same 3 companies now also control nearly 70 
 percent of all agricultural chemicals and pesticides.
 (7) In the United States, the 4 largest corn seed sellers 
 accounted for 85 percent of the market in 2015, up from 60 
 percent in 2000. Over the past 20 years, the cost for an acre's 
 worth of seeds for an average corn farmer has nearly 
 quadrupled, and the cost of fertilizer has more than doubled. 
 Yet corn yields increased only 36 percent over that time, and 
 the price received for the sale of a bushel of corn increased 
 only 31 percent.
 (8) A handful of firms dominate the processing of every 
 major commodity. Many of them are vertically integrated, which 
 means that they control successive stages of the food chain, 
 from inputs to production to distribution. The growing number 
 and scale of cross-border agribusiness and food mergers have 
 put foreign firms, often with considerable government backing, 
 into prominent and even dominant positions in the United States 
 beef, hog, poultry, seed, fertilizer, and agrichemical sectors.
 (9) Growing concentration of the agricultural sector has 
 restricted choices for farmers trying to sell their products. 
 As the bargaining power of agribusiness firms over farmers 
 increases, concentrated agricultural commodity markets are 
 stacked against the farmer, with buyers of agricultural 
 commodities often possessing regional dominance in the form of 
 oligopsony or monopsony relative to sellers of such 
 commodities.
 (10) The high concentration and consolidation of buyers in 
 agricultural markets has resulted in the thinning of both cash 
 and futures markets, thereby allowing dominant buyers to 
 leverage their market shares to move those markets to the 
 detriment of family farmers and ranchers.
 (11) Buyers with oligopsonistic or monopsonistic power have 
 incentives to engage in unfair and discriminatory acts that 
 cause farmers to receive less than a competitive price for 
 their goods. At the same time, some Federal courts have 
 incorrectly required a plaintiff to show harm to competition 
 generally, in addition to harm to the individual farmer, when 
 making a determination that an unfair, unjustly discriminatory, 
 deceptive, or preferential act exists under the Packers and 
 Stockyards Act of 1921.
 (12) The farmer's share of every retail dollar has 
 plummeted from 41 percent in 1950, to approximately 15 percent 
 today, while the profit share for farm input, marketing, and 
 processing companies has risen.
 (13) While agribusiness conglomerates are posting record 
 earnings, farmers are facing desperate times. Since 2013, net 
 farm income for United States farmers has fallen by more than 
 half and median on farm income was negative in 2017 and is 
 expected to be negative in 2018.
 (14) The benefits of low commodity prices are not being 
 passed on to American consumers. The gap between what shoppers 
 pay for food and what farmers are paid is growing wider.
 (15) Concentration, low prices, anticompetitive practices, 
 and other manipulations and abuses of the agricultural economy 
 are driving small family farmers out of business. Farmers are 
 going bankrupt or giving up, and few are taking their places; 
 more farm families are having to rely on other jobs to stay 
 afloat. Eighty-two percent of farm household income is expected 
 to come from off farm work this year, up from 53 percent in 
 1960.
 (16) Seventy-five percent of America's farmed cropland is 
 now controlled by 12 percent of farms, and the number of 
 farmers leaving the land will continue to increase unless and 
 until these trends are reversed.
 (17) The decline of small family farms undermines the 
 economies of rural communities across America; it has pushed 
 Main Street businesses, from equipment suppliers to small 
 banks, out of business or to the brink of insolvency.
 (18) Increased concentration in the agribusiness sector has 
 a harmful effect on the environment; corporate hog farming, for 
 example, threatens the integrity of local water supplies and 
 creates noxious odors in neighboring communities. Concentration 
 also can increase the risks to food safety and limit the 
 biodiversity of plants and animals.
 (19) The decline of family farming poses a direct threat to 
 American families and family values, by subjecting farm 
 families to turmoil and stress. Farm advocates across the 
 country are reporting an increase in farmer suicides over the 
 past several years.
 (20) The decline of family farming causes the demise of 
 rural communities, as stores lose customers, churches lose 
 congregations, schools and clinics become under-used, career 
 opportunities for young people dry up, and local inequalities 
 of wealth and income grow wider.
 (21) These developments are not the result of inevitable 
 market forces. Its problems arise rather from policies made in 
 Washington, including farm, antitrust, and trade policies.
 (22) Past congressional action to remediate market failure, 
 such as enacting country-of-origin labeling to provide 
 transparency for domestic farmers, ranchers, and consumers 
 regarding agricultural commodity origins, have been overturned 
 for key commodities by oligopolistic conglomerates that use 
 undifferentiated imports to reduce domestic farm prices.
 (23) To restore competition in the agricultural economy, 
 and to increase the bargaining power and enhance economic 
 prospects for family farmers, the trend toward concentration 
 must be reversed.

SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act:
 (1) Agricultural input supplier.--The term ``agricultural 
 input supplier'' means any person (excluding agricultural 
 cooperatives) engaged in the business of selling, in interstate 
 or foreign commerce, any product to be used as an input 
 (including seed, germ plasm, hormones, antibiotics, fertilizer, 
 and chemicals, but excluding farm machinery) for the production 
 of any agricultural commodity, except that no person shall be 
 considered an agricultural input supplier if sales of such 
 products are for a value less than $10,000,000 per year.
 (2) Broker.--The term ``broker'' means any person engaged 
 in the business of negotiating sales and purchases of any 
 agricultural commodity in interstate or foreign commerce for or 
 on behalf of the vendor or the purchaser, except that no person 
 shall be considered a broker if the only sales of such 
 commodities are for a value less than $10,000,000 per year.
 (3) Commission merchant.--The term ``commission merchant'' 
 means any person engaged in the business of receiving in 
 interstate or foreign commerce any agricultural commodity for 
 sale, on commission, or for or on behalf of another, except 
 that no person shall be considered a commission merchant if the 
 only sales of such commodities are for a value less than 
 $10,000,000 per year.
 (4) Dealer.--The term ``dealer'' means any person 
 (excluding agricultural cooperatives) engaged in the business 
 of buying, selling, or marketing agricultural commodities in 
 interstate or foreign commerce, except that--
 (A) no person shall be considered a dealer with 
 respect to sales or marketing of any agricultural 
 commodity of that person's own raising; and
 (B) no person shall be considered a dealer if the 
 only sales of such commodities are for a value less 
 than $10,000,000 per year.
 (5) Integrator.--The term ``integrator'' means an entity 
 that contracts with farmers for grower services to raise 
 chickens or hogs to slaughter size and weight. The integrator 
 owns the chickens or hogs, supplies the feed, slaughters, and 
 further processes the poultry or pork.
 (6) Processor.--The term ``processor'' means any person 
 (excluding agricultural cooperatives) engaged in the business 
 of handling, preparing, or manufacturing (including 
 slaughtering and food and beverage manufacturing) of an 
 agricultural commodity, or the products of such agricultural 
 commodity, for sale or marketing for human consumption, except 
 that no person shall be considered a processor if the only 
 sales of such products are for a value less than $10,000,000 
 per year.
 (7) Retailer.--The term ``retailer'' means any person 
 (excluding agricultural cooperatives) licensed as a retailer 
 under the Perishable Agriculture Commodities Act of 1930 (7 
 U.S.C. 499a(b)), except that no person shall be considered a 
 retailer if the only sales of such products are for a value 
 less than $10,000 per year.

 TITLE I--MORATORIUM ON LARGE AGRIBUSINESS, FOOD AND BEVERAGE 
 MANUFACTURING, AND GROCERY RETAIL MERGERS

SEC. 101. MORATORIUM ON LARGE AGRIBUSINESS, FOOD AND BEVERAGE 
 MANUFACTURING, AND GROCERY RETAIL MERGERS.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Moratorium.--Until the date referred to in paragraph 
 (2) and except as provided in subsection (b)--
 (A) no dealer, processor, commission merchant, 
 agricultural input supplier, broker, or operator of a 
 warehouse of agricultural commodities or retailer with 
 annual net sales or total assets of more than 
 $160,000,000 shall merge or acquire, directly or 
 indirectly, any voting securities or assets of any 
 other dealer, processor, commission merchant, 
 agricultural input supplier, broker, or operator of a 
 warehouse of agricultural commodities or retailer with 
 annual net sales or total assets of more than 
 $16,000,000; and
 (B) no dealer, processor, commission merchant, 
 agricultural input supplier, broker, or operator of a 
 warehouse of agricultural commodities or retailer with 
 annual net sales or total assets of more than 
 $16,000,000 shall merge or acquire, directly or 
 indirectly, any voting securities or assets of any 
 other dealer, processor, commission merchant, 
 agricultural input supplier, broker, or operator of a 
 warehouse of agricultural commodities or retailer with 
 annual net sales or total assets of more than 
 $160,000,000 if the acquiring person would hold--
 (i) 15 percent or more of the voting 
 securities or assets of the acquired person; or
 (ii) an aggregate total amount of the 
 voting securities and assets of the acquired 
 person in excess of $15,000,000.
 (2) Date.--The date referred to in this paragraph is the 
 earlier of--
 (A) the effective date of comprehensive 
 legislation--
 (i) addressing the problem of market 
 concentration in the food and agricultural 
 sector; and
 (ii) containing a section stating that the 
 legislation is comprehensive legislation as 
 provided in section 101 of the Food and 
 Agribusiness Merger Moratorium and Antitrust 
 Review Act of 2018; or
 (B) the date that is 18 months after the date of 
 enactment of this Act.
 (b) Waiver Authority.--The Attorney General shall have authority to 
waive the moratorium imposed by subsection (a) only under extraordinary 
circumstances, such as insolvency or similar financial distress of 1 of 
the affected parties.
 (c) Exemptions.--The classes of transactions described in section 
7A(c) of the Clayton Act (15 U.S.C. 18a(c)) are exempt from subsection 
(a).
 (d) Avoidance.--Any transaction or other device entered into or 
employed for the purpose of avoiding the moratorium contained in 
subsection (a) shall be disregarded, and the application of the 
moratorium shall be determined by applying subsection (a) to the 
substance of the transaction.
 (e) Rulemaking.--The Attorney General shall promulgate regulations 
that the Attorney General determines are necessary to implement this 
section.

 TITLE II--AGRICULTURE CONCENTRATION AND MARKET POWER REVIEW COMMISSION

SEC. 201. ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION.

 (a) Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known 
as the Food and Agriculture Concentration and Market Power Review 
Commission (hereafter in this title referred to as the ``Commission'').
 (b) Purposes.--The purpose of the Commission is to--
 (1) study the nature and consequences of concentration in 
 America's food and agricultural economy; and
 (2) make recommendations on how to change underlying 
 antitrust laws and other Federal laws and regulations to keep a 
 fair and competitive agriculture marketplace for family 
 farmers, other small- and medium-sized agriculture producers, 
 generally, and the communities of which they are a part.
 (c) Membership of Commission.--
 (1) Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of 12 
 members as follows:
 (A) Three persons, one of whom shall be a person 
 currently engaged in farming or ranching, shall be 
 appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate 
 upon the recommendation of the Majority Leader of the 
 Senate, after consultation with the Chairs of the 
 Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry and 
 of the Committee on the Judiciary.
 (B) Three persons, one of whom shall be a person 
 currently engaged in farming or ranching, shall be 
 appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate 
 upon the recommendation of the Minority Leader of the 
 Senate, after consultation with the ranking minority 
 member of the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and 
 Forestry and of the Committee on the Judiciary.
 (C) Three persons, one of whom shall be a person 
 currently engaged in farming or ranching, shall be 
 appointed by the Speaker of the House of 
 Representatives, after consultation with the Chairs of 
 the Committee on Agriculture and of the Committee on 
 the Judiciary.
 (D) Three persons, one of whom shall be a person 
 currently engaged in farming or ranching, shall be 
 appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of 
 Representatives, after consultation with the ranking 
 minority member of the Committee on Agriculture and of 
 the Committee on the Judiciary.
 (2) Qualifications of members.--
 (A) Appointments.--Persons who are appointed under 
 paragraph (1) shall be persons who--
 (i) have experience in farming or ranching, 
 expertise in agricultural economics and 
 antitrust, or have other pertinent 
 qualifications or experience relating to 
 agriculture and food and agriculture 
 industries; and
 (ii) are not officers or employees of the 
 United States.
 (B) Other consideration.--In appointing Commission 
 members, every effort shall be made to ensure that the 
 members--
 (i) are representative of a broad cross 
 sector of agriculture and antitrust 
 perspectives within the United States; and
 (ii) provide fresh insights to analyzing 
 the causes and impacts of concentration in 
 agriculture industries and sectors.
 (d) Period of Appointment; Vacancies.--
 (1) In general.--Members shall be appointed not later than 
 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act and the 
 appointment shall be for the life of the Commission.
 (2) Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the Commission shall not 
 affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as 
 the original appointment.
 (e) Initial Meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on 
which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission 
shall hold its first meeting.
 (f) Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the 
Chairperson.
 (g) Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.--The members of the 
Commission shall elect a chairperson and vice chairperson from among 
the members of the Commission.
 (h) Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall 
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
 (i) Voting.--Each member of the Commission shall be entitled to 1 
vote, which shall be equal to the vote of every other member of the 
Commission.

SEC. 202. DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.

 (a) In General.--The Commission shall be responsible for examining 
the nature, the causes, and consequences concentration in America's 
agricultural economy in the broadest possible terms.
 (b) Issues To Be Addressed.--The study shall include an examination 
of the following matters:
 (1) The nature and extent of concentration in the food and 
 agricultural sector, including food production, manufacturing, 
 transportation, processing, distribution, marketing, retailing, 
 and farm inputs such as machinery, fertilizer, and seeds.
 (2) Current trends in concentration of the food and 
 agricultural sector and what this sector is likely to look like 
 in the near and longer term future.
 (3) The effects of rising concentration on suppliers and 
 farmers, including independent and contract farmers, with 
 respect to--
 (A) competition in markets for their products and 
 services;
 (B) income and benefit levels;
 (C) income distribution;
 (D) income volatility; and
 (E) other material benefits.
 (4) The impacts of this concentration upon rural 
 communities, rural economic development, and the natural 
 environment.
 (5) The impacts of concentration in the seed industry on 
 genetic diversity in farm fields and any related impacts on 
 food security.
 (6) The impacts of this concentration upon food shoppers, 
 including the reasons that low farm prices have not resulted in 
 corresponding drops in supermarket prices.
 (7) Whether farming is approaching a scale that is larger 
 than necessary from the standpoint of productivity.
 (8) The effect of current laws and administrative practices 
 in supporting and encouraging this concentration.
 (9) Whether the existing antitrust laws provide adequate 
 safeguards against, and remedies for, the impacts of 
 concentration upon family farms, the communities they comprise, 
 and the food shoppers of this Nation.
 (10) Accurate and reliable data on the national and 
 international markets shares of multinational agribusinesses, 
 and the portion of their sales attributable to exports.
 (11) Barriers that inhibit entry of new competitors into 
 markets for the processing of agricultural commodities, such as 
 the meat packing industry.
 (12) The extent to which developments, such as packer 
 ownership of livestock, formula pricing, marketing agreements, 
 production contracting, forward contracting, and vertical 
 integration tend to give processors, agribusinesses, 
 integrators, and other buyers of agricultural commodities 
 additional market power over farmers and suppliers in local 
 markets.
 (13) Such related matters as the Commission determines to 
 be important.

SEC. 203. FINAL REPORT.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 12 months after the date of the 
initial meeting of the Commission, the Commission shall submit to the 
President and Congress a final report which contains--
 (1) the findings and conclusions of the Commission 
 described in section 202; and
 (2) recommendations for addressing the problems identified 
 as part of the Commission's analysis.
 (b) Separate Views.--Any member of the Commission may submit 
additional findings and recommendations as part of the final report.

SEC. 204. POWERS OF COMMISSION.

 (a) Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act 
at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such 
evidence as the Commission may find advisable to fulfill the 
requirements of this title. The Commission shall hold at least 1 or 
more hearings in Washington, DC, and 4 in different agriculture regions 
of the United States.
 (b) Information From Federal Agencies.--The Commission may secure 
directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the 
Commission considers necessary to carry out the provisions of this 
title. Upon request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of 
such department or agency shall furnish such information to the 
Commission.
 (c) Postal Services.--The Commission may use the United States 
mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other 
departments and agencies of the Federal Government.

SEC. 205. COMMISSION PERSONNEL MATTERS.

 (a) Compensation of Members.--Each member of the Commission shall 
be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual 
rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule 
under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day 
(including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the 
performance of the duties of the Commission.
 (b) Travel Expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be 
allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at 
rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of 
chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes 
or regular places of business in the performance of services for the 
Commission.
 (c) Staff.--
 (1) In general.--The Chairperson of the Commission may, 
 without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, 
 appoint and terminate an executive director and such other 
 additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the 
 Commission to perform its duties. The employment of an 
 executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the 
 Commission.
 (2) Compensation.--The Chairperson of the Commission may 
 fix the compensation of the executive director and other 
 personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and 
 subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, 
 relating to classification of positions and General Schedule 
 pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive 
 director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable 
 for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of 
 such title.
 (d) Detail of Government Employees.--Any Federal Government 
employee shall be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement, and 
such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service 
status or privilege.
 (e) Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The 
Chairperson of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent 
services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates 
for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual 
rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule 
under section 5316 of such title.

SEC. 206. SUPPORT SERVICES.

 The Administrator of the General Services Administration shall 
provide to the Commission on a reimbursable basis such administrative 
support services as the Commission may request.

SEC. 207. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 There are authorized to be appropriated [$2,000,000] to the 
Commission as required by this title to carry out the provisions of 
this title.
 <all>