HR 3195 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3195
To amend the Clean Air Act to provide for the control of motor vehicle
emissions.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
August 4, 1989
Mr. SKAGGS (for himself, Mrs. SCHROEDER, Mr. OWENS of Utah, Mr. TORRES,
Mr. PANETTA, Mr. LEVINE of California, Mr. EDWARDS of California, and
Mr. LANTOS) introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Clean Air Act to provide for the control of motor vehicle
emissions.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Motor Vehicle Emission Control Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. EMISSION STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN MOTOR VEHICLES.
 Section 202 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following at
 the end thereof:
 `(g) MODEL YEARS AFTER 1992- Effective with respect to the model years
 specified in tables 1 and 2 below, the regulations under subsection (a)
 applicable to emissions of hydrocarbons (HC), oxides of nitrogen (NOX),
 carbon monoxide (CO) and particulates (PM) from motor vehicles and motor
 vehicle engines in the classes specified in the tables shall contain
 standards which provide that emissions may not exceed the levels specified
 in the tables.
`TABLE 1--EMISSION STANDARDS FOR GASOLINE AND DIESEL FUELED LIGHT DUTY
VEHICLES WEIGHING LESS THAN 3,750 LBS
----------------------------------------
 Pollutant Model years Standard*
----------------------------------------
 HC 1993 through 1999 0.25 gpm
 HC 2000 and after 0.125 gpm
 NOX 1993 through 1999 0.4 gpm
 NOX 2000 and after 0.2 gpm
 CO** 1992 through 1994 3.4 gpm
 CO 1995 and after 1.7 gpm
 PM 1992 and after 0.08 gpm
----------------------------------------
*Standards are expressed in grams per mile (gpm).
** Applicable in California as well as other States notwithstanding section
209(b).
`TABLE 2- EMISSION STANDARDS FOR GASOLINE AND DIESEL FUELED TRUCKS AND BUSES
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Vehicle or engine type Pollutant Model Years
 Standard*
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Trucks (3,750 lbs or more but less than 5,750 lbs) HC 1993 & after
 0.5 gpm
 NOX 1993 & after 0.5 gpm
 CO 1993 & after
 4.0 gpm
 Trucks (5,750 lbs or more but less than 10,000 lbs CO 1993 & after
 5.6 gpm
 HC 1993 & after
 0.5 gpm
 NOX 1993 & after 1.0 gpm
 Heavy duty trucks NOX 1994-6 4.0 gbh
 NOX 1997 & after 1.7 gbh
 PM 1991-3
 0.25 gbh
 Heavy duty trucks PM 1994 & after
 0.1 gbh
 Heavy duty buses PM 1991-3
 0.1 gbh
 Heavy duty buses PM 1994 & after
 0.01 gbh
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*Standards are expressed in grams per mile (gpm) or grams per brake horsepower
hour (gbh).
The weights specified in the table above shall be based upon the loaded
vehicle weight as determined by the Administrator.'.
SEC. 3. LOW-POLLUTING VEHICLES.
 (a) DEFINITION OF LOW-EMISSION VEHICLES- Section 302 of the Clean Air Act
 is amended by adding the following new subsections at the end thereof:
 `(q) LOW-EMISSIONS VEHICLE- For purposes of this Act, except as otherwise
 expressly provided, the term `low-emissions vehicle' means a vehicle which
 meet each of the following requirements for all air pollutants regulated
 under title II of this Act--
 `(1) The vehicle is capable of burning a low emissions fuel.
 `(2) The vehicle complies with all applicable standards in effect under
 section 202.
 `(3) Emissions from the vehicle do not exceed the emissions allowable under
 the standards applicable under section 202 to emissions of the same air
 pollutant from comparable gasoline powered vehicles and contribute less
 to ozone formation.
 `(r) LOW-EMISSIONS FUEL- The term `low-emissions fuel' means methanol,
 ethanol, or natural gas, or any comparably low-polluting fuel. In determining
 whether a fuel is comparably low-polluting, the Administrator shall consider
 both the level of air pollutants from vehicles using the fuel and the
 contribution of such emissions to ambient levels of air pollutants. For
 purposes of this subsection, the term `methanol' includes any fuel which
 contains at least 85 percent methanol unless the Administrator increases such
 percentage as he deems appropriate to protect public health and welfare.'.
 (b) STANDARDS AND RELATED REQUIREMENTS- Section 202 of the Clean Air Act
 is amended by adding the following at the end:
 `(h) LOW-POLLUTING VEHICLES-
 `(1) STANDARDS- Within 18 months after the enactment of this subsection,
 the Administrator shall promulgate specific standards under subsection (a)
 for motor vehicles which burn low-emissions fuel. Such standards shall
 apply to the emission of carbon monoxide, formaldehyde, hydrocarbons,
 oxides of nitrogen, carbon dioxide, and such other air pollutants as
 the Administrator may identify as a potential threat to public health or
 welfare. The Administrator may establish different standards for vehicles
 powered by each of such fuels. Such standards shall take effect in the
 second model year commencing after the model year in which the standards
 are promulgated.
 `(2) BACT- Any standard referred to in paragraph 1 shall reflect the
 greatest degree of emission reduction achievable through the application
 of technology which the Administrator determines will be available for the
 model year to which such standards apply, giving appropriate consideration
 to the cost of applying such technology within the period of time available
 to manufacturers and to noise, energy, and safety factors associated with
 the application of such technology. Such standard shall--
 `(A) not permit emissions of any such air pollutant, including evaporative
 emissions, to exceed--
 `(i) the standard applicable to emissions of such air pollutant from
 comparable gasoline powered vehicles under standards in effect for such
 vehicles under subsection (a); or
 `(ii) the level of emissions achieved by comparable gasoline powered vehicles
 for any air pollutant which is not subject to standards in effect for such
 vehicles under this Act, and
 `(B) require that such emissions contribute less to ozone formation.
 `(3) REVIEW AND REVISION- The Administrator shall evaluate the standards
 promulgated as provided in this section periodically (but not less frequently
 than every 4 model years) and revise such standards as necessary to take
 into account improved technological capability.
 `(4) MULTIPLE FUELS AND MIXTURES- Nothing in this subsection shall be
 construed to prevent the Administrator from certifying (under section 206)
 any motor vehicle having a multiple fuel capability or capable of burning
 a mixture of fuels if the vehicle meets the standards under this subsection
 for each such fuel which it is capable of burning.
 `(5) MINIMUM PERCENTAGE OF VEHICLES- The Administrator shall establish
 in the regulations under subsection (a) a minimum percentage of new motor
 vehicles or of classes or categories of motor vehicles to be certified as
 low-emissions vehicles for any model year as he deems necessary to assure
 that an adequate supply of low-emissions vehicles will be available for
 purposes of complying with the requirements of part D of title I of this
 Act. Compliance with this subsection by each manufacturer or importer
 shall be a condition for certification of vehicles manufactured or imported
 by that manufacturer or importer in the class or category of vehicles to
 which such minimum percentage requirements apply.
 `(i) VEHICLES REQUIRING LEADED GASOLINE- The Administrator shall promulgate
 regulations under subsection (a) applicable to motor vehicles and motor
 vehicle engines manufactured during and after model year 1991 that prohibit
 the manufacture, sale, or introduction into commerce of any engine that
 requires leaded gasoline.'.
SEC. 4. EMISSIONS STANDARDS FOR NONROAD USE MOTORS.
 Title II of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following at the
 end thereof:
`Part C--Nonroad Use Motors
`SEC. 241. STANDARDS FOR NONROAD USE ENGINES.
 `(a) COVERAGE- Within 1 year after the enactment of this section, the
 Administrator shall promulgate emission standards under this section for
 emissions of carbon monoxide, volatile organic compounds, and oxides of
 nitrogen from internal combustion engines designed for use in any vehicle
 or item of machinery. The standards shall apply with respect to engines
 manufactured after January 1, 1993. The standards shall not apply to
 engines subject to standards under section 202(a), to aircraft engines,
 or to sources subject to standards of performance under section 111. The
 standards shall not apply to engines of less than 50 horsepower.
 `(b) EMISSION LEVELS- The standards promulgated under this section shall
 require that emissions of carbon monoxide, oxides of nitrogen, and volatile
 organic compounds from engines covered by this section shall not be greater
 than the emissions of such air pollutants allowable under section 202
 for motor vehicle engines of comparable horsepower using the same fuel,
 as determined by the Administrator, which are manufactured in model years
 after the model year 1992. If there is no standard for any of such air
 pollutants under section 202 for a motor vehicle engine of comparable
 horsepower using the same fuel, the Administrator shall establish standards
 under this section which are proportional to the standards applicable under
 section 202 to motor vehicle engines which are closest in horsepower and
 fuel use to the engine concerned.
 `(c) ENFORCEMENT- The standards under this section shall be subject
 to the same provisions of section 206 and 207 as are applicable in the
 case of standards under section 202, and shall be enforced in the same
 manner as the standards under section 202, with such modifications as the
 Administrator deems appropriate.'.
SEC. 5. MOTOR VEHICLE TESTING AND CERTIFICATION.
 (a) CERTIFICATION AND TESTING- Section 206(a) of the Clean Air Act is
 amended by adding the following new paragraph at the end thereof:
 `(4) Not later than one year after the enactment of this paragraph, the
 Administrator shall promulgate regulations adding an idle test and idle
 test mode to the Federal Test Procedure for light-duty vehicles. Such
 modified test procedure shall be used for the certification of light-duty
 vehicles and engines manufactured during or after model year 1992.'.
 (b) PRODUCTION LINE TESTING- Section 206(b) of the Clean Air Act is amended
 by adding the following at the end thereof:
 `(3) SELECTIVE ENFORCEMENT AUDIT- The Administrator shall revise the
 regulations under this section regarding selective enforcement auditing of
 new light-duty vehicles (as set forth in section 86.610 of Subpart G of part
 86 of title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations) such that the maximum
 percentage of failing vehicles that, for purposes of sampling inspection,
 can be considered satisfactory as a process average for purposes of such
 selective enforcement audits shall be 10 percent. Such requirement shall
 apply with respect to motor vehicles manufactured after the model year
 1990.'.
 (c) REVISION OF CERTAIN TEST PROCEDURES- Section 206 of the Clean Air Act
 is amended by adding the following new subsection at the end thereof:
 `(g) REVISION OF CERTAIN TEST PROCEDURES- Within 18 months after the
 enactment of this subsection and at least every 4 years thereafter, the
 Administrator shall review and revise as necessary the regulations under
 subsections (a) and (b) of this section regarding the testing of motor
 vehicles and motor vehicle engines to insure that vehicles are tested under
 circumstances which reflect the actual current driving conditions under
 which motor vehicles are used, including conditions relating to fuel,
 temperature, acceleration, and altitude. Such revised test procedures
 shall include testing of evaporative emissions (including running losses)
 as well as tail pipe emissions and shall provide for the testing of trucks
 weighing 3,750 pounds or more in the loaded mode.'.
 (d) AVERAGING PROHIBITED- Section 202 of the Clean Air Act is amended by
 adding the following new subsection at the end thereof:
 `(h) AVERAGING PROHIBITED- Each emission standard under this section
 shall apply to, and be met by, each and every vehicle or engine sold,
 offered for sale, introduced into commerce, or imported, and may not be
 met or complied with by the average of the performance of various vehicles,
 engines, engine families, or models manufactured by the same manufacturer.'.
 (e) USEFUL LIFE FOR PURPOSES OF CERTIFICATION; RECALL; AND IN-USE COMPLIANCE-
 Section 202(d) of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following at
 the end thereof: `In the case of vehicles and engines manufactured in the
 model year 1995 and thereafter, in lieu of the five years or fifty thousand
 mile period referred to in paragraph (1), there shall be substituted 10
 years or 100,000 miles.'.
 (f) CERTIFICATION FOR HIGH ALTITUDES- Section 206(f) of the Clean Air Act
 is amended by adding the following at the end thereof: `All motor vehicles
 and engines manufactured during and after model year 1991 shall comply with
 the requirements of section 202 of this Act regardless of the altitude at
 which they are sold. No exemption shall be allowed from this paragraph if
 such exemption would have the effect of permitting motor vehicles to be
 sold at low altitudes or at high altitudes but not at both.'.
 (g) HIGH ALTITUDE TESTING CENTER- Section 206(f) of the Clean Air Act is
 amended by adding the following at the end thereof:
 `(3) The Administrator shall establish a high altitude testing center to
 insure that the certification of motor vehicles and motor vehicle engines
 comply with the provisions of this subsection. There are authorized to be
 appropriated such sums as may be necessary to establish and operate such
 testing center.'.
SEC. 6. COMPLIANCE BY VEHICLES IN-USE.
 (a) RECALL- (1) Section 207(c)(1) of the Clean Air Act is amended by
 striking the word `properly' each time it occurs and inserting in lieu
 thereof `normally'.
 (2) Section 207(c)(2) of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 at the end thereof: `Manufacturers and importers shall offer such incentives
 as may be necessary to insure at least a 75 percent response by vehicle
 owners to each such notification. The Administrator may promulgate such
 regulations as he deems necessary to implement the requirement contained
 in the preceding sentence.'.
 (3) Section 172 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 at the end thereof:
 `(d) COMPLIANCE WITH MOTOR VEHICLE RECALL NOTICES- Each plan required under
 this part for an area which is a nonattainment area for an air pollutant
 regulated under section 202 shall contain measures to increase compliance
 by motor vehicles registered in the area with recall notifications issued
 under section 202(c).'.
 (4) Section 207(c) of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new paragraphs at the end thereof:
 `(4) USE OF INFORMATION FROM STATE PROGRAMS- In making determinations of
 nonconformity under this subsection, the Administrator shall take into
 account information collected under any State vehicle emission control
 inspection and maintenance program. Any State in which such a program
 is operating may petition the Administrator to make a determination of
 nonconformity under paragraph (1) on the basis of information collected
 in such program. The Administrator shall act upon such petition within 60
 days of receipt of such petition. The Administrator may issue regulations
 establishing minimum criteria for testing, data collection, and analysis
 and reporting to assure that emission performance data obtained by any
 State vehicle emission control inspection and maintenance program are
 suitable for the effective enforcement of this section.
 `(5) DEFINITION OF NORMALLY MAINTAINED AND USED- For the purpose of paragraph
 (1), the phrase `normally maintained and used' means the maintenance and
 use ordinarily to be expected in the hands of the ultimate purchasers,
 not necessarily in accordance with instructions under paragraph (3),
 but not including misfueling or violations of section 203(a)(3).
 `(6) QUALITY CONTROL- The Administrator shall promulgate regulations
 requiring each State which is required to implement a vehicle inspection
 and maintenance program to adopt quality control audits and reporting
 requirements to assure that such inspections detect and report to the
 Administrator any patterns of defects in any manufacturer's emission
 control systems. The Administrator shall annually report to the Congress,
 with respect to each manufacturer, any significant finding of repeated
 or common emission system defects and the actions taken to remedy such
 nonconformity through ordered or voluntary recalls or other actions
 authorized by this Act.'.
 (b TAMPERING-
 (1) PROHIBITED ACTS- Section 203(a)(3) of the Clean Air Act is amended to
 read as follows:
 `(3)(A) for any person to remove or render inoperative any device or element
 of design installed on or in a motor vehicle or motor vehicle engine in
 compliance with regulations under this title prior to its sale and delivery
 to the ultimate purchaser, or for any person knowingly to remove (except
 for purposes of repairs which result in a properly functioning emission
 control system) or to render inoperative any such device or element of
 design after such sale and delivery to the ultimate purchaser; or
 `(B) for any person to manufacture or sell, or offer to sell, any part or
 component intended for use with, or as part of, any motor vehicle or motor
 vehicle engine, where a principal use of such part or component is to bypass,
 defeat, or render inoperative any device or element of design installed on
 or in a motor vehicle or motor vehicle engine in compliance with regulations
 under this title, and where such part or component is being offered for sale
 for such use or put to such use within the knowledge of such person; or'.
 (2) PENALTIES- Section 205 of the Clean Air Act is amended to read as
 follows:
`SEC. 205. PENALTIES.
 `Any person who violates paragraph (1), (2), or (4) of section 203(a) or any
 manufacturer or dealer who violates paragraph (3)(A) of section 203(a) shall
 be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $10,000. Any other person
 who violates paragraph (3)(A) of section 203(a) or any person who violates
 paragraph (3)(B) of section 203(a) shall be subject to a civil penalty of
 not more than $2,500. Any such violation with respect to paragraph (1),
 (3), or (4) of section 203(a) shall constitute a separate offense with
 respect to each motor vehicle or motor vehicle engine.'.
SEC. 7. EVAPORATIVE EMISSIONS.
 Title II of the Clean Air Act is amended by redesignating section 216 as
 section 217 and by inserting the following new section after section 215:
`SEC. 216. RUNNING LOSS AND OTHER EVAPORATIVE EMISSIONS.
 `(a) PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS- Within 18 months after the enactment of
 this section, the Administrator shall amend the regulations under subsection
 (a) of section 202 of this Act to include in the standards promulgated under
 that subsection requirements for the use of best available technology to
 control evaporative emissions from motor vehicles for the vehicle's useful
 life, including emissions of hydrocarbons during vehicle operations.
 `(b) APPLICATION OF OTHER PROVISIONS- The provisions of this title (including
 the provisions of section 202(d) relating to the determination of useful
 life, the provisions of 206 relating to motor vehicle testing, compliance,
 and certification, and the provisions of section 207 regarding compliance
 by vehicles and engines in actual use) shall apply to the amendments
 required under subsection (a) of this section in the same manner and
 to the same extent as such provisions apply to other regulations under
 section 202(a). Any warranty required under section 207(i) shall apply to
 evaporative emissions for the period referred to in section 207(i).
 `(c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments referred to in subsection (a) of this
 section shall take effect with respect to motor vehicles and motor vehicle
 engines manufactured in the second model year after the model year in
 which the amendments are promulgated.'.
SEC. 8. EMISSION STANDARDS FOR MOTORCYCLES.
 Section 202(a)(3)(F) of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 at the end thereof: `Effective with respect to the model years specified
 in the table below, the regulations under this subsection applicable to
 emissions of hydrocarbons (HC), carbon monoxide (CO), and evaporative HC
 emissions (EHC) from motorcycles and motorcycle engines in the classes
 specified in the table shall contain standards which provide that emissions
 may not exceed the levels specified in the table.
TABLE - EMISSION STANDARDS FOR MOTORCYCLES AND MOTORCYCLE ENGINES
------------------------------------------------------------
 Engine Displacement Pollutant Model years Standard*
------------------------------------------------------------
 Less than 700 cc HC 1992 & thereafter 2.0 gpm
 Less than 700 cc CO 1992 & thereafter 17.6 gpm
 Less than 700 cc EHC 1992 & thereafter 2.0 gpt
 More than 700 cc HC 1992 & thereafter 3.6 gpm
 More than 700 cc CO 1992 & thereafter 17.6 gpm
 More than 700 cc EHC 1992 & thereafter. 4.0 gpt
------------------------------------------------------------
*Standards are expressed in grams per mile (gpm) or grams per test of
evaporative emissions (gpt).
SEC. 9. ONBOARD EMISSION DIAGNOSTICS.
 Title II of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following new
 section after section 215:
`SEC. 216. ONBOARD EMISSION DIAGNOSTICS.
 `(a) PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS- Within 18 months after the enactment of
 this section, the Administrator shall amend the regulations under subsection
 (a) of section 202 of this Act to include in the standards promulgated
 under that subsection requirements for the installation on motor vehicles
 manufactured in second model year after the model year in which the
 amendments are promulgated and thereafter of such onboard equipment to
 diagnose the effectiveness of emissions control systems as will provide
 the greatest degree of detection of emissions in excess of standards as
 is feasible, taking costs into account. To the extent practicable, the
 onboard computer shall monitor the effectiveness of each emission control
 system. The Administrator shall reevaluate the regulations amended made under
 this subsection every 4 years after the enactment of this section and revise
 such regulations as may be necessary to take into account new technology.
 `(b) APPLICATION OF OTHER PROVISIONS- The provisions of this title (including
 the provisions of section 202(d) relating to the determination of useful
 life, the provisions of 206 relating to motor vehicle testing, compliance,
 and certification, and the provisions of section 207 regarding compliance by
 vehicles and engines in actual use) shall apply to the amendments required
 under subsection (a) of this section in the same manner and to the same
 extent as such provisions apply to other regulations under section 202(a).'.
SEC. 10. MOTOR VEHICLE FUELS.
 Section 211 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following at
 the end thereof:
 `(h) EVAPORATIVE EMISSIONS FROM MOTOR VEHICLE FUELS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Administrator shall promulgate regulations to reduce
 evaporative emissions from motor vehicle fuels.
 `(2) GASOLINE VOLATILITY- Regulations under this subsection shall include a
 standard for gasoline volatility. The standard shall apply to all gasoline
 sold, or offered for sale, or introduced into commerce for use in motor
 vehicles during high ozone periods of each year. Effective with respect
 to gasoline sold in the second high ozone period which commences after
 the enactment of this subsection, the standard shall require that such
 gasoline sold, or offered for sale, or introduced into commerce for use
 in motor vehicles in Class C areas (as defined by the American Society
 of Testing Materials as of the date of enactment of this subsection)
 shall not exceed a Reid Vapor Pressure of 9 pounds per square inch (psi)
 unless the Administrator establishes a lower number which he determines to
 be achievable and appropriate for purposes of protecting public health and
 welfare. The regulations shall require a proportional reduction in areas
 other than such class C areas.
 `(3) HIGH OZONE PERIOD- For purposes of regulations referred to in paragraph
 (2), the high ozone period shall be the period between May 16 and September
 15 or such longer period as the Administrator, in his discretion, establishes
 for any region to cover periods of potential ozone air pollution in excess
 of the standard for that region.
 `(4) OXYGENATED FUEL- In the case of any standard under this subsection
 for oxygenated gasoline, the Administrator shall allow a Reid Vapor
 Pressure (`RVP') 1 psi greater than that allowed for gasoline which is
 not oxygenated. For any such fuel the RVP of the gasoline component of
 the fuel shall be within the limitations established under paragraph (2).
 `(i) OXYGENATED FUELS- (1) After October 1, 1991, the sale or introduction
 into commerce of gasoline for use in motor vehicles, in any area that is
 a nonattainment area as defined in section 171(2) for carbon monoxide,
 during the period from October 1 to April 1 of each year, which fuel has
 an oxygen content less than 2 percent oxygen by weight, shall be prohibited.
 `(2) After October 1, 1992, the sale or introduction into commerce of
 gasoline for use in motor vehicles, in any area that is a nonattainment
 area as defined in section 171(2) for carbon monoxide during the period
 from October 1 to April 1 of each year, which fuel has an oxygen content
 less than 3.7 percent oxygen by weight, shall be prohibited.
 `(3) The Administrator may waive the requirements of paragraph (1) or
 (2), in whole or in part, with respect to the level of oxygen content,
 the timing of available oxygenated gasoline, or the use of oxygenated
 fuels, in a specific area, where full implementation of such provision may
 reasonably be anticipated to result in an unacceptable increase in levels
 of other air pollutants.
 `(4) Not later than 2 years after the enactment of this subsection, the
 Administrator shall submit a report to the Energy and Commerce Committee of
 the United States House of Representatives and the Environment and Public
 Works Committee of the United States Senate concerning the increased use of
 oxygenated fuels nationwide; and the use of oxygenated fuels with an oxygen
 content by weight greater than 3.7 percent. Such report shall include an
 analysis of emissions, driveability, fuel volatility and availability of
 gasoline with increased oxygen levels.
 `(j) SULFUR CONTENT OF DIESEL FUEL- (1) After July 1, 1990, the sale or
 introduction into commerce of diesel fuel for use in motor vehicles,
 which fuel has a sulfur content in excess of 0.05 percent by weight,
 shall be prohibited.
 `(2) The fuel required to be used in certification of heavy duty diesel
 vehicles and engines manufactured during and after model year 1993 shall
 have a sulfur content that does not exceed 0.05 percent by weight.
 `(3)(A) Paragraph (1) of this subsection and any regulations promulgated by
 the Administrator thereunder shall not require a small refinery to reduce
 the sulfur content of diesel fuel to 0.05 per centum by weight prior to
 July 1, 1995.
 `(B) For the purpose of this subsection, the term `small refinery' means
 a refinery--
 `(i) the diesel fuel producing capacity of which was in operation or under
 construction at any time during the one-year period immediately preceding
 October 1, 1989,
 `(ii) which has a crude oil or bona fide feed stock capacity (as determined
 by the Administrator) of 175,000 barrels per day or less, and
 `(iii) which is owned or controlled by a refiner with a total combined crude
 oil or bona fide feed stock capacity (as determined by the Administrator)
 of 350,000 barrels per day or less.
 `(4) The Administrator shall report to the Congress not later than the
 date 6 months after the enactment of this subsection, on whether a sulfur
 content in diesel fuel of 0.05 percent by weight is necessary to assure
 that heavy-duty diesel vehicles and engines can achieve the particulate
 emission standards specified in section 202(a)(3)(F) or in regulations
 under section 202 for model year 1993 and model year 1996, or is otherwise
 warranted for the protection of public health.
 `(k) AROMATIC HYDROCARBON CONTENT OF DIESEL FUEL- The Administrator
 shall promulgate regulations under this section prohibiting the sale or
 introduction into commerce after October 1, 1993, of diesel fuel for use
 in motor vehicles which fuel has an aromatic hydrocarbon content in excess
 of 10 percent by volume.'.
SEC. 11. CONTROL OF VEHICLE REFUELING EMISSIONS.
 Section 202(a)(6) of the Clean Air Act is amended to read as follows:
 `(6) ONBOARD VAPOR RECOVERY- Within 1 year after the enactment of this
 paragraph, the Administrator shall promulgate standards under this section
 requiring that all new light-duty motor vehicles manufactured in the second
 model year after the model year in which the standards are promulgated
 and thereafter shall be equipped with vehicle-based (`onboard') systems
 for the control of evaporative emissions during vehicle refueling. The
 standards shall require that such systems provide a minimum evaporative
 emission capture efficiency of 95 percent.'.
SEC. 12. CERTIFICATION AT COLD TEMPERATURES.
 Section 206(a) of the Clean Air Act (relating to certification) is amended
 by adding the following new paragraph at the end thereof:
 `(5) CERTIFICATION AT COLD TEMPERATURES- In the case of passenger cars and
 light-duty trucks manufactured in model year 1993 and thereafter, the test
 required under paragraph (a)(1) of this subsection shall include, by rule,
 a test at 20 degrees Fahrenheit for testing emissions of carbon monoxide,
 and such vehicles shall not be treated as meeting the carbon monoxide
 standard applicable under section 202 unless, in addition to meeting other
 applicable test standards, the vehicles achieve an emissions rate less
 than 50 percent of the average actual emissions of carbon monoxide at such
 temperature from such vehicles manufactured during model years 1981 through
 1985, as estimated by the Administrator. Such test shall also provide that,
 commencing with model year 2000, in addition to meeting other applicable
 test standards, such vehicles shall achieve the standard applicable in
 model year 1992 for emissions of carbon monoxide when tested under this
 subsection at 20 degrees Fahrenheit. For purposes of this paragraph, the
 terms `passenger car' and `light duty truck' have the same meaning as set
 forth in regulations promulgated before enactment of this paragraph by
 the Administrator under this title.'.
SEC. 13. CARBON DIOXIDE EMISSIONS FROM MOTOR VEHICLES.
 (a) REGULATIONS- The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency
 shall promulgate regulations within 18 months after the enactment of this
 Act to achieve a reduction in in-use motor vehicle emissions (from all
 classes of motor vehicles as defined in section 216(2) of the Clean Air
 Act) of carbon dioxide. Such regulations shall be adequate to achieve a
 reduction in such emissions of at least 20 percent by the year 2005 and at
 least 50 percent by the year 2025. The Administrator may issue such orders
 as may be necessary to implement and enforce such regulations. Such orders
 shall be enforceable in the same manner as an order issued under section
 113 of the Clean Air Act.
 (b) STUDY- The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency
 shall undertake to enter into appropriate arrangements with the National
 Academy of Sciences to conduct a comprehensive study and investigation
 of the technological feasibility of meeting the reduction requirements
 required under subsection (a). The provisions of section 202(c) of the
 Clean Air Act shall apply to the study conducted under this subsection,
 except that in applying such provisions, the date July 1, 1991 shall be
 substituted for the date July 1, 1971, in paragraph (3) thereof.