HR 5843 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5843
To impose an excess profits tax on the income of corporations engaged in
the production of petroleum and petroleum products for a limited period.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
October 17, 1990
Mr. GILMAN introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Ways and Means
A BILL
To impose an excess profits tax on the income of corporations engaged in
the production of petroleum and petroleum products for a limited period.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That (a) subtitle A of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to income taxes) is amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new chapter:
`CHAPTER 7--EXCESS PROFITS TAX
`Sec. 1571. Imposition of tax.
`Sec. 1572. Definitions.
`Sec. 1573. Adjustments to income for years in the emergency period.
`Sec. 1574. Excess profits deduction.
`Sec. 1575. Energy plowback deduction.
`SEC. 1571. IMPOSITION OF TAX.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- In addition to the other taxes imposed by this subtitle,
 there is hereby imposed on the income of every corporation engaged in the
 production of petroleum and petroleum products for each taxable year which
 ends or begins during the emergency period, a tax equal to 40 percent of
 the excess profits taxable income for such taxable year.
 `(b) TAXABLE YEARS PARTLY IN THE EMERGENCY PERIOD- In the case of a taxable
 year which begins before the emergency period or ends after the emergency
 period, the tax imposed by subsection (a) shall be an amount equal to
 40 percent of the excess profits taxable income for the taxable year
 multiplied by a fraction the numerator of which is the number of days
 within the emergency period and the denominator of which is the total
 number of days in the taxable year.
`SEC. 1572. DEFINITIONS.
 `(a) EMERGENCY PERIOD- For the purposes of this chapter, the term `emergency
 period' means the 3-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of
 this chapter.
 `(b) BASE PERIOD- For the purposes of this chapter, the term `base period'
 means the period beginning January 1, 1986, and ending on December 31, 1988.
 `(c) PETROLEUM AND PETROLEUM PRODUCTS- For the purposes of this chapter,
 the term `petroleum and petroleum products' means any crude oil, gasoline,
 kerosene, fuel oil, or home heating oil extracted or produced by any
 corporation doing business in the United States.
 `(d) EXCESS PROFITS TAXABLE INCOME- For purposes of this chapter, the term
 `excess profits taxable income' means taxable income for the taxable year
 (computed with the adjustments specified in section 1573) reduced by the
 sum of--
 `(1) the excess profits deduction for the taxable year; plus
 `(2) the energy plowback deduction for the taxable year.
`SEC. 1573. ADJUSTMENTS TO INCOME FOR YEARS IN THE EMERGENCY PERIOD.
 `For the purposes of this chapter, in determining the taxable income of
 a corporation for a taxable year ending or beginning in the emergency
 period, the following adjustments shall be made:
 `(1) DIVIDENDS RECEIVED- The deduction for dividends received shall apply,
 without limitation, to all dividends on stock of all corporations, except
 that no deduction for dividends received shall be allowed with respect to
 dividends on stock of foreign personal holding companies or dividends on
 stock which is not a capital asset.
 `(2) GAINS AND LOSSES FROM SALES OR EXCHANGES OF CAPITAL ASSETS- There
 shall be excluded gains and losses from sales or exchanges of capital assets.
 `(3) INCOME FROM RETIREMENT OR DISCHARGE OF BONDS, ETC- There shall be
 excluded income derived from the retirement or discharge by the taxpayer of
 any bond, debenture, note, or certificate or other evidence of indebtedness,
 if the obligation of the taxpayer has been outstanding for more than 6
 months, including in the case the issuance was at a premium, the amount
 includible in gross income for such year solely because of such retirement
 or discharge.
 `(4) DEDUCTIONS ON ACCOUNT OF RETIREMENT OR DISCHARGE OF BONDS, ETC-
 If during the taxable year the taxpayer retires or discharges any bond,
 debenture, note, or certificate or other evidence of indebtedness, if the
 obligation of the taxpayer has been outstanding for more than 6 months,
 the following deductions for such taxable year shall not be allowed:
 `(A) the deduction allowable under section 162 for expenses paid or incurred
 in connection with such retirement or discharge;
 `(B) the deduction for losses allowable by reason of such discharge or
 retirement; or
 `(C) in case the issuance was at a discount, the amount deductible for
 such year solely because of such retirement or discharge.
 `(5) RECOVERY OF BAD DEBTS- There shall be excluded income attributable
 to the recovery of a bad debt if the deduction of such debt was allowable
 from gross income for any taxable year ending before the effective date
 of this chapter or if such debt was properly charged to a reserve for bad
 debts during any such taxable year.
`SEC. 1574. EXCESS PROFITS DEDUCTION.
 `(a) COMPUTATION- The excess profits deduction for a taxable year shall
 be the greater of the following:
 `(1) 100 percent of the average base period taxable income, or
 `(2) an amount equal to the total of the following amounts:
 `(A) 10 percent of the first $10,000,000 of invested capital,
 `(B) 9 percent of the next $9,000,000 of invested capital, and
 `(C) 8 percent of invested capital exceeding $20,000,000.
 `(b) AVERAGE BASE PERIOD TAXABLE INCOME- The average base period taxable
 income shall be determined by computing the base period taxable income for
 each month in the base period, the highest and lowest aggregate of 6 months
 taxable income shall be dropped and the remaining sum of 24 months shall be
 divided by 2 to obtain a base year figure for the purposes of this chapter.
 `(c) APPLICATION OF CHAPTER- The provisions of this chapter shall apply
 to all corporations which were in existence during the entire or any part
 of the base period or the emergency period as defined in this chapter.
`SEC. 1575. ENERGY PLOWBACK DEDUCTION.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- For purposes of this chapter, the term `energy plowback
 deduction' means the amount paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the
 taxable year (with respect to areas within the United States or a possession
 of the United States) for--
 `(1) intangible drilling and development costs to which section 263(c)
 applies or ascertaining the existence, location, extent, or quality of
 any deposit of crude oil or natural gas,
 `(2) the construction, reconstruction, erection, or acquisition of the
 following items but only if the original use of such items begins with
 such taxpayer--
 `(A) depreciable assets used for--
 `(i) the exploration for or the development or production of oil or gas
 (including development or production from oil shale),
 `(ii) converting oil shale, coal, or liquid hydrocarbons into oil or gas, or
 `(iii) refining oil or gas (but not beyond the primary product stage),
 `(B) pipelines for gathering or transmitting oil or gas, and facilities
 (such as pumping stations) directly related to the use of such pipelines, or
 `(3) secondary or tertiary recovery of oil or gas.
 `(b) LIMITATION- The amount of the energy plowback deduction for any taxable
 year may not exceed 25 percent of the excess profits taxable income for
 such year (determined without regard to the energy plowback deduction).'
 (b) The table of chapters for such subtitle A is amended by adding at the
 end thereof the following new item:
`Chapter 7. Excess profits tax.'
 (c) The amendments made by this Act shall take effect on the date of the
 enactment of this Act.