HR 5300 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5300
To amend the Social Security Act and the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to
provide for a Mediplan that assures the provision of health insurance coverage
to all residents and coverage of long-term health care, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
July 18, 1990
Mr. STARK (for himself and Mr. COYNE) introduced the following bill; which was
referred jointly to the Committees on Ways and Means and Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Social Security Act and the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to
provide for a Mediplan that assures the provision of health insurance coverage
to all residents and coverage of long-term health care, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as `Mediplan Act of 1990'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS-
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--HEALTH CARE ELIGIBILITY AND BENEFITS
Sec. 101. Health care eligibility and benefits.
`TITLE XXI--MEDIPLAN HEALTH BENEFITS
`Part A--Eligibility and Entitlement
`Sec. 2101. Eligibility.
`Sec. 2102. Enrollment and Mediplan cards.
`Part B--Benefits
`Sec. 2121. Scope of benefits.
`Sec. 2122. Exclusions.
`Part C--Payments for Benefits and Financing
`Sec. 2141. Payments for benefits.
`Sec. 2142. Mediplan Trust Fund.
`Part D--General Provisions
`Sec. 2161. Definitions relating to beneficiaries and income.
`Sec. 2162. Incorporation of certain medicare provisions and other provisions.
`Sec. 2163. State maintenance of effort payments.
`Sec. 2164. Modification of medicaid and other programs to avoid duplication
of benefits.
`Sec. 2165. Maintenance of additional benefits for current beneficiaries
under group health plans.
TITLE II--LONG-TERM CARE ELIGIBILITY AND BENEFITS
Sec. 201. Changes in medicare benefits.
Sec. 202. Long-term care eligibility and benefits.
`TITLE XXII--MEDIPLAN LONG-TERM CARE BENEFITS
`Part A--Eligibility
`Sec. 2201. General eligibility.
`Sec. 2202. Determination of chronic illness for purposes of eligibility
for nursing facility services and long-term home and community-based care.
`Part B--Benefits
`Sec. 2221. Scope of benefits.
`Sec. 2222. Exclusions.
`Part C--Payments for Benefits and Financing
`Sec. 2241. Nursing facility services.
`Sec. 2242. Long-term home and community-based care.
`Sec. 2243. Deductibles and coinsurance.
`Sec. 2244. Use of Mediplan Trust Fund.
`Part D--Definitions and General Provisions
`Sec. 2261. General definitions.
`Sec. 2262. Appeals of eligibility determinations.
`Sec. 2263. Incorporation of certain medicare provisions and other provisions.
`Sec. 2264. State maintenance of effort payments.
TITLE III--FINANCING PROVISIONS
Sec. 301. Income taxes for Mediplan.
Sec. 302. Tax on wages paid by employers.
TITLE I--HEALTH CARE ELIGIBILITY AND BENEFITS
SEC. 101. ELIGIBILITY AND BENEFITS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Social Security Act is amended by adding at the end
 the following new title:
`TITLE XXI--MEDIPLAN HEALTH BENEFITS
`Part A--Eligibility
`SEC. 2101. ELIGIBILITY.
 `(a) UNIVERSAL ELIGIBILITY FOR RESIDENTS- Except as provided in section
 2163(a), each individual who is a resident of the United States is entitled
 to health insurance benefits under this title.
 `(b) SPECIAL ELIGIBILITY GROUPS- For purposes of this title, an individual
 described in subsection (a) may obtain special benefits under this title
 on the basis of one or more of the following special eligibility groups:
 `(1) Children (as defined in section 2161(a)(1)).
 `(2) Low-income individuals (as defined in section 2161(a)(2)).
 `(3) Pregnant women (as defined in section 2161(a)(3)).
 `(c) RECIPROCAL COVERAGE OF NONRESIDENTS- An individual who--
 `(1) is not a resident of the United States,
 `(2) is in the United States, and
 `(3) is a national of a foreign state which provides health benefits to
 nationals of the United States who are nonresidents in that state,
is entitled to such health insurance benefits under this title, but only to
the extent the Secretary determines that such benefits would be available
to nationals of the United States similarly situated as a nonresident in
the foreign state.
`SEC. 2102. ENROLLMENT AND MEDIPLAN CARDS.
 `(a) ENROLLMENT- The Secretary shall provide a mechanism for the enrollment
 of individuals entitled to benefits under this title and, in conjunction
 with such enrollment, the issuance of a mediplan card which may be used
 for purposes of identification and processing of claims for benefits
 under this title. Mediplan cards shall identify (as appropriate) if the
 individual is a child, a pregnant woman, or a low-income individual.
 `(b) ENROLLMENT AT BIRTH- The mechanism under subsection (a) shall include
 a process for the automatic enrollment of individuals at the time of birth
 in the United States.
`Part B--Benefits
`SEC. 2121. SCOPE OF BENEFITS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in the succeeding provisions of this
 part, the benefits provided to an individual described in section 2101(a)
 by the program established by this title shall consist of entitlement to
 the same benefits as are provided under title XVIII to individuals entitled
 to benefits under part A, and enrolled under part B, of title XVIII.
 `(b) CHANGE IN THE DEDUCTIBLE AND LIMIT ON COST-SHARING-
 `(1) $500 DEDUCTIBLE PER INDIVIDUAL- Except as provided in the succeeding
 provisions of this part, the amount of expenses with respect to which an
 individual is entitled to have payment made under this title for any year
 shall first be reduced by a deductible of $500. Such deductible shall be
 instead of the deductible for inpatient hospital services under the first
 sentence of section 1813(a)(1) and the deductible under section 1833(b).
 `(2) LIMIT ON OUT-OF-POCKET EXPENSES- Whenever in a calendar year an
 individual's expenses for deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments with
 respect to services covered under this title and furnished during the year
 equals $2,500, payment of benefits under this title for the individual for
 services furnished during the remainder of the year shall be paid without
 the application of any coinsurance or copayments.
 `(c) CHILDREN-
 `(1) NO DEDUCTIBLES OR COINSURANCE- In the case of children (as defined
 in section 2161(a)(1)), there shall be no coinsurance, deductibles, or
 copayments applicable to covered benefits (including benefits described
 in paragraphs (2) and (3)).
 `(2) ADDITIONAL PREVENTIVE BENEFITS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to the periodicity schedule established with
 respect to the services under subparagraph (B), for children benefits
 shall be available under this title for the following items and services:
 `(i) Newborn and well-baby care, including normal newborn care and
 pediatrician services for high-risk deliveries.
 `(ii) Well-child care, including routine office visits, routine immunizations
 (including the vaccine itself), routine laboratory tests, and preventive
 dental care.
 `(B) PERIODICITY SCHEDULE- The Secretary, in consultation with the American
 Academy of Pediatrics, shall establish a schedule of periodicity which
 reflects the general, appropriate frequency with which services listed in
 subparagraph (A) should be provided to healthy children.
 `(3) OTHER ADDITIONAL SERVICES- For children benefits also shall be
 available under this title for the following:
 `(A) Inpatient hospital services (without regard to the restrictions
 described in subsections (a)(1) and (b)(1) of section 1812 and the
 coinsurance described in section 1813(a)(1)).
 `(B) Outpatient prescription drugs and biologicals (based on a formulary
 developed by the Secretary).
 `(C) Eyeglasses and hearing aids, and examinations therefor.
 `(d) PREGNANCY-RELATED SERVICES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In the case of a pregnant woman (as defined in section
 2161(a)(3)), benefits under this title shall include entitlement to have
 payment made for the following, without the application of deductibles,
 coinsurance, or copayments, subject to the periodicity schedule established
 with respect to the services under paragraph (2) and prior authorization
 of certain services under paragraph (3):
 `(A) Prenatal care, including care for all complications of pregnancy.
 `(B) Inpatient labor and delivery services.
 `(C) Postnatal care.
 `(D) Postnatal family planning services.
 `(2) PERIODICITY SCHEDULE- The Secretary, in consultation with the
 American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology, shall establish a schedule
 of periodicity which reflects the general, appropriate frequency with
 which services listed in paragraph (1) should be provided to pregnant
 women without complications of pregnancy.
 `(3) PRIOR AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN SERVICES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except in the case of items and services specified under
 subparagraph (B), benefits are not available with respect to an item or
 service under paragraph (1) unless the provision of the item or service has
 been approved by a utilization and quality control peer review organization
 before the provision of the item or service.
 `(B) EXCEPTION FOR ROUTINE OR COMMON ITEMS AND SERVICES- Subparagraph (A)
 shall not apply to items and services which the Secretary has specified
 on a list as being either--
 `(i) related to normal pregnancy, or
 `(ii) related to a highly prevalent complication of pregnancy,
or in the case of emergency services.
 `(4) MULTIPLE BASES FOR ELIGIBILITY- In the case of a pregnant woman who is
 also a child or a low-income individual, the benefits under this subsection
 shall be in addition or supplementation to the benefits otherwise available
 to the individual.
 `(e) LOWER-INCOME INDIVIDUALS-
 `(1) LIMITATIONS ON DEDUCTIBLES AND COINSURANCE-
 `(A) NONE FOR LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUALS- In the case of a low-income individual,
 there shall be no coinsurance, deductibles, or copayments under this title.
 `(B) PHASE-IN FOR OTHER LOWER-INCOME INDIVIDUALS- In the case of an
 individual whose applicable modified gross income (as defined in section
 2161(b)(1)) exceeds the poverty level (as defined in section 2161(b)(2))
 but does not exceed twice the poverty level, the coinsurance, deductibles,
 and copayments applicable under this title shall bear the same ratio to
 the coinsurance, deductibles, and copayments otherwise applicable as--
 `(i) the excess of the applicable modified gross income over the poverty
 level, bears to
 `(ii) the poverty level.
If the ratio determined under the preceding sentence is not a multiple of 25
percentage points, such ratio shall be rounded to the nearest 25 percentage
points.
 `(2) ADDITIONAL BENEFITS FOR LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUALS- In the case of
 low-income individuals (as defined in section 2161(a)(2)), benefits
 under this title shall also include entitlement to have payment made
 for the following, without the application of deductibles, coinsurance,
 or copayments:
 `(A) Inpatient hospital services (without regard to the restrictions
 described in subsections (a)(1) and (b)(1) of section 1812 and the
 coinsurance described in section 1813(a)(1)).
 `(B) Outpatient prescription drugs and biologicals (based on a formulary
 developed by the Secretary).
 `(C) Eyeglasses and hearing aids and examinations therefor.
`SEC. 2122. EXCLUSIONS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this section, section 1862 shall
 apply to expenses incurred for items and services provided under this title
 the same manner as such section applies to items and services provided
 under title XVIII.
 `(b) BENEFITS EXCEPTION-
 `(1) CHILDRENS' SERVICES- In applying section 1862(a) with respect to
 services described in section 2121(c)(2)(A) (relating to well-child
 services), payment shall not be denied under paragraph (1), (7), or (12)
 of such section 1862(a) if the services are provided in accordance with
 the periodicity schedule described in section 2121(c)(2)(B).
 `(2) SERVICES FOR PREGNANT WOMEN- In applying section 1862(a) with respect
 to services described in section 2121(d)(1) (other than subparagraph
 (A) thereof), payment shall not be denied under paragraph (1) or (7) of
 such section 1862(a) if the services are provided in accordance with the
 periodicity schedule described in section 2121(d)(2).
 `(3) TREATMENT OF EYEGLASSES AND HEARING AIDS FOR CHILDREN AND LOW-INCOME
 INDIVIDUALS- Payment shall not be denied under this title under section
 1862(a)(7) with respect to eyeglasses and hearing aids and examinations
 therefor in the case of children and low-income individuals.
 `(c) COORDINATION OF PAYMENTS-
 `(1) PRIMARY TO GROUP HEALTH PLANS- Section 1862(b)(1) (relating to
 requirements of group health plans) shall not apply under this title.
 `(2) SECONDARY TO MEDICARE- Payment shall not be made under this title
 with respect to benefits to the extent that payment for such benefits may
 be made under title XVIII.
`Part C--Payment for Benefits and Financing
`SEC. 2141. PAYMENTS FOR BENEFITS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this section and in
 section 2121--
 `(1) payment of benefits under this title with respect to benefits shall
 be made in the same amounts and on the same basis as payment may be made
 with respect to such benefits under title XVIII, and
 `(2) the provisions of sections 1814, 1833, 1842, 1848, and 1886 shall
 apply to payment of benefits under this title in the same manner as they
 apply to benefits under title XVIII.
 `(b) NO COST-SHARING FOR CERTAIN SERVICES- No deductibles, coinsurance,
 copayments, or other cost-sharing shall be imposed with respect to--
 `(1) well-child care services described in section 2121(c)(1),
 `(2) items and services for which an individual is entitled under this
 title as a pregnant woman, and
 `(3) items and services for qualified low-income individuals.
For provision limiting the deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments under
this title in any year, see section 2121(b).
 `(c) NO EXTRA BILLING PERMITTED- Payment under this title may only be made
 on an assignment-related basis (as defined in section 1842(i)(1)). If an
 entity knowingly and willfully presents or causes to be presented a claim
 or bills an individual enrolled under this title for charges for services
 other than on an assignment-related basis, the Secretary may apply sanctions
 against such entity in accordance with section 1842(j)(2).
 `(d) ADJUSTMENT OF PAYMENTS-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT OF NEW DRGS AND WEIGHTS- In making payment under this
 title with respect to inpatient hospital services, the Secretary shall
 make such adjustments in the diagnosis-related groups and weighting factors
 with respect to discharges within such groups, otherwise established under
 section 1886(d)(4) as may be necessary--
 `(A) to reflect the types of discharges occurring under this title which
 are not occurring under title XVIII, and
 `(B) to provide for a weighting factor, for cesearian section deliveries,
 which is 95 percent of the weighting factor that otherwise would be
 established.
 `(2) PAYMENT FOR OBSTETRICAL SERVICES-
 `(A) GLOBAL FEE- In making payment under this title with respect to the
 group of obstetrical services typical of treatment throughout a course of
 pregnancy, the Secretary shall establish, as a schedule under section 1848,
 a global fee with respect to such group of services.
 `(B) BONUS FOR EARLY PRESENTATION- The fee schedule amount with respect
 to obstetrical services under this title shall be increased by 5 percent
 in the case of services furnished to women who have presented for prenatal
 care during the first trimester.
 `(C) DISINCENTIVE FOR CAESAREAN SECTIONS- The fee schedule amount otherwise
 established with respect to a caesarean section shall be 95 percent of
 the fee schedule amount otherwise established.
 `(e) CONDITIONS OF AND LIMITATIONS ON PAYMENTS- The provisions of sections
 1814 and 1835 shall apply to payment for services under this title in the
 same manner as they apply to payment for services under parts A and B,
 respectively, of title XVIII.
 `(f) USE OF TRUST FUND- In carrying out this section, any reference in
 title XVIII to a trust fund shall be treated as a reference to the Mediplan
 Trust Fund established under section 2142.
 `(g) PAYMENT FOR OUTPATIENT PRESCRIPTION DRUGS AND BIOLOGICALS- The
 Secretary, taking into account the payment methodology that was described
 in the amendments made by section 202 of the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage
 Act of 1988 (as in effect before its repeal), shall establish a prospective
 payment methodology for the payment for outpatient prescription drugs and
 biologicals under this title.
`SEC. 2142. MEDIPLAN TRUST FUND.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT- (1) There is hereby created on the books of the Treasury
 of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Mediplan Trust Fund'
 (in this section referred to as the `Trust Fund'). The Trust Fund shall
 consist of such gifts and bequests as may be made as provided in section
 201(i)(1) and amounts appropriated under paragraph (2).
 `(2) There are hereby appropriated to the Trust Fund amounts equivalent
 to 100 percent of--
 `(A) the taxes imposed by sections 59B and 59C of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986,
 `(B) the taxes imposed by section 3111(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of
 1986, and
 `(C) the taxes imposed by sections 3221(c) of such Code.
The amounts appropriated by the preceding sentence shall be transferred from
time to time from the general fund in the Treasury to the Trust Fund, such
amounts to be determined on the basis of estimates by the Secretary of the
Treasury of the taxes, paid to or deposited into the Treasury; and proper
adjustments shall be made in amounts subsequently transferred to the extent
prior estimates were in excess of or were less than the taxes specified in
such sentence.
 `(b) INCORPORATION OF PROVISIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (2), the provisions of subsections
 (b) through (j) of section 1817 shall apply to the Trust Fund in the same
 manner as they apply to the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund.
 `(2) EXCEPTIONS- In applying paragraph (1)--
 `(A) the Board of Trustees and Managing Trustee of the Trust Fund shall be
 composed of the members of the Board of Trustees and the Managing Trustee,
 respectively, of the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund; and
 `(B) any reference in section 1817 to the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust
 Fund, to title XVIII (or part A thereof), or to section 3102(b) of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is deemed a reference to the Trust Fund under
 this section, this title, and to section 3102(c) of such Code, respectively.
`Part D--General Provisions
`SEC. 2161. DEFINITIONS RELATING TO BENEFICIARIES AND INCOME.
 `(a) TERMS RELATING TO BENEFICIARIES- In this title:
 `(1) CHILD- The term `child' means an individual who throughout a month
 has not attained 23 years of age.
 `(2) LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUAL- The term `low-income individual' means an
 individual whose applicable modified gross income (as defined in subsection
 (b)(1)) is less than 100 percent of the poverty level (as defined in
 subsection (b)(2)).
 `(3) PREGNANT WOMAN- The term `pregnant woman' means a woman who has
 been certified by a physician (in a manner specified by the Secretary) as
 being pregnant, until the last day of the month in which the 60-day period
 (beginning on the date of termination of the pregnancy) ends.
 `(b) TERMS RELATING TO INCOME- In this title:
 `(1) APPLICABLE MODIFIED GROSS INCOME-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this paragraph, the term `applicable
 modified gross income' means, for a calendar year for an individual, the
 modified gross income (as defined in section 59B(c) of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986) of the taxpayer (or the taxpayer for whom the individual
 may be claimed as a dependent) for the taxable year ending in the second
 previous calendar year.
 `(B) APPLICATION OF CURRENT YEAR MODIFIED GROSS INCOME-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Subject to clause (ii), the Secretary shall establish a
 procedure under which an individual may file a declaration of estimated
 modified gross income for a taxable year ending in a calendar year, which
 modified gross income will apply under this subsection as the applicable
 modified gross income for the calendar year. Subject to clause (ii), such
 procedure shall be applicable regardless of whether or not the individual
 filed a tax return for the taxable year ending in the second previous
 calendar year.
 `(ii) LIMITATION ON APPLICATION- The Secretary may limit the application of
 clause (i), in the case of individuals who have filed tax returns for the
 taxable year ending in the second previous calendar year, to individuals
 with respect to whom the applicable modified gross income will be reduced
 by at least 20 percent as a result of the application of such clause.
 `(iii) REQUIREMENT FOR RETURN- Any individual who has filed a declaration
 under clause (i) for a calendar year is required to file an income tax return
 for the taxable year in the calendar year, regardless of whether any income
 tax is actually owed for the year. The failure of the individual to file
 such a return makes the individual liable for overpayments under this title
 under clause (iv) in the same manner as if this paragraph had not applied.
 `(iv) COLLECTION FOR OVERPAYMENTS- If a declaration of estimated modified
 gross income is made applicable to a calendar year under clause (i) and the
 actual modified gross income for that taxable year exceeds such estimated
 modified gross income, the individual shall be liable to the United States
 for 110 percent of the amount of additional payments made under this title
 as a result of the use of such estimated modified gross income instead of
 the actual modified gross income for that taxable year.
 `(C) TRANSMITTAL OF INFORMATION- By not later than October 1 of each
 year, the Secretary of the Treasury shall transmit to the Secretary such
 information relating to the applicable modified gross income of individuals
 for the taxable year ending in the previous year as may be necessary to
 apply this title in the succeeding calendar year.
 `(2) POVERTY LEVEL- The term `poverty level' means, for an individual in a
 family, the official poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management
 and Budget, and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the
 Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981) applicable to a family of the
 size involved.
`SEC. 2162. INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN MEDICARE PROVISIONS AND OTHER PROVISIONS.
 `(a) USE OF CARRIERS AND INTERMEDIARIES- The Secretary shall provide for
 the administration of this title through the use of fiscal intermediaries
 and carriers in the same manner as title XVIII is carried out through the
 use of such fiscal intermediaries and carriers, except that no payment
 shall be made under this title except on the basis of bills or charges
 that are submitted electronically in a manner specified by the Secretary.
 `(b) DEFINITIONS- Except as otherwise provided in this title, the definitions
 contained in section 1861 shall apply for purposes of this title in the
 same manner as they apply for purposes of title XVIII.
 `(c) CERTIFICATION, PROVIDER QUALIFICATION, ETC- The provisions of sections
 1863 through 1875, sections 1878 through 1880, section 1883, section 1885,
 and sections 1887 through 1892 shall apply to this title in the same manner
 as they apply to title XVIII.
 `(d) HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS AND COMPETITIVE MEDICAL PLANS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this subsection, section 1876 shall
 apply to individuals entitled to benefits under this title in the same
 manner as such section applies to individuals entitled to benefits under
 part A, and enrolled under part B, of title XVIII.
 `(2) APPLICATION- In applying section 1876 under this section--
 `(A) the provisions of such section relating only to individuals enrolled
 under part B of title XVIII shall not apply;
 `(B) any reference to a Trust Fund established under title XVIII and to
 benefits under such title is deemed a reference to the Mediplan Trust Fund
 and to benefits under this title;
 `(C) the adjusted average per capita cost and the adjusted community rate
 shall be determined on the basis of benefits under this title; and
 `(D) subsection (f) shall not apply.
 `(e) TITLE XI PROVISIONS- The following provisions shall apply to this
 title in the same manner as they apply to title XVIII:
 `(1) Sections 1124, 1126, and 1128 through 1128B (relating to fraud
 and abuse).
 `(2) Section 1134 (relating to nonprofit hospital philanthropy).
 `(3) Section 1138 (relating to hospital protocols for organ procurement
 and standards for organ procurement agencies).
 `(4) Section 1142 (relating to research on outcomes of health care services
 and procedures), except that any reference in such section to a Trust Fund
 is deemed a reference to the Mediplan Trust Fund.
 `(5) Part B of title XI (relating to peer review of the utilization and
 quality of health care services).
 `(f) OTHER PROVISIONS- The provisions of section 201(i) shall apply to
 this title and the Mediplan Trust Fund in the same manner as they apply
 to title XVIII and the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund.
`SEC. 2163. STATE MAINTENANCE OF EFFORT PAYMENTS.
 `(a) CONDITION OF COVERAGE- Notwithstanding any other provision of this
 title, no individual who is a resident of a State is eligible for benefits
 under this title for a month in a calendar year, unless the State provides
 (in a manner and at a time specified by the Secretary) for payment to the
 Mediplan Trust Fund of 1/12th of the amount specified in subsection (b)
 for the year.
 `(b) MAINTENANCE OF EFFORT AMOUNT- The amount of payment specified in this
 subsection for a State for a year is equal to the amount of payment (net
 of Federal payments) made by a State under its State plan under title XIX
 for 1990 for medical assistance with respect to which benefits would have
 been payable under this title for low-income individuals if this title were
 in effect in that year, increased to the year involved by the compounded
 sum of the increase in the consumer price index for all urban consumers
 (U.S. City average, as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the
 Department of Labor) for each year after 1990 and up to the year involved.
`SEC. 2164. MODIFICATION OF MEDICAID AND OTHER PROGRAMS TO AVOID DUPLICATION
OF BENEFITS.
 `Notwithstanding any other provision of law--
 `(1) a State plan under title XIX shall not provide any medical assistance
 for benefits with respect to which any payments may be made under this title;
 `(2) a health benefits plan under chapter 89 of title 5, United States
 Code, shall not provide benefits for which any payment may be made under
 this title; and
 `(3) health benefits shall not be available under the Civilian Health and
 Medical Program of the Uniformed Services (as defined in section 1072(4)
 of title 10, United States Code) for services for which payment may be
 made under this title.
`SEC. 2165. MAINTENANCE OF ADDITIONAL BENEFITS FOR CURRENT BENEFICIARIES
UNDER GROUP HEALTH PLANS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- In the case of a group health plan (as defined in section
 5000(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) that, as of the date of
 the enactment of this title, provides any health benefit to an employee
 or former employee or a family member of an employee or former employee
 that is additional to the benefits provided under this title, the group
 health plan must continue to make available such an additional benefit to
 such an individual notwithstanding the enactment of this title.
 `(b) LIMITATION TO CURRENT BENEFICIARIES- Subsection (a) shall not apply
 to an individual who is not entitled to benefits under the group health
 plan as of the date of the enactment of this title.
 `(c) ENFORCEMENT- There is established a private cause of action for damages
 (which shall be in an amount triple the amount otherwise provided) in the
 case of a group health plan that fails to continue to provide benefits in
 accordance with subsection (a).'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE FOR BENEFITS- Title XXI of the Social Security Act
 shall apply to items and services furnished on or after January 1, 1992.
TITLE II--LONG-TERM CARE ELIGIBILITY AND BENEFITS
SEC. 201. CHANGES IN MEDICARE BENEFITS.
 (a) COVERAGE OF SKILLED NURSING FACILITY BENEFITS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 1812 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395d)
 is amended--
 (A) by amending paragraph (2) of subsection (a) to read as follows:
 `(2) extended care services for up to 180 days during any calendar year,';
 (B) in subsection (b)--
 (i) by inserting `or year' after `a spell of illness' the first place it
 appears, and
 (ii) by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows:
 `(2) extended care services furnished to the individual during a calendar
 year after such services have been furnished to the individual for 180
 days during the year;'; and
 (C) in subsection (e), by striking `post-hospital'.
 (2) COINSURANCE- Paragraph (3) of section 1813(a) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395e(a)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(3)(A) The amount payable for extended care services furnished an individual
 in any calendar year shall be reduced by the coinsurance amount (promulgated
 under subparagraph (C)) for that year for each day (before the 9th day)
 on which he is furnished such services during the year.
 `(B) Before September 1 of each year (beginning with 1990), the Secretary
 shall estimate the national average per diem reasonable cost recognized
 under this title for extended care services which will be furnished in
 the succeeding calendar year.
 `(C) The Secretary shall, in September of each year (beginning with 1990)
 promulgate the coinsurance amount which shall apply to extended care services
 furnished in the succeeding year. Such amount shall be equal to 20 percent
 of the national average per diem cost estimated under subparagraph (B)
 in that year. If the coinsurance amount determined under the preceding
 sentence is not a multiple of 50 cents, it shall be rounded to the nearest
 multiple of 50 cents (or, if it is a multiple of 25 cents but not a multiple
 of 50 cents, to the next higher multiple of 50 cents).'.
 (3) ADDITIONAL CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (A) Section 1811 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395c) is amended by striking
 `related post-hospital'.
 (B) Section 1814(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395f(a)) is amended--
 (i) in paragraphs (2)(B) and (6), by striking `post-hospital' each place
 it appears, and
 (ii) in paragraph (2)(B), by striking `, for any of the conditions' and
 all that follows up to the semicolon.
 (C) Section 1861 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x) is amended--
 (i) in subsection (e)--
 (I) in the matter before paragraph (1), by striking `paragraph (7) of this
 subsection, and subsection (i) of this section' and inserting `and paragraph
 (7) of this subsection', and
 (II) in the third sentence, by striking `section 1814(f)(2), and subsection
 (i) of this section' and inserting `and section 1814(f)(2)';
 (ii) by striking subsection (i);
 (iii) in subsections (v)(1)(G)(i), (v)(2)(A), and (v)(3), by striking
 `post-hospital' each place it appears; and
 (iv) in subsection (y)--
 (I) by striking `Post-Hospital' in the heading and by striking
 `post-hospital' each place it appears,
 (II) in paragraphs (2) and (3), by striking `spell of illness' and `spell'
 each place either appears and inserting `year',
 (III) in paragraph (2)(A)(i), by striking `30 days' and inserting `45 days',
 (IV) in paragraph (3), by striking `one-eighth' and all that follows through
 `31st day' and inserting `the coinsurance amount established under section
 1813(a)(3)(C) for each day before the 46th day', and
 (V) by striking paragraph (4).
 (D) Section 1866(d) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395cc(d)) is amended by striking
 `post-hospital' each place it appears.
 (E) Subsections (d)(1) and (f) of section 1883 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395tt)
 is amended by striking `post-hospital' each place it appears.
 (b) EXTENDING HOME HEALTH SERVICES- Section 1861(m) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395x(m)) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence:
 `For purposes of paragraphs (1) and (4) and sections 1814(a)(2)(C)
 and 1835(a)(2)(A), nursing care and home health aide services shall be
 considered to be provided or needed on an `intermittent' basis if they are
 provided or needed less than 7 days each week and, in the case they are
 provided or needed for 7 days each week, if they are provided or needed
 for a period of up to 180 consecutive days.'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATES-
 (1) The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to services furnished
 on or after January 1, 1991.
 (2) The amendment made by subsection (b) shall apply to services furnished
 in cases of initial periods of home health services beginning on or after
 January 1, 1991.
SEC. 202. LONG-TERM CARE ELIGIBILITY AND BENEFITS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Social Security Act, as amended by section 101 of this
 Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new title:
`TITLE XXII--MEDIPLAN LONG-TERM CARE BENEFITS
`Part A--Eligibility
`SEC. 2201. GENERAL ELIGIBILITY.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b), each individual who--
 `(1) is a resident of the United States,
 `(2) is a citizen or national of the United States or lawful resident alien
 (as defined in subsection (c)), and
 `(3) has been determined to be a chronically ill individual under section
 2202,
is entitled to long-term care benefits under this title.
 `(b) LIMITATION TO THE ELDERLY FOR A PERIOD- An individual is entitled
 to benefits under this title with respect to nursing facility services
 furnished before January 1, 1997, only if the individual is 65 years of
 age or older at the time of furnishing of the service.
 `(c) LAWFUL RESIDENT ALIEN DEFINED- In this section, the term `lawful
 resident alien' means an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence and
 any other alien lawfully residing permanently in the United States under
 color of law, including an alien granted asylum or with lawful temporary
 resident status under section 210, 210A, or 245A of the Immigration and
 Nationality Act.
`SEC. 2202. DETERMINATION OF CHRONIC ILLNESS FOR PURPOSES OF ELIGIBILITY
FOR NURSING FACILITY SERVICES AND LONG-TERM HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED CARE.
 `(a) APPLICATION OF SECTION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- This section shall apply in the determination of whether
 an individual, entitled to benefits under this title, is a chronically
 ill individual (as defined in subsection (c)(1)) for purposes of nursing
 facility services and long-term home and community-based care as well as in
 the performance of comprehensive needs assessments and in the development
 of plans of care for such individuals.
 `(2) NEED FOR CERTIFICATION- The provisions of section 1814(a) shall apply
 to nursing facility services and long-term home and community-based care
 under this title in the same manner as they apply to extended care services
 and home health services, respectively, under part A of title XVIII, except
 that, instead of the certification standard specified in paragraphs (2)(B)
 and (2)(C) of such section, there shall be substituted a certification
 that the individual has been determined to be a chronically ill individual
 under this section with respect to nursing facility services or long-term
 home and community-based care, respectively.
 `(b) ELIGIBILITY ASSESSMENTS, COMPREHENSIVE NEEDS ASSESSMENTS, AND PLANS
 OF CARE-
 `(1) REQUEST FOR ELIGIBILITY ASSESSMENT- Any individual who is eligible for
 benefits under this title may request the appropriate assessment and case
 management agency (under subsection (d)(1)) to provide for an eligibility
 assessment (as defined in subsection (c)(2)).
 `(2) PERFORMANCE OF ELIGIBILITY ASSESSMENT- Upon receiving a request under
 paragraph (1), the assessment and case management agency shall provide
 for an eligibility assessment by a case manager (as defined in subsection
 (c)(5)) and, in the case of an individual determined to be a chronically
 ill individual, a comprehensive needs assessment (as defined in subsection
 (c)(3)) by such a manager.
 `(3) DETERMINATION BASED ON ELIGIBILITY ASSESSMENT; PERFORMANCE OF
 COMPREHENSIVE NEEDS ASSESSMENT- Not later than 14 days after the date of
 receiving the request under paragraph (1), the agency shall--
 `(A) notify the individual (or the individual's legal representative)
 of its determination of eligibility, and
 `(B) if determined to be eligible, complete a comprehensive needs assessment
 for the individual.
 `(4) PLANS OF CARE- Within 30 days after completing a comprehensive needs
 assessment for an individual, the assessment and case management agency
 shall--
 `(A) complete a plan of care (as defined in subsection (c)(4)) for the
 individual,
 `(B) provide the individual with a copy or summary of the plan of care, and
 `(C) make arrangements for (or, at the option of such individuals, make
 referrals to) qualified providers, in accordance with subsection (d)(3)(C),
 to provide care under the plan of care.
 `(5) FEES-
 `(A) NO FEE FOR INITIAL ASSESSMENTS AND PLAN OF CARE- No fee shall be charged
 by an assessment and case management agency for the initial eligibility
 assessment, comprehensive needs assessment, and plan of care with respect
 to any individual.
 `(B) FEES FOR SUBSEQUENT ELIGIBILITY ASSESSMENTS- The Secretary may establish
 a schedule of fees for eligibility assessments (other than the initial
 eligibility assessment) for individuals who have never been determined under
 this section to be a chronically ill individual. Such fees shall be retained
 by the assessment and case management agency and applied against payments
 due such agency under subsection (d)(4) for conducting such assessments.
 `(c) DEFINITIONS- In this title:
 `(1) CHRONICALLY ILL INDIVIDUAL- The term `chronically ill individual'
 means an individual who has been certified by a case manager pursuant to
 an eligibility assessment (as defined in paragraph (2)) as--
 `(A) being unable to perform (without substantial assistance from another
 individual) at least--
 `(i) 3 activities of daily living (as defined in paragraph (7)), for
 purposes of provision of nursing facility services, or
 `(ii) 2 activities of daily living (as so defined), for purposes of
 provision of long-term home and community-based care, or
 `(B) having a similar level of disability due to cognitive impairment
 such that without supervision the individual would be unable to care for
 himself or herself or would be a danger to himself or herself.
 `(2) ELIGIBILITY ASSESSMENT- The term `eligibility assessment' means, with
 respect to an individual who is entitled to benefits under this title,
 an examination, using a uniform eligibility instrument and methodology
 specified by the Secretary in regulations, of the individual by a case
 manager in person at the residence of the individual (or, upon request by
 the individual, at the office of the case manager) to determine if the
 individual is a chronically ill individual. Such regulations shall be
 consistent with a system necessary to establish eligibility for nursing
 facility services and long-term home and community based care.
 `(3) COMPREHENSIVE NEEDS ASSESSMENT- The term `comprehensive needs
 assessment' means, with respect to a chronically ill individual, an
 assessment, using a uniform assessment instrument and methodology specified
 by the Secretary in regulations, of the needs of the individual for nursing
 facility services or for long-term home and community-based care, or for
 both, and the resources available to meet such needs, which assessment--
 `(A) is conducted by a case manager in person at the residence of the
 individual (or, in the case of an individual in a nursing facility, at
 the facility, as well as at the residence of the individual),
 `(B) includes an assessment of the type of impairment and functional
 status (both physical and mental), of the living arrangement, and of the
 availability of caregiver support, and
 `(C) is conducted in cooperation with the individual and the individual's
 family and in consultation with such other health professionals (such as
 a physician, physical therapist, occupational therapy, or mental health
 expert) as the case manager considers appropriate to assess fully the
 functional status of the individual.
A comprehensive needs assessment may be conducted at the same time as an
eligibility assessment is conducted.
 `(4) PLAN OF CARE- The term `plan of care', with respect to nursing facility
 services and long-term home and community-based care to be provided to a
 chronically ill individual, means a written plan which--
 `(A) is developed by a case manager (as defined in paragraph (5))
 in cooperation with the individual and the individual's family and in
 consultation with the individual's attending physician (or, in the absence
 of such physician, any physician) with respect to medical services to
 be provided,
 `(B) is based on the results of a comprehensive needs assessment of the
 individual and is reviewed and revised by the case manager as a result of
 changes in such assessment,
 `(C) includes a definition of specific outcome goals on which improvement,
 reduced rate of decline, or improved quality of life for the individual
 is expected,
 `(D) emphasizes rehabilitation (where appropriate),
 `(E) identifies the specific amount, duration, and scope of services,
 consistent with the level of impairment and limitations on payment
 established under section 2242(a)(3), to be provided as part of nursing
 facility services or long-term home and community-based care and does not
 include services or care to which the individual has objected, and
 `(F) identifies medication required by the individual.
A plan of care for an individual may be developed at the same time a
comprehensive needs assessment is conducted.
 `(5)(A) CASE MANAGER- The term `case manager' means a registered professional
 nurse or a qualified social worker who--
 `(i) is employed by an assessment and case management agency to provide
 case management services under this title, and
 `(ii) has completed a training program approved by the Secretary under
 this title.
 `(B) QUALIFIED SOCIAL WORKER- The term `qualified social worker' means
 an individual who is a graduate of a school of social work and licensed
 in social work, if applicable in the State in which the individual is
 providing social services.
 `(6) CASE MANAGEMENT SERVICES- The term `case management services' includes--
 `(A) conducting eligibility assessments and comprehensive needs assessments;
 `(B) for individuals determined to be chronically ill individuals with
 respect to--
 `(i) nursing facility services--
 `(I) developing an initial written plan of care for such services,
 `(II) auditing annually (and upon notice by such a facility of a change in
 the individuals' condition) the individuals' eligibility for such services
 and level of services, and
 `(III) monitoring the quality and quantity of care and revisions of the
 plan of care made by the facility; or
 `(ii) long-term home and community-based care, developing, implementing,
 and modifying (when necessary) plans of care for such care;
 `(C) making arrangements with and referrals to qualified nursing facilities,
 home health agencies, homemaker agencies, and adult day care programs
 (with which the agency, a case manager employed by the agency, or any
 person with an ownership, control, or financial interest (including such
 a person as defined in section 1124(a)(3)) in the agency does not have
 a direct or indirect ownership or other financial interest) to provide
 nursing facility services or long-term home and community-based care
 pursuant to plans of care;
 `(D) maintaining and making available lists of all qualified providers of
 such services and care; and
 `(E) for individuals receiving long-term home and community-based care--
 `(i) coordinating the provision of such care,
 `(ii) monitoring the plan of care for such care to ensure the quality,
 quantity, timeliness, and effectiveness of the care, and
 `(iii) monitoring the progress toward achievement of goals specified in
 the plan of care.
For chronically ill individuals for whom an initial plan of care for nursing
facility services has been developed under subparagraph (B)(i)(I), a nursing
facility shall use such plan instead of the initial plan of care otherwise
prepared under section 1819(b)(2).
 `(7) ACTIVITY OF DAILY LIVING- For purposes of paragraph (2), each of
 the following is an activity of daily living: Eating, bathing, dressing,
 toileting, and transferring in and out of a bed or in and out of a chair.
 `(d) ASSESSMENT AND CASE MANAGEMENT AGENCIES-
 `(1) AGREEMENTS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- With respect to individuals residing in each State,
 the Secretary shall enter into an agreement with a qualified nonprofit
 agency or entity (in this section referred to as an `assessment and case
 management agency') to provide case management services in accordance
 with this subsection. Such an agency may be a private nonprofit entity,
 peer review organization, health maintenance organization, or other entity
 which does not provide nursing facility services or long-term home and
 community-based care.
 `(B) PERIOD OF AGREEMENT- Such an agreement shall be for a period of 2
 years, subject to renewal if the agency continues to meet the standards
 established with respect to the previous such agreement.
 `(C) TERMINATION-
 `(i) BY AGENCY- An agency may terminate such an agreement at such time
 and upon such notice to the Secretary and the public as may be provided in
 regulations, except that notice of more than 6 months shall not be required.
 `(ii) BY SECRETARY- The Secretary may refuse to renew or may terminate such
 an agreement if the Secretary has determined, based on an annual survey
 under subsection (e)(2) or other information, that the agency is failing
 to comply substantially with provisions of the agreement, of this title,
 or the regulations thereunder.
 `(2) QUALIFICATIONS- An agency or entity is not qualified for purposes of
 paragraph (1) unless--
 `(A) it can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Secretary that it
 can provide case management services and it can meet the requirements of
 paragraph (3);
 `(B) provides only case management services and other services specified
 under this section;
 `(C) employs professionals, who are trained in assessing the needs of
 chronically ill individuals and who include registered professional nurses
 or qualified social workers to provide case management services, and employs
 one or more physicians to perform medical reviews for plans of care; and
 `(D) meets such additional conditions of participation as the Secretary
 may find necessary in the interest of the health and safety of individuals
 who are furnished services by such agency or organization and for the
 effective and efficient operation of the program.
 `(3) DUTIES- Agreements with such an assessment and case management agency
 under this subsection shall provide for performance of the following
 functions by such an agency:
 `(A) ELIGIBILITY ASSESSMENTS- The agency shall conduct eligibility
 assessments and make determinations of whether an individual is a chronically
 ill individual. If the agency determines that an individual is not a
 chronically ill individual, the agency shall permit the individual the
 opportunity to request a reconsideration of the determination by the agency.
 `(B) COMPREHENSIVE NEEDS ASSESSMENTS AND PLANS OF CARE- For each chronically
 ill individual--
 `(i) the agency shall conduct comprehensive needs assessments and develop
 initial plans of care, and provide copies of such plans of care to fiscal
 intermediaries and providers of services;
 `(ii) who is receiving long-term home and community-based care, the agency
 shall provide for a review of the eligibility assessment, a review of the
 comprehensive needs assessment, and, if appropriate, a review and revision
 of the individual's plan of care--
 `(I) within 3 months after the date of the initial determination of chronic
 illness and not less frequently than every 6 months thereafter, and
 `(II) promptly after a significant change in the individual's physical or
 mental condition; and
 `(iii) who is receiving nursing facility services under this title,
 the agency--
 `(I) shall review the individual's eligibility assessment and plan of care
 if the facility has identified the individual (under section 1819(b)(3)(F))
 as having a significant change in physical or mental condition, and
 `(II) shall audit annually the eligibility assessments and plans of care
 for each other chronically ill resident not so identified.
 `(C) OTHER CASE MANAGEMENT SERVICES- In addition, for chronically ill
 individuals--
 `(i) the agency shall provide other case management services (including
 follow-up and monitoring of the individuals and of the quality, quantity,
 and timeliness of services furnished to the individuals);
 `(ii) the agency shall make arrangements for (or, at the option of such
 individuals, make referrals to) qualified providers (with which the agency,
 a case manager employed by the agency, or any person with an ownership,
 control, or financial interest (including such a person as defined in
 section 1124(a)(3)) in the agency does not have a direct or indirect
 ownership or other financial interest) for the provision of appropriate
 nursing facility services or long-term home and community-based care,
 pursuant to plans of care; and
 `(iii) the agency shall maintain and make available a list of all
 qualified providers of such services and care in the geographic area of
 such individuals.
 `(D) STATEMENTS- The agency shall provide each chronically ill individual
 (or legal representative or guardian of such an individual) with a written
 statement describing--
 `(i) the services to be provided under the individual's plan of care and
 a schedule for provision of such services,
 `(ii) the means of appealing determinations of eligibility or benefits, and
 `(iii) the criteria and procedures used for discharge or transfer to
 another program or service.
 `(4) PAYMENTS- The Secretary shall provide for payments, in accordance
 with a fee schedule established by the Secretary, to an assessment and
 case management agency with an agreement under this section as follows:
 `(A) ASSESSMENTS-
 `(i) FOR INELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS- Payment of an amount for conducting an
 eligibility assessment for an individual who is determined not to be a
 chronically ill individual. Such a payment shall be reduced by the amount
 of any fees collected under subsection (b)(5)(B).
 `(ii) FOR ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS- Payment of an amount for conducting an
 eligibility assessment for each other individual, including conducting
 a comprehensive needs assessment and developing a plan of care for the
 individual.
 `(B) FOR PERIODIC AUDITS AND REVIEWS-
 `(i) FOR NURSING FACILITY RESIDENTS- In the case of an individual determined
 to be a chronically ill individual and who is receiving nursing facility
 services (other than extended care services) under this title, payment of
 an amount for each annual audit described in subsection (c)(6)(B)(i)(II)
 with respect to such individual.
 `(ii) FOR OTHER BENEFICIARIES- In the case of an individual determined
 to be a chronically ill individual and who is receiving long-term home
 and community-based care under this title, payment of an amount, not more
 often than twice each year, for review activities described in paragraph
 (3)(B)(ii)(I) with respect to such individual.
 `(C) FOR CASE MANAGEMENT SERVICES-
 `(i) FOR NURSING FACILITY RESIDENTS- In the case of an individual determined
 to be a chronically ill individual and who is receiving nursing facility
 services (other than extended care services) under this title, payment
 of an amount each month for case management services (other than those
 described in subparagraph (B)(i)) with respect to such individual.
 `(ii) FOR OTHER BENEFICIARIES- In the case of an individual determined to
 be a chronically ill individual and who is receiving long-term home and
 community-based care under this title, payment of an amount each month
 for case management services (other than those described in subparagraph
 (B)(ii)) with respect to such individual.
 `(iii) PAYMENTS- The payment amounts under this subparagraph shall be
 determined without regard to the amount of case management services
 furnished with respect to an individual in any month.
 `(e) SECRETARIAL DUTIES-
 `(1) DEVELOPMENT OF UNIFORM INSTRUMENTS AND METHODOLOGY- The Secretary
 shall develop and specify in regulations, by not later than July 1, 1991,
 a uniform eligibility instrument and methodology to be used in conducting
 eligibility assessments and a uniform assessment instrument and methodology
 in conducting comprehensive needs assessments under this section. Such
 instruments may be coordinated with the instrument used for purposes of
 assessments for skilled nursing facilities under section 1819.
 `(2) SURVEYS OF COMPLIANCE- The Secretary shall annually survey assessment
 and case management agencies to determine if such agencies are meeting the
 responsibilities required under this section (including the provision of
 appropriate case management services) in a cost effective manner.
 `(3) ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL OF CASE MANAGER TRAINING
 PROGRAMS- The Secretary shall establish by regulation, and shall apply,
 standards for the approval of training programs for case managers under
 subsection (c)(5)(A)(ii).
`Part B--Benefits
`SEC. 2221. SCOPE OF BENEFITS.
 `Subject to section 1812(d)(2)(A)(iii), the benefits provided to an
 individual by the program established by this title shall consist of
 entitlement to have payment made on the individual's behalf for--
 `(1) nursing facility services, and
 `(2) long-term home and community-based care.
`SEC. 2222. EXCLUSIONS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this section, section 1862 (other
 than subsection (b)) shall apply under this title in the same manner as
 it applies to extended care services under title XVIII.
 `(b) GENERAL STANDARD- In applying section 1862(a) under subsection (a)--
 `(1) with respect to nursing facility services--
 `(A) instead of applying paragraph (1) of such section, payment shall not
 be made under this title for expenses incurred which are not reasonable
 and necessary for the maintenance of the physical, mental, and psychosocial
 well-being of the individual in the facility, and
 `(B) paragraph (6) of such section shall not apply to the extent permitted
 under subparagraph (A) of this paragraph; and
 `(2) with respect to long-term home and community-care services--
 `(A) instead of applying paragraph (1) of such section, payment shall not
 be made under this title for expenses incurred which are not reasonable
 and necessary for the maintenance of the physical, mental, and psychosocial
 well-being of the individual in the community, and
 `(B) paragraph (6) of such section shall not apply to the extent permitted
 under subparagraph (A) of this paragraph.
 `(c) BENEFITS SECONDARY TO MEDICARE- In the case of an individual who is
 entitled to benefits under this title and under title XVIII, benefits
 under this title shall be payable for services only to the extent that
 benefits for such service are not payable under title XVIII. Payment of
 benefits under this title shall be coordinated with payments under title
 XVIII in the same manner as payments under title XVIII are coordinated
 under section 1862(b)(4) with payments under a primary plan.
`Part C--Payments for Benefits and Financing
`SEC. 2241. NURSING FACILITY SERVICES.
 `Except as otherwise provided in this part, payment under this title for
 all expenses with respect to nursing facility services shall be based on
 a prospective payment system, developed by the Secretary, which provides
 for the following:
 `(1) INCLUSION OF ALL EXPENSES- The system shall include compensation for
 capital-related items, as well as routine service costs. There shall be
 no separate recognition of any payment for return on equity capital.
 `(2) ADJUSTMENTS FOR CASE MIX AND AREA WAGES- The system shall provide
 an adjustment to take into account variations in case mix and variations
 in area wage levels, and may provide an adjustment that take into account
 statistically significant and justifiable differences in costs of facilities
 in urban areas and in rural areas.
 `(3) BASELINE- The payment amounts determined initially shall be based on
 the costs of nursing facility services which are reasonable and related to
 the cost of furnishing services in an efficient and effective manner or which
 are based on such other tests of reasonableness as the Secretary specifies.
 `(4) UPDATE- The rate of increase in payments shall reflect the changes in
 an index of the cost of the mix of goods and services comprising nursing
 facility services.
`SEC. 2242. LONG-TERM HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED CARE.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this part, payment
 under this title for all expenses with respect to long-term home and
 community-based care shall be based on a prospective payment system,
 developed by the Secretary, which provides for the following:
 `(1) ADJUSTMENTS FOR CASE MIX AND AREA WAGES- The system shall adjust
 payment rates to take into account variations in case mix and variations
 in area wage levels.
 `(2) BASIS- Payment rates shall take into account the costs which are
 reasonable and related to the cost of providing such respective care or
 services in the area in which such care or services are provided.
 `(3) LIMITS ON PAYMENT-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to subparagraph (C), the amounts that are
 payable (without regard to coinsurance) with respect to long-term home
 and community-based care provided in a month to an individual who--
 `(i) is certified by a physician as requiring skilled nursing and
 rehabilitation care may not exceed 90 percent of the applicable nursing
 facility limit described in subparagraph (B), or
 `(ii) is not so certified may not exceed 70 percent of the applicable
 nursing facility limit described in subparagraph (B).
 `(B) APPLICABLE LIMIT- The applicable nursing facility limit described
 in this subparagraph, with respect to long-term home and community-based
 care provided in a wage area for a month, is the median payment amounts
 made for nursing facility services in the wage area under this title, not
 taking into account any adjustment for case mix. For purposes of applying
 the previous sentence, in September of each year (beginning with 1992)
 the Secretary shall publish the Secretary's estimate of the applicable
 nursing facility limit to be applied for months in the succeeding year
 for each wage area (as so defined).
 `(C) COUNTING MEDICARE EXPENDITURES FOR HOME HEALTH SERVICES- The limit
 established under subparagraph (A) for any month shall be reduced by the
 amount of expenditures made under title XVIII with respect to the individual
 for home health services in the month.
 `(4) UPDATE- The rate of increase in payments shall reflect the changes in
 an index of the cost of the mix of goods and services comprising long-term
 home and community-based services.
 `(b) ADMINISTRATION- For purposes of administration of this title with
 respect to long-term home and community-based care, the Secretary shall enter
 into contracts under section 1842 with the regional fiscal intermediaries
 responsible, under section 1816(e)(4), for home health agencies to
 perform, under this title with respect to providers of long-term home and
 community-based care, at least the same functions as such intermediaries
 perform under section 1816 with respect to home health agencies.
`SEC. 2243. DEDUCTIBLES AND COINSURANCE.
 `(a) DEDUCTIBLE FOR NURSING FACILITY SERVICES- Except as provided in
 subsection (c)--
 `(1) INITIAL DEDUCTIBLE-
 `(A) 1993 AND 1994- No benefits shall be payable under this title with
 respect to nursing facility services furnished during 1993 and 1994 unless
 and until the individual has been furnished nursing facility services
 for at least 12 months in the preceding 24 months at a time at which the
 individual had been determined to be a chronically ill individual.
 `(B) 1995 AND THEREAFTER- No benefits shall be payable under this title
 with respect to nursing facility services furnished during a year after
 1994 unless and until the individual has been furnished nursing facility
 services for at least 2 months in the preceding 3 months at a time at
 which the individual had been determined to be a chronically ill individual.
 `(C) MONTHS EXCLUDED FROM DEDUCTIBLE- There may not be counted as a month
 under subparagraph (A) or (B) any month--
 `(i) before January 1993, or
 `(ii) for which the individual was provided extended care services for
 which payments may be made under part A of title XVIII.
There shall also be excluded, for years before 1997, any month in which the
individual had not attained 65 years of age before the end of the month.
 `(b) COINSURANCE-
 `(1) NURSING FACILITY SERVICES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (c), the amount payable
 for nursing facility services furnished under this title during a year
 shall be reduced by a coinsurance amount (promulgated under subparagraph
 (C) for that year) for each day on which the individual is provided such
 services during the year.
 `(B) NATIONAL AVERAGE PER DIEM PAYMENT AMOUNT- Before September 1 of
 each year (beginning with 1992), the Secretary shall estimate the national
 average per diem payment amount to be recognized under this title for nursing
 facility services which will be furnished in the succeeding calendar year.
 `(C) COINSURANCE AMOUNT- The Secretary shall, in September of each year
 (beginning with 1992) promulgate the coinsurance amount which shall apply
 to nursing facility services furnished in the succeeding year. Such amount
 shall be equal to 20 percent of the national average per diem payment
 amount estimated under subparagraph (B) in that year. If a coinsurance
 amount determined under the preceding sentence is not a multiple of $1,
 it shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $1 (or, if it is a multiple
 of 50 cents but not a multiple of $1, to the next higher multiple of $1).
 `(2) LONG-TERM HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED CARE- Except as provided in
 subsection (c), the amount payable for long-term home and community-based
 care under this title shall be reduced by a coinsurance amount equal to
 20 percent of the payment amount otherwise recognized with respect to such
 services and care under this title.
 `(c) EXEMPTION FOR LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUALS- The deductible under subsection
 (a) and the coinsurance under subsection (b) shall not apply in the case
 of a low-income individual (as defined in section 2261(c)(1)).
 `(d) PROHIBITION AGAINST EXTRA BILLING- No nursing facility, home health
 agency, adult day care program, or homemaker agency may impose any charges
 for services for which benefits are provided under this title except for
 the deductibles and coinsurance permitted under this section.
`SEC. 2244. USE OF MEDIPLAN TRUST FUND.
 `The provisions of section 2142 (relating to the Mediplan Trust Fund)
 shall apply to payment of amounts under this title in the same manner as
 they apply to payment of amounts under title XXI.
`Part D--Definitions and General Provisions
`SEC. 2261. GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
 `(a) DEFINITIONS RELATING TO NURSING FACILITY SERVICES-
 `(1) NURSING FACILITY- In this title, the term `nursing facility' includes
 a skilled nursing facility (as defined in section 1819(a)) and also includes
 an institution (or a distinct part of an institution)--
 `(A) which would be such a facility but for the fact that it is not
 described in subparagraph (A) or (B) of section 1819(a)(1), and
 `(B) which is primarily engaged in providing on a regular basis,
 health-related care and services to residents who because of their mental
 or physical condition require care and services (above the level of room
 and board) which can be made available to them only through institutional
 facilities on a regular basis.
 `(2) NURSING FACILITY SERVICES- The term `nursing facility services' means
 the items and services described in section 1819(h) if, for purposes of
 this paragraph, any reference in such subsection to a skilled nursing
 facility were deemed a reference to a nursing facility.
 `(3) APPLICATION OF TITLE XVIII PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO SKILLED NURSING
 FACILITIES-
 `(A) CONDITIONS OF PARTICIPATION- Subject to the succeeding sentence, the
 provisions of section 1819 shall apply to nursing facilities under this
 title in the same manner as they apply to skilled nursing facilities under
 title XVIII. In applying the provisions of section 1819 to nursing facilities
 pursuant to the previous sentence, any reference in such section to a skilled
 nursing facility is deemed to include a reference to a nursing facility.
 `(B) ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS- Except as otherwise specifically provided
 (or determined by the Secretary to be inconsistent with this title), the
 provisions of title XVIII (including sections 1861(l), 1861(u), 1861(w)(1),
 1863, 1864(a), 1865(a), and 1883) shall apply to nursing facilities in the
 same manner as they apply to skilled nursing facilities under title XVIII.
 `(b) DEFINITIONS RELATING TO LONG-TERM HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED CARE-
 `(1) LONG-TERM HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED CARE- The term `long-term home
 and community-based care' means--
 `(A) long-term home health care (as defined in paragraph (2)), and
 `(B) adult day care (as defined in paragraph (3)).
 `(2) LONG-TERM HOME HEALTH CARE--The term `long-term home health care'
 has the meaning given the term `home health services' in section 1861(m)
 if such definition were modified as follows:
 `(A) The phrase `part-time or intermittent' were omitted from paragraph
 (1) of such subsection (m).
 `(B) The phrase `or respiratory therapy' were inserted at the end of
 paragraph (2) of such subsection (m).
 `(C) Paragraph (3) of such subsection (m) were to read as follows:
 `(3)(A) medical social services under the direction of a physician, and
 (B) individual and family caregiver education and training to develop
 skills necessary to permit the individual to remain at home;' and the
 exclusion after paragraph (7)(B) of such subsection (m) did not apply to
 services described in clause (B) of paragraph (3) of such subsection (m)
 (as so revised).
 `(D) The phrase `to the extent permitted in regulations, part-time or
 intermittent' were omitted from paragraph (4) of such subsection (m).
 `(E) The phrase `, services of a homemaker or personal care aide,' were
 inserted in paragraph (4) of such subsection (m) after `home health aide'.
 `(F) The plan of care required under such subsection shall be a plan
 of care established and reviewed under section 2202 by a case manager
 (rather than by a physician).
Such term also includes services of a homemaker or personal care aide provided
by a homemaker agency (as defined in paragraph (5)).
 `(3) ADULT DAY CARE- The term `adult day care' means the following services
 furnished for up to (and including) 5 days in a week to a chronically ill
 individual by an adult day care program under a plan of care under section
 2202 for furnishing such services to such individual:
 `(A) Nursing care provided by or under the supervision of a registered
 professional nurse.
 `(B) Physical, occupational, or speech therapy.
 `(C) Medical social services under the direction of a physician.
 `(D) Services of a personal care aide, who has successfully completed a
 training program approved by the Secretary, provided under the supervision
 of a registered professional nurse.
 `(E) Planned therapeutic, social, physical, and educational activities.
 `(F) Nutritional services, including at least one meal each day and
 nutritional counseling and education.
 `(G) Transportation between the individual's residence and the adult day
 care program.
 `(4) ADULT DAY CARE PROGRAM- The term `adult day care program' means a
 public agency or private organization (or subdivision thereof) which--
 `(A) is primarily engaged in providing services described in paragraph (3)
 to chronically ill adults in a group setting outside their homes (including,
 in the case of congregate housing, common areas outside personal living
 quarters) on a less than 24-hour-a-day basis;
 `(B) provides for such services directly or under arrangements;
 `(C) maintains on the premises and available personnel, including at least
 a physician, a registered professional nurse, social worker, appropriate
 rehabilitation professionals, and (as needed) a dietician, to provide
 (or supervise the provision of) such services;
 `(D) maintains appropriate records on all individuals provided such services;
 `(E) has procedures for obtaining appropriate aid in medical emergencies; and
 `(F) meets such additional requirements as the Secretary finds necessary in
 the interest of the health and safety of individuals furnished such services.
 `(5) HOMEMAKER AGENCY- The term `homemaker agency' means a public agency or
 private organization, or a subdivision of such an agency or organization,
 which--
 `(A) is primarily engaged in providing services of homemakers and personal
 care aides;
 `(B) in the case of an agency or organization in any State in which State or
 applicable local law provides for the licensing of agencies or organizations
 of this nature, (i) is licensed pursuant to such law, or (ii) is approved,
 by the agency of such State or locality responsible for licensing agencies
 or organizations of this nature, as meeting the standards established for
 such licensing;
 `(C) meets the conditions of participation incorporated by reference in
 section 1891(g) and such other conditions of participation as the Secretary
 may find necessary in the interest of the health and safety of individuals
 who are furnished services by such agency or organization; and
 `(D) meets such additional requirements as the Secretary finds necessary
 for the effective and efficient operation of the program under this title.
 `(6) INCORPORATION OF ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS-
 `(A) ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS- Except as otherwise specifically provided
 (or determined by the Secretary to be inconsistent with this title),
 the provisions of title XVIII (including sections 1861(u), 1861(w)(1),
 1863, 1864(a), and 1865(a)) shall apply to an adult day care program and
 a homemaker agency in the same manner as they apply to a home health agency.
 `(B) APPLICATION OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS TO HOMEMAKER AGENCIES-
 `(i) TRAINING OF HOMEMAKERS AND PERSONAL CARE AIDES- The provisions of
 section 1891(a)(3) shall apply to homemakers and personal care aides used
 by homemaker agencies in the same manner as they apply to home health aides
 used by home health agencies, except, for this purpose, any date specified
 in such section shall be deemed to be the date one year after the date so
 specified and the reference in subparagraph (B)(ii) of such section to
 `items and services described in section 1861(m)' is deemed a reference
 to services of a homemaker/personal care aide.
 `(ii) SURVEY AND CERTIFICATION- The provisions of subsections (c) through
 (f) of section 1891 shall apply to homemaker agencies in the same manner
 as they apply to home health agencies under title XVIII, except that,
 for this purpose--
 `(I) any date specified in such subsections shall be deemed to be the date
 one year after the date so specified, and
 `(II) any reference to section 1861(o) or subsection (a) is deemed a
 reference to paragraph (5) of this subsection or section 1891(a)(3),
 respectively.
 `(c) DEFINITIONS RELATING TO LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUALS-
 `(1) LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUAL- The term `low-income individual' means an
 individual whose applicable modified gross income (as defined in paragraph
 (2)) is less than 200 percent of the poverty level (as defined in paragraph
 (3)).
 `(2) APPLICABLE MODIFIED GROSS INCOME-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this paragraph, the term `applicable
 modified gross income' means, for a calendar year for an individual, the
 modified gross income (as defined in section 59B(c) of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986) of the taxpayer (or the taxpayer for whom the individual
 may be claimed as a dependent) for the taxable year ending in the second
 previous calendar year.
 `(B) APPLICATION OF CURRENT YEAR MODIFIED GROSS INCOME-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Subject to clause (ii), the Secretary shall establish a
 procedure under which an individual may file a declaration of estimated
 modified gross income for a taxable year ending in a calendar year, which
 modified gross income will apply under this subsection as the applicable
 modified gross income for the calendar year. Subject to clause (ii), such
 procedure shall be applicable regardless of whether or not the individual
 filed a tax return for the taxable year ending in the second previous
 calendar year.
 `(ii) LIMITATION ON APPLICATION- The Secretary may limit the application of
 clause (i), in the case of individuals who have filed tax returns for the
 taxable year ending in the second previous calendar year, to individuals
 with respect to whom the applicable modified gross income will be reduced
 by at least 20 percent as a result of the application of such clause.
 `(iii) REQUIREMENT FOR RETURN- Any individual who has filed a declaration
 under clause (i) for a calendar year is required to file an income tax return
 for the taxable year in the calendar year, regardless of whether any income
 tax is actually owed for the year. The failure of the individual to file
 such a return makes the individual liable for overpayments under this title
 under clause (iv) in the same manner as if this paragraph had not applied.
 `(iv) COLLECTION FOR OVERPAYMENTS- If a declaration of estimated modified
 gross income is made applicable to a calendar year under clause (i) and the
 actual modified gross income for that taxable year exceeds such estimated
 modified gross income, the individual shall be liable to the United States
 for 110 percent of the amount of additional payments made under this title
 as a result of the use of such estimated modified gross income instead of
 the actual modified gross income for that taxable year.
 `(C) TRANSMITTAL OF INFORMATION- By not later than October 1 of each
 year, the Secretary of the Treasury shall transmit to the Secretary such
 information relating to the applicable modified gross income of individuals
 for the taxable year ending in the previous year as may be necessary to
 apply this title in the succeeding calendar year.
 `(3) POVERTY LEVEL- The term `poverty level' means, for an individual in a
 family, the official poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management
 and Budget, and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the
 Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981) applicable to a family of the
 size involved.
`SEC. 2262. APPEALS OF ELIGIBILITY DETERMINATIONS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Any individual dissatisfied with any determination under
 this title as to--
 `(1) an individual's eligibility for nursing facility services or long-term
 home and community-based care under this title, or
 `(2) the amount of benefits under this title,
shall be entitled, subject to subsection (b), to a hearing thereon by the
Secretary to the same extent as is provided in section 205(b) and to judicial
review of the Secretary's final decision after such hearing as is provided
in section 205(g).
 `(b) JUDICIAL REVIEW- Notwithstanding subsection (a)(2), a hearing shall
 not be available to an individual under paragraph (2) of subsection (a)
 if the amount in controversy is less than $500 and judicial review shall
 not be available to the individual under that paragraph if the aggregate
 amount in controversy is less than $1,000. In determining the amount in
 controversy, the Secretary, under regulations, shall allow two or more
 claims to be aggregated if the claims involve the delivery of similar or
 related services to the same individual or involve common issues of law
 and fact arising from services furnished to two or more individuals.
`SEC. 2263. INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN MEDICARE PROVISIONS AND OTHER PROVISIONS.
 `(a) USE OF CARRIERS AND INTERMEDIARIES- The Secretary shall provide for
 the administration of this title through the use of fiscal intermediaries
 and carriers in the same manner as title XVIII is carried out through the
 use of such fiscal intermediaries and carriers, except that no payment
 shall be made under this title except on the basis of bills or charges
 that are submitted electronically in a manner specified by the Secretary.
 `(b) DEFINITIONS- Except as otherwise provided in this title, the definitions
 contained in section 1861 shall apply for purposes of this title in the
 same manner as they apply for purposes of title XVIII.
 `(c) CERTIFICATION, PROVIDER QUALIFICATION, ETC- The provisions of sections
 1863 through 1866, sections 1870 through 1874, sections 1877 through 1880,
 and sections 1887, 1891, and 1892 shall apply to this title in the same
 manner as they apply to title XVIII.
 `(d) REPORT CONCERNING HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS AND COMPETITIVE
 MEDICAL PLANS- Not later than January 1, 1992, the Secretary shall submit
 to the Congress a report concerning recommendations on how the provisions of
 section 1876 may be adapted to apply to benefits provided under this title.
 `(e) TITLE XI PROVISIONS- The following provisions shall apply to this
 title in the same manner as they apply to title XVIII:
 `(1) Sections 1124, 1126, and 1128 through 1128B (relating to fraud
 and abuse).
 `(2) Section 1138 (relating to hospital protocols for organ procurement
 and standards for organ procurement agencies).
 `(3) Section 1142 (relating to research on outcomes of health care services
 and procedures), except that any reference in such section to a Trust Fund
 is deemed a reference to the Mediplan Trust Fund.
 `(4) Part B of title XI (relating to peer review of the utilization and
 quality of health care services).
`SEC. 2264. STATE MAINTENANCE OF EFFORT PAYMENTS.
 `(a) CONDITION OF COVERAGE- Notwithstanding any other provision of this
 title, no individual who is a resident of a State is eligible for benefits
 under this title for a month in a calendar year, unless the State provides
 (in a manner and at a time specified by the Secretary) for payment to the
 Mediplan Trust Fund of 1/12th of the amount specified in subsection (b)
 for the year.
 `(b) MAINTENANCE OF EFFORT AMOUNT- The amount of payment specified in this
 subsection for a State for a year is equal to the amount of payment (net of
 Federal payments) made by a State under its State plan under title XIX for
 1990 for medical assistance with respect to which benefits would have been
 payable under this title (or under title XVIII as a result of the amendments
 made by the Mediplan Act of 1990) for low-income individuals if such Act
 had not been enacted, increased to the year involved by the compounded
 sum of the increase in the consumer price index for all urban consumers
 (U.S. City average, as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the
 Department of Labor) for each year after 1990 and up to the year involved.
 `(c) MODIFICATION OF MEDICAID PROGRAM- Notwithstanding any other provision of
 law, a State plan under title XIX shall not provide any medical assistance
 for benefits with respect to which any payments may be made under this
 title.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) NOTICE REQUIREMENTS FOR NURSING FACILITIES- Section 1819 of the Social
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-3) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (b)(3), by adding at the end the following new
 subparagraph:
 `(F) NOTICE OF CHANGES IN CONDITION- The skilled nursing facility must
 provide notice to the appropriate case manager under section 2202 in the
 case of a significant change in condition of any resident, who is receiving
 benefits for nursing facility services under title XXII, which might affect
 the resident's eligibility for such benefits or level of benefits.'; and
 (B) in subsection (c)(1)(B)--
 (i) by striking `and' at the end of clause (ii),
 (ii) by striking the period at the end of clause (iii) and inserting `;
 and', and
 (iii) by inserting after clause (iii) the following new clause:
 `(iv) inform each resident who is eligible for benefits under title XXII
 at the time of admission to the facility and who has not had an eligibility
 assessment performed before the date of admission to the facility--
 `(I) that the resident is not eligible for benefits under such title for
 nursing facility services (other than extended care services) unless the
 resident has received an eligibility assessment, and
 `(II) of the name, address, and telephone number of the assessment and
 case management agency from which the resident can request an eligibility
 assessment.'.
 (2) WAIVER FOR HOSPICE BENEFITS- Section 1812(d)(2)(A) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395d(d)(2)(A)) is amended--
 (A) by striking `and' at the end of clause (i),
 (B) by striking the semicolon at the end of clause (ii) and inserting `,
 and', and
 (C) by inserting after clause (ii) the following new clause:
 `(iii) long-term home and community-based care under title XXII;'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE OF BENEFITS- The amendments made by this section shall
 apply to services furnished on or after January 1, 1993.
TITLE III--FINANCING PROVISIONS
SEC. 301. INCOME TAXES FOR MEDIPLAN.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of
 1986 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new part:
`PART VIII--INCOME TAXES FOR MEDIPLAN
`Sec. 59B. Tax on individuals.
`Sec. 59C. Tax on corporations, etc.
`SEC. 59B. TAX ON INDIVIDUALS.
 `(a) IMPOSITION OF TAX- In the case of an individual, there is hereby
 imposed (in addition to other taxes) for each taxable year on the modified
 gross income of the taxpayer a tax equal to the Mediplan premium determined
 under subsection (b) for such year.
 `(b) MEDIPLAN PREMIUM-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Mediplan premium for the taxable year shall be equal
 to the sum of the basic tax and the supplemental tax.
 `(2) BASIC TAX- For purposes of paragraph (1), the basic tax is the
 excess of--
 `(A) the lesser of--
 `(i) $1,000 ($2,000 in the case of a joint return), or
 `(ii) 12.5 percent of the excess (if any) of the modified gross income of
 the taxpayer over $8,000 ($16,000 in the case of a joint return), over
 `(B) the sum of the taxes imposed by sections 3111(c) and 3221(c) with
 respect to remuneration paid to such individual during the calendar year
 ending with or within the taxable year.
 `(3) SUPPLEMENTAL TAX- For purposes of paragraph (1), the supplemental
 tax is 4 percent of the excess (if any) of the modified gross income of
 the taxpayer over $16,000 ($32,000 in the case of a joint return).
 `(c) MODIFIED GROSS INCOME- For purposes of this section, the term
 `modified gross income' means the adjusted gross income of the taxpayer
 for the taxable year determined--
 `(1) without regard to paragraphs (6), (7), and (11) of section 62(a)
 and without regard to sections 911, 931, and 933, and
 `(2) increased by--
 `(A) the amount of interest received or accrued by the taxpayer during
 the taxable year which is exempt from tax,
 `(B) the amount of social security benefits (as defined in section 86(d))
 received during the taxable year which is not includible in gross income
 under section 86,
 `(C) the amount of qualified military benefits (as defined in section
 134(b)) received during the taxable year, and
 `(D) the amounts described in paragraphs (7) and (8) of section 6051(a)
 which are not includible in gross income.
 `(d) MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES EXEMPT FROM BASIC TAX-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The basic tax shall not apply to any individual who is
 a medicare-eligible individual for more than 6 full months beginning in
 the taxable year.
 `(2) MEDICARE-ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL- For purposes of this subsection, the
 term `medicare-eligible individual' means, with respect to any month,
 any individual who is entitled to (or, on application without the payment
 of an additional premium, would be entitled to) benefits under part A of
 title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
 `(3) SPECIAL RULES FOR JOINT RETURNS WHERE ONLY 1 SPOUSE IS
 MEDICARE-ELIGIBLE- In the case of a joint return where only 1 spouse is
 a medicare-eligible individual, this section shall be applied--
 `(A) as if such return were the return of an unmarried individual, and
 `(B) by taking into account one-half of the modified gross income determined
 under the joint return.
 `(e) COST-OF-LIVING ADJUSTMENT- In the case of any taxable year beginning
 in a calendar year after 1994, the $8,000, $16,000, and $32,000 amounts
 contained in this section shall be increased by an amount equal to--
 `(1) such dollar amount, multiplied by
 `(2) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3),
 for the calendar year in which the taxable year begins, by substituting
 `calendar year 1992' for `calendar year 1987' in subparagraph (B) thereof.
 `(f) COORDINATION WITH OTHER PROVISIONS-
 `(1) NOT TREATED AS MEDICAL EXPENSE- For purposes of section 213, the tax
 imposed by this section shall not be treated as an expense for medical care.
 `(2) NOT TREATED AS TAX FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES- The taxes imposed by this
 section and section 59C shall not be treated as taxes imposed by this
 chapter for purposes of determining--
 `(A) the amount of any credit allowable under this chapter, or
 `(B) the amount of the minimum tax imposed by section 55.
`SEC. 59C. TAX ON CORPORATIONS, ETC.
 `(a) IMPOSITION OF TAX- In addition to other taxes, there is hereby imposed
 a tax on every taxpayer other than an individual for the taxable year an
 amount equal to 4 percent of the modified gross income of the taxpayer
 for the taxable year.
 `(b) MODIFIED GROSS INCOME- For purposes of this section, the term `modified
 gross income' means the alternative minimum taxable income for the taxable
 year (as defined in section 55, determined by substituting `100 percent'
 for `75 percent' in paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 56(g)).
 `(c) APPLICATION OF TAX TO OTHERWISE EXEMPT ENTITIES- In the case of an
 organization which is exempt from tax under section 501(a) (without regard
 to this subsection)--
 `(1) the tax imposed by this section shall apply to such organization, and
 `(2) the modified gross income of such organization shall include--
 `(A) the unrelated business taxable income (as defined in section 512)
 of the organization for the taxable year, and
 `(B) the net investment income (within the meaning of section 4940(c))
 of the organization for such year.'
 (b) TAXES INCLUDED IN ESTIMATED TAX- Subparagraph (A) of section 6655(g)(1)
 of such Code is amended by striking `plus' at the end of clause (iii),
 by redesignating clause (iv) as clause (v), and by inserting after clause
 (iii) the following new clause:
 `(iv) the tax imposed by section 59B, plus'.
 (c) CERTAIN INFORMATION INCLUDED ON W-2- Subsection (a) of section 6051
 of such Code is amended by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (8),
 by striking the period at the end of paragraph (9) and inserting a comma,
 and by inserting after paragraph (9) the following new paragraphs:
 `(10) the total amount of qualified military benefits (as defined in
 section 134(b)), and
 `(11) the total amount of taxes paid under sections 3111(c) and 3221(c).'
 (d) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of parts for such subchapter A of chapter 1
 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`Part VIII. Income taxes for Mediplan.'
 (e) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after September 30, 1993.
SEC. 302. TAX ON WAGES PAID BY EMPLOYERS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 3111 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended
 by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d) and by inserting after
 subsection (b) the following new subsection:
 `(c) MEDIPLAN TAX-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In addition to other taxes, there is hereby imposed on
 every employer an excise tax, with respect to having individuals in his
 employ, equal to rate specified in paragraph (2) with respect to the wages
 (as defined in section 3121(a)) paid during the calendar year by him with
 respect to employment (as defined in section 3121(b) without regard to
 paragraphs (5) and (7) thereof).
 `(2) RATE OF TAX- The rate of the tax imposed by paragraph (1) shall be--
 `(A) 40 cents per hour in the case of employees whose wages are determined
 on an hourly basis, and
 `(B) 10 percent of wages (as so defined) in the case of other employees.
 `(3) MAXIMUM TAX- The amount of the tax imposed by this subsection with
 respect to wages paid by the employer during any calendar year to an
 individual shall not exceed $800.'
 (b) COMPARABLE EMPLOYER TAX FOR RAILROAD SERVICES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 3221 of such Code is amended by redesignating
 subsections (c), (d), and (e) as subsections (d), (e), and (f), respectively,
 and by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection:
 `(c) MEDIPLAN TAX-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In addition to other taxes, there is hereby imposed on
 every employer an excise tax, with respect to having individuals in his
 employ, equal to the rate specified in paragraph (2) with respect to the
 compensation paid during the calendar year by such employer for services
 rendered to such employer.
 `(2) RATE OF TAX- The rate of the tax imposed by paragraph (1) shall be--
 `(A) 40 cents per hour in the case of employees whose compensation is
 determined on an hourly basis, and
 `(B) 10 percent of compensation in the case of other employees.
 `(3) MAXIMUM TAX- The amount of the tax imposed by this subsection with
 respect to compensation paid by the employer during any calendar year to
 an individual shall not exceed $800.'
 (2) TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS-
 (A) Subsection (f) of section 3221 of such Code, as redesignated by
 subparagraph (A), is amended by striking `(a) and (b)' and inserting `(a),
 (b), and (c)'.
 (B) The heading of clause (i) of section 3231(e)(2)(B) of such Code is
 amended by inserting `AND MEDIPLAN' after `TIER 1'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 remuneration paid after September 30, 1993.