[Congressional Bills 118th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 6611 Introduced in House (IH)]

<DOC>

118th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 6611

 To amend the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 to make 
certain reforms to the authorities under such Act, to reauthorize title 
 VII of such Act, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 December 6, 2023

 Mr. Turner (for himself and Mr. Himes) introduced the following bill; 
 which was referred to the Committee on the Judiciary, and in addition 
 to the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, for a period to be 
subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration 
 of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee 
 concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To amend the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 to make 
certain reforms to the authorities under such Act, to reauthorize title 
 VII of such Act, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``FISA Reform and 
Reauthorization Act of 2023''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Amendments to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 
 1978.
 TITLE I--RESTRICTION ON FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION QUERIES

Sec. 101. Revoking Federal Bureau of Investigation authority to conduct 
 queries unrelated to national security.
Sec. 102. Strictly limiting Federal Bureau of Investigation personnel 
 authorizing United States person queries.
Sec. 103. Notification for certain queries conducted by Federal Bureau 
 of Investigation.
Sec. 104. Requirement for congressional consent prior to certain 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation queries for 
 purpose of defensive briefings.
Sec. 105. Restrictions relating to conduct of certain queries by 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Sec. 106. Prohibition on involvement of political appointees in process 
 to approve Federal Bureau of Investigation 
 queries.
Sec. 107. Requirement for adoption of certain minimum accountability 
 standards.
Sec. 108. Restriction on certain information available to Federal 
 Bureau of Investigation.
Sec. 109. Mandatory audits of United States person queries conducted by 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Sec. 110. Prohibited purposes for queries using United States person 
 query terms.
 TITLE II--FISA APPLICATIONS AND ORDERS

Sec. 201. Requirement for sworn statements for factual assertions.
Sec. 202. Prohibition on use of politically derived information in 
 applications for certain orders by the 
 Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court.
Sec. 203. Prohibition on use of press reports in applications for 
 certain orders by the Foreign Intelligence 
 Surveillance Court.
Sec. 204. Description of techniques carried out before application.
Sec. 205. Requirement for certain justification prior to extension of 
 orders.
Sec. 206. Requirement for certifications regarding accuracy of 
 applications.
Sec. 207. Requirement for justification of underlying criminal offense 
 in certain applications.
Sec. 208. Modification to duration of approved period under certain 
 orders for non-United States persons.
 TITLE III--FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE COURT AND FOREIGN 
 INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE COURT OF REVIEW

Sec. 301. Designation of counsel to scrutinize applications for United 
 States persons.
Sec. 302. Requirement for transcripts of proceedings.
Sec. 303. Requirement for notification to congress of certain 
 transcripts.
Sec. 304. Judicial consistency for extensions.
Sec. 305. Mandatory appointment of amicus curiae in judicial review of 
 annual section 702 certifications and 
 procedures.
 TITLE IV--FISA PENALTIES

Sec. 401. Removal or suspension of federal officers for misconduct 
 before Foreign Intelligence Surveillance 
 Court.
Sec. 402. Penalties for unauthorized disclosure of application for 
 electronic surveillance.
Sec. 403. Increased criminal penalties for offense under FISA.
Sec. 404. Criminal penalties for unauthorized disclosure of certain 
 incidentally collected United States person 
 information.
Sec. 405. Contempts constituting crimes.
Sec. 406. Sentencing enhancement for false declarations before FISC.
Sec. 407. Annual reporting on disciplinary actions by Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation.
 TITLE V--REPORTS AND OTHER MATTERS

Sec. 501. Inclusion of counternarcotics in definition of foreign 
 intelligence.
Sec. 502. Revocation of statutory reporting exemption and additional 
 reporting requirement for Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation.
Sec. 503. Notification to Congress of certain unauthorized disclosures.
Sec. 504. Definition of electronic communication service provider.
Sec. 505. Vetting of non-United States persons.
Sec. 506. Accountability measures for executive leadership of Federal 
 Bureau of Investigation.
Sec. 507. Report on technology needed for near-real time monitoring of 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation compliance.
Sec. 508. Inspector General report on Federal Bureau of Investigation 
 querying practices.
Sec. 509. Sense of Congress on the targeted collection of United States 
 person information.
Sec. 510. FISA Reform Commission.
Sec. 511. Extension of certain authorities; sunset.
Sec. 512. Severability; applicability date.

SEC. 2. AMENDMENTS TO THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT OF 
 1978.

 (a) References to Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978.--
Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an 
amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or a 
repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be 
considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Foreign 
Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 (50 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.).
 (b) Effect of Certain Amendments on Conforming Changes to Tables of 
Contents.--When an amendment made by this Act adds a section or larger 
organizational unit to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 
1978 (50 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.), repeals or transfers a section or larger 
organizational unit in such Act, or amends the designation or heading 
of a section or larger organizational unit in such Act, that amendment 
also shall have the effect of amending the table of contents in such 
Act to alter the table to conform to the changes made by the amendment.

 TITLE I--RESTRICTION ON FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION QUERIES

SEC. 101. REVOKING FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION AUTHORITY TO CONDUCT 
 QUERIES UNRELATED TO NATIONAL SECURITY.

 Subsection (f)(2) of section 702 is amended to read as follows:
 ``(2) Prohibition on conduct of queries that are solely 
 designed to find and extract evidence of a crime.--
 ``(A) Limits on authorizations of united states 
 person queries.--The querying procedures adopted 
 pursuant to paragraph (1) for the Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation shall prohibit queries of information 
 acquired under subsection (a) that are solely designed 
 to find and extract evidence of criminal activity.
 ``(B) Exceptions.--The restriction under 
 subparagraph (A) shall not apply with respect to a 
 query if--`(i) there is a reasonable belief that such 
 query may retrieve information that could assist in 
 mitigating or eliminating a threat to life or serious 
 bodily harm'; or `(ii) such query is necessary to 
 identify information that must be produced or preserved 
 in connection with a litigation matter or to fulfill 
 discovery obligations in criminal matters under the 
 laws of the United States or any State thereof.'''.

SEC. 102. STRICTLY LIMITING FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION PERSONNEL 
 AUTHORIZING UNITED STATES PERSON QUERIES.

 Subsection (f) of section 702, as amended by this Act, is further 
amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (6); and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(3) Restrictions imposed on federal bureau of 
 investigation.--
 ``(A) Limits on authorizations of united states 
 person queries.--
 ``(i) In general.--Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation personnel must obtain prior 
 approval from a Federal Bureau of Investigation 
 supervisor (or employee of equivalent or 
 greater rank) or attorney who is authorized to 
 access unminimized contents or noncontents 
 obtained through acquisitions authorized under 
 subsection (a) for any query of such 
 unminimized contents or noncontents made using 
 a United States person query term.
 ``(ii) Exception.--A United States person 
 query to be conducted by the Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation of unminimized contents or 
 noncontents obtained through acquisitions 
 authorized under subsection (a) using a United 
 States person query term may be conducted 
 without obtaining prior approval as specified 
 in clause (i) only if the person conducting the 
 United States person query has a reasonable 
 belief that conducting the query could assist 
 in mitigating or eliminating a threat to life 
 or serious bodily harm.''.

SEC. 103. NOTIFICATION FOR CERTAIN QUERIES CONDUCTED BY FEDERAL BUREAU 
 OF INVESTIGATION.

 Subsection (f)(3) of section 702, as amended by this Act, is 
further amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(B) Notification requirement for certain fbi 
 queries.--
 ``(i) Requirement.--The Director of the 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation shall promptly 
 notify appropriate congressional leadership of 
 any query conducted by the Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation using a query term that is 
 reasonably believed to be the name or other 
 personally identifying information of a Member 
 of Congress, and shall also notify the member 
 who is the subject of such query.
 ``(ii) Appropriate congressional leadership 
 defined.--In this subparagraph, the term 
 `appropriate congressional leadership' means 
 the following:
 ``(I) The chairs and ranking 
 minority members of the congressional 
 intelligence committees.
 ``(II) The Speaker and minority 
 leader of the House of Representatives.
 ``(III) The majority and minority 
 leaders of the Senate.
 ``(iii) National security considerations.--
 In submitting a notification under clause (i), 
 the Director shall give due regard to the 
 protection of classified information, sources 
 and methods, and national security.
 ``(iv) Waiver.--
 ``(I) In general.--The Director may 
 waive a notification required under 
 clause (i) if the Director determines 
 such notification would impede an 
 ongoing national security or law 
 enforcement investigation.
 ``(II) Termination.--A waiver under 
 subclause (I) shall terminate on the 
 date the Director determines the 
 relevant notification would not impede 
 the relevant national security or law 
 enforcement investigation or on the 
 date that such investigation ends, 
 whichever is earlier''.

SEC. 104. REQUIREMENT FOR CONGRESSIONAL CONSENT PRIOR TO CERTAIN 
 FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION QUERIES FOR PURPOSE OF 
 DEFENSIVE BRIEFINGS.

 Subsection (f)(3) of section 702, as amended by this Act, is 
further amended by inserting after subparagraph (B) the following new 
subparagraph:
 ``(C) Consent required for fbi to conduct certain 
 queries for purpose of defensive briefing.--
 ``(i) Consent required.--The Federal Bureau 
 of Investigation may not, for the exclusive 
 purpose of supplementing the contents of a 
 briefing on the defense against a 
 counterintelligence threat to a Member of 
 Congress, conduct a query using a query term 
 that is the name or restricted personal 
 information (as such term is defined in section 
 119 of title 18, United States Code) of that 
 member unless--
 ``(I) the member provides consent 
 to the use of the query term; or
 ``(II) the Deputy Director of the 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation 
 determines that exigent circumstances 
 exist sufficient to justify the conduct 
 of such query.
 ``(ii) Notification.--
 ``(I) Notification of consent 
 sought.--Not later than three business 
 days after submitting a request for 
 consent from a Member of Congress under 
 clause (i), the Director of the Federal 
 Bureau of Investigation shall notify 
 the appropriate congressional 
 leadership, regardless of whether the 
 member provided such consent.
 ``(II) Notification of exception 
 used.--Not later than three business 
 days after the conduct of a query under 
 clause (i) without consent on the basis 
 of the existence of exigent 
 circumstances determined under 
 subclause (II) of such clause, the 
 Director of the Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation shall notify the 
 appropriate congressional leadership.
 ``(iii) Rule of construction.--Nothing in 
 this subparagraph may be construed as--
 ``(I) applying to matters outside 
 of the scope of the briefing on the 
 defense against a counterintelligence 
 threat to be provided or supplemented 
 under clause (i); or
 ``(II) limiting the lawful 
 investigative activities of the Federal 
 Bureau of Investigation other than 
 supplementing the contents of a 
 briefing on the defense against a 
 counterintelligence threat to a Member 
 of Congress.
 ``(iv) Appropriate congressional leadership 
 defined.--In this subparagraph, the term 
 `appropriate congressional leadership' means 
 the following:
 ``(I) The chairs and ranking 
 minority members of the congressional 
 intelligence committees.
 ``(II) The Speaker and minority 
 leader of the House of Representatives.
 ``(III) The majority and minority 
 leaders of the Senate.''.

SEC. 105. RESTRICTIONS RELATING TO CONDUCT OF CERTAIN QUERIES BY 
 FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION.

 Subsection (f)(3) of section 702, as amended by this Act, is 
further amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(D) Querying procedures applicable to federal 
 bureau of investigation.--For any procedures adopted 
 under paragraph (1) applicable to the Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation, the Attorney General, in consultation 
 with the Director of National Intelligence, shall 
 include the following requirements:
 ``(i) Training.--A requirement that, prior 
 to conducting any query, personnel of the 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation successfully 
 complete training on the querying procedures on 
 an annual basis.
 ``(ii) Additional prior approvals for 
 sensitive queries.--A requirement that, absent 
 exigent circumstances, prior to conducting 
 certain queries, personnel of the Federal 
 Bureau of Investigation receive approval, at 
 minimum, as follows:
 ``(I) In general.--
 ``(aa) Approval from the 
 Deputy Director of the Federal 
 Bureau of Investigation if the 
 query uses a query term 
 reasonably believed to identify 
 a United States elected 
 official, an appointee of the 
 President or a State governor, 
 a United States political 
 candidate, a United States 
 political organization or a 
 United States person prominent 
 in such organization, or a 
 United States media 
 organization or a United States 
 person who is a member of such 
 organization.
 ``(bb) Approval from an 
 attorney of the Federal Bureau 
 of Investigation if the query 
 uses a query term reasonably 
 believed to identify a United 
 States religious organization 
 or a United States person who 
 is prominent in such 
 organization.
 ``(cc) Approval from an 
 attorney of the Federal Bureau 
 of Investigation if such 
 conduct involves batch job 
 technology (or successor tool).
 ``(iii) Prior written justification.--A 
 requirement that, prior to conducting a query 
 using a United States person query term, 
 personnel of the Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation provide a written statement of 
 the specific factual basis to support the 
 reasonable belief that such query meets the 
 standards required by the procedures adopted 
 under paragraph (1). The Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation shall keep a record of each such 
 written statement.
 ``(iv) Storage of certain contents and 
 noncontents.--Any system of the Federal Bureau 
 of Investigation that stores unminimized 
 contents or noncontents obtained through 
 acquisitions authorized under subsection (a) 
 together with contents or noncontents obtained 
 through other lawful means shall be configured 
 in a manner that--
 ``(I) requires personnel of the 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation to 
 affirmatively elect to include such 
 unminimized contents or noncontents 
 obtained through acquisitions 
 authorized under subsection (a) when 
 running a query; or
 ``(II) includes other controls 
 reasonably expected to prevent 
 inadvertent queries of such unminimized 
 contents or noncontents.
 ``(v) Waiver authority for foreign 
 intelligence surveillance court.--If the 
 Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court finds 
 that the procedures adopted under paragraph (1) 
 include measures that are reasonably expected 
 to result in similar compliance outcomes as the 
 measures specified in clauses (i) through (iv) 
 of this subparagraph, the Foreign Intelligence 
 Surveillance Court may waive one or more of the 
 requirements specified in such clauses.''.
 (v) Waiver Authority for Foreign Intelligence Surveillance 
Court.--If the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court finds that the 
procedures adopted under paragraph (1) include measures that are 
reasonably expected to result in similar compliance outcomes as the 
measures specified in clauses (i) through (iv) of this subparagraph, 
the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court may waive one or more of 
the requirements specified in such clauses.

SEC. 106. PROHIBITION ON INVOLVEMENT OF POLITICAL APPOINTEES IN PROCESS 
 TO APPROVE FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION QUERIES.

 Subsection (f)(3)(D)(ii) of section 702, as amended by this Act, is 
further amended by inserting after subclause (I) the following new 
subclause:
 ``(II) Prohibition on political 
 appointees within the process to 
 approve federal bureau of investigation 
 queries.--The procedures shall prohibit 
 any political personnel, such as those 
 classified by the Office of Personnel 
 Management as Presidential Appointment 
 with Senate Confirmation, Presidential 
 Appointment (without Senate 
 Confirmation), Noncareer Senior 
 Executive Service Appointment, or 
 Schedule C Excepted Appointment, from 
 inclusion in the Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation's prior approval process 
 under subclause (I).''.

SEC. 107. REQUIREMENT FOR ADOPTION OF CERTAIN MINIMUM ACCOUNTABILITY 
 STANDARDS.

 (a) Minimum Accountability Standards.--Subsection (f) of section 
702, as amended by this Act, is further amended by inserting after 
paragraph (3) the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Minimum accountability standards.--The Director of 
 the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall issue minimum 
 accountability standards that set forth escalating consequences 
 for noncompliant querying of United States person terms within 
 the contents of communications that were acquired under this 
 section. Such standards shall include, at minimum, the 
 following:
 ``(A) Zero tolerance for willful misconduct.
 ``(B) Escalating consequences for unintentional 
 noncompliance, including the threshold for mandatory 
 revocation of access to query information acquired 
 under this section.
 ``(C) Consequences for supervisors who oversee 
 users that engage in noncompliant queries.''.
 (b) Deadlines.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Director of the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation shall issue the minimum accountability standards required 
under subsection (f)(4) of section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence 
Surveillance Act of 1978 (50 U.S.C. 1881a).
 (c) Reports.--
 (1) Submission of standards.--Not later than 90 days after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director of the 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation shall submit to the appropriate 
 congressional committees the minimum accountability standards 
 issued under subsection (a).
 (2) Annual report on implementation.--Not later than 
 December 1, 2024, and annually thereafter for 3 years, the 
 Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall submit to 
 the appropriate congressional committees a report detailing 
 each adverse personnel action taken pursuant to the minimum 
 accountability standards and a description of the conduct that 
 led to each such action.
 (d) Definition of Appropriate Congressional Committees.--In this 
section, the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the congressional intelligence committees, as such term 
 is defined in subsection (b) of section 701 of the Foreign 
 Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 (50 U.S.C. 1881); and
 (2) the Committees on the Judiciary of the House of 
 Representatives and of the Senate.

SEC. 108. RESTRICTION ON CERTAIN INFORMATION AVAILABLE TO FEDERAL 
 BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION.

 Section 702 is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection:
 ``(n) Restriction on Certain Information Available to Federal 
Bureau of Investigation.--
 ``(1) Restriction.--The Federal Bureau of Investigation may 
 not ingest unminimized information acquired under this section 
 into its analytic repositories unless the targeted person is 
 relevant to an existing, open, predicated full national 
 security investigation by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
 ``(2) Exception for exigent circumstances.--Paragraph (1) 
 does not apply if the Director of the National Security Agency 
 decides it is necessary due to exigent circumstances and 
 provides notification within three business days to the 
 congressional intelligence committees, the Speaker and minority 
 leader of the House of Representatives, and the majority and 
 minority leaders of the Senate.
 ``(3) Exception for assistance to other agencies.--
 Subparagraph (A) does not apply where the Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation has agreed to provide technical, analytical, or 
 linguistic assistance at the request of another federal 
 agency.''.

SEC. 109. MANDATORY AUDITS OF UNITED STATES PERSON QUERIES CONDUCTED BY 
 FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION.

 (a) Audits Required.--For each query identified by the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation as a United States person query against 
information acquired pursuant to subsection (a) of section 702 of the 
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 (50 U.S.C. 1881a) 
conducted by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, not later than 180 
days after the conduct of such query, the Department of Justice shall 
conduct an audit of such query.
 (b) Applicability.--The requirement under subsection (a) shall 
apply with respect to queries conducted on or after the date of the 
enactment of this Act.
 (c) Sunset.--This section shall terminate on the earlier of the 
following:
 (1) The date that is 4 years after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.
 (2) The date on which the Attorney General submits to the 
 appropriate congressional committees a certification that the 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation has implemented a process for 
 the internal audit of all queries referred to in subsection 
 (a).
 (d) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the congressional intelligence committees, as such term 
 is defined in subsection (b) of section 701 of the Foreign 
 Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 (50 U.S.C. 1881); and
 (2) the Committees on the Judiciary of the House of 
 Representatives and of the Senate.

SEC. 110. PROHIBITED PURPOSES FOR QUERIES USING UNITED STATES PERSON 
 QUERY TERMS.

 No query of information acquired under section 702 of the Foreign 
Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 (50 U.S.C. 1881a) using a United 
States person query term may be conducted for the purpose of--
 (1) suppressing or burdening criticism, dissent, or the 
 free expression of ideas or political opinions of such United 
 States person; or
 (2) disadvantaging or harming such United States person 
 based on their ethnicity, race, gender, sexual orientation, or 
 religion.

 TITLE II--FISA APPLICATIONS AND ORDERS

SEC. 201. REQUIREMENT FOR SWORN STATEMENTS FOR FACTUAL ASSERTIONS.

 (a) Title I.--Subsection (a)(3) of section 104 is amended by 
striking ``a statement of'' and inserting ``a sworn statement of''.
 (b) Title III.--Subsection (a)(3) of section 303 is amended by 
striking ``a statement of'' and inserting ``a sworn statement of''.
 (c) Section 703.--Subsection (b)(1)(C) of section 703 is amended by 
striking ``a statement of'' and inserting ``a sworn statement of''.
 (d) Section 704.--Subsection (b)(3) of section 704 is amended by 
striking ``a statement of'' and inserting ``a sworn statement of''.
 (e) Applicability.--The amendments made by this section shall apply 
with respect to applications made on or after the date that is 120 days 
after the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 202. PROHIBITION ON USE OF POLITICALLY DERIVED INFORMATION IN 
 APPLICATIONS FOR CERTAIN ORDERS BY THE FOREIGN 
 INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE COURT.

 (a) Title I.--Subsection (a)(6) of section 104 is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (D), by striking ``; and'' and 
 inserting a semicolon;
 (2) in subparagraph (E)(ii), by striking the semicolon and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding after subparagraph (E) the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(F) that none of the information included in the 
 statement described in paragraph (3) was solely 
 produced by, derived from information produced by, or 
 obtained using the funds of, a political organization 
 (as such term is defined in section 527 of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986) on the opponent of a candidate in 
 an election for Federal, State, or local office, 
 unless--
 ``(i) the political organization is clearly 
 identified in the body of the statement 
 described in paragraph (3);
 ``(ii) the information has been 
 corroborated; and
 ``(iii) the investigative techniques used 
 to corroborate the information are clearly 
 identified in the body of the statement 
 described in paragraph (3); and''.
 (b) Title III.--Subsection (a)(6) of section 303 is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (D), by striking ``; and'' and 
 inserting a semicolon;
 (2) in subparagraph (E), by striking the semicolon and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by inserting after subparagraph (E) the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(F) that none of the information included in the 
 statement described in paragraph (3) was solely 
 produced by, derived from information produced by, or 
 obtained using the funds of, a political organization 
 (as such term is defined in section 527 of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986) on the opponent of a candidate in 
 an election for Federal, State, or local office, 
 unless--
 ``(i) the political organization is clearly 
 identified in the body of the statement 
 described in paragraph (3);
 ``(ii) the information has been 
 corroborated; and
 ``(iii) the investigative techniques used 
 to corroborate the information are clearly 
 identified in the body of the statement 
 described in paragraph (3); and''.
 (c) Applicability.--The amendments made by this section shall apply 
with respect to applications made on or after the date that is 120 days 
after the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 203. PROHIBITION ON USE OF PRESS REPORTS IN APPLICATIONS FOR 
 CERTAIN ORDERS BY THE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE 
 COURT.

 (a) Title I.--Subsection (a)(6) of section 104, as amended by this 
Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new 
subparagraph:
 ``(G) that none of the information included in the 
 statement described in paragraph (3) is solely 
 attributable to or derived from the content of a media 
 source unless the statement includes a clear 
 identification of each author of that content, and, 
 where applicable, the publisher of that content;''.
 (b) Title III.--Subsection (a)(6) of section 303, as amended by 
this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new 
subparagraph:
 ``(G) that none of the information included in the 
 statement described in paragraph (3) is solely 
 attributable to or derived from the content of a media 
 source unless the statement includes a clear 
 identification of each author of that content, and, 
 where applicable, the publisher of that content;''.
 (c) Applicability.--The amendments made by this section shall apply 
with respect to applications made on or after the date that is 120 days 
after the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 204. DESCRIPTION OF TECHNIQUES CARRIED OUT BEFORE APPLICATION.

 (a) Title I.--Subsection (a) of section 104, as amended by this 
Act, is further amended--
 (1) in paragraph (8), by striking ``; and'' and inserting a 
 semicolon;
 (2) in paragraph (9), by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(10) with respect to a target who is a United States 
 person, a statement summarizing the investigative techniques 
 carried out before making the application;''.
 (b) Applicability.--The amendments made by this section shall apply 
with respect to applications made on or after the date that is 120 days 
after the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 205. REQUIREMENT FOR CERTAIN JUSTIFICATION PRIOR TO EXTENSION OF 
 ORDERS.

 (a) Applications for Extension of Orders Under Title I.--Subsection 
(a) of section 104, as amended by this Act, is further amended by 
adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(11) in the case of an application for an extension of an 
 order under this title for a surveillance targeted against a 
 United States person, a summary statement of the foreign 
 intelligence information obtained pursuant to the original 
 order (and any preceding extension thereof) as of the date of 
 the application for the extension, or a reasonable explanation 
 of the failure to obtain such information; and''.
 (b) Applications for Extension of Orders Under Title III.--
Subsection (a) of section 303, as amended by this Act, is further 
amended by:
 (1) in paragraph (7), by striking ``; and'' and inserting a 
 semicolon;
 (2) in paragraph (8), by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting a semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(9) in the case of an application for an extension of an 
 order under this title in which the target of the physical 
 search is a United States person, a summary statement of the 
 foreign intelligence information obtained pursuant to the 
 original order (and any preceding extension thereof) as of the 
 date of the application for the extension, or a reasonable 
 explanation of the failure to obtain such information; and''.
 (c) Applicability.--The amendments made by this section shall apply 
with respect to applications made on or after the date that is 120 days 
after the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 206. REQUIREMENT FOR CERTIFICATIONS REGARDING ACCURACY OF 
 APPLICATIONS.

 (a) Title I.--Subsection (a) of section 104, as amended by this 
Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(12) a certification by the applicant or declarant that, 
 to the best knowledge of the applicant or declarant, the 
 Attorney General or a designated attorney for the Government 
 has been apprised of all information that might reasonably--
 ``(A) call into question the accuracy of the 
 application or the reasonableness of any assessment in 
 the application conducted by the department or agency 
 on whose behalf the application is made; or
 ``(B) otherwise raise doubts with respect to the 
 findings required under section 105(a).''.
 (b) Title III.--Subsection (a) of section 303 is amended by adding 
at the end the following:
 ``(10) a certification by the applicant that, to the best 
 knowledge of the applicant, the Attorney General or a 
 designated attorney for the Government has been apprised of all 
 information that might reasonably--
 ``(A) call into question the accuracy of the 
 application or the reasonableness of any assessment in 
 the application conducted by the department or agency 
 on whose behalf the application is made; or
 ``(B) otherwise raise doubts with respect to the 
 findings required under section 304(a).''.
 (c) Title IV.--Subsection (c) of section 402 is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2), by striking ``; and'' and inserting a 
 semicolon;
 (2) in paragraph (3), by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) a certification by the applicant seeking to use the 
 pen register or trap and trace device covered by the 
 application that, to the best knowledge of the applicant, the 
 Attorney General or a designated attorney for the Government 
 has been apprised of all information that might reasonably--
 ``(A) call into question the accuracy of the 
 application or the reasonableness of any assessment in 
 the application conducted by the department or agency 
 on whose behalf the application is made; or
 ``(B) otherwise raise doubts with respect to the 
 findings required under subsection (d).''.
 (d) Title V.--Subsection (b)(2) of section 502 is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (C)(i), by striking ``; and'' and 
 inserting a semicolon;
 (2) in subparagraph (D), by striking the period at the end 
 and inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(E) a statement by the applicant that, to the 
 best knowledge of the applicant, the application fairly 
 reflects all information that might reasonably--
 ``(i) call into question the accuracy of 
 the application or the reasonableness of any 
 assessment in the application conducted by the 
 department or agency on whose behalf the 
 application is made; or
 ``(ii) otherwise raise doubts with respect 
 to the findings required under subsection 
 (c).''.
 (e) Title VII.--
 (1) Section 703.--Subsection (b)(1) of section 703 is 
 amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (I), by striking ``; and'' and 
 inserting a semicolon;
 (B) in subparagraph (J), by striking the period at 
 the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(K) a certification by the applicant that, to the 
 best knowledge of the applicant, the Attorney General 
 or a designated attorney for the Government has been 
 apprised of all information that might reasonably--
 ``(i) call into question the accuracy of 
 the application or the reasonableness of any 
 assessment in the application conducted by the 
 department or agency on whose behalf the 
 application is made; or
 ``(ii) otherwise raise doubts with respect 
 to the findings required under subsection 
 (c).''.
 (2) Section 704.--Subsection (b) of section 704 is 
 amended--
 (A) in paragraph (6), by striking ``; and'' and 
 inserting a semicolon;
 (B) in paragraph (7), by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(8) a certification by the applicant that, to the best 
 knowledge of the applicant, the Attorney General or a 
 designated attorney for the Government has been apprised of all 
 information that might reasonably--
 ``(A) call into question the accuracy of the 
 application or the reasonableness of any assessment in 
 the application conducted by the department or agency 
 on whose behalf the application is made; or
 ``(B) otherwise raise doubts with respect to the 
 findings required under subsection (c).''.
 (f) Applicability.--The amendments made by this section shall apply 
with respect to applications made on or after the date that is 120 days 
after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (g) Accuracy Procedures.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, the Attorney General, in consultation with 
the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, shall issue 
procedures governing the review of case files, as appropriate, to 
ensure that applications to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court 
under title I or III of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 
1978 (50 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.) that target United States persons are 
accurate and complete.

SEC. 207. REQUIREMENT FOR JUSTIFICATION OF UNDERLYING CRIMINAL OFFENSE 
 IN CERTAIN APPLICATIONS.

 (a) Title I.--Subsection (a)(3)(A) of section 104 is amended by 
inserting before the semicolon at the end the following: ``, and, in 
the case of a target that is a United States person alleged to be 
acting as an agent of a foreign power (as described in section 
101(b)(2)(B)), that a violation of the criminal statutes of the United 
States as referred to in section 101(b)(2)(B) has occurred or will 
occur''.
 (b) Title III.--Subsection (a)(3)(A) of section 303 is amended by 
inserting before the semicolon at the end the following: ``, and, in 
the case of a target that is a United States person alleged to be 
acting as an agent of a foreign power (as described in section 
101(b)(2)(B)), that a violation of the criminal statutes of the United 
States as referred to in section 101(b)(2)(B) has occurred or will 
occur''.
 (c) Applicability.--The amendments made by this section shall apply 
with respect to applications made on or after the date that is 120 days 
after the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 208. MODIFICATION TO DURATION OF APPROVED PERIOD UNDER CERTAIN 
 ORDERS FOR NON-UNITED STATES PERSONS.

 (a) Title I.--Subsection (d) of section 105 is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``against a 
 foreign power, as defined in section 101(a), (1), (2), 
 or (3),'' and inserting ``against a foreign power''; 
 and
 (B) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``120 days'' 
 and inserting ``one year''; and
 (2) by striking paragraph (2); and
 (3) by redesignating paragraphs (3) and (4) as paragraphs 
 (2) and (3), respectively.
 (b) Title III.--Subsection (d) of section 304 is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``against a 
 foreign power, as defined in paragraph (1), (2), or (3) 
 of section 101(a),'' and inserting ``against a foreign 
 power''; and
 (B) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``120 days'' 
 and inserting ``one year''; and
 (2) by striking paragraph (2); and
 (3) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (2).

 TITLE III--FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE COURT AND FOREIGN 
 INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE COURT OF REVIEW

SEC. 301. DESIGNATION OF COUNSEL TO SCRUTINIZE APPLICATIONS FOR UNITED 
 STATES PERSONS.

 Section 103 is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection:
 ``(l) Designation of Counsel for Certain Applications.--To assist 
the court in the consideration of any application for an order pursuant 
to section 104 that targets a United States person, the presiding judge 
designated under subsection (b) shall appoint one or more attorneys to 
review such applications, and provide a written analysis to the judge 
considering the application, of--
 ``(1) the sufficiency of the evidence used to make the 
 probable cause determination under section 105(a)(2);
 ``(2) any material weaknesses, flaws, or other concerns in 
 the application; and
 ``(3) a recommendation as to the following, which the judge 
 shall consider during a proceeding on the application, as 
 appropriate--
 ``(A) that the application should be approved, 
 denied, or modified;
 ``(B) that the Government should supply additional 
 information in connection with such application; or
 ``(C) that any requirements or conditions should be 
 imposed on the Government for the approval of such 
 application.''.

SEC. 302. REQUIREMENT FOR TRANSCRIPTS OF PROCEEDINGS.

 Subsection (c) of section 103 is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``, and hearings shall be transcribed'' 
 before the first period;
 (2) by inserting ``, transcriptions of hearings,'' after 
 ``applications made''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new sentence: 
 ``Transcriptions and any related records, including testimony 
 and affidavits, shall be stored in a file associated with the 
 relevant application or order.''.

SEC. 303. REQUIREMENT FOR NOTIFICATION TO CONGRESS OF CERTAIN 
 TRANSCRIPTS.

 Subsection (c) of section 601 is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``; and'' and inserting a 
 semicolon;
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking the period and inserting 
 ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(3) for any hearing, oral argument, or other proceeding 
 before the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court or Foreign 
 Intelligence Surveillance Court of Review for which a court 
 reporter produces a transcript, not later than 45 days after 
 the government receives the final transcript or the date on 
 which the matter of the hearing, oral argument, or other 
 proceeding is resolved, whichever is later, a notice of the 
 existence of such transcript. Not later than three business 
 days after a committee referred to in subsection (a) requests 
 to review an existing transcript, the Attorney General shall 
 facilitate such request.''.

SEC. 304. JUDICIAL CONSISTENCY FOR EXTENSIONS.

 Subsection (d) of section 105 is amended by adding at the end the 
following new paragraph:
 ``(5) An extension of an order issued under this title for 
 surveillance targeted against a United States person, to the 
 extent practicable and absent exigent circumstances, shall be 
 granted or denied by the same judge who issued the original 
 order.''.

SEC. 305. MANDATORY APPOINTMENT OF AMICUS CURIAE IN JUDICIAL REVIEW OF 
 ANNUAL SECTION 702 CERTIFICATIONS AND PROCEDURES.

 Subsection (i) of section 103 is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) and (B) as 
 clause (i) and (ii), respectively;
 (B) by striking ``A court established'' and 
 inserting the following subparagraph:
 ``(A) In general.--A court established'';
 (C) in subparagraph (A), as inserted by 
 subparagraph (B) of this section--
 (i) in clause (i), as so redesignated--
 (I) by striking ``appoint an 
 individual who has'' and inserting 
 ``appoint one or more individuals who 
 have''; and
 (II) by striking ``; and'' and 
 inserting a semicolon;
 (ii) in clause (ii), as so redesignated--
 (I) by striking ``appoint an 
 individual or organization'' and 
 inserting ``appoint one or more 
 individuals or organizations''; and
 (II) by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following 
 new clause:
 ``(iii) shall appoint one or more 
 individuals who have been designated under 
 paragraph (1) to serve as amicus curiae to 
 assist such court in the consideration of any 
 certification or procedures submitted for 
 review pursuant to section 702, including any 
 amendments to such certifications or 
 procedures, if the court established under 
 subsection (a) has not appointed an individual 
 under clause (i) or (ii), unless the court 
 issues a finding that such appointment is not 
 appropriate or is likely to result in undue 
 delay.''; and
 (D) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraphs:
 ``(B) Expertise.--In appointing one or more 
 individuals under subparagraph (A)(iii), the court 
 shall, to the maximum extent practicable, appoint an 
 individual who possesses expertise in both privacy and 
 civil liberties and intelligence collection.
 ``(C) Timing.--In the event that the court appoints 
 one or more individuals or organizations pursuant to 
 this paragraph to assist such court in a proceeding 
 under section 702, notwithstanding subsection (j)(1)(B) 
 of such section, the court shall issue an order 
 pursuant to subsection (j)(3) of such section as 
 expeditiously as possible consistent with subsection 
 (k)(1) of such section, but in no event later than 60 
 days after the date on which such certification, 
 procedures, or amendments are submitted for the court's 
 review, or later than 60 days after the court has 
 issued an order appointing one or more individuals 
 pursuant to this paragraph, whichever is earlier, 
 unless a judge of that court issues an order finding 
 that extraordinary circumstances necessitate additional 
 time for review and that such extension of time is 
 consistent with the national security.''; and
 (2) in paragraph (4)--
 (A) by striking ``paragraph (2)(A)'' and inserting 
 ``paragraph (2)'';
 (B) by striking ``provide to the court, as 
 appropriate'';
 (C) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) through (C) 
 as clauses (i) through (iii), respectively;
 (D) by inserting before clause (i) the following 
 new subparagraphs:
 ``(A) be limited to addressing the specific issues 
 identified by the court; and
 ``(B) provide to the court, as appropriate--''; and
 (E) in subparagraph (B)(i), as redesignated, by 
 inserting ``of United States persons'' after ``civil 
 liberties''.

 TITLE IV--FISA PENALTIES

SEC. 401. REMOVAL OR SUSPENSION OF FEDERAL OFFICERS FOR MISCONDUCT 
 BEFORE FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE COURT.

 Section 103, as amended by this Act, is further amended by adding 
at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(m) Removal or Suspension of Federal Officers for Misconduct 
Before Courts.--An officer or employee of the United States Government 
who engages in intentional misconduct with respect to proceedings 
before the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court or the Foreign 
Intelligence Surveillance Court of Review shall be subject to 
appropriate adverse actions, including, as appropriate, suspension 
without pay or removal.''.

SEC. 402. PENALTIES FOR UNAUTHORIZED DISCLOSURE OF APPLICATION FOR 
 ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (a) of section 109 is amended--
 (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking 
 ``intentionally'';
 (2) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) by inserting ``intentionally'' before ``engages 
 in''; and
 (B) by striking ``; or'' and inserting a semicolon;
 (3) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) by striking ``disclose'' and inserting 
 ``intentionally discloses''; and
 (B) by striking the period at the end and inserting 
 ``; or''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(3) knowingly and willfully communicates, furnishes, 
 transmits, or otherwise makes available to an unauthorized 
 person, or publishes, or uses in any manner prejudicial to the 
 safety or interest of the United States or for the benefit or 
 any foreign government to the detriment of the United States an 
 application, in whole or in part, for an order for electronic 
 surveillance under this Act.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Subsection (b) of such section is 
amended by striking ``under subsection (a)'' and inserting ``under 
paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (a)''.

SEC. 403. INCREASED CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR OFFENSE UNDER FISA.

 Subsection (c) of section 109 is amended to read: ``PENALTY.--A 
person guilty of an offense in this section shall be fined under title 
18, imprisoned for not more than 10 years, or both.''.

SEC. 404. CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR UNAUTHORIZED DISCLOSURE OF CERTAIN 
 INCIDENTALLY COLLECTED UNITED STATES PERSON INFORMATION.

 Title VII is amended by inserting the following new section:

``SEC. 709. PENALTIES FOR UNAUTHORIZED DISCLOSURE.

 ``(a) Offense.--A person is guilty of an offense under this section 
if that person knowingly and willfully communicates, furnishes, 
transmits, or otherwise makes available to an unauthorized person, or 
publishes, or uses in any manner prejudicial to the safety or interest 
of the United States or for the benefit of any foreign government to 
the detriment of the United States any classified information that 
contains the contents of any communication acquired under this title to 
which a known United States person is a party.
 ``(b) Penalty.--A person guilty of an offense in this section shall 
be fined under title 18, imprisoned for not more than 8 years, or both.
 ``(c) Jurisdiction.--There is Federal jurisdiction over an offense 
under this section if the person committing the offense was an officer 
or employee of the United States at the time the offense was 
committed.''.

SEC. 405. CONTEMPTS CONSTITUTING CRIMES.

 Section 402 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by 
inserting after ``any district court of the United States'' the 
following: ``, including the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court or 
the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court of Review established by 
section 103 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 (50 
U.S.C. 1803),''.

SEC. 406. SENTENCING ENHANCEMENT FOR FALSE DECLARATIONS BEFORE FISC.

 Subsection (a) of section 1623 of title 18, United States Code, is 
amended by inserting before ``, or both'' the following: ``or, if such 
proceedings are before or ancillary to the Foreign Intelligence 
Surveillance Court or the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court of 
Review established by section 103 of the Foreign Intelligence 
Surveillance Act of 1978 (50 U.S.C. 1803), imprisoned not more than ten 
years''.

SEC. 407. ANNUAL REPORTING ON DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS BY FEDERAL BUREAU OF 
 INVESTIGATION.

 Section 603 is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (e) as subsection (g); and
 (2) by inserting the following new subsection:
 ``(e) Mandatory Reporting by Director of Federal Bureau of 
Investigation.--The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
shall annually submit to the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence 
and the Committee on Judiciary of the House of Representatives and the 
Select Committee on Intelligence and the Committee on the Judiciary of 
the Senate, a report describing the accountability actions taken by the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation in the preceding 12-month period for 
noncompliant querying of information acquired under section 702, to 
include the number of ongoing personnel investigations, the outcome of 
any completed personnel investigations and any related adverse 
personnel actions taken.''.

 TITLE V--REPORTS AND OTHER MATTERS

SEC. 501. INCLUSION OF COUNTERNARCOTICS IN DEFINITION OF FOREIGN 
 INTELLIGENCE.

 Subsection (e)(1) of section 101 is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``; or'' and inserting 
 a semicolon; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(D) international production, distribution, or 
 financing of illicit synthetic drugs, opioids, cocaine, 
 or other drugs driving overdose deaths, or any 
 controlled substance designated by the Controlled 
 Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 801 et seq.), or precursors 
 of any aforementioned; or''.

SEC. 502. REVOCATION OF STATUTORY REPORTING EXEMPTION AND ADDITIONAL 
 REPORTING REQUIREMENT FOR FEDERAL BUREAU OF 
 INVESTIGATION.

 (a) In General.--Section 603, as amended by this Act, is further 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)(2)(B) by inserting ``(or combined 
 unminimized contents and noncontents information)'' after 
 ``unminimized contents'';
 (2) in subsection (d), by amending paragraph (2) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(2) Nonapplicability to electronic mail address and 
 telephone numbers.--Paragraph (3)(B) of subsection (b) shall 
 not apply to orders resulting in the acquisition of information 
 by the Federal Bureau of Investigation that does not include 
 electronic mail addresses or telephone numbers.''; and
 (3) by inserting the following new subsection:
 ``(f) Mandatory Reporting on Section 702 by Director of Federal 
Bureau of Investigation.--
 ``(1) Annual report.--The Director of the Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation shall annually submit to the Permanent Select 
 Committee on Intelligence and the Committee on the Judiciary of 
 the House of Representatives and the Select Committee on 
 Intelligence and the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate a 
 report that includes--
 ``(A) the number of United States person queries by 
 the Federal Bureau of Investigation of unminimized 
 contents or noncontents acquired pursuant to section 
 702(a);
 ``(B) the number of approved queries using the 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation's batch job technology, 
 or successor tool;
 ``(C) the number of queries using the Federal 
 Bureau of Investigation's batch job technology, or 
 successor tool, conducted by the Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation against information acquired pursuant to 
 section 702(a) for which pre-approval was not obtained 
 due to emergency circumstances;
 ``(D) the number of United States person queries 
 conducted by the Federal Bureau of Investigation of 
 unminimized contents or noncontents acquired pursuant 
 to section 702(a) solely to retrieve evidence of a 
 crime;
 ``(E) a good faith estimate of the number of United 
 States person query terms used by the Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation to conduct queries of unminimized 
 contents or noncontents acquired pursuant to section 
 702(a) primarily to protect the United States person 
 who is the subject of the query; and
 ``(F) a good faith estimate of the number of United 
 States person query terms used by the Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation to conduct queries of unminimized 
 contents or noncontents acquired pursuant to section 
 702(a) where the United States person who is the 
 subject of the query is a target or subject of an 
 investigation by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
 ``(2) Public availability.--Subject to declassification 
 review by the Attorney General and the Director of National 
 Intelligence, each annual report submitted pursuant to 
 paragraph (1) shall be available to the public during the first 
 April following the calendar year covered by the report.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on January 1, 2025.

SEC. 503. NOTIFICATION TO CONGRESS OF CERTAIN UNAUTHORIZED DISCLOSURES.

 If the Director of National Intelligence becomes aware of an actual 
or potential significant unauthorized disclosure or compromise of 
information acquired under section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence 
Surveillance Act of 1978 (50 U.S.C. 1881a), as soon as practicable, but 
not later than 7 days after the date on which the Director becomes so 
aware, the Director shall notify the congressional intelligence 
committees of such actual or potential disclosure or compromise.

SEC. 504. DEFINITION OF ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION SERVICE PROVIDER.

 (a) Subsection (b)(4) of section 701 is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (D)--
 (A) by striking ``other communication''; and
 (B) by inserting ``, or equipment that is being or 
 may be used to transmit or store such communications'' 
 after ``stored''; and
 (2) in subparagraph (E), by inserting ``custodian,'' after 
 ``employee,''.
 (b) Subsection (6) of section 801 is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (D)--
 (A) by striking ``other communication''; and
 (B) by inserting ``, or equipment that is being or 
 may be used to transmit or store such communications'' 
 after ``stored''; and
 (2) in subparagraph (F), by inserting ``custodian,'' after 
 ``employee,''.

SEC. 505. VETTING OF NON-UNITED STATES PERSONS.

 Subsection (f) of section 702, as amended by this Act, is further 
amended by inserting after paragraph (4) the following new paragraph:
 ``(5) Vetting of non-united states persons.--For any 
 procedures for one or more agencies adopted under paragraph 
 (1)(A), the Attorney General, in consultation with the Director 
 of National Intelligence, shall ensure that the procedures 
 enable the vetting of all non-United States persons who are 
 being processed for travel to the United States using terms 
 that do not qualify as United States person query terms under 
 this Act.''.

SEC. 506. ACCOUNTABILITY MEASURES FOR EXECUTIVE LEADERSHIP OF FEDERAL 
 BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION.

 (a) Measures Required.--The Director of the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation shall ensure that, as soon as practicable following the 
date of enactment of this Act, there are in effect measures for holding 
the executive leadership of each covered component appropriately 
accountable for ensuring compliance with covered procedures by the 
personnel of the Federal Bureau of Investigation assigned to that 
covered component. Such measures shall include a requirement for an 
annual evaluation of the executive leadership of each such covered 
component with respect to ensuring such compliance during the preceding 
year.
 (b) Briefings Required.--
 (1) Briefings.--On a semiannual basis for the 2-year period 
 following the date of the enactment of this Act, and on an 
 annual basis thereafter, the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
 shall provide to the appropriate congressional committees a 
 briefing on the implementation of subsection (a).
 (2) Matters.--Each briefing under paragraph (1) shall 
 include, with respect to the period covered by the briefing, 
 the following:
 (A) A description of specific measures under 
 subsection (a) that the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
 has implemented.
 (B) A description of specific measures under such 
 subsection that the Federal Bureau of Investigation has 
 proposed to be implemented or modified, and the 
 timeline for such proposed implementation or 
 modification.
 (C) A summary of compliance with covered procedures 
 by the personnel of the Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation, disaggregated by covered component, and 
 a description of any adverse personnel actions taken 
 against, or other actions taken to ensure the 
 appropriate accountability of, the executive leadership 
 of covered components that underperformed with respect 
 to ensuring such compliance.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term 
 ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (A) the congressional intelligence committees, as 
 such term is defined in subsection (b) of section 701 
 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 
 (50 U.S.C. 1881); and
 (B) the Committees on the Judiciary of the House of 
 Representatives and the Senate.
 (2) Covered component.--The term ``covered component'' 
 means a field office, Headquarters division, or other element 
 of the Federal Bureau of Investigation with personnel who have 
 access to the unminimized contents of communications obtained 
 through acquisitions authorized under section 702(a).
 (3) Covered procedure.--The term ``covered procedure''--
 (A) means any procedure governing the use of 
 authorities under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance 
 Act of 1978 (50 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.); and
 (B) includes querying procedures and minimization 
 procedures adopted pursuant to such Act.
 (4) Executive leadership.--The term ``executive 
 leadership'' includes--
 (A) with respect to a field office of the Federal 
 Bureau of Investigation, an Assistant Director in 
 Charge or Special Agent in Charge of the field office; 
 and
 (B) with respect to a division of the Federal 
 Bureau of Investigation Headquarters, an Assistant 
 Director of the division.

SEC. 507. REPORT ON TECHNOLOGY NEEDED FOR NEAR-REAL TIME MONITORING OF 
 FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION COMPLIANCE.

 (a) Study Required.--The Director of National Intelligence, in 
coordination with the National Security Agency and in consultation with 
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, shall conduct a study on 
technological enhancements that would enable the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation to conduct near-real time monitoring of compliance in any 
system of the Federal Bureau of Investigation that stores information 
acquired under section 702. Such study shall consider the potential 
cost and assess the feasibility of implementation within a period of 
one year of each technological enhancement under consideration.
 (b) Submission.--Not later than one year after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Director of National Intelligence shall 
submit the results of the study to the appropriate congressional 
committees.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section the term ``appropriate 
congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the congressional intelligence committees, as such term 
 is defined in subsection (b) of section 701 of the Foreign 
 Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 (50 U.S.C. 1881); and
 (2) the Committees on the Judiciary of the House of 
 Representatives and the Senate.

SEC. 508. INSPECTOR GENERAL REPORT ON FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION 
 QUERYING PRACTICES.

 (a) Report.--Not later than 545 days after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Inspector General of the Department of Justice shall 
submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report on the 
querying practices of the Federal Bureau of Investigation under section 
702.
 (b) Matters Included.--The report under subsection (a) shall 
include, at a minimum, the following:
 (1) An evaluation of compliance by personnel of the Federal 
 Bureau of Investigation with the querying procedures adopted 
 under section 702(f), with a particular focus on compliance by 
 such personnel with the procedures governing queries using 
 United States person query terms.
 (2) A discussion of each specific reform that, in the view 
 of the Inspector General, is responsible for any identified 
 improvement in the Federal Bureau of Investigation's record of 
 compliance with the querying procedures, including an 
 identification of whether such reform was--
 (A) required by this Act or another Act of 
 Congress;
 (B) required by the Foreign Intelligence 
 Surveillance Court or the Attorney General; or
 (C) voluntarily adopted by the Director of the 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation.
 (3) An assessment of the status of the implementation by 
 the Federal Bureau of Investigation of all reforms related to 
 querying that are required by this Act.
 (4) An evaluation of the effectiveness of the Office of 
 Internal Auditing of the Federal Bureau of Investigation with 
 respect to monitoring and improving query compliance by 
 personnel of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
 (5) Recommendations to further improve compliance with 
 querying procedures by personnel of the Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation, particularly with respect to compliance with the 
 procedures governing queries using United States person query 
 terms.
 (6) Any other relevant matter the Inspector General 
 determines appropriate.
 (c) Form.--The report under subsection (a) shall be submitted in 
unclassified form and may include a classified annex.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in this section, terms 
 used in this section have the meanings given such terms in the 
 Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 (50 U.S.C. 1801 
 et seq.).
 (2) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term 
 ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (A) the congressional intelligence committees, as 
 such term is defined in subsection (b) of section 701 
 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 
 (50 U.S.C. 1881); and
 (B) the Committees on the Judiciary of the House of 
 Representatives and the Senate.

SEC. 509. SENSE OF CONGRESS ON THE TARGETED COLLECTION OF UNITED STATES 
 PERSON INFORMATION.

 It is the sense of Congress that section 702 of the Foreign 
Intelligence Surveillance Act has always prohibited, and continues to 
prohibit, the intelligence community from targeting a United States 
person for collection of foreign intelligence information. If the 
intelligence community intends to target a United States person for 
collection of foreign intelligence information under the Foreign 
Intelligence Surveillance Act, the government must first obtain an 
individualized court order based upon a finding of probable cause that 
the United States person is a foreign power, an agent of a foreign 
power, or an officer or employee of a foreign power, in order to 
conduct surveillance targeting that United States person.

SEC. 510. FISA REFORM COMMISSION.

 (a) Establishment.--
 (1) In general.--There is established a commission to 
 consider ongoing reforms to the Foreign Intelligence 
 Surveillance Act of 1978 (50 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.).
 (2) Designation.--The commission established under 
 paragraph (1) shall be known as the ``FISA Reform Commission'' 
 (in this section the ``Commission'').
 (b) Membership.--
 (1) Composition.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
 Commission shall be composed of the following members:
 (i) The Principal Deputy Director of 
 National Intelligence.
 (ii) The Deputy Attorney General.
 (iii) The Deputy Secretary of Defense.
 (iv) The Deputy Secretary of State.
 (v) The Chair of the Privacy and Civil 
 Liberties Oversight Board.
 (vi) Three members appointed by the 
 majority leader of the Senate, in consultation 
 with the Chairman of the Select Committee on 
 Intelligence of the Senate and the Chairman of 
 the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate, 1 
 of whom shall be a member of the Senate and 2 
 of whom shall not be.
 (vii) Three members appointed by the 
 minority leader of the Senate, in consultation 
 with the Vice Chairman of the Select Committee 
 on Intelligence of the Senate and the Ranking 
 Member of the Committee on the Judiciary of the 
 Senate, 1 of whom shall be a member of the 
 Senate and 2 of whom shall not be.
 (viii) Three members appointed by the 
 Speaker of the House of Representatives, in 
 consultation with the Chairman of the Permanent 
 Select Committee on Intelligence of the House 
 of Representatives and the Chairman of the 
 Committee on the Judiciary of the House of 
 Representatives, 1 of whom shall be a member of 
 the House of Representatives and 2 of whom 
 shall not be.
 (ix) Three members appointed by the 
 minority leader of the House of 
 Representatives, in consultation with the 
 Ranking Member of the Permanent Select 
 Committee on Intelligence of the House of 
 Representatives and the Ranking Member of the 
 Committee on the Judiciary of the House of 
 Representatives, 1 of whom shall be a member of 
 the House of Representatives and 2 of whom 
 shall not be.
 (B) Nonmembers of congress.--
 (i) Qualifications.--The members of the 
 Commission who are not Members of Congress and 
 who are appointed under clauses (vi) through 
 (ix) of subparagraph (A) shall be individuals 
 who are nationally recognized for expertise, 
 knowledge, or experience in--
 (I) use of intelligence information 
 by the intelligence community (as 
 defined in section 3 of the National 
 Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3003)), 
 national policymakers and military 
 leaders;
 (II) the implementation, funding, 
 or oversight of the national security 
 laws of the United States;
 (III) privacy, civil liberties, and 
 transparency; or
 (IV) laws and policies governing 
 methods of electronic surveillance.
 (ii) Conflicts of interest.--An official 
 who appoints members of the Commission may not 
 appoint an individual as a member of the 
 Commission if such individual possesses any 
 personal or financial interest in the discharge 
 of any of the duties of the Commission.
 (iii) Security clearances.--All members of 
 the Commission described in clause (i) shall 
 possess an appropriate security clearance in 
 accordance with applicable provisions of law 
 concerning the handling of classified 
 information.
 (2) Co-chairs.--
 (A) In general.--The Commission shall have 2 co-
 chairs, selected from among the members of the 
 Commission.
 (B) Agreement.--The individuals who serve as the 
 co-chairs of the Commission shall be agreed upon by the 
 members of the Commission.
 (c) Appointment; Initial Meeting.--
 (1) Appointment.--Members of the Commission shall be 
 appointed not later than 90 days after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.
 (2) Initial meeting.--The Commission shall hold its initial 
 meeting on or before the date that is 180 days after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act.
 (d) Meetings; Quorum; Vacancies.--
 (1) In general.--After its initial meeting, the Commission 
 shall meet upon the call of the co-chairs of the Commission.
 (2) Quorum.--Nine members of the Commission shall 
 constitute a quorum for purposes of conducting business, except 
 that 2 members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for 
 purposes of receiving testimony.
 (3) Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the Commission shall not 
 affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner in 
 which the original appointment was made.
 (4) Quorum with vacancies.--If vacancies in the Commission 
 occur on any day after 90 days after the date of the enactment 
 of this Act, a quorum shall consist of a majority of the 
 members of the Commission as of such day.
 (e) Duties.--The duties of the Commission are as follows:
 (1) To review the effectiveness of the current 
 implementation of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 
 1978 (50 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.).
 (2) To develop recommendations for legislative action to 
 reform the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 (50 
 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.) that provide for the effective conduct of 
 United States intelligence activities and the protection of 
 privacy and civil liberties.
 (f) Powers of Commission.--
 (1) In general.--
 (A) Hearings.--The Commission or, on the 
 authorization of the Commission, any subcommittee or 
 member thereof, may, for the purpose of carrying out 
 this section--
 (i) hold such hearings and sit and act at 
 such times and places, take such testimony, 
 receive such evidence, and administer such 
 oaths; and
 (ii) require, by subpoena or otherwise, the 
 attendance and testimony of such witnesses and 
 the production of such books, records, 
 correspondence, memoranda, papers, and 
 documents, as the Commission or such designated 
 subcommittee or designated member considers 
 necessary.
 (B) Issuance and enforcement of subpoenas.--
 (i) Issuance.--A subpoena issued under 
 subparagraph (A)(ii) shall--
 (I) bear the signature of the co-
 chairs of the Commission; and
 (II) be served by a person or class 
 of persons designated by the co-chairs 
 for that purpose.
 (ii) Enforcement.--The provisions of 
 sections 102 through 104 of the Revised 
 Statutes of the United States (2 U.S.C. 192-
 194) shall apply in the case of any failure of 
 a witness to comply with any subpoena or to 
 testify when summoned under authority of this 
 paragraph.
 (2) Information from federal agencies.--
 (A) In general.--The Commission may secure directly 
 from any executive department, agency, bureau, board, 
 commission, office, independent establishment, or 
 instrumentality of the Federal Government information, 
 suggestions, estimates, and statistics for the purposes 
 of this section.
 (B) Furnishing information.--Each such department, 
 agency, bureau, board, commission, office, 
 establishment, or instrumentality described in 
 subparagraph (A) shall, to the extent authorized by 
 law, furnish such information, suggestions, estimates, 
 and statistics directly to the Commission, upon request 
 of the co-chairs of the Commission.
 (C) Protection of classified information.--The 
 Commission shall handle and protect all classified 
 information provided to it under this section in 
 accordance with applicable provisions of law.
 (3) Assistance from federal agencies.--
 (A) Director of national intelligence.--The 
 Director of National Intelligence shall provide to the 
 Commission, on a nonreimbursable basis, such 
 administrative services, funds, staff, facilities, and 
 other support services as are necessary for the 
 performance of the duties of the Commission under this 
 section.
 (B) Attorney general.--The Attorney General may 
 provide the Commission, on a nonreimbursable basis, 
 with such administrative services, staff, and other 
 support services as the Commission may request.
 (C) Other departments and agencies.--In addition to 
 the assistance set forth in subparagraphs (A) and (B), 
 other departments and agencies of the United States may 
 provide the Commission such services, funds, 
 facilities, staff, and other support as such 
 departments and agencies consider advisable and as may 
 be authorized by law.
 (D) Cooperation.--The Commission shall receive the 
 full and timely cooperation of any official, 
 department, or agency of the Federal Government whose 
 assistance is necessary, as jointly determined by the 
 co-chairs selected under subsection (b)(2), for the 
 fulfillment of the duties of the Commission, including 
 the provision of full and current briefings and 
 analyses.
 (4) Postal services.--The Commission may use the United 
 States postal services in the same manner and under the same 
 conditions as the departments and agencies of the Federal 
 Governments.
 (5) Gifts.--No member or staff of the Commission may 
 receive a gift or benefit by reason of the service of such 
 member or staff to the Commission.
 (g) Staff of Commission.--
 (1) Appointment and compensation of staff.--The co-chairs 
 of the Commission, in accordance with rules agreed upon by the 
 Commission, shall appoint and fix the compensation of a staff 
 director and such other personnel as may be necessary to enable 
 the Commission to carry out its duties, without regard to the 
 provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing 
 appointments in the competitive service, and without regard to 
 the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 
 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule 
 pay rates, except that no rate of pay fixed under this 
 subsection may exceed the equivalent of that payable to a 
 person occupying a position at level V of the Executive 
 Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
 (2) Detail of government employees.--Any Federal Government 
 employee may be detailed to the Commission without 
 reimbursement from the Commission, and such detailee shall 
 retain the rights, status, and privileges of his or her regular 
 employment without interruption.
 (3) Security clearances.--All staff of the Commission and 
 all experts and consultants employed by the Commission shall 
 possess a security clearance in accordance with applicable 
 provisions of law concerning the handling of classified 
 information.
 (h) Compensation and Travel Expenses.--
 (1) Compensation of members.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph 
 (2), each member of the Commission may be compensated 
 at not to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual 
 rate of basic pay in effect for a position at level IV 
 of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 
 5, United States Code, for each day during which that 
 member is engaged in the actual performance of the 
 duties of the Commission under this title.
 (B) Exception.--Members of the Commission who are 
 officers or employees of the United States or Members 
 of Congress shall receive no additional pay by reason 
 of their service on the Commission.
 (2) Travel expenses.--While away from their homes or 
 regular places of business in the performance of services for 
 the Commission, a member of the Commission may be allowed 
 travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in 
 the same manner as persons employed intermittently in the 
 Government service are allowed expenses under section 5703 of 
 title 5, United States Code.
 (i) Treatment of Information Relating to National Security.--
 (1) In general.--The Director of National Intelligence 
 shall assume responsibility for the handling and disposition of 
 any information related to the national security of the United 
 States that is received, considered, or used by the Commission 
 under this title.
 (2) Information provided by congressional intelligence 
 committees.--Any information related to the national security 
 of the United States that is provided to the Commission by a 
 congressional intelligence committee may not be further 
 provided or released without the approval of the chairman of 
 such committee.
 (3) Access after termination of commission.--
 Notwithstanding any other provision of law, after the 
 termination of the Commission under subsection (j)(2), only the 
 members and designated staff of the congressional intelligence 
 committees, the Director of National Intelligence (and the 
 designees of the Director), and such other officials of the 
 executive branch of the Federal Government as the President may 
 designate shall have access to information related to the 
 national security of the United States that is received, 
 considered, or used by the Commission.
 (j) Final Report; Termination.--
 (1) Final report.--
 (A) Definitions.--In this paragraph:
 (i) Appropriate committees of congress.--
 The term ``appropriate committees of Congress'' 
 means--
 (I) the congressional intelligence 
 committees;
 (II) the Committee on the Judiciary 
 of the Senate; and
 (III) the Committee on the 
 Judiciary of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (ii) Congressional leadership.--The term 
 ``congressional leadership'' means--
 (I) the majority leader of the 
 Senate;
 (II) the minority leader of the 
 Senate;
 (III) the Speaker of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (IV) the minority leader of the 
 House of Representatives.
 (B) Final report required.--Not later than 5 years 
 from the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission 
 shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress, 
 congressional leadership, the Director of National 
 Intelligence, and the Attorney General a final report 
 on the findings of the Commission.
 (C) Form of final report.--The final report 
 submitted pursuant to subparagraph (B) shall be in 
 unclassified form but may include a classified annex.
 (D) Assessments of final report.--Not later than 1 
 year after receipt of the final report under 
 subparagraph (B), the Director of National Intelligence 
 and the Attorney General shall each submit to the 
 appropriate committees of Congress and congressional 
 leadership an assessment of such report.
 (2) Termination.--
 (A) In general.--The Commission, and all the 
 authorities of this section, shall terminate on the 
 date that is 2 years after the date on which the final 
 report is submitted under paragraph (1)(B).
 (B) Wind-down period.--The Commission may use the 
 120-day period referred to in subparagraph (A) for the 
 purposes of concluding its activities, including 
 providing testimony to Congress concerning the final 
 report referred to in that paragraph and disseminating 
 the report.
 (k) Inapplicability of Certain Administrative Provisions.--
 (1) Federal advisory committee act.--The provisions of the 
 Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App.) shall not apply 
 to the activities of the Commission under this section.
 (2) Freedom of information act.--The provisions of section 
 552 of title 5, United States Code (commonly referred to as the 
 ``Freedom of Information Act''), shall not apply to the 
 activities, records, and proceedings of the Commission under 
 this section.
 (l) Funding.--
 (1) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated funds to the extent and in such amounts as 
 specifically provided in advance in appropriations acts for the 
 purposes detailed in this section.
 (2) Availability in general.--Subject to paragraph (1), the 
 Director of National Intelligence shall make available to the 
 Commission such amounts as the Commission may require for 
 purposes of the activities of the Commission under this 
 section.
 (3) Duration of availability.--Amounts made available to 
 the Commission under paragraph (2) shall remain available until 
 expended or upon termination under subsection (i)(2), whichever 
 occurs first.
 (m) Congressional Intelligence Committees Defined.--In this 
section, the term ``congressional intelligence committees'' means--
 (1) the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate; and
 (2) the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the 
 House of Representatives.

SEC. 511. EXTENSION OF CERTAIN AUTHORITIES; SUNSET.

 (a) FISA Amendments Act of 2008.--Section 403(b) of the FISA 
Amendments Act of 2008 (Public Law 110-261; 122 Stat. 2474) is 
amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) by striking ``December 31, 2023'' and inserting 
 ``December 31, 2031''; and
 (B) by inserting ``and the FISA Reform and 
 Reauthorization Act of 2023'' after ``the FISA 
 Amendments Reauthorization Act of 2017'';
 (2) in paragraph (2) in the matter preceding subparagraph 
 (A), by striking ``December 31, 2023'' and inserting ``December 
 31, 2031''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--Section 404(b) of the FISA Amendments 
Act of 2008 (Public Law 110-261; 122 Stat. 2476), is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) in the heading, by striking ``December 31, 
 2023'' and inserting ``December 31, 2031''; and
 (B) by inserting ``and the FISA Reform and 
 Reauthorization Act of 2023'' after ``the FISA 
 Amendments Reauthorization Act of 2017'';
 (2) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``and the FISA Reform 
 and Reauthorization Act of 2023'' after ``the FISA Amendments 
 Reauthorization Act of 2017''; and
 (3) in paragraph (4), by inserting ``and the FISA Reform 
 and Reauthorization Act of 2023'' after ``the FISA Amendments 
 Reauthorization Act of 2017'' in each place it appears.
 (c) Sunset.--Effective December 31, 2031, the Foreign Intelligence 
Surveillance Act of 1978 is amended so that section 702 reads as it 
read on the day before the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 512. SEVERABILITY; APPLICABILITY DATE.

 (a) Severability.--If any provision of this Act, any amendment made 
by this Act, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances 
is held invalid, the validity of the remainder of the Act, of any such 
amendments, and of the application of such provisions to other persons 
and circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
 (b) Applicability Date.--Subsection (f) of section 702 of the 
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 (50 U.S.C. 1881a), as 
amended by this Act, shall apply with respect to certifications 
submitted under subsection (h) of such section to the Foreign 
Intelligence Surveillance Court after January 1, 2024.
 <all>