HR 4490 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 4490
To provide for the containment of prescription drug prices by reducing
certain nonresearch related tax credits to pharmaceutical manufacturers,
by establishing the Prescription Drug Policy Review Commission, by requiring
a study of the feasibility of establishing a pharmaceutical products price
review board, and by requiring a study of the value of Federal subsidies
and tax credits given to pharmaceutical manufacturers, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
March 18, 1992
Mr. DORGAN of North Dakota (for himself, Mr. ASPIN, Mr. AUCOIN, Mr. BILBRAY,
Mr. DURBIN, Mr. FROST, Mr. JOHNSON of South Dakota, Mr. JOHNSTON of Florida,
Mr. KOLTER, and Ms. PELOSI) introduced the following bill; which was referred
jointly to the Committees on Ways and Means and Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To provide for the containment of prescription drug prices by reducing
certain nonresearch related tax credits to pharmaceutical manufacturers,
by establishing the Prescription Drug Policy Review Commission, by requiring
a study of the feasibility of establishing a pharmaceutical products price
review board, and by requiring a study of the value of Federal subsidies
and tax credits given to pharmaceutical manufacturers, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Prescription Drug Cost Containment Act
 of 1992'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) although prescription drugs represent one of the most frequently used
 medical care interventions in treating common acute and chronic diseases,
 many Americans, especially elderly and other vulnerable populations, are
 unable to afford their medications because of excessive and persistent
 prescription drug price inflation;
 (2) between 1980 and 1990, prescription drug price inflation was triple
 the rate of general inflation, and in the first half of 1991, prescription
 drug price inflation increased even faster, exceeding 3 1/2 times the
 rate of general inflation on an annualized basis;
 (3) because of the limited availability of private or public prescription
 drug coverage for the elderly, prescription drugs represent the highest
 out-of-pocket medical care cost for 3 of 4 elderly patients, surpassed
 only by costs of long-term care services;
 (4) prescription drug manufacturers continue to make enormous profits on
 the backs of the elderly, poor, and other vulnerable populations that are
 unable to afford their medications;
 (5) the Federal Government and American taxpayer provide substantial
 subsidies to the pharmaceutical industry in the form of tax incentives,
 tax write-offs, and grants for non-research activities;
 (6) for example, in 1987 alone, the pharmaceutical industry received a
 section 936 tax credit of more than $1,400,000,000, and such credit is
 estimated to have yielded over $2,000,000,000 in tax breaks in 1990 to
 such industry; and
 (7) in addition, there is a need to determine whether Federal subsidies
 are used in the most efficient manner by the pharmaceutical industry to
 develop drugs which represent true therapeutic advances over those products
 already on the market.
 (b) PURPOSES- The purposes of this Act are--
 (1) to insure that elderly patients and all Americans have access to
 reasonably-priced pharmaceutical products;
 (2) to establish a medicare outpatient prescription drug benefit
 demonstration project and trust fund;
 (3) to provide for the establishment of the Prescription Drug Policy Review
 Commission and a study of the impact of a pharmaceutical price review board
 on containing price inflation on prescription pharmaceutical products in
 the United States;
 (4) to provide for a study on how Federal tax credits and subsidies and
 market exclusivity given to the pharmaceutical industry can be used to modify
 an individual manufacturer's pricing behavior and research priorities; and
 (5) to provide the Federal Government with information on drug prices in
 other industrialized nations.
SEC. 3. REDUCTION IN POSSESSIONS TAX CREDIT FOR EXCESSIVE PHARMACEUTICAL
INFLATION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 936 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating
 to Puerto Rico and possession tax credit) is amended by adding at the end
 the following new subsection:
 `(i) REDUCTION FOR EXCESSIVE PHARMACEUTICAL INFLATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In the case of any manufacturer of single source drugs or
 innovator multiple source drugs, the amount by which the credit under this
 section for the taxable year (determined without regard to this subsection)
 exceeds the manufacturer's wage base for such taxable year shall be reduced
 by the product of--
 `(A) the amount of such excess, multiplied by
 `(B) the sum of the reduction percentages for each single source drug or
 innovator multiple source drug of the manufacturer for such taxable year.
 `(2) MANUFACTURER'S WAGE BASE- For purposes of this subsection--
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The manufacturer's wage base for any taxable year is
 equal to the total amount of wages paid during such taxable year by the
 manufacturer to eligible employees in Puerto Rico with respect to the
 manufacture of single source drugs and innovator multiple source drugs.
 `(B) ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEES- The term `eligible employee' means any employee
 of the manufacturer (as defined in section 3121(d)) who is a bona fide
 resident of Puerto Rico and subject to tax by Puerto Rico on income from
 sources within and without Puerto Rico during the entire taxable year.
 `(C) WAGES- The term `wages' has the meaning given such term by section
 3121(a).
 `(3) REDUCTION PERCENTAGE- For purposes of this subsection--
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The reduction percentage for any drug for any taxable
 year is the percentage determined by multiplying--
 `(i) the sales percentage for such drug for such taxable year, by
 `(ii) the price increase percentage for such drug for such taxable year.
 `(B) SALES PERCENTAGE- The sales percentage for any drug for any taxable
 year is the percentage determined by dividing--
 `(i) the total sales of such drug by the manufacturer for such taxable
 year, by
 `(ii) the total sales of all single source drugs and innovator multiple
 source drugs by the manufacturer for such taxable year.
 `(C) PRICE INCREASE PERCENTAGE- The price increase percentage for any drug
 for any taxable year is the percentage determined by multiplying--
 `(i) 20, times
 `(ii) the excess (if any) of--
 `(I) the percentage increase in the average manufacturer's price for such
 drug for the taxable year over such average price for the base taxable
 year, over
 `(II) the percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index (as defined in
 section 1(g)(5)) for the taxable year over the base taxable year.
 `(D) TOTAL SALES-
 `(i) DOMESTIC SALES ONLY- Total sales shall only include sales for use or
 consumption in the United States.
 `(ii) SALES TO RELATED PARTIES NOT INCLUDED- Total sales shall not include
 sales to any related party (as defined in section 267(b)).
 `(E) AVERAGE MANUFACTURER'S PRICE- The term `average manufacturer's price'
 for any taxable year means the average price paid to the manufacturer by
 wholesalers or direct buyers and purchasers for each single source drug
 or innovator multiple source drug sold to the various classes of purchasers.
 `(F) BASE TAXABLE YEAR- The base taxable year for any single source drug
 or innovator multiple source drug is the later of--
 `(i) the last taxable year ending in 1991, or
 `(ii) the first taxable year beginning after the date on which the marketing
 of such drug begins.
 `(4) OTHER DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this subsection--
 `(A) MANUFACTURER-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- The term `manufacturer' means any person which is
 engaged in--
 `(I) the production, preparation, propagation, compounding, conversion,
 or processing of prescription drug products, either directly or indirectly
 by extraction from substances of natural origin, or independently by means
 of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical
 synthesis, or
 `(II) in the packaging, repackaging, labeling, relabeling, or distribution
 of prescription drug products.
Such term does not include a wholesale distributor of drugs or a retail
pharmacy licensed under State law.
 `(ii) CONTROLLED GROUPS- For purposes of clause (i)--
 `(I) CONTROLLED GROUP OF CORPORATIONS- All corporations which are
 members of the same controlled group of corporations shall be treated as 1
 person. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term `controlled group of
 corporations' has the meaning given to such term by section 1563(a), except
 that `more than 50 percent' shall be substituted for `at least 80 percent'
 each place it appears in section 1563(a)(1), and the determination shall
 be made without regard to subsections (a)(4) and (e)(3)(C) of section 1563.
 `(II) PARTNERSHIPS, PROPRIETORSHIPS, ETC., WHICH ARE UNDER COMMON CONTROL-
 Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary, all trades or business
 (whether or not incorporated) which are under common control shall be
 treated as 1 person. The regulations prescribed under this subclause shall
 be based on principles similar to the principles which apply in the case
 of subclause (I).
 `(B) SINGLE SOURCE DRUG- The term `single source drug' means a drug or
 biological which is produced or distributed under an original new drug
 application or product licensing application, including a drug product
 or biological marketed by any cross-licensed producers or distributors
 operating under the new drug application or product licensing application.
 `(C) INNOVATOR MULTIPLE SOURCE DRUG- The term `innovator multiple
 source drug' means a multiple source drug (within the meaning of section
 1927(k)(7)(A)(i) of the Social Security Act) that was originally marketed
 under an original new drug application or a product licensing application
 approved by the Food and Drug Administration.
 `(5) SPECIAL RULES- For purposes of this subsection--
 `(A) DOSAGE TREATMENT- Except as provided by the Secretary, each dosage
 form and strength of a single source drug or innovator multiple source
 drug shall be treated as a separate drug.
 `(B) ROUNDING OF PERCENTAGES- Any percentage shall be rounded to the
 nearest hundredth of a percent.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1991.
SEC. 4. MEDICARE OUTPATIENT PRESCRIPTION DRUG PROGRAM DEMONSTRATION PROJECT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Not later than October 1, 1992, the Secretary of Health
 and Human Services (in this section referred to as the `Secretary')
 shall establish no less than 15 demonstration projects in counties (or
 other geographic areas) located in different States in rural and urban
 areas. Each of the counties (or other geographic areas) designated shall
 have a significant proportion (as determined by the Secretary) of individuals
 eligible for medicare benefits under title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
 (b) PURPOSE- (1) The purpose of demonstration projects conducted under
 this section is to assess--
 (A) the impact on cost, quality of care, and access to prescription drugs of
 developing (in each geographic area) a medicare outpatient prescription drug
 benefit using various forms of benefit design and reimbursement policies, and
 (B) the impact on cost and quality of care of extending coverage of
 outpatient prescription drugs to medicare beneficiaries served by community
 health centers.
 (2) The partial purpose of at least 5 of the demonstration projects is--
 (A) to assess the impact on quality of care and reduction in other health
 care service expenditures of reimbursing pharmacists separately for providing
 ongoing drug utilization management (including medication regimen review)
 to insure that prescriptions are appropriate, medically necessary, and
 unlikely to result in adverse medical results;
 (B) to reimburse pharmacists (or other persons authorized to dispense
 drugs under State law) under such projects based on marketplace pricing; and
 (C) to use an electronic, on-line claims capture and adjudication component
 in such projects to process medicare prescription drug claims.
 (c) PROJECT REQUIREMENTS- (1) A project conducted under this section shall
 provide for coverage of all drugs and biologicals approved by the Federal
 Food and Drug Administration and all medically accepted indications of
 these drugs as indicated in the 3 national compendia of drug use standards:
 the USP-DI, AHFS-DI, and AMA-DE.
 (2) In each geographic area in which a project is conducted, a Drug Use
 Review Board (in this section referred to as the `DUR Board') shall be
 established which shall consist of a sufficient number of actively practicing
 physicians and pharmacists from the geographic area who shall possess
 knowledge in pharmacology and therapeutics, especially as it relates to
 drug use with respect to the elderly. In lieu of establishing a DUR Board in
 the area, functions of the DUR Board may be performed by the State medicaid
 DUR Board established under section 1927(g) of the Social Security Act.
 (3) The DUR Board established under this section shall be responsible
 for recommending the design and development of the medicare prescription
 drug benefit within the geographic area. It shall establish a program of
 prospective and retrospective drug use review for medicare beneficiaries
 entitled to drug benefits under the project. The Board shall also develop
 appropriate educational interventions to ensure that drugs are prescribed
 and dispensed in accordance with standards that are described in the 3
 national medical compendia and the peer-reviewed medical literature.
 (4) In assessing the total costs of the medicare prescription drug benefit,
 the DUR Board should consider various levels of discounts, rebates (or
 other appropriate incentives), and inflation containment mechanisms that
 could be negotiated with, or required from, pharmaceutical manufacturers
 as a condition of participating in the program, such as the discounts and
 rebates provided to the medicaid program under section 1927 of the Social
 Security Act.
 (d) DURATION OF PROJECTS- The demonstration projects established under this
 section shall be conducted for a period of 5 fiscal years beginning October
 1, 1992, except that the Secretary may terminate a project before the end
 of such period if the Secretary determines that the State conducting the
 project is not in substantial compliance with the terms of the application
 approved by the Secretary under this section.
 (e) EVALUATION AND REPORT OF SECRETARY- The Secretary shall fund an
 independent evaluation of the demonstration projects and shall report
 to the Congress on the results of such evaluation no later than 5 years
 from the date of enactment of this Act. The report of the Secretary shall
 review the impact on cost and quality of care of the various forms of
 benefit design and reimbursement policies to provide prescription drugs
 to medicare beneficiaries and make recommendations on the applicability
 of the demonstration projects to other medicare beneficiaries.
SEC. 5. ESTABLISHMENT OF MEDICARE OUTPATIENT PRESCRIPTION DRUG TRUST FUND.
 Part B of title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) is
 amended by inserting after section 1841 the following new section:
`MEDICARE OUTPATIENT PRESCRIPTION DRUG TRUST FUND
 `SEC. 1841A. (a) There is established in the Treasury of the United States
 a trust fund to be known as the `Medicare Outpatient Prescription Drug
 Trust Fund' (in this section referred to as the `Trust Fund'), consisting
 of such gifts and bequests as may be made as provided in section 201(i)(1)
 and amounts transferred to such Trust Fund under subsection (b).
 `(b) There are hereby appropriated to the Trust Fund amounts equivalent
 to the additional revenues raised as a result of the amendments made by
 section 3(a) of the Prescription Drug Cost Containment Act of 1992. The
 amounts required to be transferred to the Trust Fund under the preceding
 sentence shall be transferred at least quarterly from the general fund
 of the Treasury to the Trust Fund on the basis of estimates made by the
 Secretary of the Treasury. Proper adjustment shall be made in amounts
 subsequently transferred to the extent prior estimates were in excess of
 or less than the amounts required to be transferred.
 `(c) The provisions of subsections (b) through (i) of section 1841, as in
 effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Prescription
 Drug Cost Containment Act of 1992, shall apply to the Trust Fund in the
 same manner as such provisions apply to the Federal Supplemental Medical
 Insurance Trust Fund.
 `(d)(1) Of the amounts in the Trust Fund--
 `(A) an amount determined under paragraph (2) shall be available for each
 of the fiscal years 1993 through 1997 for making expenditures to carry out
 the demonstration projects established under section 4 of the Prescription
 Drug Cost Containment Act of 1992;
 `(B) $1,000,000 shall be available for each fiscal year beginning with
 fiscal year 1993 for--
 `(i) the administrative expenses of the Prescription Drug Policy Review
 Commission, and
 `(ii) the report required under section 7 of the Prescription Drug Cost
 Containment Act of 1992; and
 `(C) such funds, as provided in appropriation Acts, beginning with fiscal
 year 1998 shall be available to the Secretary of Health and Human Services
 to improve the accessibility of prescription drugs to the elderly.
 `(2)(A) For purposes of paragraph (1)(A), the amount determined under this
 paragraph is--
 `(i) for fiscal year 1993, $200,000,000, and
 `(ii) for fiscal years 1994, 1995, 1996 and 1997, the dollar amount for
 the previous fiscal year, increased by the cost-of-living adjustment.
 `(B) For purposes of subparagraph (A), the cost-of-living adjustment for
 any fiscal year is the percentage (if any) by which--
 `(i) the CPI for the previous fiscal year, exceeds
 `(ii) the CPI for fiscal year 1992.
 `(C) For purposes of subparagraph (B), the CPI for any fiscal year is the
 average of the Consumer Price Index for prescription drugs as of the close
 of the 12-month period ending on June 30 of the previous fiscal year.'
SEC. 6. PRESCRIPTION DRUG POLICY REVIEW COMMISSION.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Director of the Congressional Office of Technology
 Assessment (in this section referred to as the `Director' and the `Office',
 respectively) shall provide for the appointment of a Prescription Drug
 Policy Review Commission (in this section referred to as the `Commission'),
 to be composed of individuals with expertise in the provision and financing
 of inpatient and outpatient drugs and biologicals. The provisions of title
 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service
 shall not apply to the appointment of members of the Commission.
 (b) COMPOSITION- (1) The Commission shall consist of 11 individuals. Members
 of the Commission shall first be appointed by no later than October 1, 1992,
 for a term of 3 years, except that the Director may provide initially for
 such shorter terms as will insure that (on a continuing basis) the terms
 of no more than 4 members expire in any one year.
 (2) The membership of the Commission shall include--
 (A) recognized experts in the fields of health care economics and
 quality assurance, medicine, pharmacology, pharmacy, and prescription
 drug reimbursement,
 (B) other health care professionals, and
 (C) at least one individual who is an advocate of medicare and medicaid
 recipients.
 (c) ANNUAL REPORTS- The Commission shall submit to the Congress an annual
 report (by not later than January 1 of each year beginning with 1994)
 which shall include information and recommendations regarding national
 and international drug policy issues, such as--
 (1) trends and changes in prices for prescription and non-prescription
 drugs in the inpatient and outpatient setting in the United States;
 (2) trends and changes in prices for prescription drugs in other
 industrialized nations, such as Canada, Japan, and countries of the European
 Economic Community;
 (3) the scope of coverage, reimbursement, and financing under titles
 XVIII and XIX of the Social Security Act (including the structure and
 operation of the demonstration projects provided under section 4 of this
 Act), and other programs that directly provide or receive Federal funds
 to provide coverage for or reimbursement of prescription drugs, such as
 the Department of Veterans Affairs, the Department of Defense, and Public
 Health Service clinics;
 (4) the availability and affordability of prescription drugs for various
 population groups in the United States, and the accessibility and
 affordability of public and private insurance programs for prescription
 drugs for such population groups;
 (5) changes in the level and nature of use of prescription drugs by
 recipients of benefits under titles XVIII and XIX of the Social Security Act,
 taking into account the impact of such changes on aggregate expenditures
 under these titles;
 (6) suggestions to make prescription drugs more affordable and cost-effective
 for third party insurers, including State-based pharmaceutical assistance
 and general assistance programs;
 (7) evaluation of technologies available for efficient third party
 prescription drug program administration, such as electronic claims
 management and payment technologies;
 (8) methods of providing reimbursement under Federal health care programs
 to providers for drug products and cognitive services;
 (9) evaluation of the use and efficiency of all Federal tax credits
 and subsidies given to the pharmaceutical industry for various purposes,
 including the tax credit allowed under section 936 of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986; and
 (10) evaluation of the impact on total health care expenditures in other
 industrialized nations of switching prescription drugs to non-prescription
 status, and the role of various health professionals in the distribution
 of such non-prescription drugs.
 (d) SPECIAL REPORT- (1) The Commission shall submit to the Committee on
 Finance of the United States Senate, the Committee on Energy and Commerce
 and the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives, and
 the Special Committee on Aging of the United States Senate, by not later
 than October 1, 1993, a study of the feasibility of establishing in the
 United States a pharmaceutical products price review board.
 (2) In conducting the study, the Commission shall--
 (A) assess the impact of such a board in other industrialized nations,
 such as Canada, in containing the costs of prescription drugs and the
 introductory price of new drugs;
 (B) suggest how such a board might operate in the United States, including
 the membership of the Board;
 (C) suggest guidelines that might be used by the board in determining
 whether prices or price increases for prescription drugs are excessive
 and whether the introductory prices on new drugs are excessive; and
 (D) suggest incentives for drug manufacturers to price their products
 fairly in the United States, including a system of compulsory licensing of
 pharmaceutical products or a reduction in the period of market exclusivity
 as a penalty for excessive inflation.
 (e) ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS- Section 1845(c)(1) of the Social Security
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-1(c)(1)) shall apply to the Commission in the same
 manner as such section applies to the Physician Payment Review Commission.
SEC. 7. REPORT ON FEDERAL SUBSIDIES AND INCENTIVES PROVIDED TO THE
PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY.
 (a) REPORT- By not later than July 1, 1992, the Secretary of Health and Human
 Services, acting in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, shall
 submit a report to the Committee on Finance of the United States Senate,
 the Committee on Energy and Commerce and the Committee on Ways and Means
 of the United States House of Representatives, and the Special Committee
 on Aging of the United States Senate, on Federal subsidies and incentives
 provided to the pharmaceutical industry. Such report shall include--
 (1) a determination of the total cost over the 5 immediately preceding
 fiscal years to Federal taxpayers of all Federal subsidies provided to
 the pharmaceutical industry (including tax incentives, subsidies, grants,
 and any other financial support);
 (2) a description of--
 (A) the purposes for which such Federal subsidies are used by the
 pharmaceutical industry;
 (B) the Federal role in researching and developing patented pharmaceutical
 products and the extent to which the Federal Government should co-license
 certain drugs and biologicals;
 (C) the extent to which pharmaceutical industry marketing research costs
 are incorporated into allowable Federal tax credits;
 (D) comparable financial incentives, subsidies, and tax credits provided
 to the pharmaceutical industry by other industrialized nations and the
 use of such incentives, subsidies, and credits by such industry;
 (E) the relationship between the total Federal financial support provided to
 the pharmaceutical industry by the United States and other industrialized
 nations and the prices paid by the citizens of such respective nations
 for prescription drugs; and
 (F) the extent to which tax credits provided by the Federal Government
 subsidize total worldwide pharmaceutical industry research and development;
 and
 (3) recommendations on how Federal tax credits to pharmaceutical
 manufacturers and marketing exclusivity for drug products may be related to--
 (A) an individual manufacturer's pricing behavior in the marketplace; and
 (B) the relative therapeutic value of new pharmaceutical products researched,
 developed, and marketed in the United States.
SEC. 8. MANUFACTURER INTERNATIONAL DRUG PRICE REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
 Subparagraph (A) of section 1927(b)(3) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1396r-8(b)(3)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of clause (i),
 (2) by striking the period at the end of clause (ii) and inserting `,
 and', and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 `(iii) not later than 30 days after the end of each calendar year, the
 average price that the manufacturer sold each covered outpatient drug in
 such calendar year in the following countries: Canada, Australia, and the
 countries of the European Economic Community.'.