HR 2530 SC2
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 2530
To assist and encourage the development through the States of a system of
universal comprehensive health care.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
June 4, 1991
Mr. SANDERS introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to
the Committees on Energy and Commerce and Ways and Means
August 28, 1991
Additional sponsors: Mr. SCHEUER, Mr. OWENS of New York, Mr. WASHINGTON,
Mr. ABERCROMBIE, Mr. TRAFICANT, Ms. NORTON, and Mr. Savage
SEPTEMBER 18, 1992
Additional sponsors: Mr. MFUME, and Mr. DeFazio
A BILL
To assist and encourage the development through the States of a system of
universal comprehensive health care.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `National Health Care and Cost Containment Act'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) every man, woman, and child in the United States is entitled to quality,
 comprehensive health care as a human right regardless of income;
 (2) the primary objective of American health care policy must be to promote,
 protect, and restore the physical and mental well-being of residents of
 the United States and to facilitate access to health services without
 financial or other barriers;
 (3) the current health system is fragmented, inefficient, and wasteful, and
 health insurance costs are continuing to soar to an unsustainable level; and
 (4) approximately 37,000,000 Americans have no health insurance and
 another 50,000,000 have such inadequate insurance that a major illness
 would lead to bankruptcy; elderly citizens spend 18% of their income on
 medical care despite the existence of medicare; the United States has
 one of the highest infant mortality rates of any industrialized nation;
 and we lag behind many other nations in terms of life expectancy.
 (b) PURPOSE- It is the purpose of this Act--
 (1) to promote, protect, and restore the physical and mental well-being
 of residents of the United States, and to facilitate reasonable access to
 health services without financial or other barriers; and
 (2) to assist and encourage the development through the States of a system
 of universal, comprehensive health care.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this Act:
 (1) The term `dentist' means a person lawfully entitled to practice
 dentistry in the place in which the practice is carried on by that person.
 (2) The term `domestic health expenditure' means the total expenditure
 in a State from all sources for health care and related services as set
 forth in the National Health Accounts as developed by the Health Care
 Financing Administration.
 (3) The term `extended health care services' means services provided for
 residents of a State, namely--
 (A) nursing homecare;
 (B) adult residential care; and
 (C) other extended care services provided to an individual in the
 individual's home.
 (4) The term `extra billing' means the billing for an insured health service
 rendered to an insured person by a medical practitioner or a dentist in
 an amount in addition to any amount paid or to be paid for that service
 by the health care insurance plan of the State.
 (5) The term `global budget' means a comprehensive, binding annual budget
 setting forth in advance the aggregate compensation to be received from
 the public authority for provision of all the insured health services to
 be provided. Global budgets shall consist of--
 (A) an operating budget to reimburse operating expenses, exclusive of
 depreciation charges; and
 (B) an annual capital budget setting forth the capital expenditures
 authorized by the State for the provision of insured health services,
 regardless whether the source of funds for the capital expenditure is
 derived from accumulated depreciation charges; operating surpluses or
 retained earnings; expenditure of accumulated fund balances; issuance of
 bonds, notes, debentures or other evidence of indebtedness; borrowed funds;
 or any other source including equity capitalization.
 (6) The term `health care insurance plan' means a plan or plans established
 by the law of the State to provide for insured health services.
 (7) The term `health care practitioner' means a person lawfully entitled
 under the law of the State to provide health services in the place in
 which the services are provided by that person.
 (8) The term `hospital service' means any type of services provided to
 inpatients or outpatients at a hospital, if the services are medically
 necessary for the purpose of maintaining health, preventing disease,
 diagnosing or treating an injury, illness, or disability, namely--
 (A) accommodation and meals at the standard level and preferred accommodation
 if medically required;
 (B) nursing services;
 (C) laboratory, radiological, and other diagnostic procedures, together
 with necessary interpretations;
 (D) drugs, biologicals, and related preparations when administered in
 the hospital;
 (E) use of operating room, case room, and anesthetic facilities, including
 necessary equipment and supplies;
 (F) medical and surgical equipment and supplies;
 (G) use of radiotherapy facilities;
 (H) use of physiotherapy facilities; and
 (I) services provided by persons who receive remuneration therefore from
 the hospital.
 (9) The term `insured person' means a resident of the State, other than
 a member of the Armed Forces, a person serving a term of imprisonment in
 a Federal penitentiary or who is subject to detention in a State facility
 awaiting trial or sentencing in a Federal prosecution.
 (10) The term `insured health services' means hospital services, physicians'
 services, and surgical-dental services provided to insured persons, but
 does not include any health services--
 (A) under any health insurance or workers' compensation plan providing
 benefits to the agents, officers, or employees of any Federal agency or
 department, unless such Federal agency or department makes contributions
 in support of the State health care insurance plan on the same terms and
 conditions as if it were a nongovernmental employer;
 (B) from a Federal provider of services (other than such a provider of
 Indian health services and other than such a provider of the Department
 of Veterans' Affairs) which is providing medical services to the public
 generally or as otherwise required by law; and
 (C) for any item of service, other than service which are funded by medicare
 or medicaid, which the United States otherwise provides or funds by law.
 (11) The term `long-term care' means an array of services needed by an
 individual, who has lost some capacity because of chronic illness or
 condition, consisting of assistance with basic activities and routines of
 daily living necessary to remain independent.
 (12) The term `medical practitioner' means a person lawfully entitled
 to practice medicine in the place in which the practice is carried on by
 that person.
 (13) The term `National Health Expenditure' means the total expenditure
 in the Nation from all sources for health care and related services as
 set forth in the National Health Accounts developed by the Health Care
 Financing Administration.
 (14) The term `nursing home' means a nonhospital facility that provides
 nursing, skilled nursing, or long-term care on an in-patient or in-residence
 basis.
 (15) The term `physicians services' means any medically required services
 rendered by a medical physician.
 (16) The term `public authority' means the entity appointed, created,
 or designated to administer its health care insurance plan by a State
 electing to participate under this Act.
 (17) The term `resident' means a person who makes his or her home and
 is ordinarily present in the State, but does not include a tourist,
 a transient, or a visitor to the State.
 (18) The term `surgical-dental procedures' means any medically or dentally
 required procedures performed by a dentist in a hospital, where a hospital
 is required for the proper performance of the procedures.
 (19) The term `State' means each of the United States and the District
 of Columbia.
 (20) The term `user charge' means any charge for an insured health service
 that is not payable directly or indirectly by a State health care insurance
 plan.
TITLE I--FEDERAL CONTRIBUTIONS AND PAYMENTS
SEC. 101. STATE OPTION.
 Subject to the provisions of this Act, a full cash contribution is payable
 by the United States to each participating State, as part of the Federal
 contribution toward the cost of providing insured health services by the
 State under a health care insurance plan, if the State at its option elects
 to comply with the conditions set forth in title II of this Act.
SEC. 102. BLOCK GRANT FEDERAL CONTRIBUTION.
 For each State electing to establish a qualifying health care insurance
 plan, the United States shall each fiscal year commencing in 1994 make a
 full cash payment to the public authority of the State consisting of--
 (1) payments due to the State under section 1903(a)(8) of the Social
 Security Act (as added by section 103(a));
 (2) payments to the State under section 1893 of the Social Security Act
 (as added by section 104); and
 (3) payment of a Federal Share Block Grant to defray the State costs of
 providing insurance to the uninsured and underinsured, the costs of extending
 coverage for long-term care and home care, and to defray the State costs
 of insuring expenditures which are currently paid on an out-of-pocket basis.
SEC. 103. PAYMENTS UNDER MEDICAID.
 (a) PAYMENTS UNDER MEDICAID TO ELIGIBLE STATES FOR SERVICES PROVIDED UNDER
 HEALTH CARE PLAN TO MEDICAID-ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS- Section 1903(a) of the
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (7), by striking the period at the end and inserting `;
 plus'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(8) with respect to a State that has enacted an eligible health care
 insurance plan for such quarter for purposes of title II of the National
 Health Care and Cost Containment Act, an amount equal to the Federal medical
 assistance percentage (as defined in section 1905(b)) of the total amount
 expended during such quarter under such eligible health care insurance
 plan for individuals who are eligible for medical assistance under the
 plan approved under this title.'.
 (b) SERVICES UNDER HEALTH CARE PLAN AS OPTIONAL SERVICES UNDER MEDICAID-
 Section 1905(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)), as amended
 by the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990, is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (21);
 (2) in paragraph (24), by striking the comma at the end and inserting
 a semicolon;
 (3) by redesignating paragraphs (22), (23), and (24) as paragraphs (25),
 (22), and (23), respectively, and by transferring and inserting paragraph
 (25) after paragraph (23), as so redesignated; and
 (4) by inserting after paragraph (23) the following new paragraph:
 `(24) any other medical and other health services provided under an eligible
 health care insurance plan (as described in title II of the National Health
 Care and Cost Containment Act); and'.
SEC. 104. PAYMENTS UNDER MEDICARE.
 Title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) is amended
 by adding at the end the following new section:
`GRANTS TO STATES WITH ELIGIBLE HEALTH CARE INSURANCE PLANS
 `SEC. 1893. (a) PAYMENTS TO STATES IN LIEU OF COVERAGE OF STATE RESIDENTS-
 `(1) NO PAYMENTS WITH RESPECT TO CERTAIN INDIVIDUALS- Notwithstanding any
 other provision of this title, no payment may be made under this title
 with respect to any services provided during a year to an individual who
 resides in a State that has enacted an eligible health care insurance
 plan for that year for purposes of title II of the National Health Care
 and Cost Containment Act.
 `(2) PAYMENTS TO STATES- The Secretary shall make payments to States
 described in paragraph (1) in accordance with subsection (b).
 `(b) DETERMINATION OF AMOUNT OF PAYMENT TO ELIGIBLE STATES-
 `(1) AMOUNT OF PAYMENT FOR EQUIVALENT PAYMENTS UNDER PART A- During each
 year for which a State has enacted an eligible health care insurance plan
 described in subsection (a)(1), the Secretary shall make a payment from
 the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund to the State for the year in an
 amount equal to--
 `(A) for the first year for which the State has enacted such a plan, the
 product of the Secretary's estimate of the number of individuals residing
 in the State who are entitled to benefits under part A during the year and
 the per capita amount of the payments made from the Trust Fund during the
 previous year with respect to services provided to individuals residing in
 the State during that previous year, increased by the Secretary's estimate
 of the percentage increase (if any) in the per capita amount of the payments
 made from the Trust Fund for the year over the per capita amount of such
 payments for that previous year; and
 `(B) for each subsequent year, the amount determined under this paragraph
 for the preceding year, increased by the percentage increase (if any)
 in the per capita amount of the payments made from the Trust Fund for the
 year over the per capita amount of such payments for the preceding year.
 `(2) AMOUNT OF PAYMENT FOR EQUIVALENT PAYMENTS UNDER PART B- During each
 year for which a State has enacted an eligible health care insurance plan
 described in subsection (a)(1), the Secretary shall make a payment from
 the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund to the State for
 the year in an amount equal to--
 `(A) for the first year for which the State has enacted such a plan, the
 product of the Secretary's estimate of the number of individuals residing in
 the State who are enrolled under part B during the year and the per capita
 amount of the payments made from the Trust Fund during the previous year
 with respect to services provided to individuals residing in the State
 during that previous year, increased by the Secretary's estimate of the
 percentage increase (if any) in the per capita amount of the payments
 made from the Trust Fund for the year over the per capita amount of such
 payments for that previous year; and
 `(B) for each subsequent year, the amount determined under this paragraph
 for the preceding year, increased by the percentage increase (if any)
 in the per capita amount of the payments made from the Trust Fund for the
 year over the per capita amount of such payments for the preceding year.'.
SEC. 105. BLOCK GRANT FOR UNINSURED, UNDERINSURED, LONG-TERM CARE, AND
OUT-OF-POCKET EXPENDITURES.
 The United States shall make to each participating State a cash payment
 in the form of a block grant calculated by multiplying 6 percent by the
 estimated domestic health expenditure of the participating State for the
 first fiscal year in which the State is eligible for the grant. Grants in
 subsequent years shall be increased each fiscal year equal to the percentage
 increase in national health expenditure.
SEC. 106. ANNUAL TRUE-UP.
 The payments made under section 1893 of the Social Security Act (as added
 by section 104) and the Block Grant payment under section 105 shall be
 based upon the best statistical estimates available for the fiscal year
 in which the grants are made based upon data provided annually by the
 Health Care Financing Administration. When data regarding National Health
 Expenditure, national medicare outlay, the number of medicare enrollees
 existing nationally and in each State, and other pertinent data, become
 known with a reasonable degree of certainty, the Secretary of Health and
 Human Services shall true-up each participating State's payment under
 section 1893 of the Social Security Act and block grant payment. The
 true-up shall be made in the form of debit or credit adjustments to be
 made to the participating State in the next ensuing fiscal year.
TITLE II--STATE HEALTH CARE INSURANCE PLANS
SEC. 201. QUALIFICATION.
 In order that a State may qualify for the contribution each fiscal year,
 the health care insurance plan for the State must, throughout the fiscal
 year, satisfy the criteria in sections 202 through 206 respecting the
 following matters:
 (1) public administration;
 (2) comprehensiveness;
 (3) universality;
 (4) portability; and
 (5) accessibility.
SEC. 202. PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- In order to satisfy the criterion respecting public
 administration:
 (1) The health care insurance plan of the State must be administered and
 operated on a nonprofit basis by a public authority appointed or designated
 by the government of the State.
 (2) The public authority must be responsible to the State government for
 that administration and operation.
 (3) The public authority must be subject to audit of its accounts and
 financial transactions by such authority that is charged by the law with
 the audit of the accounts of the State.
 (b) DESIGNATION OF INTERMEDIARY PERMITTED- The criterion respecting public
 administration is not contravened by reason that only the public authority
 has the power to designate an agency--
 (1) to receive on its behalf any amounts payable under the State health
 insurance plan; or
 (2) to carry out on its behalf any responsibility in connection with
 receipt or payment of accounts rendered for insured services, if it
 is a condition of the designation that all those accounts are subject
 to assessment and approval by the public authority and that the public
 authority shall determine the amounts to be paid in respect thereto.
 (c) NON-APPLICATION OF ANTITRUST LAWS AND ERISA- Any participating State,
 and the public authority of a State established pursuant to this Act,
 shall be immune and exempt from the application of the anti-trust laws
 of the United States, and a State health care insurance plan enacted
 under the terms of this Act preempts and supersedes the provisions of 29
 U.S.C. 1144(a), or any other provisions of the Employee Retirement Income
 Security Act of 1974 in the event of any conflict therewith.
SEC. 203. COMPREHENSIVENESS.
 In order to satisfy the criterion respecting comprehensiveness, the health
 care insurance plan of the State must insure all insured health services
 provided by hospitals, medical practitioners, dentists, extended health
 care services, and where the law of the State so provides, similar or
 additional services rendered by other health care practitioners.
SEC. 204. UNIVERSALITY.
 In order to satisfy the criterion respecting universality, the health
 care insurance plan of the State must entitle 100 percent of the insured
 persons of the State to the insured health services provided for by the
 plan on uniform terms and conditions.
SEC. 205. PORTABILITY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- In order to satisfy the criterion respecting portability,
 the health care insurance plan of a State--
 (1) must not impose any minimum period of residence in the State, or
 waiting period, in excess of 3 months before residents of the State are
 eligible for or entitled to insured health services; and
 (2) must provide for, and be administered and operated, so as to provide for
 the payments of amounts for the cost of insured health services provided to
 insured persons while temporarily absent from the State on the basis that--
 (A) where insured services are provided within another participating State,
 payment for health services is at the rate that is approved by the health
 insurance plan in the State in which the services are provided, unless the
 States concerned agree to apportion the cost between them in a different
 manner, and
 (B) where the insured services are provided out of the United States, or in
 a State which does not have a qualified State health care insurance plan,
 payment is made on the basis of the amount that would have been paid by
 the State for similar services rendered in the participating State, with
 due regard, in the case of hospital services, to the size of the hospital,
 standards of service, and other relevant factors. Providers of health
 care services located with States which do not have a qualified health
 care insurance plan, must, absent the consent of the public authority,
 accept payment from the public authority of the State with a qualified
 plan as payment in full for covered services. Under no circumstances may
 extra billing be made to insured persons.
 (b) PRIOR CONSENT FOR SERVICES PROVIDED TO TEMPORARILY ABSENT RESIDENTS
 PERMITTED- The criterion respecting portability is not contravened by a
 requirement of a State health care insurance plan that the prior consent
 of the public authority that administers and operates the plan must be
 obtained for elective insured health services provided to a resident of the
 State while temporarily absent from the State if the services in question
 are available on a substantially similar basis in the State.
 (c) DEFINITION- For the purposes of this section, the term `elective insured
 health services' means insured health services other than services which
 are provided in an emergency or in any other circumstance in which medical
 care is required without delay.
SEC. 206. ACCESSIBILITY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- In order to satisfy the criterion respecting accessibility,
 the health care insurance plan of a State must meet the following
 requirements:
 (1) The plan must provide for insured health services on uniform terms and
 conditions on a basis that does not impede or preclude, either directly
 or indirectly whether by charges made to insured persons or otherwise,
 reasonable access to those services by insured persons, and shall provide
 for the payment by the State of any premiums assessed under section 1839
 of the Social Security Act on insured persons who are enrolled under part
 B of the medicare program.
 (2) The plan must provide payment for insured services in accordance with
 a tariff or system of payment authorized by the law of the State.
 (3) The plan must provide reasonable compensations for all insured services
 rendered by medical practitioners or dentists. States are free to utilize a
 variety of compensation plans including, but not limited to, fee-for-service,
 compensation caps, capitation payments, and prospective pre-payment for
 services provided that capitation or prospective pre-payment compensation
 is part of a global budget binding on the service provider. Funds from
 a State health care insurance plan may be used to induce physicians to
 practice in under-served areas by means of scholarships, tuition and
 living stipends, and student debt retirement. A State may enter into
 an agreement with medical practitioners and dentists under a bargaining
 system that provides for negotiations relating to compensation for insured
 health services between the State and State organizations that represent
 practicing medical practitioners or dentists in the State: Provided,
 That participation in such negotiations or in such agreements under this
 section shall not be considered a violation of Federal anti-trust laws. A
 State may provide for the settlement of disputes relating to compensation
 through conciliation or binding arbitration. The reimbursements made by
 the public authority shall be compensation in full for insured services,
 and no extra billing shall be made by the medical practitioner or dentist
 to the insured person for the provision of insured health services.
 (4) The plan must provide for the payment to hospitals and nursing
 facilities of the reasonable costs of providing insured health services,
 while containing the costs thereof, through the establishment of global
 budgets. The reimbursements made by the public authority to a hospital
 shall be compensation in full for insured services, and no hospital or
 nursing facility shall impose any extra billing upon an insured person
 for the provision of insured health services.
 (b) UTILIZATION CONTROL AND QUALITY REVIEW- State programs shall include
 efforts to improve the quality of care through the reduction of unnecessary
 surgery, monitoring practice patterns and assuring independence for provider
 quality oversight and discipline through an Office of Inspector General
 or other similar oversight agency.
SEC. 207. CERTIFICATION.
 In order for a State health care insurance plan to qualify under this Act--
 (1) the government of the State shall receive a certification from the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services that it has established a plan
 which meets the terms and conditions of this Act;
 (2) the government of the State shall at all times and in the manner
 prescribed by regulation provide the Secretary of Health and Human Services
 with such information as the Secretary may reasonably require for the
 purposes of this Act; and
 (3) the Secretary shall within 6 months of the enactment of this Act,
 adopt reasonable rules and regulations in order to carry out the purposes
 of this Act.
TITLE III--BUDGET-NEUTRAL FINANCING OF THE FEDERAL BLOCK GRANT
SEC. 301. EFFECTIVE DATE OF PROGRAM.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Commencing January 1, 1994, each State which receives
 certification from the Secretary of Health and Human Services under section
 207 shall be eligible for the Federal contributions and payments set forth
 in title I.
 (b) DATE REQUIRED FOR CERTIFICATION- States electing to participate under
 this Act on that date shall have received certification from the Secretary
 no later than September 1, 1993.
 (c) STATES PARTICIPATING IN SUBSEQUENT YEARS- States which do not initially
 elect to participate, may later do so commencing on January 1 of any
 succeeding year, provided they have received the necessary certification
 by September 1 preceding the fiscal year of participation.
SEC. 302. NOTIFICATION BY THE SECRETARY.
 The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall, commencing September 1,
 1993, and each September 1 thereafter, notify the Congressional Budget
 Office of the States which have elected to participate under this Act. The
 notice shall contain a list of the States participating under this Act,
 and shall provide such information as Congressional Budget Office may
 require in calculating the budgetary outlays necessary to fully fund the
 Block Grant to such States under section 105.
SEC. 303. CALCULATION OF BLOCK GRANT OUTLAY.
 The Congressional Budget Office shall report to the Congress and to
 the Secretary of the Treasury by September 15, 1993, and each September
 15 thereafter, the budgetary outlay necessary to fund the block grant
 described in section 105 to participating States, and the rate of the
 surtax under section 304 necessary to fully fund it.
SEC. 304. IMPOSITION OF SURTAX TO PROVIDE FUNDS FOR NATIONAL HEALTH CARE
AND COST CONTAINMENT FEDERAL BLOCK GRANT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of
 1986 (relating to determination of tax liability) is amended by adding at
 the end the following new part:
`PART VIII--NATIONAL HEALTH CARE AND COST CONTAINMENT SURTAX
`Sec. 59B. Surtax on regular tax.
`Sec. 59C. Surtax on minimum tax.
`Sec. 59D. Determination of applicable percentage.
`Sec. 59E. Special rules.
`SEC. 59B. SURTAX ON REGULAR TAX.
 `In the case of any taxpayer, the amount of the tax imposed under section
 1 or section 11 for the taxable year shall be increased by the applicable
 percentage of such amount.
`SEC. 59C. SURTAX ON MINIMUM TAX.
 `In the case of any taxpayer, the amount of the tentative minimum tax
 determined under section 55 for the taxable year shall be increased by
 the applicable percentage of such amount.
`SEC. 59D. DETERMINATION OF APPLICABLE PERCENTAGE.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Not later than December 15 of 1993 and each calendar
 year thereafter, the Secretary shall prescribe the applicable percentage
 which shall apply under sections 59B and 59C with respect to taxable years
 beginning in the succeeding calendar year.
 `(b) AMOUNT OF INCREASE- Subject to subsections (c) and (d), the applicable
 percentage to apply with respect to any calendar year shall be prescribed
 under subsection (a) at a level determined by the Secretary to be sufficient
 to increase Federal revenues during the calendar year by an amount equal
 to the amount of the reduction in Federal revenues which the Secretary
 estimates will occur during the calendar year as a result of the payment
 of block grants under section 105 of the National Health Care and Cost
 Containment Act.
 `(c) ADJUSTMENTS- The Secretary shall make adjustments in the applicable
 percentage under subsection (b) for any calendar year to the extent that
 the estimate made under such subsection for the preceding calendar year
 was in excess of or less than the amount of the reduction described in
 such subsection which occurred during such preceding calendar year.
`SEC. 59E. SPECIAL RULES.
 `(a) COORDINATION WITH OTHER PROVISIONS- The provisions of this part shall
 be applied--
 `(1) after the application of sections 1(h), 801(a)(2), and 1201, but
 `(2) before the application of any other provision of this title which refers
 to the amount of tax imposed by section 1, 11, or 55, as the case may be.
 `(b) TREATMENT OF CERTAIN TAXES- For purposes of this part, a tax shall be
 treated as imposed under section 11 if the amount of such tax is determined
 by reference to such section (or to any rate contained in such section).'
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of parts for such subchapter A is amended
 by adding at the end the following new item:
`Part VIII. National health care and cost containment surtax.'
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
SEC. 305. ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL HEALTH CARE BLOCK GRANT TRUST FUND.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subchapter A of chapter 98 of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986 (relating to establishment of trust funds) is amended by adding
 at the end the following new section:
`SEC. 9511. NATIONAL HEALTH CARE BLOCK GRANT TRUST FUND.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- There is established in the Treasury of the United States
 a trust fund to be known as the `National Health Care Block Grant Trust
 Fund', which shall consist of any amount appropriated or credited to the
 trust fund under this section or section 9602(b).
 `(b) TRANSFER TO FUND OF AMOUNTS DESIGNATED- There are hereby appropriated
 to the National Health Care Block Grant Trust Fund amounts equivalent to
 taxes received in the Treasury under part VIII of subchapter A of chapter 1
 (relating to National health care and cost containment surtax).
 `(c) EXPENDITURES FROM FUND- Amounts in the National Health Care Block
 Grant Trust Fund shall be available for the payment of block grants by the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services under section 105 of the National
 Health Care and Cost Containment Act.'
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for such subchapter A is
 amended by adding at the end the following new item:
`Sec. 9511. National Health Care Block Grant Trust Fund.'