HR 1590 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1590
To provide for designation by the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary
of Agriculture of an ancient forest reserve system, including lands managed by
the Bureau of Land Management and portions of national forests established
by reservations from the public domain; to require the Secretary of the
Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture to enhance economic stability in
the Pacific Northwest; and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
March 21, 1991
Mr. VENTO (for himself, Mr. UDALL, Mr. KOSTMAYER, Mr. DE LUGO, Mr. RAHALL,
Mrs. BYRON, Mr. DARDEN, Mr. VISCLOSKY, Mr. OWENS of Utah, Mr. LEWIS of
Georgia, Mr. HOAGLAND, Mr. BLAZ, Mr. MCDERMOTT, Mr. BONIOR, Mr. BEILENSON,
Mr. PEASE, Ms. NORTON, Mr. LANCASTER, Mr. GUARINI, Mr. WEISS, and Mr. BEREUTER)
introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the Committees
on Agriculture, Interior and Insular Affairs and Education and Labor
A BILL
To provide for designation by the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary
of Agriculture of an ancient forest reserve system, including lands managed by
the Bureau of Land Management and portions of national forests established
by reservations from the public domain; to require the Secretary of the
Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture to enhance economic stability in
the Pacific Northwest; and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Ancient Forest Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) examples of old growth forest ecosystems are rapidly disappearing from
 the public lands administered by the Bureau of Land Management and from
 national forest lands;
 (2) the old growth forest ecosystems of Federal lands of the Pacific
 Northwest are of unique importance to the Nation, and the northern spotted
 owl is an indicator of the condition of these ecosystems;
 (3) significant scientific evaluation and recommendations for protecting
 and preserving the northern spotted owl are found in the report to the
 Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture of the Interagency
 Scientific Committee to Address the Conservation of the Northern Spotted
 Owl, dated April 12, 1990;
 (4) the Nation needs land use policies which require the regeneration of
 old growth forest ecosystems;
 (5) certain timber dependent rural communities in the Pacific Northwest
 need economic assistance to become less timber dependent;
 (6) old growth forest ecosystems help protect the global environment by
 preserving biological diversity, slowing atmospheric change, and providing
 a scientific benchmark for monitoring the health of the planet; and
 (7) the economy of the Pacific Northwest requires a stable and certain
 supply of timber, and timber products from old growth forests on public
 lands and national forests currently play an important role in this economy.
SEC. 3. PURPOSES.
 The purposes of this Act are as follows:
 (1) To provide for management of certain Federal lands by the Secretary
 of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture to assure protection
 in perpetuity of a resource of old growth forest ecosystems for the use,
 enjoyment, and recreation of the American people.
 (2) To ensure the viability and recovery of the northern spotted owl as
 well as the viability of other species of plants and animals dependent on
 or associated with old growth forest ecosystems.
 (3) To provide a stable supply of timber from Federal lands to help maintain
 the economy of the Pacific Northwest.
 (4) To provide assistance in promoting economic diversification and
 stability in rural communities impacted by a declining timber supply,
 including assistance to workers displaced by such decline.
SEC. 4. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this Act:
 (1) The terms `Secretary' and `Secretaries' means the Secretary of the
 Interior in the case of lands under the administrative jurisdiction of the
 Bureau of Land Management and the Secretary of Agriculture in the case of
 National Forest System lands.
 (2) The term `Oregon and California Lands' means those lands administered
 by the Bureau of Land Management that are identified by the Act of August
 28, 1937 (43 U.S.C. 1181f).
 (3) The term `Ancient Forest Reserves' means the Pacific Northwest Ancient
 Forest Reserve System designated under section 5(a) of this Act.
 (4) The term `Ancient Forest Scientific Committee' means the committee
 established under section 9 of this Act.
 (5) The term `Douglas-fir Region' means--
 (A) Federal lands that are included within the following 17 National Forests
 in Oregon, Washington and Northern California: Olympic, Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie,
 Wenatchee, Okanogan, Gifford Pinchot, Mt. Hood, Siuslaw, Willamette,
 Deschutes, Umpqua, Rogue River, Siskiyou, Winema, Klamath, Six Rivers,
 Shasta-Trinity, and Mendocino; and
 (B) Federal lands that are included within the following 6 Bureau of Land
 Management administrative districts in Oregon and Northern California:
 Salem, Eugene, Roseburg, Medford, Coos Bay, and Ukiah.
 (6) The term `habitat conservation areas' means those areas identified
 as such in the report of the Interagency Scientific Committee entitled `A
 Conservation Strategy for the Northern Spotted Owl' and dated April 12, 1990.
 (7) The term `Interagency Scientific Committee' means the Scientific
 Committee to Address the Conservation of the Northern Spotted Owl,
 as identified in the report entitled `A Conservation Strategy for the
 Northern Spotted Owl' and dated April 12, 1990.
 (8) The term `New Forestry Principles' means those forestry techniques
 defined and periodically refined as the New Forestry Principles by the
 Ancient Forest Scientific Committee pursuant to section 9 of this Act.
 (9) The term `old growth forest ecosystem' shall refer generally to natural
 forests of high structural and compositional diversity, and specifically
 shall be defined by the Ancient Forest Committee, taking into account
 available scientific literature and criteria in this Act.
SEC. 5. PACIFIC NORTHWEST ANCIENT FOREST RESERVE SYSTEM.
 (a) DESIGNATION OF PACIFIC NORTHWEST ANCIENT FOREST RESERVE SYSTEM- Within 3
 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture
 and the Secretary of the Interior shall designate and reserve lands for
 a Pacific Northwest Ancient Forest Reserve System consisting of Federal
 lands in the Douglas-fir Region containing approximately 5,660,000 acres
 on national forest lands and approximately 660,000 acres on public lands
 administered by the Bureau of Land Management, which may include lands
 already designated, withdrawn, or reserved for other purposes, including
 wilderness. Designation pursuant to this subsection shall be in addition to,
 and not in lieu of, such other prior designation, withdrawal, or reservation.
 (b) PURPOSES- The purposes of the Ancient Forest Reserves are to protect for
 the benefit of present and future generations of Americans the ecological,
 environmental, aesthetic, and recreational values of old growth forest
 ecosystems on Bureau of Land Management and national forest lands in
 the Douglas-fir Region and to regenerate such ecosystems where they once
 occurred within the Ancient Forest Reserve System.
 (c) CRITERIA- The Ancient Forest Reserves shall be designated based on
 the following criteria:
 (1) The Ancient Forest Reserves shall include lands needed for the
 viability and recovery of northern spotted owl populations. The Secretaries
 shall consider, as a starting point, but not be limited to, the habitat
 conservation areas recommended by the Interagency Scientific Committee.
 (2) The Ancient Forest Reserves shall include old growth forest ecosystems
 in stands of sufficient quantity and distribution over the landscape to
 protect, maintain and replace old growth forest functions, including
 the perpetuation of biological diversity, water quality, recreation,
 and long-term forest productivity.
 (3) The Ancient Forest Reserves shall include a significant amount of low
 elevation old growth forest ecosystems.
 (4) The Ancient Forest Reserves shall be well distributed geographically
 through the Douglas-fir Region.
 (5) The Ancient Forest Reserves may include some lands that are not currently
 old growth forest ecosystems if they can be managed to regenerate old
 growth forest ecosystems or to provide connectors between remaining old
 growth forest ecosystems.
 (6) The Ancient Forest Reserves shall include no less than the same amount
 of acres of old growth forest ecosystems as are found in the habitat
 conservation areas on the date of enactment of this Act.
 (7) The Ancient Forest Reserves shall include at least 50 percent of the
 old growth forest ecosystems as found on the date of enactment of this
 Act in the Douglas-fir Region and that are outside of congressionally
 designated areas, such as wilderness areas and wild and scenic rivers
 where commercial timber sales are prohibited.
 (8) The Secretaries shall consider the recommendations of the Ancient
 Forest Scientific Committee pursuant to section 9.
 (9) The Secretaries shall consider lands that minimize the impacts on
 Federal timber supply, but only if consistent with the purposes of the
 Ancient Forest Reserves and the criteria of this subsection.
 (d) PROCESS OF ADJUSTMENTS- The Secretaries may, as part of their regular
 land management planning process, recommend adjustments of the boundaries of
 the Ancient Forest Reserves only if such recommendations are consistent with
 subsections (b) and (c) and comply with each of the following requirements:
 (1) The adjustment recommendation shall be preceded by public involvement
 as provided in the land management planning process.
 (2) This recommendation shall maintain approximately the acreage established
 by this section.
 (3) The recommendation shall be reviewed by the Ancient Forest Scientific
 Committee, which shall produce a report commenting on the recommendation
 before it is forwarded to Congress. The Ancient Forest Scientific Committee
 may also make recommendations for adjustments on its own initiative to
 the Secretaries.
 (4) The recommended adjustments, together with the report of the Ancient
 Forest Scientific Committee shall be submitted to the Committees on Interior
 and Insular Affairs and Agriculture of the House of Representatives and
 to the Committees on Energy and Natural Resources and Agriculture of the
 Senate. No adjustment of any boundary of any Ancient Forest Reserve shall
 occur unless made by Act of Congress, except that technical and clerical
 corrections can be made.
SEC. 6. MANAGEMENT OF THE PACIFIC NORTHWEST ANCIENT FOREST RESERVE SYSTEM.
 The following shall apply to lands designated as Ancient Forest Reserves:
 (1) No removal of vegetation shall be allowed except for the purposes of
 public safety, recreation, and administration.
 (2) Effective upon the designation of the Ancient Forest Reserves and
 subject to valid existing rights, Federal lands within the Ancient Forest
 Reserves are withdrawn from disposition under the public land laws and from
 location, entry, and patent under the mining laws of the United States,
 from the operation of the mineral leasing laws of the United States and
 from operation of the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970.
 (3) Except as prohibited or restricted by applicable law or previous
 designation of lands as wilderness or otherwise, roads, structures, and
 motorized and nonmotorized recreation and access may be permitted within
 the Ancient Forest Reserves where compatible with the protection of old
 growth forest ecosystems and where consistent with the purposes of the
 Ancient Forest Reserves as specified in section 5. The Ancient Forest
 Scientific Committee shall recommend to the Secretaries criteria for
 managing and regulating such uses.
 (4) The Secretary shall permit hunting, fishing, and trapping on lands and
 waters within the Ancient Forest Reserves in accordance with applicable
 Federal and State laws, except that the Secretary may designate areas
 where, and establish periods when, no hunting, fishing, or trapping will be
 permitted for reasons of public safety, administration, or compliance with
 provisions of applicable law. Except in emergencies, regulations closing
 areas to hunting, fishing, or trapping pursuant to this subsection shall be
 put into effect only after consultation with the appropriate State agency
 having responsibility for fish and wildlife. Nothing in this Act shall be
 construed as affecting the jurisdiction or responsibilities of the States
 with respect to fish and wildlife on Federal lands and waters covered by
 this Act.
 (5) Areas within the Ancient Forest Reserves not meeting the definition
 of old growth forest ecosystems, as defined under this Act, or affected
 by fire or other natural causes, shall be managed to regenerate old growth
 forest ecosystems.
SEC. 7. OLD GROWTH FOREST ECOSYSTEMS OUTSIDE THE ANCIENT FOREST RESERVES.
 Any timber harvest (including salvage harvest) in an area of an old
 growth forest ecosystem which is outside of the Ancient Forest Reserves
 but within the Douglas-fir Region shall be managed using the techniques
 described under New Forestry Principles. These techniques shall include
 (but not be limited to)--
 (1) managing for ecosystems and multiple resources rather than for
 individual resources;
 (2) allowing for a high level of structural and compositional diversity
 in managed stands; and
 (3) avoiding forest fragmentation.
The New Forestry Principles shall be implemented no later than 3 years after
the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 8. ANCIENT FOREST RESEARCH PROGRAM.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT OF RESEARCH PROGRAM- The Secretary of Agriculture and
 the Secretary of the Interior shall, within 3 years after the date of
 enactment of this Act, establish an Ancient Forest Research Program.
 (b) PURPOSES OF PROGRAM- The purposes of the research program established
 under this section shall include (but not be limited to) each of the
 following:
 (1) Basic research on old growth forest ecosystems, their processes,
 and species dependent on them.
 (2) The development and testing of ecologically and hydrologically sensitive
 forest management practices at the stand and landscape levels.
 (3) Analysis of the socioeconomic impacts of these practices.
 (4) The integration of recreational, fish and wildlife, aesthetic, and
 ecological uses of old growth forest ecosystems with commodity uses of
 these ecosystems.
 (5) The feasibility of supplying the economy with old growth forest products
 on a sustained basis and the methods to accomplish this objective.
 (6) Techniques for regenerating old growth forest ecosystems.
SEC. 9. THE ANCIENT FOREST SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The President shall establish a permanent 11-person
 Ancient Forest Scientific Committee (hereafter in this section referred
 to as the `committee') within 6 months after the date of enactment of this
 Act. The committee shall consist of the following members to be appointed
 by the President from a list of candidates to be developed and submitted
 to the President by the National Academy of Sciences:
 (1) 1 forest ecologist, appointed to serve as chairperson.
 (2) 3 forest ecologists with expertise on Douglas-fir Region old growth
 forest ecosystems.
 (3) 2 wildlife biologists, one of whom has expertise on the northern
 spotted owl.
 (4) 1 forest economist with expertise on the economy of the Douglas-fir
 Region.
 (5) 1 silviculturist with expertise on Douglas-fir Region forests.
 (6) 1 forest planner.
 (7) 1 hydrologist with expertise on Douglas-fir Region watersheds.
 (8) 1 fisheries biologist with expertise on Douglas-fir Region fisheries.
Each member shall be a recognized expert in the field for which the member is
considered for appointment and shall be free of economic conflict of interest
with regard to the subject of this Act. The list of candidates provided by
the National Academy of Sciences shall consist of at least twice as many
nominees in each category specified in this section. Members of the committee
shall serve for 4-year terms and may be reappointed to additional terms.
 (b) ADMINISTRATION OF COMMITTEE- (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2),
 members of the committee shall each be paid at a rate not to exceed and
 consistent with the rate paid to employees of the United States performing
 similar duties and with similar qualifications for each day (including
 travel time) during which they are engaged in the actual performance of
 duties vested in the committee. While away from their homes or regular
 places of business in the performance of services for the committee,
 members of the committee shall be allowed travel expenses, including
 per diem in lieu of subsistence, in the same manner as persons employed
 intermittently in Government service are allowed expenses under section
 5703 of title 5 of the United States Code.
 (2) Other than reimbursement of expenses pursuant to paragraph (1),
 members of the committee who are full-time officers or employees of the
 United States shall receive no additional pay, allowances, or benefits by
 reason of their service on the committee.
 (3) Upon request of the committee, the head of any Federal agency is
 authorized to provide facilities, equipment, personnel, and other types
 of support to the committee to assist the committee in carrying out its
 duties under this Act.
 (c) REPORTS- (1) Within 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the
 committee shall submit a report to the Secretaries containing a definition
 of old growth forest ecosystems in the Douglas-fir Region.
 (2) Within 2 1/2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the
 committee shall submit a report to the Secretaries containing recommendations
 for the Secretaries. The report shall contain each of the following:
 (A) A definition of old growth forest ecosystems in the Douglas-fir Region.
 (B) Recommendations on the management of the Ancient Forest Reserves
 consistent with section 6.
 (C) A definition of New Forestry Principles and recommendations for
 their implementation in the Douglas-fir Region based on the provisions of
 section 7.
 (D) Guidelines for the Ancient Forest Research Program based on the
 provisions of section 8.
 (E) Recommendations for the boundaries of the Ancient Forest Reserves
 consistent with the provisions of section 5.
 (3) The reports under paragraphs (1) and (2) shall also be submitted to the
 Committees on Interior and Insular Affairs and Agriculture of the House
 of Representatives and to the Committees on Energy and Natural Resources
 and Agriculture of the Senate.
 (d) PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT- After receiving the committee's recommendations,
 but before implementing any of these recommendations and before establishing
 the boundaries of the Ancient Forest Reserves, the Ancient Forest Research
 Program, and the New Forestry Principles, the Secretaries shall provide
 an adequate opportunity for public involvement, including public hearings
 at appropriate locations.
 (e) EFFECT OF RECOMMENDATIONS- Within 6 months after receipt of
 the recommendations of the committee, the respective Secretaries shall
 determine whether or not to adopt the recommendations of the committee. If
 the respective Secretaries fail to adopt any or all of the recommendations,
 they shall provide written notice to Congress of each deviation from the
 recommendations, and reasons therefor, at least 30 days before designating
 the Ancient Forest Reserves.
 (f) CONTINUATION OF COMMITTEE- After the Ancient Forest Reserves
 are designated and the New Forestry Principles and the Ancient Forest
 Research Program are implemented, the committee shall review and advise
 the Secretaries on the operations of these programs and on any needed
 modifications and to review any agency proposal for modifications.
 (g) EXEMPTION- The committee shall not be subject to the Federal Advisory
 Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App.).
SEC. 10. INTERIM MANAGEMENT.
 (a) NATIONAL FOREST TIMBER OFFER- To the extent consistent with this Act
 and other applicable law, for each of the fiscal years 1992 through 1994,
 the Secretary of Agriculture shall offer at least 2,200,000,000 board feet
 per year from national forest lands within the Douglas-fir Region, consistent
 with the requirements of subsection (c). To the extent consistent with this
 Act and other applicable law, during this interim period, the timber sale
 program for Region 6 of the Forest Service, which includes part of the
 Douglas-fir Region, shall be at least 2,600,000,000 board feet per year,
 consistent with the requirements of subsection (c).
 (b) BLM TIMBER OFFER- To the extent consistent with this Act and other
 applicable law, for each of the fiscal years 1992 through 1994, the Secretary
 of the Interior shall offer at least 450,000,000 board feet per year from
 lands administered by the Bureau of Land Management within the Douglas-fir
 Region, consistent with the requirements of subsection (c).
 (c) LIMITATIONS ON TIMBER SALES- During the interim period between
 the date of enactment of this Act and the designation of the Ancient
 Forest Reserves, the Secretaries shall follow the Interagency Scientific
 Committee's guidelines on tree diameter and canopy closure for the forest
 land base outside of habitat conservation areas, and no timber sale shall
 occur in the following:
 (1) The habitat conservation areas recommended by the Interagency Scientific
 Committee, except that the boundaries of such areas may be adjusted by the
 respective Secretary during this interim period if such adjustments are in
 accordance with other applicable law and the following requirements are met:
 (A) The Interagency Scientific Committee approves such adjustments as
 being consistent with the intent of the guidelines in its report, and
 (B) an equivalent amount of acreage with an equivalent amount of old
 growth forest ecosystems is added by the appropriate Secretary to the
 habitat conservation area system.
 (2) All old growth forest lands, as defined by the Forest Service for its
 planning purposes, which are closed to commercial timber harvest by land
 and resource management plans that are in effect during this interim period.
 (3) All old growth forest lands, as defined by the Bureau of Land Management
 for its planning purposes, which are closed to commercial timber harvest
 by district plans that are in effect during this interim period.
 (4) All areas closed to timber harvest by the Bureau of Land Management's
 December 22, 1987, agreement with the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife
 pertaining to the northern spotted owl.
 (5) The following areas, as identified in maps prepared by the Forest
 Service and dated July 1990:
 (A) Siouxon Creek in the Gifford Pinchot National Forest and consisting
 of approximately 6,500 acres.
 (B) Bourbon Creek in the Gifford Pinchot National Forest and consisting
 of approximately 1,700 acres.
 (C) Areas with redwood trees in the Siskiyou National Forest and consisting
 of approximately 300 acres.
 (D) Elk River in the Siskiyou National Forest and consisting of approximately
 17,000 acres.
 (E) North Kalmiopsis in the Siskiyou National Forest and consisting of
 approximately 89,700 acres.
 (F) Gene Creek-South Lake Chelan in the Wenatchee National Forest and
 consisting of approximately 25,600 acres.
 (G) Opal Creek in the Willamette National Forest and consisting of
 approximately 6,800 acres.
 (H) White Chuck in the Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest and consisting
 of approximately 5,500 acres.
 (I) Foggy Dew in the Okanogan National Forest and consisting of approximately
 21,100 acres.
 (d) CONSISTENCY WITH LAND AND RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLANS- Timber sales
 offered pursuant to this section by the Secretaries shall be consistent
 with applicable land and resource management plans.
 (e) PART OF PLANS- The requirements of this section shall be incorporated
 as soon as practicable into the applicable land and resource management
 plans. Such incorporation shall be considered nonsignificant for the
 purposes of the National Environmental Protection Act of 1969, the Forest
 and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974, the National Forest
 Management Act of 1976, and the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of
 1976 and shall be effective upon public notice.
 (f) TIMBER SALE PRIORITY- All timber sales planned, prepared, or awarded
 during the interim protection period shall be ranked and prioritized by the
 Secretaries from least ecological impact to higher impact considering stand
 size, structure, location, and past timber harvest. The Forest Service
 and the Bureau of Land Management shall evaluate all commercial timber
 available from lands not designated for interim protection according to
 this criteria, and shall offer sales, from those lands, of lowest impact
 first before offering sales of greater impacts.
SEC. 11. ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE TO RURAL COMMUNITIES.
 (a) PAYMENTS FOR COUNTIES- Effective for the first 5 fiscal years beginning
 on or after the date of enactment of this Act, the term `50 percent' shall
 be substituted for the term `twenty-five per centum' for the purposes of
 amounts paid under the Act of May 23, 1908, and section 13 of the Act of
 March 1, 1911 (16 U.S.C. 500), with respect to national forests in the
 Douglas-fir Region.
 (b) OREGON AND CALIFORNIA LANDS- In addition to the 50 percent share
 provided by subsection (a) of the first section of title II of the Act of
 August 28, 1937 (43 U.S.C. 1181f), for the first 5 fiscal years beginning
 on or after the date of enactment of this Act, the 25 percent amount of
 the Oregon and California land grant fund described in subsection (b) of
 such section shall be paid to the counties in the same manner as provided
 in such subsection (a).
 (c) FOREST PRODUCTIVITY INITIATIVE- The Secretary of Agriculture,
 through the Forest Service's State and private forestry programs,
 shall establish within one year after the date of enactment of this
 Act a special initiative to improve the productivity on State, county,
 and private lands in those counties that include lands that are part of
 the Douglas-fir Region. The Forest Service shall give hiring preference
 to workers from local communities within such region for the purposes of
 such initiative. The initiative shall include the following:
 (1) Improved wood utilization through the training of loggers, mill owners,
 and landowners on more efficient harvesting methods.
 (2) Improved wood utilization by sawmills by providing assistance in
 implementing the latest lumber production and drying technologies, for
 the purpose of creating job opportunities.
 (3) Improved wood utilization by plywood plants and veneer mills through
 technical assistance to help them convert to the latest technologies,
 for the purpose of creating job opportunities.
 (4) Timber stand improvement on non-Federal forest lands.
 (5) Tree planting on non-Federal forest lands.
 (d) IMPROVEMENT OF CONDITION OF FEDERAL FOREST LANDS- The Secretaries
 shall establish within one year after the date of enactment of this Act a
 program to improve the condition of Federal forest lands in the Douglas-fir
 Region. The Secretaries shall give hiring preference to workers from
 local communities within such region for the purposes of such program. The
 program shall include--
 (1) constructing recreational, tourism, and interpretive facilities on
 such lands,
 (2) improving commercial and recreational fisheries,
 (3) conducting natural resource inventories,
 (4) reclaiming roads no longer needed for timber sales,
 (5) implementing New Forestry Principles,
 (6) constructing and maintaining administrative facilities for the
 respective agencies,
 (7) maintaining and constructing hiking trails,
 (8) restoring and enhancing wildlife habitat,
 (9) restoring and enhancing watershed and water quality, and
 (10) enhancing timber management programs.
 (e) FOREST COMMUNITY ASSISTANCE TASK FORCE- The Secretaries shall establish
 within 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act a community
 assistance task force at the national level to oversee assistance to rural
 communities in those counties that include lands that are parts of the
 Douglas-fir Region. Any rural community in the Douglas-fir Region that
 is impacted by declining Federal timber sales can request assistance from
 the national task force. The national task force shall do the following:
 (1) Establish local community task forces which will help communities
 diversify their economies and which will coordinate and facilitate at the
 local level Federal, State, and private programs to help displaced workers.
 (2) As funds are available, provide grants and loans to local communities
 to help them diversify their economies.
 (3) Make available facilities, equipment, and personnel of the agencies
 administered by the Secretaries to help provide assistance to workers
 and communities, as may be identified by the national and local community
 task forces.
 (4) Coordinate its assistance programs with those of the Department of
 Labor described in section 12 and cooperate with the Forest Community
 Assistance Coordinator described in subsection (f).
 (f) FOREST COMMUNITY ASSISTANCE COORDINATOR- (1) Within 6 months after
 the date of enactment of this Act, the President shall appoint a Forest
 Community Assistance Coordinator to coordinate the efforts of the Federal
 Government to alleviate social and economic dislocation caused by reductions
 in timber harvests on national forest lands and the public lands administered
 by the Bureau of Land Management.
 (2) The Coordinator shall be paid at the rate of basic pay payable for
 level IV of the Executive Schedule. The Coordinator may appoint and fix
 the pay of additional personnel as the Coordinator considers appropriate
 to carry out the duties described in this subsection.
 (3) The duties of the Coordinator shall include (but not be limited to)
 the following:
 (A) Identifying existing Federal programs that can help alleviate social
 and economic dislocation caused by reductions in timber harvest. The
 Coordinator shall cooperate with the forest community assistance task force
 established under subsection (e) to disseminate information about these
 programs to State and local governments, private industry, and displaced
 timber workers and shall help facilitate the benefits of these programs
 reaching those who need them the most.
 (B) Developing new assistance programs to help alleviate such economic
 and social dislocation.
 (C) Submitting an annual report to Congress on the amounts and types of
 assistance the Federal Government has provided and how effective that
 assistance has been.
 (g) TERMINATION- Unless otherwise specified, the provisions of this section
 shall expire 10 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 12. JOB TRAINING PARTNERSHIP FUNDS.
 (a) SPECIAL JOB TRAINING FUND- (1) Effective for 5 fiscal years after
 the date of enactment of this Act, 5 percent of the Federal portion of
 all moneys received from Federal timberlands each fiscal year shall be
 deposited into the Treasury of the United States and shall constitute a
 special fund which shall be available without further appropriation for
 the purposes of section 325 of the Job Partnership Training Act.
 (2) For the purposes of paragraph (1) of this subsection--
 (A) the term `Federal timberlands' means National Forest System lands and
 lands administered by the Bureau of Land Management; and
 (B) the term `moneys received'--
 (i) with respect to National Forest System lands, has the same meaning
 given such term under the Act of May 23, 1908 (16 U.S.C. 500) and section
 13 of the Act of March 1, 1911 (16 U.S.C. 500); and
 (ii) with respect to lands administered by the Bureau of Land Management,
 means--
 (I) moneys deposited into the Oregon and California land-grant fund pursuant
 to the Act of August 28, 1937 (Chapter 876, 50 Stat. 874; 43 U.S.C. 1181a
 et seq.);
 (II) moneys deposited into the Coos Bay Wagon Road grant fund pursuant to
 the Act of May 24, 1939 (Chapter 144, 53 Stat. 753; 43 Stat. 1181f-1 et
 seq.); and
 (III) moneys received from the disposal of timber and other forest products
 pursuant to the Act of July 31, 1947 (30 U.S.C. 601 et seq.).
 (3) Nothing in this section shall be construed as modifying or altering
 payments to States under the Act of May 23, 1908 (16 U.S.C. 500), section
 13 of the Act of March 1, 1911 (16 U.S.C. 500), the Act of August 28, 1937
 (43 U.S.C. 1181f et seq.), and the Act of May 24, 1939 (43 U.S.C. 1181f-1
 et seq.).
 (b) JOB TRAINING PARTNERSHIP ACT- Part B of title III of the Job Training
 Partnership Act (29 U.S.C. 1662-1662c) is amended by adding at the end
 the following:
`TIMBER WORKER ADJUSTMENT PROGRAM
 `SEC. 325. (a) NOTICE REQUIREMENT- The Secretaries of Agriculture and
 Interior shall--
 `(1) provide timely information to the Secretary of Labor on any Federal
 action with respect to managing the harvesting of timber on Federal
 lands within their respective jurisdictions, if such action will have a
 substantial impact on employment,
 `(2) where feasible, identify the location of the employment which will
 be affected by any such Federal action, and
 `(3) provide to the Secretary of Labor such information with respect to
 such Federal action as the Secretary of Labor may require.
If the Secretary of Labor receives information under this subsection, the
Secretary shall notify the Governor of each State, and the affected service
delivery areas within each State, in which such Federal action is expected
to have a substantial impact on employment.
 `(b) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of Labor shall make grants to States and
 service delivery areas (and combinations of service delivery areas) to
 provide training and adjustment assistance to eligible employees adversely
 affected by a Federal action with respect to which the Secretary has received
 a notice under subsection (a). For purposes of this section, an eligible
 employee is an eligible dislocated worker as defined in section 301(a) who
 has been terminated or laid off, or has received a notice of termination
 or lay off, from employment in the timber industry as a consequence of
 such Federal action.
 `(c) APPLICATION- In reviewing applications for grants under subsection
 (b), the Secretary of Labor shall give priority to applications from areas
 which have the greatest number of eligible employees.
 `(d) USE OF FUNDS- Grants under subsection (b) may be used for any purpose
 for which funds may be used under section 314 or this part.
 `(e) ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE-
 `(1) JOB SEARCH ALLOWANCE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Grants under subsection (b) for adjustment assistance may be
 used to provide job search allowances to eligible employees. Such allowance,
 if granted, shall provide reimbursement to the worker of not more than
 90 percent of the cost of necessary job search expenses as prescribed by
 regulations of the Secretary but may not exceed $800 unless the need for a
 greater amount is justified in the application and approved by the Secretary.
 `(B) CRITERIA FOR GRANTING JOB SEARCH ALLOWANCES- A job search allowance
 may be granted only--
 `(i) to assist an eligible employee who has been totally separated from
 a job within the United States; and
 `(ii) where the Secretary determines that such employee cannot reasonably
 be expected to secure suitable employment in the commuting area in which
 the worker resides.
 `(2) RELOCATION ALLOWANCE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Grants under subsection (b) for adjustment assistance may
 be used to provide relocation allowances to eligible employees. Such an
 allowance may only be granted to assist an eligible employee in relocating
 within the United States and only if the Secretary determines that--
 `(i) such employee cannot reasonably be expected to secure suitable
 employment in the commuting area in which the employee resides; and
 `(ii) such employee--
 `(I) has obtained suitable employment affording a reasonable expectation
 of long-term duration in the area in which the employee wishes to relocate,
 or has obtained a bona fide offer of such employment, and
 `(II) is totally separated from previous employment at the time relocation
 commences.
 `(B) AMOUNT OF RELOCATION ALLOWANCE- The amount of any relocation allowance
 for any eligible employee may not exceed the amount which is equal to the
 sum of--
 `(i) 90 percent of the reasonable and necessary expenses, specified in
 regulations prescribed by the Secretary, incurred in transporting an
 employee and the employee's family, if any, and household effects, and
 `(ii) a lump-sum equivalent to 3 times the employee's average weekly wage,
 up to a maximum payment of $800, unless the need for a greater amount is
 justified in the application and approved by the Secretary.
 `(f) ADMINISTRATION- Not more than 5 percent of the funds obligated to
 carry out this section may be used for the administration of this section.
 `(g) FUNDING- Funds to carry out this section shall be made available from
 the Special Job Training Fund established in section 12 of the Ancient
 Forest Act of 1991.'.
SEC. 13. BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT OREGON AND CALIFORNIA LANDS.
 The Secretary of the Interior shall conduct a study on consolidation
 of the Bureau of Land Management's Oregon and California lands through
 exchange, purchase, or donation. Three years after the date of enactment
 of the Act, the Secretary shall submit a report on the study's findings
 and conclusions to the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs in the
 House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
 in the Senate.
SEC. 14. PLANNING.
 Where applicable, provisions of this Act shall be incorporated into Forest
 Service and Bureau of Land Management planning activities pursuant to
 applicable law. Nothing in this Act shall prevent the implementation of
 those portions of plans pursuant to other applicable law that are unaffected
 by provisions of this Act.
SEC. 15. NATIONAL MANDATE.
 (a) AMENDMENT OF FEDERAL LAND POLICY AND MANAGEMENT ACT OF 1976- Section
 202(c)(3) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43
 U.S.C. 1712(c)(3)) is amended by inserting `, including old growth forest
 ecosystems' after `concern'.
 (b) OTHER AMENDMENTS- (1) The first section of the Multiple-Use
 Sustained-Yield Act of 1960 (16 U.S.C. 528) is amended by inserting `old
 growth forest ecosystems,' after `outdoor recreation,'.
 (2) Section 6(e)(1) of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning
 Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1604) is amended by inserting `old growth forest
 ecosystems,' after `outdoor recreation,'.
 (c) NATIONWIDE INVENTORY- The Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary
 of the Interior shall prepare a nationwide inventory of old growth forest
 ecosystems on national forests and public lands administered by the Bureau
 of Land Management. The inventory shall be completed and submitted to
 Congress no later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act
 for the Douglas-fir Region and no later than 3 years after the date of
 enactment of this Act for the rest of the Nation.
SEC. 16. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to
 carry out the purposes of this Act.