HR 4718 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 4718
To provide for the admission of the State of New Columbia into the Union.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
March 31, 1992
Ms. NORTON introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on the District of Columbia
A BILL
To provide for the admission of the State of New Columbia into the Union.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `New Columbia Admission Act'.
SEC. 2. ADMISSION INTO THE UNION.
 Subject to the provisions of this Act, and upon issuance of the proclamation
 required by section 7(d)(1) of this Act, the State of New Columbia
 (hereinafter referred to as `the State') is declared to be a State of
 the United States of America, is declared admitted into the Union on an
 equal footing with the other States in all respects whatever, and the
 constitution adopted by the Council of the District of Columbia in the
 Constitution for the State of New Columbia Approval Act of 1987 (D.C. Law
 7-8), subject to ratification by a majority of the registered qualified
 electors of the District of Columbia, is found to be republican in form and
 in conformity with the Constitution of the United States and the principles
 of the Declaration of Independence and is accepted, ratified, and confirmed.
SEC. 3. CONSTITUTION.
 The constitution of the State of New Columbia shall always be republican
 in form and shall not be repugnant to the Constitution of the United States
 and the principles of the Declaration of Independence.
SEC. 4. TERRITORIES AND BOUNDARIES.
 (a) Subject to the provisions of this section, the State of New Columbia
 shall consist of all of the territory, together with the territorial waters,
 of the District of Columbia. The State of New Columbia shall not include
 the National Capital Service Area of the District of Columbia, which is
 described in subsection (b). As of the date of admission of New Columbia
 into the Union, the District of Columbia shall consist of the National
 Capital Service Area.
 (b) The National Capital Service Area, subject to the provisions of
 section 16, is comprised of the principal Federal monuments, the White
 House, the Capitol Building, the United States Supreme Court Building,
 and the Federal executive, legislative, and judicial office buildings
 located adjacent to the Mall and the Capitol Building.
 (c) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section or of section 16, the
 boundaries of the State of New Columbia shall include the District Building.
SEC. 5. COMPACT WITH UNITED STATES; CLAIMS TO FEDERAL LANDS AND PROPERTY.
 (a) As a compact with the United States, the State and its people disclaim
 all right and title to any lands or other property not granted or confirmed
 to the State or its political subdivisions by or under the authority of
 this Act, the right or title to which is held by the United States or
 subject to disposition by the United States.
 (b)(1) Nothing contained in this Act shall recognize, deny, enlarge,
 impair, or otherwise affect any claim against the United States, and any
 such claim shall be governed by applicable laws of the United States.
 (2) Nothing in this Act is intended or shall be construed as a finding,
 interpretation, or construction by the Congress that any applicable law
 authorizes, establishes, recognizes, or confirms the validity or invalidity
 of any such claim, and the determination of the applicability or effect
 of any law to any such claim shall be unaffected by anything in this Act.
 (c) No taxes shall be imposed by the State upon any lands or other property
 now owned or hereafter acquired by the United States, except to the extent
 as Congress may permit.
 (d)(1) Upon the admission of the State of New Columbia into the Union,
 the annual Federal payment authorized to be appropriated to the District
 of Columbia shall be authorized to be appropriated to the State of New
 Columbia. Nothing in this Act is intended to alter the basis for the
 Federal payment to the District of Columbia or the State of New Columbia.
 (2) Not later than 7 months before the beginning of each fiscal year,
 the Governor shall submit a report to Congress on the effects of the
 presence of the seat of the Federal Government within or adjacent to the
 State on the revenues and expenditures of the State, and shall include in
 the report information relating to--
 (A) services rendered to the Federal Government and services rendered
 because of the State's proximity to the seat of the Federal Government,
 and the cost to the State of providing such services;
 (B) potential revenues lost because of the presence of the Federal
 Government within or adjacent to the State, including Federally-imposed
 height or other restrictions on buildings located within the State and
 revenues not obtainable because of a lack of taxable property and business
 income within the State; and
 (C) potential revenues gained because of the presence of the Federal
 Government within or adjacent to the State.
 (3) At the time the Governor submits the report described in paragraph
 (2) to Congress, the Governor shall submit copies of the report to the
 Directors of the Congressional Budget Office and the Office of Management
 and Budget, who shall submit reports to Congress analyzing the Governor's
 report not later than 30 days after receiving copies of the report.
 (e) The State may not change any provision of its Constitution concerning
 height limitations on buildings without the consent of Congress.
 (f) Nothing in this Act or the Constitution or laws of the State may be
 construed to permit the State to refuse to allow an individual to serve as
 a qualified registered elector of the State solely because the individual
 resides in the National Capital Service Area.
SEC. 6. STATE TITLE TO LANDS AND PROPERTY.
 (a) The State of New Columbia and its political subdivisions shall have
 and retain title or jurisdiction for purposes of administration and
 maintenance to all property, real and personal, with respect to which
 title or jurisdiction for purposes of administration and maintenance is
 held by the territory of the District of Columbia as of the date of the
 enactment of this Act.
 (b) All laws of the United States reserving to the United States the free use
 or enjoyment of property which vests in or is conveyed to the State of New
 Columbia or its political subdivisions pursuant to this section or reserving
 the right to alter, amend, or repeal laws relating thereto shall cease to
 be effective upon the admission of the State of New Columbia into the Union.
SEC. 7. ELECTIONS.
 (a)(1) Not more than sixty days after the date of enactment of this Act, the
 President of the United States shall certify such enactment to the Mayor of
 the District of Columbia. Not more than thirty days after such certification
 the Mayor of the District of Columbia shall issue a proclamation for the
 elections, subject to the provisions of this Act, for officers of all State
 elective offices provided for by the constitution of the proposed State
 of New Columbia and for two Senators and one Representative in Congress.
 (2) In the first election of Senators from the State (pursuant to
 paragraph (1)) the two senatorial offices shall be separately identified
 and designated, and no person may be a candidate for both offices. No such
 identification or designation of either of the two senatorial offices shall
 refer to or be taken to refer to the terms of such offices, or in any way
 impair the privilege of the Senate to determine the class to which each
 of the Senators elected shall be assigned.
 (b) The proclamation of the Mayor of the District of Columbia required by
 subsection (a) shall provide for the holding of a primary election and a
 general election and at such elections the officers required to be elected
 as provided in subsection (a) shall be chosen by the people. Such elections
 shall be held, and the qualifications of voters shall be, as prescribed by
 the constitution of the proposed State of New Columbia for the election of
 members of the proposed State legislature. Election returns shall be made
 and certified in such manner as the constitution of the proposed State of
 New Columbia may prescribe. The Mayor of the District of Columbia shall
 certify the results of such elections to the President of the United States.
 (c)(1) At an election designated by proclamation of the Mayor of the District
 of Columbia, which may be the primary or the general election held pursuant
 to subsection (b), a territorial general election, or a special election,
 there shall be submitted to the electors qualified to vote in such election,
 for adoption or rejection, the following propositions:
 (A) New Columbia shall immediately be admitted into the Union as a State.
 (B) The boundaries of the State of New Columbia shall be as prescribed in
 the New Columbia Admission Act and all claims of the State to any areas
 of land or sea outside the boundaries so prescribed are hereby irrevocably
 relinquished to the United States.
 (C) All provisions of the New Columbia Admission Act, including provisions
 reserving rights or powers to the United States and provisions prescribing
 the terms or conditions of the grants of lands or other property made to the
 State of New Columbia, are consented to fully by the State and its people.
 (2) In the event the propositions under paragraph (1) are adopted in
 such election by a majority of the legal votes cast on such submission,
 the proposed constitution of the proposed State of New Columbia, adopted
 by the Council of the District of Columbia in the Constitution for the
 State of New Columbia Approval Act of 1987 (D.C. Law 7-8), shall be deemed
 amended accordingly.
 (3) In the event any one of the propositions under paragraph (1) is not
 adopted at such election by a majority of the legal votes cast on such
 submission, the provisions of this Act shall cease to be effective.
 (4) The Mayor of the District of Columbia is authorized and directed to take
 such action as may be necessary or appropriate to ensure the submission
 of such propositions to the people. The return of the votes cast on such
 propositions shall be made by the election officers directly to the Board
 of Elections of the District of Columbia, which shall certify the results
 of the submission to the Mayor. The Mayor shall certify the results of
 such submission to the President of the United States.
 (d)(1) If the President finds that the propositions set forth in subsection
 (c)(1) have been duly adopted by the people of New Columbia, the President,
 upon certification of the returns of the election of the officers required
 to be elected as provided in subsection (a), shall issue a proclamation
 announcing the results of such election as so ascertained. Upon the issuance
 of such proclamation by the President, the State of New Columbia shall be
 deemed admitted into the Union as provided in section 2 of this Act.
 (2) Until the State of New Columbia is admitted into the Union, individuals
 holding legislative, executive, and judicial offices of the District of
 Columbia, including the Delegate in Congress from the District of Columbia,
 shall continue to discharge the duties of their respective offices. Upon the
 issuance of such proclamation by the President of the United States and the
 admission of the State of New Columbia into the Union, the officers elected
 at such election, and qualified under the provisions of the constitution and
 laws of such State, shall proceed to exercise all the functions pertaining
 to their offices in, under, or by authority of the government of such State,
 and offices not required to be elected at such initial election shall be
 selected or continued in office as provided by the constitution and laws
 of such State. The Governor of such State shall certify the election of the
 Senators and Representative in the manner required by law, and the Senators
 and Representative shall be entitled to be admitted to seats in Congress
 and to all the rights and privileges of Senators and Representatives of
 other States in the Congress of the United States.
SEC. 8. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES MEMBERSHIP.
 The State of New Columbia upon its admission into the Union shall be entitled
 to one Representative until the taking effect of the next reapportionment,
 and such Representative shall be in addition to the membership of the House
 of Representatives as now prescribed by law, except that such temporary
 increase in the membership shall not operate to either increase or decrease
 the permanent membership of the House of Representatives or affect the
 basis of apportionment for the Congress.
SEC. 9. LAWS IN EFFECT.
 Upon admission of the State of New Columbia into the Union, all of the
 territorial laws then in force in the Territory of the District of Columbia
 shall be and continue in force and effect throughout the State, except as
 modified or changed by this Act, or by the Constitution of the State, or
 as thereafter modified or changed by the legislature of the State. All of
 the laws of the United States shall have the same force and effect within
 the State as elsewhere in the United States.
SEC. 10. CONTINUATION OF SUITS.
 (a) No writ, action, indictment, cause, or proceeding pending in any
 court of the District of Columbia or in the United States District Court
 for the District of Columbia shall abate by reason of the admission of
 the State of New Columbia into the Union, but shall be transferred and
 shall proceed within such appropriate State courts as shall be established
 under the constitution of the State, or shall continue in the United States
 District Court for the District of Columbia, as the nature of the case may
 require. And no writ, action, indictment, cause, or proceeding shall abate
 by reason of any change in the courts, but shall proceed within the State
 or United States courts according to the laws thereof, respectively. The
 appropriate State courts shall be the successors of the courts of the
 District of Columbia as to all cases arising within the limits embraced
 within the jurisdiction of such courts, respectively, with full power
 to proceed with such cases, and award mesne or final process therein,
 and all files, records, indictments, and proceedings relating to any such
 writ, action, indictment, cause, or proceeding shall be transferred to
 such appropriate State courts and shall be proceeded with therein in due
 course of law.
 (b) All civil causes of action and all criminal offenses which shall have
 arisen or been committed prior to the admission of the State, but as to
 which no writ, action, indictment, or proceeding shall be pending at the
 date of such admission, shall be subject to prosecution in the appropriate
 State courts or in the United States District Court for the District
 of Columbia in like manner, to the same extent, and with like right of
 appellate review, as if such State had been created and such State courts
 had been established prior to the accrual of such causes of action or the
 commission of such offenses. The admission of the State shall effect no
 change in the substantive or criminal law governing causes of action and
 criminal offenses which shall have arisen or been committed, and any such
 criminal offenses as shall have been committed against the laws of the
 District of Columbia shall be tried and punished by the appropriate courts
 of the State, and any such criminal offenses as shall have been committed
 against the laws of the United States shall be tried and punished in the
 United States District Court for the District of Columbia.
SEC. 11. APPEALS.
 Parties shall have the same rights of appeal from and appellate review of
 final decisions of the United States District Court for the District of
 Columbia or the District of Columbia Court of Appeals in any case finally
 decided prior to the admission of the State of New Columbia into the Union,
 whether or not an appeal therefrom shall have been perfected prior to such
 admission. The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
 Circuit and the Supreme Court of the United States shall have the same
 jurisdiction in such cases as by law provided prior to the admission of
 the State into the Union. Any mandate issued subsequent to the admission of
 the State shall be to the United States District Court for the District of
 Columbia or a court of the State, as appropriate. Parties shall have the
 same rights of appeal from and appellate review of all orders, judgments,
 and decrees of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia
 and of the highest court of the State of New Columbia, as successor to
 the District of Columbia Court of Appeals, in any case pending at the time
 of admission of the State into the Union, and the United States Court of
 Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit and the Supreme Court of the
 United States shall have the same jurisdiction therein, as by law provided
 in any case arising subsequent to the admission of the State into the Union.
SEC. 12. JUDICIAL AND CRIMINAL PROVISIONS.
 Effective upon the admission of New Columbia into the Union--
 (1) Section 41 of title 28, United States Code is amended in the second
 column by inserting `, New Columbia' after `District of Columbia'.
 (2) The first paragraph of section 88 of title 28, United States Code,
 is amended to read as follows:
 `The District of Columbia and the State of New Columbia comprise one
 judicial district.'.
SEC. 13. MILITARY LANDS.
 (a) Subject to subsection (b) and notwithstanding the admission of the
 State of New Columbia into the Union, authority is reserved in the United
 States for the exercise by the Congress of the United States of the power
 of exclusive legislation, as provided by article I, section 8, clause 17,
 of the Constitution of the United States, in all cases whatsoever over such
 tracts or parcels of land located within the State of New Columbia that,
 immediately prior to the admission of the State, are controlled or owned
 by the United States and held for defense or Coast Guard purposes.
 (b)(1) The State of New Columbia shall always have the right to serve
 civil or criminal process within such tracts or parcels of land in suits
 or prosecutions for or on account of rights acquired, obligations incurred,
 or crimes committed within the State but outside of such tracts or parcels
 of land.
 (2) The reservation of authority in the United States for the exercise by
 the Congress of the United States of the power of exclusive legislation
 over such lands shall not operate to prevent such lands from being a part
 of the State of New Columbia, or to prevent the State from exercising over
 or upon such lands, concurrently with the United States, any jurisdiction
 which it would have in the absence of such reservation of authority and
 which is consistent with the laws hereafter enacted by the Congress pursuant
 to such reservation of authority.
 (3) The power of exclusive legislation shall vest and remain in the United
 States only so long as the particular tract or parcel of land involved
 is controlled or owned by the United States and used for defense or Coast
 Guard purposes, except that the United States shall continue to have sole
 and exclusive jurisdiction over such military installations as have been
 or may be determined to be critical areas as delineated by the President
 of the United States or the Secretary of Defense.
SEC. 14. UNITED STATES NATIONALITY.
 No provision of this Act shall operate to confer United States nationality,
 to terminate nationality lawfully acquired, or to restore nationality
 terminated or lost under any law of the United States or under any treaty
 to which the United States is or was a party.
SEC. 15. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS.
 No law or regulation which is in force on the effective date of this
 Act shall be deemed amended or repealed by this Act except to the extent
 specifically provided herein or to the extent that such law or regulation
 is inconsistent with this Act.
SEC. 16. NATIONAL CAPITAL SERVICE AREA.
 (a) The National Capital Service Area referred to in section 4 is more
 particularly described as follows:
 Beginning at the point on the present Virginia-District of Columbia boundary
 due west of the northernmost point of Theodore Roosevelt Island and running
 due east of the eastern shore of the Potomac River;
 thence generally south along the shore at the mean high water mark to the
 northwest corner of the Kennedy Center;
 thence east along the north side of the Kennedy Center to a point where
 it reaches the E Street Expressway;
 thence east on the expressway to E Street Northwest and thence east on E
 Street Northwest to Eighteenth Street Northwest;
 thence south on Eighteenth Street Northwest to Constitution Avenue Northwest;
 thence east on Constitution Avenue to Seventeenth Street Northwest;
 thence north on Seventeenth Street Northwest to Pennsylvania Avenue
 Northwest;
 thence east on Pennsylvania Avenue to Jackson Place Northwest;
 thence north on Jackson Place to H Street Northwest;
 thence east on H Street Northwest to Madison Place Northwest;
 thence south on Madison Place Northwest to Pennsylvania Avenue Northwest;
 thence east on Pennsylvania Avenue Northwest to Fifteenth Street Northwest;
 thence south on Fifteenth Street Northwest to Pennsylvania Avenue Northwest;
 thence southeast on Pennsylvania Avenue Northwest to John Marshall Place
 Northwest;
 thence north on John Marshall Place Northwest to C Street Northwest;
 thence east on C Street Northwest to Third Street Northwest;
 thence north on Third Street Northwest to D Street Northwest;
 thence east on D Street Northwest to Second Street Northwest;
 thence south on Second Street Northwest to the intersection of Constitution
 Avenue Northwest and Louisiana Avenue Northwest;
 thence northeast on Louisiana Avenue Northwest to North Capitol Street;
 thence north on North Capitol Street to Massachusetts Avenue Northwest;
 thence southeast on Massachusetts Avenue Northwest so as to encompass
 Union Square;
 thence following Union Square to F Street Northeast;
 thence east on F Street Northeast to Second Street Northeast;
 thence south on Second Street Northeast to D Street Northeast;
 thence west on D Street Northeast to First Street Northeast;
 thence south on First Street Northeast to Maryland Avenue Northeast;
 thence generally north and east on Maryland Avenue to Second Street
 Northeast;
 thence south on Second Street Northeast to C Street Southeast;
 thence west on C Street Southeast to New Jersey Avenue Southeast;
 thence south on New Jersey Avenue Southeast to D Street Southeast;
 thence west on D Street Southeast to Washington Avenue Southwest;
 thence southeast on Washington Avenue Southwest to E Street Southeast;
 thence west on E Street Southeast to the intersection of Washington Avenue
 Southwest and South Capitol Street;
 thence northwest on Washington Avenue Southwest to Second Street Southwest;
 thence south on Second Street Southwest to Virginia Avenue Southwest;
 thence generally west on Virginia Avenue to Third Street Southwest;
 thence north on Third Street Southwest to C Street Southwest;
 thence west on C Street Southwest to Sixth Street Southwest;
 thence north on Sixth Street Southwest to Independence Avenue;
 thence west on Independence Avenue to Twelfth Street Southwest;
 thence south on Twelfth Street Southwest to D Street Southwest;
 thence west on D Street Southwest to Fourteenth Street Southwest;
 thence south on Fourteenth Street Southwest to the middle of the Washington
 Channel;
 thence generally south and east along the midchannel of the Washington
 Channel to a point due west of the northern boundary line of Fort Lesley
 McNair;
 thence due east to the side of the Washington Channel;
 thence following generally south and east along the side of the Washington
 Channel at the mean high water mark, to the point of confluence with the
 Anacostia River, and along the northern shore at the mean high water mark
 to the northernmost point of the Eleventh Street Bridge;
 thence generally south and east along the northern side of the Eleventh
 Street Bridge to the eastern shore of the Anacostia River;
 thence generally south and west along such shore at the mean high water
 mark to the point of confluence of the Anacostia and Potomac Rivers;
 thence generally south along the eastern shore at the mean high water mark
 of the Potomac River to the point where it meets the present southeastern
 boundary line of the District of Columbia;
 thence south and west along such southeastern boundary line to the point
 where it meets the present Virginia-District of Columbia boundary; and
 thence generally north and west up the Potomac River along the
 Virginia-District of Columbia boundary to the point of beginning.
 (b) Where the area in subsection (a) is bounded by any street, such street,
 and any sidewalk thereof, shall be included within such area.
 (c)(1) Any Federal real property affronting or abutting, as of the date
 of the enactment of this Act, the area described in subsection (a) shall
 be deemed to be within such area.
 (2) For the purposes of paragraph (1) Federal real property affronting or
 abutting such area described in subsection (a) shall--
 (A) be deemed to include, but not limited to, Fort Lesley McNair, the
 Washington Navy Yard, the Anacostia Naval Annex, the United States Naval
 Station, Bolling Air Force Base, and the Naval Research Laboratory; and
 (B) not be construed to include any area situated outside of the District
 of Columbia boundary as it existed immediately prior to the date of the
 enactment of this Act, nor be construed to include any portion of the
 Anacostia Park situated east of the northern side of the Eleventh Street
 Bridge, or any portion of the Rock Creek Park.
SEC. 17. STATEHOOD TRANSITION COMMISSION.
 (a) There is established a Statehood Transition Commission.
 (b) The Commission shall be composed of thirteen members appointed as
 follows:
 (1) three shall be appointed by the President;
 (2) two shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House;
 (3) two shall be appointed by the President of the Senate;
 (4) three shall be appointed by the Mayor of the District of Columbia; and
 (5) three shall be appointed by the Council of the District of Columbia.
 (c) The Commission shall advise the President, the Congress, the Mayor,
 the Council, and the Governor and House of Delegates for the State of
 New Columbia, as appropriate, concerning necessary procedures to effect
 an orderly transition to statehood for the District of Columbia and other
 matters relating to the assumption of the property, functions, and activities
 of the District of Columbia by the State of New Columbia during the first
 2 years of the existence of the State of New Columbia. The Commission
 shall submit such reports as the Commission considers appropriate or as
 may be requested.
 (d) The Commission shall cease to exist 2 years after the date of the
 admission into the Union of the State of New Columbia.