[Congressional Bills 117th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 9087 Introduced in House (IH)]

<DOC>

117th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 H. R. 9087

 To restart onshore and offshore oil and gas leasing, streamline 
 permitting for energy infrastructure, ensure transparency in energy 
 development on Federal lands, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 September 29, 2022

 Mr. Westerman (for himself and Mr. Graves of Missouri) introduced the 
 following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Natural 
 Resources, and in addition to the Committees on Agriculture, 
 Transportation and Infrastructure, Energy and Commerce, and Armed 
Services, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in 
 each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the 
 jurisdiction of the committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To restart onshore and offshore oil and gas leasing, streamline 
 permitting for energy infrastructure, ensure transparency in energy 
 development on Federal lands, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Transparency And 
Production of American Energy Act'' or the ``TAP American Energy Act''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Severability.
 TITLE I--FEDERAL OIL AND GAS PROGRAMS

Sec. 101. Prohibition on moratoria of new energy leases on certain 
 Federal land and on withdrawal of Federal 
 land from energy development.
Sec. 102. Onshore oil and gas leasing.
Sec. 103. Processing applications for permits to drill.
Sec. 104. Access to Federal oil and gas from non-Federal surface 
 estate.
Sec. 105. Offshore oil and gas leasing.
Sec. 106. Five-year plan for offshore oil and gas leasing.
Sec. 107. Offshore geological and geophysical survey licensing.
TITLE II--OVERSIGHT AND TRANSPARENCY OF FEDERAL ENERGY LEASING PROGRAMS

Sec. 201. Expressions of interest; applications for permits to drill; 
 offshore geological and geophysical survey 
 licensing.
Sec. 202. Staff planning report.
 TITLE III--ADVANCING U.S. ENERGY SYSTEMS

Sec. 301. Definitions.
Sec. 302. Renewable energy and transmission projects and rights-of-way.
Sec. 303. No net loss determination for existing rights-of-way.
Sec. 304. National Environmental Policy Act clarification.
Sec. 305. Determination of National Environmental Policy Act adequacy.
Sec. 306. National Environmental Policy Act review deadlines.
Sec. 307. Determination regarding right-of-way.
Sec. 308. Energy corridor expansion.
Sec. 309. Funding to process permits and develop information 
 technology.
Sec. 310. Geothermal leasing.
Sec. 311. Terms of rights-of-way.
Sec. 312. Limitation on claims.
 TITLE IV--ADVANCING ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE

Sec. 401. Liquefied natural gas by rail.
Sec. 402. One Federal decision for pipelines.
Sec. 403. Clean Water Act Certification.
Sec. 404. Limitation on claims.

SEC. 2. SEVERABILITY.

 If any provision of this Act, an amendment made by this Act, or the 
application of such provision or amendment to any person or 
circumstance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder 
of this Act, the amendments made by this Act, and the application of 
such provisions to any person or circumstance shall not be affected 
thereby.

 TITLE I--FEDERAL OIL AND GAS PROGRAMS

SEC. 101. PROHIBITION ON MORATORIA OF NEW ENERGY LEASES ON CERTAIN 
 FEDERAL LAND AND ON WITHDRAWAL OF FEDERAL LAND FROM 
 ENERGY DEVELOPMENT.

 (a) Prohibitions.--
 (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 law, the President shall not carry out any action that would 
 prohibit or substantially delay the issuance of any of the 
 following on Federal land, unless such an action has been 
 authorized by an Act of Congress:
 (A) New oil and gas leases, drill permits, 
 approvals, or authorizations.
 (B) New coal leases (including leases by 
 applications in process or expansions of existing 
 leases), permits, approvals, or authorizations.
 (2) Prohibition on withdrawal.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of law, the President shall not withdraw any Federal 
 land from forms of entry, appropriation, or disposal under the 
 public land laws or disposition under laws pertaining to 
 mineral and geothermal leasing unless the withdrawal has been 
 authorized by an Act of Congress.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Federal land.--The term ``Federal land'' means--
 (A) National Forest System land;
 (B) public lands (as defined in section 103 of the 
 Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 
 U.S.C. 1702));
 (C) the outer Continental Shelf (as defined in 
 section 2 of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 
 U.S.C. 1331)); and
 (D) land managed by the Secretary of Energy.
 (2) President.--The term ``President'' means the President 
 or any designee, including--
 (A) the Secretary of Agriculture;
 (B) the Secretary of Energy; and
 (C) the Secretary of the Interior.

SEC. 102. ONSHORE OIL AND GAS LEASING.

 (a) Requirement To Immediately Resume Onshore Oil and Gas Lease 
Sales.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Interior shall 
 immediately resume onshore oil and gas lease sales in 
 compliance with the Mineral Leasing Act (30 U.S.C. 181 et 
 seq.).
 (2) Requirement.--The Secretary of the Interior shall 
 ensure that any oil and gas lease sale pursuant to paragraph 
 (1) is conducted immediately on completion of all applicable 
 scoping, public comment, and environmental analysis 
 requirements under the Mineral Leasing Act (30 U.S.C. 181 et 
 seq.) and the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 
 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.).
 (b) Annual Lease Sales.--
 (1) In general.--In accordance with the Mineral Leasing Act 
 (30 U.S.C. 181 et seq.), beginning in fiscal year 2023, the 
 Secretary of the Interior shall annually conduct a minimum of 
 four oil and gas lease sales in each of the following States:
 (A) Wyoming.
 (B) New Mexico.
 (C) Colorado.
 (D) Utah.
 (E) Montana.
 (F) North Dakota.
 (G) Oklahoma.
 (H) Nevada.
 (I) Any other State in which there is land 
 available for oil and gas leasing under the Mineral 
 Leasing Act (30 U.S.C. 181 et seq.) or any other 
 mineral leasing law.
 (2) Requirement.--In conducting a lease sale under 
 paragraph (1) in a State described in that paragraph, the 
 Secretary of the Interior shall offer all parcels eligible for 
 oil and gas exploration, development, and production under the 
 resource management plan in effect for the State.
 (3) Replacement sales.--If, for any reason, a lease sale 
 under paragraph (1) for a fiscal year is canceled, delayed, or 
 deferred, including for a lack of eligible parcels, the 
 Secretary of the Interior shall conduct a replacement sale 
 during the same fiscal year.

SEC. 103. PROCESSING APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS TO DRILL.

 Section 17(p) of the Mineral Leasing Act (30 U.S.C. 226(p)) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4) Effect of pending civil action on processing 
 applications for permits to drill.--Pursuant to the 
 requirements of paragraph (2), notwithstanding the existence of 
 any pending civil actions which do not directly affect or 
 involve the application or related lease, the Secretary shall 
 process an application for a permit to drill under a valid 
 existing lease, unless a United States Federal court has 
 determined that the lease was not issued in compliance with the 
 National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4321 et 
 seq.).''.

SEC. 104. ACCESS TO FEDERAL OIL AND GAS FROM NON-FEDERAL SURFACE 
 ESTATE.

 Section 17 of the Mineral Leasing Act (30 U.S.C. 226) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(r) No Federal Permit Required for Oil and Gas Activities on 
Certain Land.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall not require an 
 operator to obtain a Federal drilling permit for oil and gas 
 exploration and production activities conducted on non-Federal 
 surface estate, provided that--
 ``(A) the United States holds an ownership interest 
 of less than 50 percent of the subsurface mineral 
 estate to be accessed by the proposed action; and
 ``(B) the operator submits to the Secretary a State 
 permit to conduct oil and gas exploration and 
 production activities on the non-Federal surface 
 estate.
 ``(2) No federal action.--An oil and gas exploration and 
 production activity carried out under paragraph (1)--
 ``(A) shall require no additional Federal action;
 ``(B) may commence 30 days after submission of the 
 State permit to the Secretary;
 ``(C) shall be categorically excluded from any 
 further analysis and documentation under the National 
 Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4321 et 
 seq.) if the activity is conducted pursuant to this Act 
 for the purpose of exploration or development of oil or 
 gas; and
 ``(D) shall not be subject to--
 ``(i) section 306108 of title 54, United 
 States Code (commonly known as the National 
 Historic Preservation Act of 1966); and
 ``(ii) section 7 of the Endangered Species 
 Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1536).
 ``(3) Royalties and production accountability.--(A) Nothing 
 in this subsection shall affect the amount of royalties due to 
 the United States under this Act from the production of oil and 
 gas, or alter the Secretary's authority to conduct audits and 
 collect civil penalties pursuant to the Federal Oil and Gas 
 Royalty Management Act of 1982 (30 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.).
 ``(B) The Secretary may conduct onsite reviews and 
 inspections to ensure proper accountability, measurement, and 
 reporting of production of Federal oil and gas, and payment of 
 royalties.
 ``(4) Exceptions.--This subsection shall not apply to 
 actions on Indian lands or resources managed in trust for the 
 benefit of Indian Tribes.''.

SEC. 105. OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS LEASING.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall conduct all lease sales 
described in the 2017-2022 Outer Continental Shelf Oil and Gas Leasing 
Proposed Final Program (November 2016) that have not been conducted as 
of the date of enactment of this Act by not later than September 30, 
2023.
 (b) Gulf of Mexico Region Annual Lease Sales.--Notwithstanding any 
other provision of law, beginning in fiscal year 2023, the Secretary of 
the Interior shall annually conduct a minimum of 2 region-wide oil and 
gas lease sales in the following planning areas of the Gulf of Mexico 
region, as described in the 2017-2022 Outer Continental Shelf Oil and 
Gas Leasing Proposed Final Program (November 2016):
 (1) The Central Gulf of Mexico Planning Area.
 (2) The Western Gulf of Mexico Planning Area.
 (c) Alaska Region Annual Lease Sales.--Notwithstanding any other 
provision of law, beginning in fiscal year 2022, the Secretary of the 
Interior shall annually conduct a minimum of 2 region-wide oil and gas 
lease sales in the Alaska region of the Outer Continental Shelf, as 
described in the 2017-2022 Outer Continental Shelf Oil and Gas Leasing 
Proposed Final Program (November 2016).
 (d) Requirements.--In conducting lease sales under subsections (b) 
and (c), the Secretary of the Interior shall--
 (1) issue such leases in accordance with the Outer 
 Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1332 et seq.); and
 (2) include in each such lease sale all unleased areas that 
 are not subject to restrictions as of the date of the lease 
 sale.

SEC. 106. FIVE-YEAR PLAN FOR OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS LEASING.

 Section 18 of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 
1344) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by striking ``subsections (c) and (d) of this 
 section, shall prepare and periodically revise,'' and 
 inserting ``this section, shall issue every five 
 years'';
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(5) Each five-year program shall include at least two 
 lease sales per year.''; and
 (C) in paragraph (3), by inserting ``domestic 
 energy security,'' after ``between'';
 (2) by redesignating subsections (f) through (h) as 
 subsections (h) through (j), respectively; and
 (3) by inserting after subsection (e) the following:
 ``(f) Five-Year Program for 2023-2028.--The Secretary shall issue 
the five-year oil and gas leasing program for 2023 through 2028 by not 
later than December 31, 2022.
 ``(g) Subsequent Leasing Programs.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 36 months after 
 conducting the first lease sale under an oil and gas leasing 
 program prepared pursuant to this section, the Secretary shall 
 begin preparing the subsequent oil and gas leasing program 
 under this section.
 ``(2) Requirement.--Each subsequent oil and gas leasing 
 program under this section shall be approved by not later than 
 180 days before the expiration of the previous oil and gas 
 leasing program.''.

SEC. 107. OFFSHORE GEOLOGICAL AND GEOPHYSICAL SURVEY LICENSING.

 The Secretary of the Interior shall authorize geological and 
geophysical surveys related to oil and gas activities on the Gulf of 
Mexico Outer Continental Shelf, except within areas subject to existing 
oil and gas leasing moratoria. Such authorizations shall be issued 
within 30 days of receipt of a completed application and shall, as 
applicable to survey type, comply with the mitigation and monitoring 
measures in subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), (f), and (g) of section 
217.184 of title 50, Code of Federal Regulations (as in effect on 
January 1, 2022), and section 217.185 of title 50, Code of Federal 
Regulations (as in effect on January 1, 2022). Geological and 
geophysical surveys authorized pursuant to this section are deemed to 
be in full compliance with the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 (16 
U.S.C. 1361 et seq.) and the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 
1531 et seq.), and their implementing regulations.

TITLE II--OVERSIGHT AND TRANSPARENCY OF FEDERAL ENERGY LEASING PROGRAMS

SEC. 201. EXPRESSIONS OF INTEREST; APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS TO DRILL; 
 OFFSHORE GEOLOGICAL AND GEOPHYSICAL SURVEY LICENSING.

 (a) Report.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of 
this section, the Secretary of the Interior shall submit to the 
Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives and the 
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate a report that 
describes--
 (1) the status of nominated parcels for future onshore oil 
 and gas lease sales, including--
 (A) the number of expressions of interest that the 
 Bureau of Land Management has not taken any action to 
 review, or not completed review of, as of the date of 
 enactment of this section; and
 (B) how long such expressions of interest have been 
 pending;
 (2) the status of each pending application for a permit to 
 drill, including the number of applications received, in each 
 Bureau of Land Management State office as of the date of 
 enactment of this section, including--
 (A) a description of the cause of delay for pending 
 applications, including as a result of staffing 
 shortages, technical limitations, incomplete 
 applications, and incomplete review pursuant to the 
 National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 
 4321 et seq.) or other applicable laws;
 (B) the number of days an application has been 
 pending in violation of section 17(p)(2) of the Mineral 
 Leasing Act (30 U.S.C. 226(p)(2)); and
 (C) steps the office is taking to come into 
 compliance with the requirements of section 17(p)(2) of 
 the Mineral Leasing Act (30 U.S.C. 226(p)(2));
 (3) the number of permits to drill issued by each Bureau of 
 Land Management State office as of the date of enactment of 
 this section;
 (4) the status of each pending application for a license 
 for offshore geological and geophysical surveys, including the 
 number of applications received, in each Bureau of Ocean Energy 
 management regional office, including--
 (A) a description of any cause of delay for pending 
 applications, including as a result of staffing 
 shortages, technical limitations, incomplete 
 applications, and incomplete review pursuant to the 
 National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 
 4321 et seq.) or other applicable laws;
 (B) the number of days an application has been 
 pending; and
 (C) steps the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management is 
 taking to complete review of each application;
 (5) the number of licenses for offshore geological and 
 geophysical surveys issued by each Bureau of Ocean Energy 
 Management regional office as of the date of enactment of this 
 section;
 (6) the status of each pending application for a permit to 
 drill, including the number of applications received, in each 
 Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement regional office, 
 including--
 (A) a description of any cause of delay for pending 
 applications, including as a result of staffing 
 shortages, technical limitations, incomplete 
 applications, and incomplete review pursuant to the 
 National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 
 4321 et seq.) or other applicable laws;
 (B) the number of days an application has been 
 pending; and
 (C) steps the Bureau of Safety and Environmental 
 Enforcement is taking to complete review of each 
 application;
 (7) the number of permits to drill issued by each Bureau of 
 Safety and Environmental Enforcement regional office as of the 
 date of enactment of this section;
 (8) how, as applicable, the Bureau of Land Management, the 
 Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, and the Bureau of Safety and 
 Environmental Enforcement determines whether to--
 (A) issue a license for geological and geophysical 
 surveys;
 (B) issue a permit to drill; and
 (C) issue, extend, or suspend an oil and gas lease;
 (9) when determinations described in paragraph (8) are sent 
 to the national office of the Bureau of Land Management, the 
 Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, or the Bureau of Safety and 
 Environmental Enforcement for final approval;
 (10) the degree to which Bureau of Land Management, Bureau 
 of Ocean Energy Management, and Bureau of Safety and 
 Environmental Enforcement field, State, and regional offices 
 exercise discretion on such final approval;
 (11) the number of auctioned leases receiving accepted bids 
 that have not been issued to winning bidders and the number 
 days such leases have not been issued; and
 (12) a description of the uses of application for permit to 
 drill fees paid by permit holders over the previous 5-year 
 period.
 (b) Pending Applications for Permits To Drill.--Not later than 30 
days after the date of enactment of this section, the Secretary of the 
Interior shall issue all pending applications for a permit to drill 
that meet the requirements of section 17(p)(2) of the Mineral Leasing 
Act (30 U.S.C. 226(p)(2)).
 (c) Public Availability of Data.--
 (1) Mineral leasing act.--Section 17 of the Mineral Leasing 
 Act (30 U.S.C. 226) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(s) Public Availability of Data.--
 ``(1) Expressions of interest.--Not later than 30 days 
 after the date of enactment of this subsection, and each month 
 thereafter, the Secretary shall publish on the website of the 
 Department of the Interior the number of pending, approved, and 
 not approved expressions of interest in nominated parcels for 
 future onshore oil and gas lease sales in the preceding month.
 ``(2) Applications for permits to drill.--Not later than 30 
 days after the date of enactment of this subsection, and each 
 month thereafter, the Secretary shall publish on the website of 
 the Department of the Interior the number of pending and 
 approved applications for permits to drill in the preceding 
 month in each State office.
 ``(3) Past data.--Not later than 30 days after the date of 
 enactment of this subsection, the Secretary shall publish on 
 the website of the Department of the Interior, with respect to 
 the 5-year period ending on the date of enactment of this 
 subsection--
 ``(A) the number of approved and not approved 
 expressions of interest for onshore oil and gas lease 
 sales during such 5-year period; and
 ``(B) the number of approved and not approved 
 applications for permits to drill during such 5-year 
 period.''.
 (2) Outer continental shelf lands act.--Section 8 of the 
 Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1337) is amended 
 by adding at the end the following:
 ``(q) Public Availability of Data.--
 ``(1) Offshore geological and geophysical survey 
 licenses.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment 
 of this subsection, and each month thereafter, the Secretary 
 shall publish on the website of the Department of the Interior 
 the number of pending and approved applications for licenses 
 for offshore to geological and geophysical surveys in the 
 preceding month.
 ``(2) Applications for permits to drill.--Not later than 30 
 days after the date of enactment of this subsection, and each 
 month thereafter, the Secretary shall publish on the website of 
 the Department of the Interior the number of pending and 
 approved applications for permits to drill on the outer 
 Continental Shelf in the preceding month in each regional 
 office.
 ``(3) Past data.--Not later than 30 days after the date of 
 enactment of this subsection, the Secretary shall publish on 
 the website of the Department of the Interior, with respect to 
 the 5-year period ending on the date of enactment of this 
 subsection--
 ``(A) the number of approved applications for 
 licenses for offshore geological and geophysical 
 surveys; and
 ``(B) the number of approved applications for 
 permits to drill on the outer Continental Shelf.''.
 (d) Requirement To Submit Documents and Communications.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 60 days after the date of 
 enactment of this section, the Secretary of the Interior shall 
 submit to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the 
 Senate and the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of 
 Representatives all documents and communications relating to 
 the comprehensive review of Federal oil and gas permitting and 
 leasing practices required under section 208 of Executive Order 
 14008 (86 Fed. Reg. 7624; relating to tackling the climate 
 crisis at home and abroad).
 (2) Inclusions.--The submission under paragraph (1) shall 
 include all documents and communications submitted to the 
 Secretary of the Interior by members of the public in response 
 to any public meeting or forum relating to the comprehensive 
 review described in that paragraph.

SEC. 202. STAFF PLANNING REPORT.

 The Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture 
shall each annually submit to the Committee on Natural Resources of the 
House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural 
Resources of the Senate a report on the staffing capacity of each 
respective agency with respect to issuing oil, gas, coal, and renewable 
energy leases, rights-of-way, easements, and permits. Each such report 
shall include--
 (1) the number of staff assigned to oil, gas, coal, and 
 renewable energy leasing and permitting, respectively; and
 (2) a description of how many staff are needed to meet 
 statutory requirements for such leasing and permitting and how, 
 as applicable, the Department of the Interior or the Department 
 of Agriculture plans to address staffing shortfalls for such 
 leasing and permitting.

 TITLE III--ADVANCING U.S. ENERGY SYSTEMS

SEC. 301. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Energy facility.--The term ``energy facility'' means a 
 facility the primary purpose of which is the exploration for, 
 or the development, production, conversion, storage, transfer, 
 processing, or transportation of, any energy resource.
 (2) Energy storage device.--The term ``energy storage 
 device''--
 (A) means any equipment that stores energy, 
 including electricity, compressed air, pumped water, 
 heat, and hydrogen, which may be converted into, or 
 used to produce, electricity; and
 (B) includes a battery, regenerative fuel cell, 
 flywheel, capacitor, superconducting magnet, and any 
 other equipment the Secretary concerned determines may 
 be used to store energy which may be converted into, or 
 used to produce, electricity.
 (3) Public lands.--The term ``public lands'' means any land 
 and interest in land owned by the United States within the 
 several States and administered by the Secretary of the 
 Interior or the Secretary of Agriculture without regard to how 
 the United States acquired ownership, except--
 (A) lands located on the Outer Continental Shelf; 
 and
 (B) lands held for the benefit of Indians, Aleuts, 
 and Eskimos.
 (4) Renewable energy facility.--The term ``renewable energy 
 facility'' means any equipment or facility that produces 
 electricity from a renewable energy resource, including wind, 
 solar, tidal, biomass, landfill gas, geothermal, methane, 
 hydrogen, or water.
 (5) Right-of-way.--The term ``right-of-way'' means--
 (A) a right-of-way issued, granted, or renewed 
 under section 501 of the Federal Land Policy and 
 Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1761); or
 (B) a right-of-way granted under section 28 of the 
 Mineral Leasing Act (30 U.S.C. 185).
 (6) Secretary concerned.--The term ``Secretary concerned'' 
 means--
 (A) with respect to public lands, the Secretary of 
 the Interior; and
 (B) with respect to National Forest System Lands, 
 the Secretary of Agriculture.

SEC. 302. RENEWABLE ENERGY AND TRANSMISSION PROJECTS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY.

 (a) Exemption.--An action by the Secretary concerned with respect 
to a covered activity shall be not considered a major Federal action 
under section 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 
1969 (42 U.S.C. 4332(2)(C)).
 (b) Covered Activity.--In this section, the term ``covered 
activity'' means--
 (1) geotechnical investigations;
 (2) off-road travel in an existing right-of-way;
 (3) construction of meteorological towers where the total 
 soil or vegetation disruption at the location is less than 5 
 acres;
 (4) adding a battery or other energy storage device to an 
 existing or planned energy facility, if that storage resource 
 is located within the physical footprint of the existing or 
 planned energy facility;
 (5) drilling temperature gradient holes and other 
 geothermal exploratory wells, including constructing or making 
 improvements to structure pads for such activities--
 (A) that are less than 12 inches in diameter; and
 (B) where the total soil or vegetation disruption 
 at the location is less than 5 acres;
 (6) any repair, maintenance, upgrade, optimization, or 
 minor addition to existing transmission and distribution 
 infrastructure, including--
 (A) operation, maintenance, or repair of power 
 equipment and structures within existing substations, 
 switching stations, transmission, and distribution 
 lines;
 (B) the addition, modification, retirement, or 
 replacement of breakers, transmission towers, 
 transformers, bushings, or relays;
 (C) the voltage uprating, modification, 
 reconductoring with conventional or advanced 
 conductors, and clearance resolution of transmission 
 lines;
 (D) routine and emergency vegetation management, 
 including the removal of hazard trees and other hazard 
 vegetation within or adjacent to an existing right-of-
 way; and
 (E) improvements to or construction of structure 
 pads for such infrastructure; 
 (7) approval of and activities conducted in accordance with 
 operating plans or agreements for transmission and distribution 
 facility or under a special use authorization for an electric 
 transmission and distribution facility right-of-way; and
 (8) construction, maintenance, realignment, or repairs on 
 an existing permanent or temporary access road--
 (A) within an existing right-of-way or within a 
 transmission or utility corridor established by 
 Congress or in a land use plan; or
 (B) that serves an existing transmission line, 
 distribution line, or renewable energy facility.

SEC. 303. NO NET LOSS DETERMINATION FOR EXISTING RIGHTS-OF-WAY.

 Upon a determination by the Secretary concerned that there will be 
no overall net loss of vegetation, soil, or habitat, as defined by 
acreage and function, resulting from a proposed action, decision, or 
activity within an existing right-of-way or within a right-of-way 
corridor established in a land use plan, that action, decision, or 
activity shall not be considered a major Federal action under section 
102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 
4332(2)(C)).

SEC. 304. NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT CLARIFICATION.

 Title I of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 
4321 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 106. APPLICATION LIMITED TO FEDERAL LAND AND CERTAIN FEDERAL 
 ACTIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--Under section 102(2)(C), the term `major Federal 
action' does not include a project or action that--
 ``(1) does not involve Federal land; and
 ``(2) is not subject to Federal control and responsibility.
 ``(b) Exclusion.--A project or action may not be determined to be a 
major Federal action under section 102(2)(C) on the basis of--
 ``(1) an interstate effect of such project or action; or
 ``(2) the provision of Federal funds for such project or 
 activity.
 ``(c) Scope of Review.--The scope of any review under section 102 
shall extend only to so much of a major Federal action as is--
 ``(1) on Federal land; or
 ``(2) is subject to Federal control and responsibility.''.

SEC. 305. DETERMINATION OF NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT ADEQUACY.

 The Secretary concerned shall use previously completed 
environmental assessments and environmental impact statements to 
satisfy the requirements of section 102 of the National Environmental 
Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4332) with respect to any proposed 
transmission project, any proposed project to construct, connect, 
operate, or maintain a pipeline facility to transport an energy 
resource, hydrogen, carbon dioxide, or natural gas, or any proposed 
project to construct or maintain a renewable energy facility if such 
Secretary determines that--
 (1) the new proposed action is substantially the same as a 
 previously analyzed proposed action or alternative analyzed in 
 a previous environmental assessment or environmental impact 
 statement; and
 (2) the effects of the proposed action are substantially 
 the same as the effects analyzed in such existing environmental 
 assessments or environmental impact statements.

SEC. 306. NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT REVIEW DEADLINES.

 (a) In General.--With respect to major Federal actions carried out 
by the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Agriculture, the 
Secretary concerned shall complete--
 (1) any environmental assessment required under section 
 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 
 U.S.C. 4332(2)(C)) relating to the major Federal action by not 
 later than 1 year after the sooner of, as applicable--
 (A) the date on which the Secretary concerned 
 notifies the applicant under section 307 that the 
 application to establish a right-of-way for the major 
 Federal action is complete; and
 (B) the date on which the Secretary concerned 
 begins the scoping for the major Federal action; and
 (2) any environmental impact statement required section 
 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 
 U.S.C. 4332(2)(C)) relating to the major Federal action by not 
 later than 2 years after the sooner of, as applicable--
 (A) the date on which the Secretary concerned 
 notifies the applicant under section 307 that the 
 application to establish a right-of-way for the major 
 Federal action is complete; and
 (B) the date on which the Secretary concerned 
 issues a notice of intent to prepare the environmental 
 impact statement for the major Federal action.
 (b) Extension.--The Secretary concerned may extend a deadline 
described in subsection (a) with the approval of the applicant.
 (c) Report.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary concerned shall each 
 annually submit to the Committee on Natural Resources of the 
 House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and 
 Natural Resources of the Senate a report that--
 (A) identifies any environmental assessment and 
 environmental impact statement that is not completed by 
 the appropriate deadline described in subsection (a) or 
 the deadline extended under subsection (b), as 
 applicable; and
 (B) provides an explanation for any failure to meet 
 such deadline.
 (2) Inclusions.--Each report submitted under paragraph (1) 
 shall identify--
 (A) the respective field office, ranger district, 
 or region office, as applicable, responsible for each 
 such environmental assessment and environmental impact 
 statement;
 (B) as applicable, the date on which--
 (i) the Secretary concerned notifies the 
 applicant under section 307 that the 
 application to establish a right-of-way for the 
 major Federal action is complete;
 (ii) the Secretary concerned begins the 
 scoping for the major Federal action; or
 (iii) the Secretary concerned issues a 
 notice of intent to prepare the environmental 
 impact statement for the major Federal action; 
 and
 (C) when such environmental assessment and 
 environmental impact statement is expected to be 
 complete.

SEC. 307. DETERMINATION REGARDING RIGHT-OF-WAY.

 Not later than 60 days after the Secretary concerned receives an 
application to establish a right-of-way, the Secretary concerned shall 
notify the applicant as to whether the application is complete or 
deficient. If the Secretary concerned determines the application is 
complete, the Secretary concerned may not consider any other 
application to establish a right-of-way on the same or any overlapping 
parcels of land while such application is pending.

SEC. 308. ENERGY CORRIDOR EXPANSION.

 Section 368 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (42 U.S.C. 15926) is 
amended by inserting at the end the following:
 ``(f) Nominations and Expressions of Interest for Energy Corridor 
Expansion.--(1) Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Secretaries, acting jointly, shall establish 
procedures, in accordance with the subsection, under their respective 
authorities for States and counties to submit requests to the 
Secretaries, jointly, for Federal land to be added to existing 
corridors for oil, gas, CO2 and hydrogen pipelines and electricity 
transmission and distribution facilities on Federal land within the 
borders of the requesting States and counties.
 ``(2) A request under paragraph (1) must be submitted jointly by 
the Governor of each State and the highest elected official of each 
county within whose borders the Federal land to be added to the 
existing corridor is located.
 ``(3) After receiving a request that is in accordance with the 
procedures established under paragraph (1), the Secretaries, acting 
jointly, shall--
 ``(A) consult with the Federal Energy Regulatory 
 Commission, affected utility service providers, Indian Tribes, 
 relevant State agencies, affected counties and municipalities, 
 and any other impacted persons as appropriate, regarding 
 whether to grant or deny the request;
 ``(B) for a request for an addition of more than 100 acres, 
 perform any environmental reviews that may be required to 
 complete the designation of such corridors before granting the 
 request;
 ``(C) respond to the requesting States and counties 
 indicating that the request is granted or denied, in whole or 
 in part--
 ``(i) not later than 150 days after receiving a 
 request for an addition of 100 acres or less; and
 ``(ii) not later than 1 year after receiving a 
 request for an addition of more than 100 acres;
 ``(D) for requests that are denied, in whole or in part, 
 explain the basis upon which the request was denied, in whole 
 or in part, and what, if any, corrective or supplementary 
 actions the requesting States and counties may take to address 
 the reasons for denial and to submit a new application; and
 ``(E) for requests that are granted, under their respective 
 authorities--
 ``(i) designate the Federal land subject to the 
 granted request as an addition to the existing 
 corridor;
 ``(ii) specify the centerline, width, and 
 compatible uses of the designated addition; and
 ``(iii) incorporate the designated addition into 
 the relevant agency land use and resource management 
 plans or equivalent plans.''.

SEC. 309. FUNDING TO PROCESS PERMITS AND DEVELOP INFORMATION 
 TECHNOLOGY.

 (a) In General.--In fiscal years 2023 through 2025, the Secretary 
of Agriculture (acting through the Forest Service) and the Secretary of 
the Interior, after public notice, may accept and expend funds 
contributed by non-Federal entities for dedicated staff, information 
resource management, and information technology system development to 
expedite the evaluation of permits, biological opinions, concurrence 
letters, environmental surveys and studies, processing of applications, 
consultations, and other activities for the leasing, development, or 
expansion of an energy facility under the jurisdiction of the 
respective Secretaries.
 (b) Effect on Permitting.--In carrying out this section, the 
Secretary of the Interior shall ensure that the use of funds accepted 
under subsection (a) will not impact impartial decision making with 
respect to permits, either substantively or procedurally.

SEC. 310. GEOTHERMAL LEASING.

 Section 4(b) of the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970 (30 U.S.C. 
1003(b)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2), by striking ``2 years'' and inserting 
 ``year'';
 (2) by redesignating paragraphs (3) and (4) as paragraphs 
 (5) and (6), respectively; and
 (3) after paragraph (2), by inserting the following:
 ``(3) Replacement sales.--If a lease sale under paragraph 
 (1) for a year is canceled or delayed, the Secretary of the 
 Interior shall conduct a replacement sale during the same year.
 ``(4) Requirement.--In conducting a lease sale under 
 paragraph (2) in a State described in that paragraph, the 
 Secretary of the Interior shall offer all nominated parcels 
 eligible for geothermal development and utilization under the 
 resource management plan in effect for the State.''.

SEC. 311. TERMS OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY.

 (a) Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976.--Section 501 of 
the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1761) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(e) Any right-of-way granted, issued, amended, or renewed under 
subsection (a)(4) may be limited to a term of not more than 50 years 
before such right-of-way is subject to renewal or amendment.''.
 (b) Mineral Leasing Act.--Section 28(n) of the Mineral Leasing Act 
(30 U.S.C. 185(n)) is amended by striking ``thirty'' and inserting 
``50''.

SEC. 312. LIMITATION ON CLAIMS.

 (a) In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a 
claim arising under Federal law seeking judicial review of a permit, 
license, or approval issued by a Federal agency for a transmission, 
distribution, or renewable energy project shall be barred unless--
 (1) the claim is filed within 150 days after publication of 
 a notice in the Federal Register announcing that the permit, 
 license, or approval is final pursuant to the law under which 
 the agency action is taken, unless a shorter time is specified 
 in the Federal law pursuant to which judicial review is 
 allowed; and
 (2) the claim is filed by a party that submitted a comment 
 during the public comment period for such permit, license, or 
 approval and such comment was sufficiently detailed to put the 
 agency on notice of the issue upon which the party seeks 
 judicial review.
 (b) Savings Clause.--Nothing in this section shall create a right 
to judicial review or place any limit on filing a claim that a person 
has violated the terms of a permit, license, or approval.
 (c) Transportation Projects.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to or 
supersede a claim subject to section 139(l)(1) of title 23, United 
States Code.

 TITLE IV--ADVANCING ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE

SEC. 401. LIQUEFIED NATURAL GAS BY RAIL.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Transportation may not issue any 
regulation or long-term order that--
 (1) prohibits the transportation of ``methane, refrigerated 
 liquid'', commonly known as liquefied natural gas (LNG), by 
 rail; or
 (2) restricts or contracts the scope of allowance provided 
 by the final rule of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials 
 Safety Administration, titled ``Hazardous Materials: Liquefied 
 Natural Gas by Rail'' and published in the Federal Register on 
 July 24, 2020 (85 Fed. Reg. 44994).
 (b) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to limit the authority of the Secretary of Transportation 
from issuing short-term emergency orders related to the transportation 
of liquefied natural gas by rail.

SEC. 402. ONE FEDERAL DECISION FOR PIPELINES.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 601 of title 49, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 60144. Efficient environmental reviews and one Federal decision.
 ``(a) Efficient Environmental Reviews.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary of Transportation shall 
 apply the project development procedures, to the greatest 
 extent feasible, described in section 139 of title 23 to any 
 pipeline project that requires the approval of the Secretary 
 under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 
 4321 et seq.).
 ``(2) Regulations and procedures.--In carrying out 
 paragraph (1), the Secretary shall incorporate into agency 
 regulations and procedures pertaining to pipeline projects 
 described in paragraph (1) aspects of such project development 
 procedures, or portions thereof, determined appropriate by the 
 Secretary in a manner consistent with this section, that 
 increase the efficiency of the review of pipeline projects.
 ``(3) Discretion.--The Secretary may choose not to 
 incorporate into agency regulations and procedures pertaining 
 to pipeline projects described in paragraph (1) such project 
 development procedures that could only feasibly apply to 
 highway projects, public transportation capital projects, and 
 multimodal projects.
 ``(4) Applicability.--Subsection (l) of section 139 of 
 title 23 shall apply to pipeline projects described in 
 paragraph (1).
 ``(b) Additional Categorical Exclusions.--The Secretary shall 
maintain and make publicly available, including on the Internet, a 
database that identifies project-specific information on the use of a 
categorical exclusion on any pipeline project carried out under this 
title.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 601 of title 49, 
United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:

``60144. Efficient environmental reviews and one Federal decision.''.

SEC. 403. CLEAN WATER ACT CERTIFICATION.

 Section 401(d) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 
U.S.C. 1341(d)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``water quality standard in effect under 
 section 303 of this Act,'' before ``standard of performance''; 
 and
 (2) by inserting ``water quality'' before ``requirement of 
 State law''.

SEC. 404. LIMITATION ON CLAIMS.

 (a) In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a 
claim arising under Federal law seeking judicial review of a permit or 
lease sale for oil and gas production on Federal lands, or an 
authorization needed for the construction, connection, operation, or 
maintenance of pipeline facilities to transport an energy resource, 
hydrogen, carbon dioxide, or natural gas, issued by a Federal agency 
shall be barred unless--
 (1) the claim is filed within 150 days after publication of 
 a notice in the Federal Register announcing that the permit, 
 lease sale, or authorization is final pursuant to the law under 
 which the agency action is taken, unless a shorter time is 
 specified in the Federal law pursuant to which judicial review 
 is allowed; and
 (2) the claim is filed by a party that submitted a comment 
 during the public comment period for such permit, lease sale, 
 or authorization and such comment was sufficiently detailed to 
 put the agency on notice of the issue upon which the party 
 seeks judicial review.
 (b) Savings Clause.--Nothing in this section shall create a right 
to judicial review or place any limit on filing a claim that a person 
has violated the terms of a permit, lease sale, or authorization.
 (c) Transportation Projects.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to or 
supersede a claim subject to section 139(l)(1) of title 23, United 
States Code.
 <all>