S 1177 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1177
To amend the Social Security Act to assure universal access to health
insurance for basic health services in the United States through qualified
employer health plans and a public health insurance plan, to contain costs and
assure quality in the provision of health services, to reform the provision
of health insurance to small employers, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
MAY 23 (legislative day, APRIL 25), 1991
Mr. ROCKEFELLER introduced the following bill; which was read twice and
referred to the Committee on Finance
A BILL
To amend the Social Security Act to assure universal access to health
insurance for basic health services in the United States through qualified
employer health plans and a public health insurance plan, to contain costs and
assure quality in the provision of health services, to reform the provision
of health insurance to small employers, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Pepper Commission Health
 Care Access and Reform Act of 1991'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents of this Act is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--ACCESS TO PRIVATE OR PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE FOR BASIC HEALTH
SERVICES THROUGH EMPLOYMENT
Sec. 101. Employment-based health insurance coverage.
`TITLE XXI--ACCESS TO PRIVATE OR PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE FOR BASIC HEALTH
SERVICES THROUGH EMPLOYMENT
`Part A--Employer Requirement to Enroll Employees and Families in a Qualified
Employer Health Plan or in Public Health Insurance Plan
`Sec. 2101. Application to full-time employees.
`Sec. 2102. Application to part-time employees.
`Sec. 2103. Application to seasonal and temporary employees.
`Sec. 2104. Treatment of all family members as a unit.
`Sec. 2105. Meeting requirement of enrollment in qualified employer health
plan through enrollment in public health insurance plan.
`Sec. 2106. Application of requirement to employers of different sizes.
`Sec. 2107. Timing of enrollment; period of coverage.
`Sec. 2108. Enforcement.
`Part B--Requirements for Qualified Employer Health Plans
`Sec. 2121. Qualified employer health plan and covered employer health
plan defined.
`Sec. 2122. Requirements relating to employee premiums and cost-sharing.
`Part C--Definitions and Miscellaneous
`Sec. 2181. Definitions.
`Sec. 2182. Nonapplication to residents of Puerto Rico and territories.
TITLE II--ACCESS TO HEALTH INSURANCE FOR BASIC HEALTH SERVICES THROUGH A
PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN
Sec. 201. Public health insurance plan.
`TITLE XXII--ACCESS TO HEALTH INSURANCE FOR BASIC HEALTH THROUGH A PUBLIC
HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN
`Part A--Eligibility and Enrollment
`Sec. 2201. Eligibility to enroll for health insurance benefits and to apply
for low-income assistance.
`Sec. 2202. Application for enrollment.
`Sec. 2203. Coverage period; termination of enrollment.
`Sec. 2204. Requirement of health insurance coverage.
`Part B--Health Insurance Benefits
`Sec. 2211. Basic health services (including preventive services) for
general enrollees.
`Sec. 2212. EPSDT services.
`Sec. 2213. Medicare supplemental benefits for low-income medicare
beneficiaries.
`Sec. 2214. Scope of coverage.
`Part C--Payments for Benefits; Deductibles, Coinsurance, and Stop-Loss
Protection for Basic Health Services
`Sec. 2221. Payments for benefits.
`Sec. 2222. Deductible for basic health services.
`Sec. 2223. Coinsurance for basic health services.
`Sec. 2224. Limit on cost-sharing for basic health services.
`Sec. 2225. Exclusions; coordination.
`Sec. 2226. Application of qualified health plan provisions.
`Part D--Premiums, Public Health Insurance Trust Fund
`Sec. 2231. Premiums.
`Sec. 2232. Collection of premiums.
`Sec. 2233. Public Health Insurance Trust Fund.
Part E--Assistance for Low-Income Individuals
`Sec. 2241. Assistance for individuals with income below the poverty line
enrolled on a non-employment basis.
`Sec. 2242. Assistance for individuals with income below twice the poverty
line enrolled on a non-employment basis.
`Sec. 2243. Assistance for individuals covered under qualified employer
health plans.
`Sec. 2244. Applications for assistance.
`Sec. 2245. Reconciliation of premium assistance through use of income
statements.
`Sec. 2246. Treatment of certain cash assistance recipients.
`Sec. 2247. Computation of family adjusted total income.
`Part F--Qualified Health Plans
`Sec. 2251. Certification of qualified health plans.
`Sec. 2252. Treatment of family as a unit; coverage period; health plan cards.
`Sec. 2253. Requirements respecting basic benefits.
`Sec. 2254. Requirements respecting limits on preexisting condition exclusions
and coverage standards for basic health services.
`Sec. 2255. Requirements respecting limits on cost-sharing.
`Sec. 2256. Adequacy of payments.
`Sec. 2257. Coordination and portability of health coverage under qualified
health plans.
`Sec. 2258. Consumer protections.
`Sec. 2259. Preemption of certain State and Federal requirements.
`Part G--Administrative Provisions
`Sec. 2261. Agreements with hospitals; participating physicians; treatment
of Indian Health Services facilities.
`Sec. 2262. Health maintenance organizations and competitive medical plans.
`Sec. 2263. Use of fiscal agents.
`Sec. 2264. General administration.
`Sec. 2265. Determinations; appeals; Provider Reimbursement Review Board.
`Sec. 2266. Program integrity.
`Sec. 2267. Information by telephone.
`Sec. 2268. Incorporation of miscellaneous medicare provisions.
`Part H--Definitions and Miscellaneous
`Sec. 2281. Incorporation of certain definitions used in other health-related
titles.
`Sec. 2282. Definitions relating to families.
`Sec. 2283. Other definitions.
`Sec. 2284. Glossary of defined terms used in title and contained in this
title or related titles.
`Sec. 2284. Other definitions.
`Sec. 2285. Authorizing reciprocal coverage of foreign nationals.
`Sec. 2286. Nonapplication to residents of Puerto Rico and territories.
TITLE III--QUALITY ASSURANCE AND COST CONTAINMENT
Sec. 301. Application of payment rates under public health insurance plan
under qualified employer health plans.
Sec. 302. Favorable treatment of managed care.
Sec. 303. Application of outcomes research to public health insurance plan.
Sec. 304. Application of peer review program under the public health
insurance plan.
Sec. 305. Medical malpractice.
Sec. 306. Report on requiring use of uniform claims forms.
TITLE IV--GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE REFORM
Subtitle A--General Reforms
Sec. 401. General reforms.
`TITLE XXIII--GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE STANDARDS
`Part A--General Standards; Definitions
`Sec. 2301. Application of requirements to employment-related health plans.
`Sec. 2302. Establishment of standards.
`Sec. 2303. Requirements applicable to all employment-related health plans.
`Sec. 2304. Definitions.
`Part B--Small Employer Health Insurance Reform
`Sec. 2311. Enrollment practice and guaranteed renewability requirements
for small employer health plans.
`Sec. 2312. Rating practices for small employer health plans.
`Sec. 2313. Basic benefit package for small employer health plans.
`Sec. 2314. Public plan reimbursement option for small employer health plans.
`Sec. 2315. Miscellaneous disclosure and record-keeping requirements for
small employer health plans.
`Sec. 2316. Nonapplication in Puerto Rico and the territories.
Subtitle B--Reinsurance Systems
Sec. 411. Encouraging development of reinsurance systems.
Subtitle C--Encouraging Establishment of Managed Care
Sec. 421. Favorable treatment of managed care plans and utilization review
programs.
`Part C--Favorable Treatment of Managed Care
`Sec. 2331. Favorable treatment of managed care plans.
`Sec. 2332. Favorable treatment of utilization review programs.
TITLE V--EXPANSION OF PRIMARY CARE AND PUBLIC HEALTH DELIVERY CAPACITY IN
MEETING HEALTH OBJECTIVES
Sec. 501. extension of authorizations for primary care and public health
programs through the year 2000.
Sec. 502. Expanding primary care and public health delivery capacity.
Sec. 503. Annual report on impact of Act in meeting goals and objectives
stated in `Healthy People, 2000'.
TITLE VI--FINANCING AND TAX-RELATED PROVISIONS
Sec. 601. Progressive financing of public health insurance plan.
Sec. 602. State maintenance of effort payments.
Sec. 603. Full deduction for qualified health plan insurance costs of
self-employed individuals.
Sec. 604. Excise tax for violation of health benefit plan requirements.
Sec. 605. Refundable credit for qualified plan costs of very small employers.
Sec. 606. Repeal of COBRA continuation requirements.
TITLE VII--MEDICARE AND MEDICAID AMENDMENTS
Subtitle A--Medicare
Sec. 701. Protection for low-income medicare beneficiaries.
Sec. 702. Phased-in requirement of part B enrollment.
Sec. 703. Changes in participation agreements.
Sec. 704. Assuring coordination of enrollment with qualified health plans.
Sec. 705. Miscellaneous.
Subtitle B--Medicaid
Sec. 711. Coordination with public health insurance program.
TITLE VIII--CONFORMING CHANGES TO ERISA
Sec. 801. Repeal of COBRA continuation requirements.
TITLE I--ACCESS TO PRIVATE OR PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE FOR BASIC HEALTH
SERVICES THROUGH EMPLOYMENT
SEC. 101. EMPLOYMENT-BASED HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE.
 The Social Security Act is amended by adding at the end the following
 new title:
`TITLE XXI--ACCESS TO PRIVATE OR PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE FOR BASIC HEALTH
SERVICES THROUGH EMPLOYMENT
`Part A--Employer Requirement to Enroll Employees and Families in a Qualified
Employer Health Plan or in Public Health Insurance Plan
`SEC. 2101. APPLICATION TO FULL-TIME EMPLOYEES.
 `(a) UNMARRIED EMPLOYEES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this part, each employer shall,
 in accordance with this title, enroll each of its full-time employees who
 is unmarried in a qualified employer health plan (or in the public health
 insurance plan, if elected by the employer under section 2105).
 `(2) MULTIPLE FULL-TIME EMPLOYMENT- In the case of an unmarried individual
 who is a full-time employee of more than 1 employer, the individual
 shall elect (in a manner specified by the Secretary) the covered employer
 health plan (as defined in section 2121(b)) under which the individual
 will be enrolled.
 `(b) MARRIED EMPLOYEES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this part, each employer shall,
 in accordance with this title, enroll each of its full-time employees who
 is married in a qualified employer health plan (or in the public health
 insurance plan, if elected by the employer under section 2105).
 `(2) BOTH FULL-TIME EMPLOYEES-
 `(A) ASSIGNMENT BASED ON DATE OF BIRTH RULE- In the case of married
 individuals both of whom are full-time employees, both individuals shall
 be enrolled in the covered employer health plan of the employee with the
 earlier month, day, and time of birth in the year.
 `(B) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as preventing
 the nonenrolling plan from supplementing the benefits of the enrolling plan.
 `(C) DEFINITIONS- In this paragraph, the terms `enrolling employer' and
 `enrolling plan' mean, with respect to a married couple, the employer that
 offers the covered employer health plan in which the couple is enrolled under
 subparagraph (A) and such plan, respectively, and the terms `nonenrolling
 employer' and `nonenrolling plan' mean the other employer and other covered
 employer health plan.
 `(3) MULTIPLE FULL-TIME EMPLOYMENT- In the case of married individuals both
 of whom are full-time employees, if either spouse is a full-time employee
 of more than 1 employer that spouse shall elect the employer which shall
 be treated as the spouse's enrolling employer in applying this subsection.
`SEC. 2102. APPLICATION TO PART-TIME EMPLOYEES.
 `(a) REQUIRED ENROLLMENT OR CONTRIBUTION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL-
 `(A) REGULAR PART-TIME EMPLOYEES- Except as provided in this part, with
 respect to each part-time employee who is not a medicare beneficiary and
 who normally performs on a monthly basis for the employer 10 or more hours
 of service per week, each employer shall, in accordance with this title,
 enroll the employee (and families members) in a qualified employer health
 plan (or in the public health insurance plan, if elected by the employer
 under section 2105).
 `(B) VERY PART-TIME EMPLOYEES- Except as provided in this part, with respect
 to each part-time employee who is not a medicare beneficiary and who normally
 performs on a monthly basis for the employer less than 10 hours of service
 per week, each employer shall, in accordance with this title, either--
 `(i) enroll the employee (and family member) in a qualified employer health
 plan, or
 `(ii) subject to subsection (c), provide for a contribution towards the
 employee's enrollment under the public health insurance plan in an amount
 equal to not less than the minimum amount specified in subsection (b).
 `(2) FULL-TIME EMPLOYMENT EXCEPTION- Paragraph (1) shall not apply with
 respect to a part-time employee if--
 `(A) the employee is the full-time employee of another employer,
 `(B) the employee's spouse is a full-time employee, or
 `(C) the employee is the child of an individual who is a full-time employee.
 `(3) UNIFORM ELECTION- The election under paragraph (1)(B) shall be made
 uniformly with respect to all part-time employees.
 `(b) MINIMUM CONTRIBUTION- For purposes of subsection (a)(1)(B)(ii),
 subject to subsection (c), the minimum amount specified in this subsection
 with respect to an employee is the product of--
 `(1) the employer premium percentage determined under section 2231(b)(2)
 for the year, and
 `(2) the wages paid by the employer with respect to such employee for the
 period during which the contribution is required.
 `(c) MULTIPLE PART-TIME EMPLOYMENT- Subject to subsection (a)(2),
 the treatment of unmarried, and married, individuals who have multiple
 part-time employment shall be governed by rules, established by the
 Secretary, based on the principles of the rules for multiple full-time
 employment described in subsections (a)(2) and (b)(3) of section 2101.
`SEC. 2103. APPLICATION TO SEASONAL AND TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in section 2104(b), in the case of
 an employee designated under paragraph (3) as a seasonal or temporary
 employee (as defined in section 2181(b)(3)), whether a part-time or
 full-time employee, instead of enrolling the employee (and family members)
 in the qualified employer health plan of the employer, the employer shall
 make a payment to the public health insurance plan in an amount not less
 than the minimum amount specified in subsection (b), and the amount of
 such payment shall be credited towards the enrollment of the employee
 (and family members) under the public health insurance plan. The failure
 of the employee to be enrolled in the public health insurance plan shall
 not affect the liability for, or amount of the, such payment to the plan.
 `(2) FULL-TIME EMPLOYMENT EXCEPTION- Paragraph (1) shall not apply with
 respect to a seasonal or temporary employee if--
 `(A) the employee is the full-time or part-time employee (but not a seasonal
 or temporary employee) of another employer, or
 `(B) the employee's spouse is a full-time or part-time employee (but not
 a seasonal or temporary employee).
 `(3) DESIGNATION OF SEASONAL OR TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES- Each employer shall
 designate, at the time of initial employment and in a manner specified by
 the Secretary, if the individual is to be treated under this title as a
 seasonal or temporary employee.
 `(4) KEEPING CONTRIBUTION IF NOT ENROLLED- A contribution is required with
 respect to an employee (and family members) under paragraph (1) regardless
 of whether or not the employee (and family members) are enrolled under
 the public health insurance plan.
 `(b) MINIMUM CONTRIBUTION- The minimum amount specified in this subsection
 with respect to an employee is the product of--
 `(1) the employer premium percentage computed under section 2231(b)(2)
 for the year, and
 `(2) the wages paid by the employer with respect to such employee for the
 period during which the contribution is required.
`SEC. 2104. TREATMENT OF ALL FAMILY MEMBERS AS A UNIT.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- In accordance with section 2252(a), enrollment of an
 employee in a covered employer health plan shall include enrollment of
 the other family members of the employee.
 `(b) NO CONTRIBUTION REQUIRED FOR CHILDREN- In the case of an individual
 who is a child, the employer of the child is not required to enroll the
 child in a covered employer health plan or make a contribution with respect
 to enrollment under the public health insurance plan on behalf of a child
 by virtue of the part-time or full-time employment of the child (whether
 or not the parent of the child is a full-time or part-time employee).
`SEC. 2105. MEETING REQUIREMENT OF ENROLLMENT IN QUALIFIED EMPLOYER HEALTH
PLAN THROUGH ENROLLMENT IN PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- In the case where an employer is required under this part
 to enroll employees (and family members) in a qualified employer health
 plan, the employer may elect to meet such requirement by entering into an
 agreement with the Secretary to enroll such individuals under the public
 health insurance plan.
 `(b) CONTENTS OF AGREEMENT- Such agreement shall provide, among other
 things, for the following:
 `(1) The employer shall provide to the Secretary (in such form and manner
 as the Secretary may specify and no later than the date enrollment under
 a qualified employer health plan is required under this part) completed
 application forms for enrollment with the public health insurance plan
 of employees (and family members) required to be enrolled under this part
 and covered under the agreement.
 `(2) The employer shall provide for payment of employer premiums (in the
 amount established under section 2231(b)) with respect to such enrollment.
 `(3) The employer shall withhold from the pay of the employee any amount
 of the employee premium applicable to such enrollment which is charged by
 the employer consistent with section 2122(b) (relating to limitation on
 employee premiums).
 `(c) ELECTION FOR FULL-TIME AND PART-TIME EMPLOYEES OR FOR PART-TIME
 EMPLOYEES ONLY- The election under subsection (a), insofar as it applies
 to employees who are not seasonal or temporary employees, shall only be
 available with respect to either--
 `(1) all employees (and their family members), including part-time
 employees, or
 `(2) all part-time employees (and their family members).
`SEC. 2106. APPLICATION OF REQUIREMENT TO EMPLOYERS OF DIFFERENT SIZES.
 `(a) LARGE EMPLOYERS- Except as provided in subsection (d), the requirements
 of this part apply to large employers as of January 1 of the 4th year
 beginning after the date of the enactment of this title.
 `(b) SMALL EMPLOYERS THAT ARE NOT VERY SMALL EMPLOYERS-
 `(1) BASELINE SURVEY OF CURRENT AVAILABILITY- The Secretary shall
 provide for a survey of small employers that are not very small employers
 respecting their offering, as of January of the first year beginning after
 the date of the enactment of this title, of health benefits to employees
 for which there is some employer contribution toward part or all of the
 costs of coverage. Based on such survey, the Secretary shall determine
 the percentage, as of such month, of full-time equivalent employees of
 such employers who have been offered health benefits for which there is
 some such employer contribution.
 `(2) INITIAL FOLLOW-UP SURVEY- The Secretary shall provide for a survey of
 small employers that are not very small employers respecting the coverage,
 as of January of the 4th year beginning after the date of the enactment of
 this title, of their employees under a qualified employer health plan. Based
 on such survey, the Secretary shall determine the percentage, as of such
 month, of full-time equivalent employees of such employers who are covered
 under a qualified employer health plan.
 `(3) 80 PERCENT TEST-
 `(A) FAILURE TO MEET TEST- If the percentage determined (under a survey
 as of January of a year) under paragraph (2) (or, if applicable, under
 subparagraph (B)(ii)) is less than the target percentage (as defined in
 subparagraph (C)), then, subject to subsection (d), the requirements of
 this part apply to small employers that are not very small employers as
 of January 1 of the following year.
 `(B) TEST MET- If the percentage determined (under a survey as of January
 of a year) under paragraph (2) (or, if applicable, under clause (ii)
 of this subparagraph) is not less than the target percentage--
 `(i) the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on how to assure
 coverage of all full-time employees (and family members) of small employers
 that are not very small employers under qualified health plans,
 `(ii) the Secretary shall provide for a survey and determination, of the
 type described in paragraph (2), for the month of January in the following
 year, and
 `(iii) the provisions of this paragraph (other than clause (i)) shall also
 apply to the survey (and any subsequent surveys under clause (ii)).
No subsequent surveys shall be conducted under clause (ii) after the first
year in which condition described in subparagraph (A) has been met.
 `(C) TARGET PERCENTAGE DEFINED- In this paragraph, the term `target
 percentage' means the percentage determined under paragraph (1) plus 80
 percent of the difference between such percentage and 100 percent.
 `(4) EMPLOYEES DO NOT INCLUDE MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES- In this subsection
 (and, by reference, subsection (c)) the term `employees' does not include
 medicare beneficiaries.
 `(c) VERY SMALL EMPLOYERS- The provisions of subsection (b) shall be applied
 separately to very small employers in the same manner as they apply to
 small employers that are not very small employers, except that, for this
 purpose, the reference in subsection (b)(2) to the 4th year beginning
 after the date of the enactment of this title is deemed a reference to
 the 5th year beginning after such date.
 `(d) TRANSITIONAL RULES-
 `(1) EXCEPTION FOR NON-FULL-TIME WORKERS- The requirements of this part
 shall in no case apply to part-time employees or to seasonal or temporary
 employees earlier than January 1 of the 6th year beginning after the date
 of the enactment of this title.
 `(2) TRANSITION FOR COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS- The requirements
 of this part shall not apply to employers with respect to their employees,
 insofar as such employees are covered under a collective bargaining agreement
 ratified before the date of the enactment of this title, earlier than the
 date of termination of such agreement (determined without regard to any
 extension thereof agreed to after the date of the enactment of this title).
 `(3) SUSPENSION OF DATE OF BIRTH- In the case of married individuals both of
 whom are full-time employees, the rule (described in section 2101(b)(2)(A))
 requiring coverage under a covered employer health plan based on a date
 of birth rule shall only apply if both spouses are required under this
 part to be enrolled under a qualified employer health plan.
`SEC. 2107. TIMING OF ENROLLMENT; PERIOD OF COVERAGE.
 `(a) TIMING OF ENROLLMENT; NOTICES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Enrollment under this part shall occur not later than
 the date on which the employment, for which such enrollment is required
 under this part, commences.
 `(2) REFERENCE TO DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENT- For requirement for disclosure
 to employees of information respecting--
 `(A) certain managed care plans, and
 `(B) the availability of low-income assistance under part E of title XXII,
see section 2258(a)(2).
 `(b) PERIOD OF COVERAGE-
 `(1) BEGINNING OF COVERAGE- Coverage under a covered employer health plan
 shall begin in accordance with section 2252(b).
 `(2) TERMINATION OF COVERAGE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- If an enrollment is effected under this part on the basis
 of employment, coverage under such enrollment may be terminated, subject
 to subparagraph (B), on the last day of the month (or of any subsequent
 month) during which such employment is terminated.
 `(B) NOTICE REQUIRED- Effective on the date specified in section 2257(b)(2),
 coverage under a covered employer health plan shall not be terminated as of
 the last day of a month unless notice has been provided to the Secretary,
 as required in section 2257(b)(1), of such termination at least 7 days
 before the last day of that month.
 `(3) TREATMENT OF FAMILY MEMBERS- Subject to section 2252, the period of
 coverage for family members of an employee shall be the same as the period
 of coverage for the employee.
`SEC. 2108. ENFORCEMENT.
 `(a) COMPLAINTS AND INVESTIGATIONS- The Secretary shall establish
 procedures--
 `(1) for individuals and entities to file written, signed complaints
 respecting potential violations of the requirements of this part,
 `(2) for the investigation of those complaints which, on their face,
 have a substantial probability of validity, and
 `(3) for the investigation of such other violations of the requirements
 of this part as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
For purposes of this paragraph, the designation as a seasonal or temporary
employee under section 2103(a)(3) of an individual who is employed for periods
in excess of the period permitted under section 2181(b)(3) constitutes a
violation of the requirements of this part.
 `(b) AUTHORITY IN INVESTIGATIONS- In conducting investigations and hearings
 under this section--
 `(1) agents of the Secretary and administrative law judges shall have
 reasonable access to examine evidence of any person or entity being
 investigated, and
 `(2) administrative law judges, may, if necessary, compel by subpoena the
 attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence at any designated
 place or hearing.
In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena lawfully issued under this
subsection and upon application of the Secretary, an appropriate district
court of the United States may issue an order requiring compliance with such
subpoena and any failure to obey such order may be punished by such court
as a contempt thereof.
 `(c) HEARING-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Before imposing an order described in subsection (d)
 against an employer under this section for a violation of the requirements
 of this part, the Secretary shall provide the employer with notice and,
 upon request made within a reasonable time (of not less than 30 days,
 as established by the Secretary) of the date of the notice, a hearing
 respecting the violation.
 `(2) CONDUCT OF HEARING- Any hearing so requested shall be conducted
 before an administrative law judge under section 201. If no hearing is
 so requested, the Secretary's imposition of the order shall constitute a
 final and unappealable order.
 `(3) ISSUANCE OF ORDERS- If the administrative law judge determines, upon
 the preponderance of the evidence received, that an employer named in the
 complaint has violated the requirements of this part, the administrative
 law judge shall state his findings of fact and issue and cause to be served
 on such employer an order described in subsection (d).
 `(d) CEASE AND DESIST ORDER WITH CIVIL MONEY PENALTY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this subsection,
 the order under this section--
 `(A) shall require the employer--
 `(i) to cease and desist from such violations, and
 `(ii) to pay a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed 3 times the amount
 of premiums which the employer would be required to pay to enroll all
 individuals (otherwise required under this part to be enrolled under a
 qualified employer health plan) under the public health insurance plan a
 period of not less than 1 year; and
 `(B) may require the employer to take such other remedial action as is
 appropriate.
 `(2) CORRECTIONS WITHIN 30 DAYS- No order shall be imposed under this
 section by reason of any violation if the employer establishes to the
 satisfaction of the Secretary that--
 `(A) such violation was due to reasonable cause and not to willful
 neglect, and
 `(B) such violation is corrected within the 30-day period beginning on
 earliest date the employer knew, or exercising reasonable diligence could
 have known, that such a violation was occurring.
 `(3) WAIVER BY SECRETARY- In the case of a violation which is due to
 reasonable cause and not to willful neglect, the Secretary may waive part
 or all of the civil money penalty imposed by paragraph (1)(A)(ii) to the
 extent that payment of such penalty would be grossly excessive relative
 to the violation involved and to the need for deterrence of violations.
 `(4) STATE LOSS OF FUNDS- In the case of an employer that is a State or
 political subdivision of a State or an agency or instrumentality of a State
 or political subdivision and that violates the requirements of this part,
 instead of imposing a civil money penalty under paragraph (1)(A)(ii),
 there shall be imposed an order reducing payments to the State (in which
 the violation occurs), under title IV, V, XIX, or XX (as specified by
 the Secretary), in an amount equivalent to the amount of the civil money
 penalty that otherwise would be imposed in the case of other employers.
 `(e) ADMINISTRATIVE APPELLATE REVIEW- The decision and order of
 an administrative law judge shall become the final agency decision and
 order of the Secretary unless, within 30 days, the Secretary modifies or
 vacates the decision and order, in which case the decision and order of
 the Secretary shall become a final order under this section.
 `(f) JUDICIAL REVIEW- An employer adversely affected by a final order
 issued under this section may, within 45 days after the date the final
 order is issued, file a petition in the Court of Appeals for the appropriate
 circuit for review of the order.
 `(g) ENFORCEMENT OF ORDERS- If an employer fails to comply with a final order
 issued under this section against the employer, the Secretary shall file a
 suit to seek compliance with the order in any appropriate district court
 of the United States. In any such suit, the validity and appropriateness
 of the final order shall not be subject to review.
 `(h) USE OF AMOUNTS COLLECTED- Civil money penalties collected under this
 section shall be credited to the Public Health Insurance Trust Fund.
`Part B--Requirements for Qualified Employer Health Plans
`SEC. 2121. QUALIFIED EMPLOYER HEALTH PLAN AND COVERED EMPLOYER HEALTH
PLAN DEFINED.
 `(a) QUALIFIED EMPLOYER HEALTH PLAN DEFINED- In this title and title XXII,
 the term `qualified employer health plan' means an employment-related
 health plan (as defined in section 2304(a)(2)) that--
 `(1) is a qualified health plan (as defined in section 2251(a)),
 `(2) except as provided in section 2122, does not impose premiums,
 deductibles, or copayments on employees (and family members) required to
 be enrolled in a covered employer health plan under part A, and
 `(3) meets the requirements of section 2243(c)(3) (relating to coordination
 of low-income assistance for deductibles and coinsurance).
Such term does not include the public health insurance plan.
 `(b) COVERED EMPLOYER HEALTH PLAN DEFINED- In this title, the term `covered
 employer health plan' means, with respect to employees (and family members)
 whom an employer is required to enroll under part A, the qualified employer
 health plan in which they are enrolled or, in the case of an election
 with respect to such employees (and family members) under section 2105,
 the public health insurance plan.
`SEC. 2122. REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO EMPLOYEE PREMIUMS AND COST-SHARING.
 `(a) ENROLLEE PREMIUMS AND COST-SHARING PERMITTED-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A qualified employer health plan may require an enrollee
 to pay for--
 `(A) premiums for coverage under the plan, but only if the premiums do
 not exceed the limitations imposed under this section, and
 `(B) cost-sharing amounts for coverage under the plan, but only if the
 cost-sharing does not exceed the limitations on deductibles, copayments,
 and coinsurance imposed with respect to qualified health plans under
 section 2255.
 `(2) TREATMENT OF ADDITIONAL, REQUIRED COVERAGE- If a qualified employer
 health plan provides benefits in addition to the benefits required under
 this title and the employee is not permitted the option of not accepting
 such additional benefits, the plan--
 `(A) may not impose a premium, for such basic and additional benefits,
 that exceeds the premiums that may be imposed for the basic benefits, and
 `(B) shall assure that cost-sharing is not imposed with respect to basic
 health services once the cost-sharing limit has been reached in a year
 with respect to benefits for such services.
 `(3) NONDISCRIMINATION IN PREMIUM AMOUNTS- Under a qualified employer
 health plan, no employee may be charged a different premium for similar
 benefits in the same covered employer health plan for the same beneficiary
 class based on the age or sex of the employee.
 `(b) LIMITATION ON PREMIUMS-
 `(1) MONTHLY PREMIUM LIMITED TO 20 PERCENT OF ACTUARIAL RATE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- A qualified employer health plan may not require an
 employee to pay a premium--
 `(i) for coverage for a period of longer than one month, or
 `(ii) the amount of which on a monthly basis exceeds 20 percent of the
 monthly actuarial rate (as defined under subparagraph (B)).
 `(B) MONTHLY ACTUARIAL RATE DEFINED- For purposes of this subsection,
 the term `monthly actuarial rate' means--
 `(i) with respect to a qualified employer health plan in a plan year, the
 average monthly per enrollee amount that the plan estimates, for enrollees
 under the plan during the year, would be necessary to pay for the total
 benefits required during the year under the plan (with respect to basic
 health services), including administrative costs for the provision of such
 benefits and an appropriate amount for a contingency margin, or
 `(ii) with respect to the public health insurance plan, the beneficiary
 actuarial rate (established under section 2231(a)(2)) applicable to basic
 health services in the community with respect to the beneficiary class
 which describes the employee's enrollment.
 `(C) APPLICATION ON BASIS OF FAMILY STATUS- For purposes of subparagraph
 (B)(i), a qualified employer health plan may provide for the premium to be
 applied, and the monthly actuarial rate described in such subparagraph to
 be estimated, for basic health services based on the beneficiary classes
 described in section 2231(d)(1) (other than subparagraphs (A) and (C))
 or on such other beneficiary classifications, consistent with subsection
 (a), as the employer or plan may specify.
 `(3) LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT OF PREMIUMS- An employee enrolled under a
 qualified employer health plan is liable for payment of premiums required
 under that plan in accordance with this subsection. In no case shall
 an employee be liable for premiums with respect to a qualified employer
 health plan, other than the portion of the premium which may be imposed
 on the employee consistent with this section.
 `(4) WITHHOLDING PERMITTED- No provision of State law shall prevent an
 employer of an employee enrolled under a qualified employer health plan
 from withholding the amount of any premium due by the employee under this
 subsection from the wages paid the employee.
 `(5) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this section shall be construed--
 `(A) as preventing an employer from paying part or all of the employee
 premium for basic health services or other health services, or
 `(B) subject to subsection (a), from requiring an employee to pay for
 all or part of the premium for benefits for services other than basic
 health services.
`Part C--Definitions and Miscellaneous
`SEC. 2181. DEFINITIONS.
 `(a) EMPLOYEE, EMPLOYER, EMPLOYMENT, WAGES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In this title, except as otherwise provided in this
 section, the terms `wages', `employer', `employee', and `employment'
 have the same meanings as such terms have for purposes of chapter 21 of
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 `(2) MODIFICATIONS OF RULES- In applying paragraph (1)--
 `(A) the exceptions specified in paragraphs (5), (6), (7), and (8) of section
 3121(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall not be applied, and
 `(B) in applying section 3121(a) of such Code, the limitation of wages
 to the contribution and benefit base under section 3121(a) of such Code
 shall not apply.
 `(3) TREATMENT OF FEDERAL EMPLOYMENT- In applying paragraph (1), the term
 `employment' shall not be considered to include service performed in the
 employ of the United States if, in connection with the performance of such
 service, the individual--
 `(A) is enrolled in a health benefits plan under chapter 89 of title 5,
 United States Code, or
 `(B) is provided medical and dental benefits under chapter 55 of title 10,
 United States Code.
 `(b) DEFINITIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES- In this title:
 `(1) FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE- The term `full-time employee' means, with respect
 to an employer, an employee who normally performs on a monthly basis at
 least 25 hours of service per week for that employer.
 `(2) PART-TIME EMPLOYEE- The term `part-time employee' means, with respect
 to an employer, an employee who is not a full-time employee.
 `(3) SEASONAL OR TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE- The term `seasonal or temporary
 employee' means, with respect to an employer, an employee who is employed
 by the employer for not more than 4 months in any 12 month period; except
 that the Secretary may extend such period for up to 6 months in any 12
 month period in the case of employment that is sporadic, irregular, and
 seasonal in nature.
 `(4) TREATMENT OF CONSULTANTS AND CONTRACTORS- The term `employee'
 includes an individual who is a consultant or contractor of an employer
 if the Secretary determines that the consulting arrangement or contract
 was entered into to avoid the requirements of this title.
 `(5) EXCLUSION OF FOREIGN EMPLOYMENT- The term `employee' does not include
 an individual--
 `(A) who is not a citizen or resident of the United States with respect
 to service performed outside the United States, or
 `(B) who is a citizen or resident of the United States with respect to
 services performed outside the United States for an employer other than an
 American employer (as defined in section 3121(h) of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986).
 `(c) DEFINITIONS RELATING TO SIZE OF EMPLOYER- In this title:
 `(1) VERY SMALL EMPLOYER- The term `very small employer' means, with
 respect to a calendar year, an employer that normally employs fewer than
 25 employees on a typical business day during the calendar year.
 `(2) SMALL EMPLOYER- The term `small employer' means, with respect to a
 calendar year, an employer that normally employs fewer than 101 employees
 on a typical business day during the calendar year.
 `(3) LARGE EMPLOYER- The term `large employer' means an employer that is
 not a small employer.
 `(4) APPLICATION OF CONTROLLED GROUP RULES- For purposes of determining
 if an employer is a very small, small, or large employer or the number
 of hours an individual is normally employed with respect to an employer,
 rules similar to the rules of subsection (b) and (c) of section 414 of
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall apply.
 `(d) INCORPORATION OF DEFINITIONS- Except as otherwise provided in this
 title, the terms defined in section 2282 and 2283 shall apply under this
 title in the same manner as they apply under title XXII.
`SEC. 2182. NONAPPLICATION TO RESIDENTS OF PUERTO RICO AND TERRITORIES.
 `The provisions of this title shall not apply with respect to an employee
 who is not a resident of one of the 50 States or the District of Columbia.'.
TITLE II--ACCESS TO HEALTH INSURANCE FOR BASIC HEALTH SERVICES THROUGH A
PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN
SEC. 201. PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN.
 The Social Security Act is amended by adding after the title added by
 section 101 the following new title:
`TITLE XXII--ACCESS TO HEALTH INSURANCE FOR BASIC HEALTH SERVICES THROUGH
A PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN
`Part A--Eligibility and Enrollment
`SEC. 2201. ELIGIBILITY TO ENROLL FOR HEALTH INSURANCE BENEFITS AND TO APPLY
FOR LOW-INCOME ASSISTANCE.
 `(a) ELIGIBILITY TO ENROLL FOR HEALTH INSURANCE BENEFITS- Subject to
 subsection (c)--
 `(1) ENROLLMENT TO OBTAIN BENEFITS WITH RESPECT TO BASIC HEALTH SERVICES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Each eligible individual (as defined in subsection (d))
 who is not a medicare beneficiary is eligible to enroll under this title--
 `(i) on a non-employment basis, for health insurance benefits with respect
 to basic health services and with respect to EPSDT services, or
 `(ii) on an employment basis, for health insurance benefits with respect
 to basic health services.
 `(B) ENROLLMENT UNDER TITLE ON AN EMPLOYMENT AND NON-EMPLOYMENT BASIS
 DEFINED- An eligible individual is considered, for purposes of this title,
 to be enrolled under this title--
 `(i) with respect to basic health services on an `employment basis' only
 if the individual is enrolled by an employer pursuant to a public plan
 election under section 2105, or
 `(ii) on a `non-employment basis'--
 `(I) with respect to EPSDT services and medicare supplemental benefits, and
 `(II) with respect to basic health services, if the individual is enrolled
 under this title other than on an employment basis.
 `(C) ENROLLMENT UNDER A QUALIFIED EMPLOYER HEALTH PLAN DEFINED- An individual
 is considered, for purposes of this title, to be `enrolled under a qualified
 employer health plan' if--
 `(i) the individual is enrolled under a qualified employer health plan
 (as defined in section 2281(b)(7)) as an employee (or family member of
 an employee),
 `(ii) the employer is required to provide for such enrollment (or, in
 the case of a public plan election, for enrollment under this title)
 under part A of title XXI, and
 `(iii) the amount of the employee share of the premium is limited under
 section 2122(b).
 `(2) ENROLLMENT TO OBTAIN BENEFITS WITH RESPECT TO EPSDT SERVICES- An
 eligible individual who--
 `(A)(i) is enrolled under this title on an employment basis, (ii) is
 enrolled under a qualified employer health plan, or (iii) is enrolled
 under another qualified health plan, and
 `(B) is not a medicare beneficiary,
is eligible to enroll under this title with respect to EPSDT services.
 `(3) NON-EMPLOYED MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES- In the case of an eligible
 individual who--
 `(A) is a medicare beneficiary, and
 `(B) is not enrolled under a qualified employer health plan or under this
 title on an employment basis,
the individual is eligible to enroll under this title with respect to
medicare supplemental benefits only if the individual is a low-income medicare
beneficiary (as defined in section 2283(a)(1)(B)).
 `(b) ELIGIBILITY TO APPLY FOR LOW-INCOME ASSISTANCE- Subject to subsection
 (c), each eligible individual who--
 `(1) is enrolled in the public health insurance plan under this title,
 whether on a non-employment basis or on an employment basis,
 `(2) is enrolled under a qualified employer health plan, or
 `(3) is a medicare beneficiary,
is eligible to apply for low-income assistance under part E.
 `(c) PHASE-IN OF ELIGIBILITY-
 `(1) DELAY IN FULL ELIGIBILITY- Except as provided in paragraph (2),
 no individual is eligible to enroll for any health insurance benefits
 under this title or to apply for low-income assistance under part E for
 any period before January 1 of the 6th year beginning after the date of
 the enactment of this title.
 `(2) ELIGIBILITY PHASE-IN-
 `(A) CHILDREN AND PREGNANT WOMEN- Children under 7 years of age and pregnant
 women (as defined in section 2282) are eligible to enroll under this title
 on a non-employment basis and to apply for low-income assistance under
 part E effective on January 1 of the 2nd year beginning after the date of
 the enactment of this title.
 `(B) ALL CHILDREN- Unmarried individuals under 19 years of age are eligible
 to enroll under this title on a non-employment basis and to apply for
 low-income assistance under part E effective on January 1 of the 3rd year
 beginning after the date of the enactment of this title.
 `(C) EMPLOYEES OF LARGE EMPLOYERS- Large employers may provide for
 enrollment of employees (and family members) on an employment basis
 effective January 1 of the 4th year beginning after the date of the
 enactment of this title. Employees of such employers (and their family
 members) who are enrolled under qualified employer health plans (or under
 this title on an employment basis) are eligible as of such date to apply
 for low-income assistance under part E.
 `(D) OTHER EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS- Any other employer who is subject to the
 requirements of part A of title XXI may provide for enrollment of employees
 (and family members) on an employment basis. Employees of such employers
 (and their family members) who are enrolled under qualified employer health
 plans (or under this title on an employment basis) are eligible as of the
 date the employers are subject to such requirements to apply for low-income
 assistance under part E.
 `(d) ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL DEFINED- In this section, the term `eligible
 individual' means an individual who is--
 `(1)(A) a citizen or national of the United States, (B) an alien lawfully
 admitted for permanent residence, or (C) an alien otherwise residing
 permanently in the United States under color of law, and
 `(2) a resident of the United States.
`SEC. 2202. APPLICATION FOR ENROLLMENT.
 `(a) PERIOD OF APPLICATION- Individuals eligible to enroll under this
 title may apply to enroll at any time at which they are so eligible.
 `(b) APPLICATION PROCESS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The filing of a complete application for enrollment
 under this title shall (except as the Secretary may provide) constitute
 enrollment under this title. Such an application may be filed with the
 Secretary by mail or at such locations as the Secretary may specify.
 `(2) AVAILABILITY OF APPLICATIONS- The Secretary shall make applications
 for enrollment under this title available--
 `(A) at local offices of the Social Security Administration,
 `(B) at out-reach sites (such as provider locations), and
 `(C) at other locations accessible to a broad cross-section of individuals
 eligible to enroll.
 `(3) APPLICATION FOR LOW-INCOME ASSISTANCE- An application for enrollment
 under this section may (but need not) be accompanied by an application
 for low-income assistance under part E.
 `(4) RESTRICTION ON USE OF AGENTS- The Secretary may not provide for
 receipt or processing of applications for enrollment under this title--
 `(A) by any non-Federal entity which is directly or indirectly involved
 in the administration of title IV, XVI, or XIX of this Act, or
 `(B) by any entity which does not meet such standards as the Secretary
 establishes to assure the confidentiality of information collected in the
 enrollment process.
`SEC. 2203. COVERAGE PERIOD; TERMINATION OF ENROLLMENT.
 `(a) BEGINNING OF COVERAGE- For provision regarding the beginning of
 coverage under the public health insurance plan, see section 2252(b).
 `(b) TERMINATION OF ENROLLMENT DURING TRANSITION PERIOD-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Before January 1 of the 6th year beginning after the date
 of the enactment of this title, except as provided in paragraph (3)--
 `(A) an individual enrolled under this title may terminate enrollment on
 a non-employment basis by providing written notice to the Secretary that
 the individual--
 `(i) no longer wishes to be enrolled in the public health insurance plan, or
 `(ii) is enrolled under a qualified health plan or is a medicare beneficiary;
 and
 `(B) the Secretary may terminate enrollment on a non-employment basis
 of an individual, after providing the individual (or the individual's
 representative) with written notice, for failure to pay premiums required
 with respect to such enrollment.
 `(2) EFFECTIVE DATE OF TERMINATION- A termination of enrollment under
 paragraph (1)(A) shall take effect at the close of the month following
 the month in which the notice is filed. A termination of enrollment under
 paragraph (1)(B) shall take effect on a date (determined under regulations)
 after the date written notice of such termination has been provided to
 the enrollee (or the enrollee's representative). Such regulations shall
 provide a grace period of at least 1 month after the date of written notice
 in which overdue premiums may be paid and coverage continued.
 `(3) MINIMUM PERIOD OF ENROLLMENT DURING TRANSITION- Subject to paragraph
 (4), before January 1 of the 6th year beginning after the date of the
 enactment of this title--
 `(A) IN GENERAL- An individual (other than a pregnant woman or newborn)
 who is enrolled under this title on a non-employment basis may not terminate
 enrollment less than 12 months after the date of the enrollment.
 `(B) PREGNANT WOMEN AND NEWBORNS- In the case of a woman who is enrolled
 under this title during pregnancy on a non-employment basis--
 `(i) the enrollment of the woman may not be terminated earlier than the
 end of the month in which the 60-day period, beginning on the last day of
 the pregnancy, ends; and
 `(ii) the newborn child shall be deemed enrolled under this title as of
 the date of birth, and such enrollment may not be terminated earlier than
 the end of the month in which the child's first birthday occurs.
 `(4) TERMINATION PERMITTED IF COVERED UNDER ANOTHER QUALIFIED HEALTH PLAN-
 The minimum period of enrollment under paragraph (3) shall not apply if,
 at the time of termination of enrollment, the individual is immediately
 covered under another qualified health plan which will provide coverage
 during the minimum period for which enrollment is otherwise required under
 such paragraph.
 `(c) TERMINATION OF ENROLLMENT AFTER TRANSITION PERIOD- For limitations
 on termination of enrollment under this title on or after January 1 of
 the 6th year beginning after the date of the enactment of this title,
 see section 2204(c).
`SEC. 2204. REQUIREMENT OF HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE.
 `(a) REQUIREMENT FOR ALL ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Effective on and after the date specified in subsection
 (e), each eligible individual (as defined in section 2201(d)) who is
 not an excepted individual (as defined in paragraph (2)), is deemed to
 have enrolled under this title on the date before such date or as soon
 thereafter as the individual is not an excepted individual. If such an
 individual has not filed an application for enrollment under this title
 by such date, the Secretary shall provide a means to collect information
 sufficient to effect such enrollment as soon as possible after such date.
 `(2) EXCEPTED INDIVIDUALS- For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `excepted
 individual' means an individual who--
 `(A) is a medicare beneficiary,
 `(B) is enrolled under a qualified employer health plan, or
 `(C) demonstrates (in a manner specified by the Secretary) enrollment
 under a qualified health plan or under a Federal health plan (as defined
 in subsection (f)).
 `(b) AUTOMATIC CONTINUING ENROLLMENT- For provisions relating to coordination
 of enrollment among qualified health plans and assuring continuous coverage
 for basic health services (and portability of health insurance benefits
 among such plans), see section 2257.
 `(c) LIMITATION ON TERMINATION OF ENROLLMENT FOR BASIC HEALTH SERVICES-
 Effective on the date specified in subsection (e) and with respect to
 basic health services--
 `(1) EMPLOYMENT-BASED ENROLLMENT- An individual enrolled under this title
 on an employment basis may not elect to terminate such enrollment.
 `(2) NON-EMPLOYMENT BASIS- An individual enrolled under this title on a
 non-employment may not terminate such enrollment unless--
 `(A) the individual is no longer eligible to be enrolled under this title
 because of a change of immigration or residency status, or
 `(B) the individual demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary
 that the individual is a medicare beneficiary or is enrolled under another
 qualified health plan.
 `(d) ENFORCEMENT-
 `(1) MONITORING OF INDIVIDUAL TAX RETURNS- The Secretary of the Treasury
 shall require, in conjunction with the filing of each individual income
 tax return under chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 or (in
 the case of individuals not required to file such a return) at such other
 times as the Secretary may specify, the filing of such information as may
 be necessary to establish compliance with subsection (a).
 `(2) RETROACTIVE ENROLLMENT- If such an individual has not provided
 evidence of enrollment in a qualified health plan or Federal health plan,
 the Secretary--
 `(A) shall enroll the individual pursuant to the filing of such return, and
 `(B) shall require the payment of twice the amounts of premiums that would
 have been paid if the person had been enrolled on a timely basis, unless
 the individual has established to the satisfaction of the Secretary good
 cause for the failure to enroll on a timely basis.
 `(e) EFFECTIVE DATE OF REQUIREMENT- The date specified in this subsection
 is January 1 of the 6th year beginning after the date of the enactment of
 this title.
 `(f) FEDERAL HEALTH PLAN DEFINED- In this section, the term `Federal health
 plan' means a health plan of, or contributed to by, the Federal Government on
 behalf of its employees, retirees, and their family members, and includes--
 `(1) the Federal employees health insurance program under chapter 89 of
 title 5, United States Code,
 `(2) the program for the provision of medical and dental benefits under
 chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, and
 `(3) the program for the provision of hospital care and medical services
 by the Department of Veterans' Affairs under chapter 17 of title 38,
 United States Code.
`Part B--Health Insurance Benefits
`SEC. 2211. BASIC HEALTH SERVICES (INCLUDING PREVENTIVE SERVICES) FOR
GENERAL ENROLLEES.
 `(a) GENERAL POPULATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in the succeeding provisions of this
 part, the health insurance benefits provided to an individual enrolled
 under this title (whether on an employment basis or a non-employment
 basis) shall consist of entitlement to have payment made, subject to the
 succeeding provisions of this title, with respect to basic health services
 (as defined in subsection (b)).
 `(b) BASIC HEALTH SERVICES DEFINED-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In this title, the term `basic health services' means,
 subject to paragraph (2), the following items and services:
 `(A) Preventive services (described in subsection (c)).
 `(B) Inpatient hospital services.
 `(C) Medical and other health services (as defined in section 2281(a)(9)),
 which include physicians' services and certain other practitioner services
 and outpatient and clinic services.
 `(2) TREATMENT OF MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE SERVICES- Basic health
 services include the items and services described in paragraph (1) for
 the treatment of mental illness, a mental disorder, or substance abuse,
 but do not include--
 `(A) inpatient hospital services for such treatment for any individual in
 excess of 45 days in any calendar year, and
 `(B) outpatient psychotherapy and counseling for such treatment for any
 individual in excess of 25 visits in any calendar year.
 `(c) PREVENTIVE SERVICES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In this title, the term `preventive services' means the
 following items and services furnished in accordance with any applicable
 periodicity schedule established under paragraph (2):
 `(A) Prenatal care (including home visitation services).
 `(B) Well-child care (including appropriate immunizations according to
 age and health history).
 `(C) Screening mammography (as defined in section 2281(a)(15)).
 `(D) Screening pap smear (as defined in section 2281(a)(16)).
 `(E) Family planning services.
 `(F) Colorectal cancer screening services (as defined by the Secretary).
 `(2) PERIODICITY SCHEDULES-
 `(A) PRENATAL CARE- With respect to prenatal care under paragraph (1)(A),
 the Secretary shall establish a schedule of periodicity which reflects the
 appropriate frequency with which such care should be provided to pregnant
 women, taking into account age and other risk factors.
 `(B) WELL-CHILD CARE- With respect to well-child care under paragraph
 (1)(B), the Secretary shall establish a schedule of periodicity which
 reflects the general, appropriate frequency with which such care should
 be provided routinely to healthy children.
 `(C) SCREENING MAMMOGRAPHY AND SCREENING PAP SMEAR- With respect to screening
 mammography and screening pap smear, the Secretary shall establish a schedule
 of periodicity which reflects the appropriate frequency with which such
 services should be provided to individuals, taking into account age and
 other risk factors.
 `(D) COLORECTAL CANCER SCREENING SERVICES- With respect to colorectal
 cancer screening services described in paragraph (1)(F), the Secretary
 shall establish a schedule of periodicity which reflects the appropriate
 frequency with which such services should be provided to individuals,
 taking into account age and other risk factors.
 `(3) CONSULTATION- The Secretary shall consult with recognized medical
 organizations involved in the respective field (or fields) of health in
 establishing the periodicity schedules under paragraph (2).
 `(4) STANDARDS- The Secretary shall establish standards for entities
 furnishing preventive services under this title, in the case of providers
 and practitioners who otherwise are not qualified to provide other services
 under title XVIII or this title.
 `(5) REVIEW OF ADDITIONAL PREVENTIVE SERVICES- The Secretary shall examine
 and periodically report to Congress on additional services that, based
 on studies of usefulness and cost-effectiveness, should be included as
 preventive services under this title.
`SEC. 2212. EPSDT SERVICES.
 `(a) INCLUDED WITH NON-EMPLOYMENT BASED ENROLLMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each child who is enrolled under this title on a
 non-employment basis is entitled to health insurance benefits with respect to
 EPSDT services, regardless of whether or not the child is entitled to health
 insurance benefits under this title with respect to basic health services.
 `(2) OPTIONAL EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS- Nothing in this section shall be
 construed as preventing an employer from providing, or as requiring an
 employer to provide, a contribution with respect to enrolling children of
 employees under this title in order to obtain health insurance benefits
 with respect to EPSDT services.
 `(b) EPSDT SERVICES DEFINED- In this title, the term `EPSDT services'
 means the following items and services, but only to the extent they are
 not preventive services (as defined in section 2211(c)(1)):
 `(1) Screening services--
 `(A) which are provided--
 `(i) at intervals which meet reasonable standards of medical and dental
 practice, as determined by the Secretary after consultation with recognized
 medical and dental organizations involved in child health care, and
 `(ii) at such other intervals, indicated as medically necessary, to determine
 the existence of certain physical or mental illnesses or conditions; and
 `(B) which shall at a minimum include--
 `(i) a comprehensive health and developmental history (including assessment
 of both physical and mental health development),
 `(ii) a comprehensive unclothed physical exam,
 `(iii) appropriate immunizations according to age and health history,
 `(iv) laboratory tests (including lead blood level assessment appropriate
 for age and risk factors), and
 `(v) health education (including anticipatory guidance).
 `(2) Vision services--
 `(A) which are provided--
 `(i) at intervals which meet reasonable standards of medical practice,
 as determined by the Secretary after consultation with recognized medical
 organizations involved in child health care, and
 `(ii) at such other intervals, indicated as medically necessary, to
 determine the existence of a suspected illness or condition; and
 `(B) which shall at a minimum include diagnosis and treatment for defects
 in vision, including eyeglasses.
 `(3) Dental services--
 `(A) which are provided--
 `(i) at intervals which meet reasonable standards of dental practice,
 as determined by the Secretary after consultation with recognized dental
 organizations involved in child health care, and
 `(ii) at such other intervals, indicated as medically necessary, to
 determine the existence of a suspected illness or condition; and
 `(B) which shall at a minimum include relief of pain and infections,
 restoration of teeth, and maintenance of dental health.
 `(4) Hearing services--
 `(A) which are provided--
 `(i) at intervals which meet reasonable standards of medical practice,
 as determined by the Secretary after consultation with recognized medical
 organizations involved in child health care, and
 `(ii) at such other intervals, indicated as medically necessary, to
 determine the existence of a suspected illness or condition; and
 `(B) which shall at a minimum include diagnosis and treatment for defects
 in hearing, including hearing aids.
 `(c) TREATMENT OF CERTAIN PROVIDERS AND PRACTITIONERS-
 `(1) STANDARDS- The Secretary shall establish qualifying standards for
 providers and practitioners furnishing EPSDT services under this title,
 in the case of providers and practitioners who otherwise are not qualified
 to provide other services under title XVIII or this title.
 `(2) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this title shall be construed as limiting
 the providers and practitioners furnishing EPSDT services to providers
 and practitioners who are qualified to provide all such services or as
 preventing such a provider or practitioner that is qualified under this
 title to furnish one or more (but not all) of such items or services from
 being qualified to furnish such items and services as part of EPSDT services.
`SEC. 2213. MEDICARE SUPPLEMENTAL BENEFITS FOR LOW-INCOME MEDICARE
BENEFICIARIES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- In the case of a low-income medicare beneficiary who is
 enrolled under this title on a non-employment basis and is not enrolled
 under a qualified employer health plan, the health insurance benefits under
 this title shall consist of medicare supplemental benefits described in
 subsection (b).
 `(b) MEDICARE SUPPLEMENTAL BENEFITS DEFINED- In this title, the term
 `medicare-supplemental benefits' means the minimum benefits required to
 be offered by a medicare supplemental policy under section 1882, plus
 coverage of the inpatient hospital deductible under part A of title XVIII.
`SEC. 2214. SCOPE OF COVERAGE.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this section,
 services covered under this title are not subject to any limitation on
 amount, duration, or scope. However, no payment shall be made under this
 title for services furnished which are not reasonable and medically necessary
 (as determined under subsection (b)).
 `(b) REASONABLENESS AND MEDICAL NECESSITY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this subsection, services are
 considered not reasonable and medically necessary under this title unless
 they would be considered (under section 1862(a)(1)) reasonable and medically
 necessary for purposes of title XVIII.
 `(2) PREVENTIVE SERVICES; EPSDT SERVICES, ETC- In the case of preventive
 services provided consistent with the periodicity schedule established
 under section 2211(c)(2) and EPSDT services provided consistent with any
 periodicity schedule applicable to such services--
 `(A) such services shall be considered to be reasonable and medically
 necessary, and
 `(B) shall not be subject to exclusion through the operation of paragraph
 (1), (7), or (12) of section 1862(a) (as incorporated under section
 2225(a)(2)).
 `(3) USE OF SAME NATIONAL COVERAGE DECISION REVIEW PROCESS- The provisions
 of section 1869(b)(3) shall apply under this title in the same manner as
 they apply under title XVIII. Any determination under such title that,
 under paragraph (1), would apply under this title shall not be subject to
 review under this paragraph.
 `(c) REFERENCE TO LIMITATIONS ON CERTAIN MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE
 TREATMENT SERVICES- For limitation on coverage of basic health services
 for the treatment of mental illness, a mental disorder, or substance abuse,
 see section 2211(b)(2).
 `(d) REPORT ON PRESCRIPTION DRUGS AS A COVERED SERVICE- Not later than
 the beginning of the 3rd year beginning after the date of the enactment of
 this title, Director of the Office of Technology Assessment shall submit to
 Congress a report on the cost-effectiveness of including health insurance
 benefits under this title for some or all prescription drugs.
`Part C--Payments for Benefits; Deductibles, Coinsurance, and Stop-loss
Protection for Basic Health Services
`SEC. 2221. PAYMENTS FOR BENEFITS.
 `(a) USE OF MEDICARE PAYMENT RULES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this title--
 `(A) payment of benefits under this title with respect to benefits shall
 be made, subject to adjustment in payment rates under subsection (b),
 in the same amounts and on the same basis as payment may be made with
 respect to such benefits under title XVIII, and
 `(B) the provisions of sections 1814, 1815, 1833, 1834(c) (other than
 paragraphs (1)(A) and (2)), 1835, 1842, 1848, 1886, 1887 shall apply
 to payment of benefits (and provision of services and charges thereon)
 under this title in the same manner as they apply to benefits, services,
 and charges under title XVIII.
 `(2) IDENTIFICATION OF COMPARABLE PAYMENT METHODS FOR NEW SERVICES- In
 the case of services for which there is not a payment basis established
 under title XVIII, the Secretary shall establish payment rules that are
 similar to the payment rules for similar services under such title.
 `(3) NO JUDICIAL OR ADMINISTRATION REVIEW- There shall be no administrative
 or judicial review of the payment rates or rules under this section
 (including adjustments made under subsection (b)).
 `(b) ADJUSTMENT OF MEDICARE PAYMENT RATES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of payment for inpatient hospital services,
 physicians' services, and other services under this title for which payment
 rates are established under title XVIII, the Secretary shall adjust
 the payment rates otherwise established under title XVIII to take into
 account differences between the population served under that title and the
 population served by this title or enrolled under qualified employer health
 plans and such other appropriate factors (such as the special circumstances
 of hospitals the inpatients of which are predominantly children) as the
 Secretary deems appropriate.
 `(2) CONSULTATION- In making adjustments under paragraph (1), the Secretary
 shall consult with the Prospective Payment Assessment Commission with
 respect to inpatient hospital services and with the Physician Payment
 Review Commission with respect to physicians' services.
 `(d) USE OF TRUST FUND- In carrying out this section, any reference in
 title XVIII to a trust fund shall be treated as a reference to the Public
 Health Insurance Trust Fund established under section 2233.
 `(e) WITHHOLDING OF PAYMENTS FOR CERTAIN MEDICARE AND MEDICAID PROVIDERS- The
 provisions of section 1885 (relating to withholding of payments for certain
 medicaid providers) shall apply under this title in the same manner as they
 apply under title XVIII, except that for this purpose any reference in such
 section to title XIX shall be deemed to include a reference to title XVIII.
 `(f) OFFSET OF PAYMENTS TO INDIVIDUALS TO COLLECT PAST-DUE OBLIGATIONS
 ARISING FROM BREACH OF SCHOLARSHIP AND LOAN CONTRACT- The provisions of
 section 1892 (relating to offset of payments to individuals to collect
 past-due obligations arising from breach of scholarship and loan contracts)
 shall apply under this title in the same manner as they apply under title
 XVIII; except that, in applying this subsection, the amounts transferred
 under subsection (e) of that section shall be credited directly to the
 scholarship or loan program to which the amounts were due.
`SEC. 2222. DEDUCTIBLE FOR BASIC HEALTH SERVICES.
 `(a) DEDUCTIBLE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this section and part E, the amount
 of expenses for basic health services with respect to which an individual
 is entitled to have payment made under this title for any year shall first
 be reduced by a deductible of--
 `(A) $250, in the case of each person included within a beneficiary class
 described in subparagraph (A) or (C) of section 2231(d)(1), or
 `(B) $500, in the case of each individual included within another
 beneficiary class.
 `(2) FAMILY DEDUCTIBLE- In the case of individuals described in paragraph
 (1)(B) who are members of a family, the deductible under such paragraph
 shall be applied collectively to the expenses of all family members who
 are not medicare beneficiaries.
 `(3) APPLICATION OF DEDUCTIBLE IN PLACE OF MEDICARE DEDUCTIBLES- The
 deductible established under this subsection shall be applied instead of
 applying the deductible for inpatient hospital services under the first
 sentence of section 1813(a)(1) and the deductible under section 1833(b).
 `(4) INDEXING OF DOLLAR AMOUNTS OF DEDUCTIBLE- The dollar amounts specified
 in paragraph (1) shall be increased each year (beginning with second year
 after the year in which this title is enacted) by a percentage equal to
 the percentage increase in the contribution and benefit base (determined
 under section 230) from the year before the year in which this title is
 enacted to the year before the year involved. Any such increase shall be
 rounded to the nearest multiple of $5.
 `(b) DEDUCTIBLE DOES NOT APPLY TO PREVENTIVE SERVICES, EPSDT SERVICES, AND
 MEDICARE SUPPLEMENTAL BENEFITS- The deductible established under subsection
 (a) does not apply--
 `(1) to preventive services or EPSDT services provided consistent with
 the respective periodicity schedules, or
 `(2) to medicare supplemental benefits.
`SEC. 2223. COINSURANCE FOR BASIC HEALTH SERVICES.
 `(a) COINSURANCE RATES- Subject to subsections (b) and (c), the coinsurance
 rates applicable to basic health services under title XVIII shall apply
 in the administration of this title
 `(b) NO COINSURANCE FOR PREVENTIVE AND EPSDT SERVICES- There shall be no
 coinsurance under this title in the case of--
 `(1) preventive services, and
 `(2) EPSDT screening services described in section 2112(b)(1),
provided consistent with any applicable periodicity schedules.
 `(c) NO COINSURANCE FOR INPATIENT HOSPITAL SERVICES- Payment shall be
 made for inpatient hospital services under this part without regard to
 the coinsurance amounts established under section 1813(a).
`SEC. 2224. LIMIT ON COST-SHARING FOR BASIC HEALTH SERVICES.
 `(a) LIMITATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Whenever in a calendar year an individual's or family's
 expenses for the deductible and coinsurance with respect to basic health
 services covered under this title and furnished during the year equals
 $3,000, payment of benefits under this title for the individual or family
 for basic health services furnished during the remainder of the year shall
 be paid without the application of any coinsurance.
 `(2) INDEXING OF DOLLAR AMOUNT OF LIMIT- The dollar amount specified in
 paragraph (1) shall be increased each year (beginning with second year
 after the year in which this title is enacted) by a percentage equal to
 the percentage increase in the contribution and benefit base (determined
 under section 230) from the year before the year in which this title is
 enacted to the year before the year involved. Any such increase shall be
 rounded to the nearest multiple of $5.
 `(b) CREDITING FOR EXPENSES INCURRED UNDER QUALIFIED EMPLOYER HEALTH PLANS-
 For provision relating to the accounting of cost-sharing incurred for basic
 health services furnished under this title and the crediting under this
 title of cost-sharing incurred for such services furnished under other
 qualified health plans, see section 2257(c).
`SEC. 2225. EXCLUSIONS; COORDINATION.
 `(a) IN GENERAL-
 `(1) REASONABLENESS AND MEDICAL NECESSITY- For exclusion of payment
 for services on the basis of reasonableness and medical necessity, see
 section 2214.
 `(2) OTHER EXCLUSIONS- Except as provided in this section and section 2214,
 section 1862 (other than subsection (a)(1)) shall apply to expenses incurred
 for items and services provided under this title in the same manner as
 such section applies to items and services provided under title XVIII.
 `(b) RELATIONSHIP TO MEDICARE IN CASE OF EMPLOYMENT BASED ENROLLMENT- In the
 case of enrollment of a medicare beneficiary on an employment basis under
 this title, in applying section 1862(b) (pursuant to subsection (a)(2)
 of this section), the public health insurance plan shall be treated as a
 large group health plan (described in section 1862(b)).
 `(c) SECONDARY PAYOR FOR EPSDT SERVICES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Payment under this title with respect to EPSDT services
 shall be secondary to payment under other qualified health plans with
 respect to such services. In applying this paragraph, State plans of medical
 assistance under title XIX shall not be treated as qualified health plans.
 `(2) COORDINATION- Under standards established by the Secretary, the
 coordination of benefit standards specified in section 1862(b)(4) shall apply
 in the case described in paragraph (1) in the same manner as such standards
 apply under title XVIII in the case in which such title is a secondary payor.
`SEC. 2226. APPLICATION OF QUALIFIED HEALTH PLAN PROVISIONS.
 `Except as specifically provided in part F, the provisions of part F shall
 apply to the public health insurance plan in the same manner as they apply
 to qualified health plans.
`Part D--Premiums, Public Health Insurance Trust Fund
`SEC. 2231. PREMIUMS.
 `(a) BENEFICIARY PREMIUMS-
 `(1) AMOUNT OF PREMIUMS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this section, the premium to be
 charged for enrollment under this title on a non-employment basis of
 any individual in a beneficiary class (as defined in subsection (d))
 for a benefit package (as defined in subsection (c)) in any community
 (as defined in subsection (e)) is the actuarial rate established under
 paragraph (2) with respect to such class, package, and community.
 `(B) PART-TIME EMPLOYEES AND SEASONAL OR TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Subject to clause (iii), in the case of a covered employee
 (as defined in clause (ii)) who--
 `(I) normally performs on a monthly basis 10 or more hours of work per
 week for any employer, the premium to be charged for enrollment under this
 title on a non-employment basis is 20 percent of the beneficiary actuarial
 rate otherwise applicable under subparagraph (A), or
 `(II) is not described in subclause (I), the premium to be charged for
 enrollment under this title on a non-employment basis is the beneficiary
 actuarial rate otherwise applicable under subparagraph (A), less the amount
 of the contributions of all the employers with respect to that employee,
 but in no case is the premium under this subclause to be less than the
 premium described in subclause (I).
 `(ii) COVERED EMPLOYEE DEFINED- In clause (i), the term `covered employee'
 means an individual who--
 `(I) is employed by one or more employers as a part-time employee or as
 a seasonal or temporary employee, and
 `(II) none of whose employers has elected to meet the requirements of part
 A of title XXI with respect to part-time employees or seasonal or temporary
 employees, respectively, through enrollment under a qualified employer
 health plan, but all of whom are providing any contribution towards the
 employee's premiums under this title,
and includes the family members of such an employee.
 `(iii) LIMIT ON PREMIUM WHERE PREMIUM SUBSIDY- In no case shall the premium
 under clause (i) exceed--
 `(I) the beneficiary actuarial rate otherwise applicable under subparagraph
 (A), reduced by
 `(II) the amount of any premium subsidy under part E.
 `(C) MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- In the case of a low-income medicare beneficiary enrolled
 under this title on a non-employment basis, the amount of the monthly
 premium to be charged for enrollment under this part shall be equal to
 the amount (if any) by which--
 `(I) 1/12 of 5 percent of the individual's adjusted total income (as
 defined in section 2247, subject to clause (ii)) for the year in which
 the month occurs, exceeds
 `(II) the premiums paid for enrollment of the individual in the month
 under part B (and, if applicable, part A) of title XVIII.
 `(ii) COMPUTATION OF ADJUSTED TOTAL INCOME- In the case of a medicare
 beneficiary who is married and who is not enrolled in a qualified employer
 health plan or under this title on an employment basis, in applying clause
 (i) and section 2242(b), the individual's adjusted total income is 1/2
 of the sum of the family adjusted total income of the family of which the
 individual is a member.
 `(2) DETERMINATION OF ACTUARIAL RATES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- In September of each year, beginning with the 1st year
 beginning after the date of the enactment of this title, the Secretary shall
 determine and publish the beneficiary actuarial rate for each beneficiary
 class (as specified in subsection (d)) for each of the benefit packages
 (as specified in subsection (c)) available under this title (with respect
 to that class) for each community (designated under subsection (e)) for
 health insurance benefits in the following year.
 `(B) BASIS FOR ACTUARIAL RATES- Each such actuarial rate shall be
 established in a manner so that if all eligible individuals in the class
 were enrolled under this title for the benefit package in the community,
 the aggregate of the rates would be equal to the total expenditures
 (including administrative expenses) with respect to that class, benefit
 package, and community under this title in that following year. Each such
 actuarial rate shall be uniform within each beneficiary class, benefit
 package, and community, and shall not vary among such individuals by age,
 sex, health, or other risk characteristics.
 `(C) PUBLIC STATEMENT- Whenever the Secretary publishes beneficiary
 actuarial rates under this paragraph, the Secretary shall, at the time of
 such publication, include a public statement setting forth the actuarial
 assumptions and bases employed in arriving at the amount of the actuarial
 rates.
 `(3) NO JUDICIAL OR ADMINISTRATION REVIEW- There shall be no administrative
 or judicial review of the actuarial rates determined under this subsection.
 `(b) EMPLOYER PREMIUMS-
 `(1) AMOUNT OF PREMIUMS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The employer premium to be charged an employer for
 enrollment of full-time employees (and their families) on an employment
 basis under this title in a year is the product of--
 `(i) the employer premium percentage computed under paragraph (2) for the
 year, and
 `(ii) the wages paid by the employer with respect to such employees.
The employer premium to be charged for employment based enrollment of part-time
and seasonal employees (and their families) under this title if the product
described in the previous sentence as applied to such employees instead of
to full-time employees.
 `(B) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this subsection prevents an employer from
 making contributions on behalf of the enrollment on a non-employment basis
 of individual employees (and their families)--
 `(i) with respect to basic health services during the period beginning with
 the 3rd year that begins after the date of the enactment of this title and
 ending with the year before the year in which the employer is required to
 enroll employees in a qualified employer health plan, or
 `(ii) at any time with respect to EPSDT services.
 `(2) DETERMINATION OF EMPLOYER PREMIUM PERCENTAGE- The Secretary shall
 determine in September of each year (beginning with the 3rd year beginning
 after the date of the enactment of this title) the employer premium
 percentage with respect to employers purchasing health benefits under this
 title with respect to their employees for different beneficiary classes for
 the following year. Such percentage may (at the Secretary's discretion)
 be determined separately for each region (as defined by the Secretary)
 and shall be determined as follows:
 `(A) TRANSITIONAL PERCENTAGE- The percentage shall be computed for each
 year in the transition period so that it is anticipated that by the 6th
 year after the date of the enactment of this title--
 `(i) the number of full-time equivalent employees (and family members) who
 will be enrolled under this title on an employment basis, will be equal to
 `(ii) 1/2 of the number of full-time equivalent employees (and family
 members) not covered under any employer health plan as of the date of the
 enactment of this title.
 `(B) PERCENTAGE AFTER TRANSITIONAL PERIOD- For any subsequent year, the
 percentage established under this paragraph for the previous year for
 a beneficiary class shall be increased by an index established by the
 Secretary. The index shall reflect the ratio of--
 `(i) the rate of increase in per capita health care costs under this title
 for individuals enrolled on an employment basis, to
 `(ii) the rate of increase in the contribution and benefit base (under
 section 230).
 `(3) NO JUDICIAL OR ADMINISTRATION REVIEW- There shall be no administrative
 or judicial review of the employer premium percentage determined under
 this subsection.
 `(4) TRANSITION PERIOD DEFINED- In this subsection, the term `transition
 period' means the period beginning with the 4th year beginning after the
 date of the enactment of this title and ending with the 6th year beginning
 after such date.
 `(c) BENEFIT PACKAGES- For purposes of this section, each of the following
 shall be treated as a separate benefit package:
 `(1) Benefits for basic health services and EPSDT services.
 `(2) Benefits for basic health services.
 `(3) Benefits for EPSDT services.
 `(4) Medicare supplemental benefits.
 `(d) BENEFICIARY CLASSES- For purposes of this section, the beneficiary
 classes are as follows:
 `(1) With respect to benefit packages described in paragraphs (1) and (2)
 of subsection (c), each of the following:
 `(A) Only 1 child.
 `(B) Only 2 or more children in the same family.
 `(C) 1 adult.
 `(D) A married couple without children.
 `(E) 1 adult and 1 child.
 `(F) A married couple with 1 or more children, or 1 adult with 2 or more
 children.
 `(2) With respect to the benefit package described in subsection (c)(3),
 each child.
 `(3) With respect to the benefit package described in subsection (c)(4),
 each medicare beneficiary.
The Secretary may establish additional classes of beneficiaries if it is
necessary to carry out the purposes of this title, title XXI, and title XXIII.
 `(e) COMMUNITY- For purposes of this section, the term `community' means
 a geographic area designated by the Secretary as--
 `(1) encompassing one or more adjacent metropolitan statistical areas, or
 `(2) the remaining area within each State (that is not designated within
 any community under paragraph (1));
except that the Secretary may designate an entire State as a community if
such a designation would better carry out the purposes of this title and
title XXIII. The Secretary from time to time may change the boundaries of
communities designated under paragraph (1) or (2) for such purposes. There
shall be no administrative or judicial review of the designation of communities
under this subsection.
`SEC. 2232. COLLECTION OF PREMIUMS.
 `(a) INDIVIDUAL ENROLLMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In the case of individuals enrolled on a non-employment
 basis under this title, the Secretary shall provide for the payment of
 premiums on a monthly or quarterly basis. To the maximum extent feasible,
 the Secretary shall arrange for payment of such premiums through automatic
 withhold ing from income sources or accounts with financial institutions.
 `(2) COLLECTION OF UNPAID PREMIUMS-
 `(A) TRANSMISSION OF INFORMATION TO SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY- In the case
 of premium amounts owing and unpaid under this subsection, the Secretary
 shall inform the Secretary of the Treasury of individuals or individuals
 owing such amounts and the amounts owed.
 `(B) COLLECTION- The Secretary of the Treasury shall assess and collect
 the amounts referred to in subparagraph (A) in the same manner as taxes
 imposed by subtitle C of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 `(b) EMPLOYER ENROLLMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In the case of individuals enrolled under this title
 on an employment basis, the employer shall provide for periodic payments
 of premiums to the Secretary in a form, manner, and time established by
 the Secretary. Such frequency may vary based on the number of full-time
 employees covered and the amount of premiums due.
 `(2) COLLECTION OF UNPAID PREMIUMS-
 `(A) TRANSMISSION OF INFORMATION TO SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY- In the case
 of premium amounts owing and unpaid under this subsection, the Secretary
 shall inform the Secretary of the Treasury of employers owing such amounts
 and the amounts owed.
 `(B) COLLECTION- The Secretary of the Treasury shall assess and collect
 the amounts referred to in subparagraph (A) in the same manner as taxes
 imposed by subtitle C of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 `(c) DEPOSIT- Premiums collected under this section shall be deposited to
 the credit of the Public Health Insurance Trust Fund (established under
 section 2233).
`SEC. 2233. PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE TRUST FUND.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- There is hereby created on the books of the Treasury of
 the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Public Health Insurance
 Trust Fund' (in this section referred to as the `Trust Fund'). The Trust
 Fund shall consist of such gifts and bequests as may be made as provided in
 paragraph (2) and such amounts as may be deposited in, or appropriated to,
 such Trust Fund as provided in this part.
 `(2) AUTHORIZATION TO ACCEPT GIFTS- The Managing Trustee of the Trust
 Fund is authorized to accept on behalf of the United States money gifts
 and bequests made unconditionally to the Trust Fund, for the benefit of
 the Trust Fund, or any activity financed through the Trust Fund.
 `(b) INCORPORATION OF PROVISIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this subsection,
 the provisions of subsections (b) through (e) of section 1841 shall apply to
 the Trust Fund in the same manner as they apply to the Federal Supplementary
 Medical Insurance Trust Fund (established under section 1841).
 `(2) GENERAL REFERENCES- In applying paragraph (1), any reference in
 section 1841 to the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund or
 to title XVIII (or part B thereof) is deemed a reference to the Trust Fund
 and this title, respectively.
 `(3) TRANSFERS TO SMI TRUST FUND- There shall be transferred periodically
 (but not less often than monthly) from the Trust Fund to the Federal Hospital
 Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust
 Fund, amounts equivalent to the premium subsidies provided under part E of
 this title with respect to premiums under part A or part B, respectively,
 of title XVIII.
 `(c) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS TO COVER GOVERNMENT CONTRIBUTIONS-
 `(1) ANNUAL ESTIMATE OF EXPENDITURES- In April before the beginning of
 each fiscal year, the Secretary shall determine and report to Congress on--
 `(A) the total amount of expenditures projected under this title in the
 fiscal year involved, and
 `(B) the total amount of revenues (other than those attributable to this
 subsection) to be deposited into the Trust Fund in the fiscal year.
Such determination and report shall first be made for the fiscal year that ends
during the 2nd year that begins after the date of the enactment of this title.
 `(2) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 for each fiscal year, out of any moneys in the Treasury not otherwise
 appropriated, to the Public Health Insurance Trust Fund, a Government
 contribution equal to the amount by which--
 `(A) the projected expenditures for the fiscal year reported under paragraph
 (1)(A), exceed
 `(B) the projected revenues for the fiscal year reported under paragraph
 (1)(B).
`Part E--Assistance for Low-Income Individuals
`SEC. 2241. ASSISTANCE FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH INCOME BELOW THE POVERTY LINE
ENROLLED ON A NON-EMPLOYMENT BASIS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this section, in the case
 of an individual--
 `(1) who is enrolled under this title on a non-employment basis,
 `(2) who is not a low-income medicare beneficiary, and
 `(3) whose family adjusted total income (as defined in section 2247)
 does not exceed 100 percent of the official poverty line (as defined in
 section 2183(2)),
the low-income assistance under this part shall consist of waiver of the
premiums imposed under section 2231(a) and of any deductibles or coinsurance
under this title for the individual and the individual's family.
 `(b) TREATMENT OF MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES- In the case of a medicare
 beneficiary--
 `(1) who is not enrolled under a qualified employer health plan or under
 this title on an employment basis, and
 `(2) whose family adjusted total income (as defined in section 2247)
 does not exceed 100 percent of the official poverty line (as defined in
 section 2183(2)),
the low-income assistance under this part shall consist of (A) payment for
premiums imposed under part A (if any) or part B of title XVIII and (B)
waiver of any premiums imposed for medicare supplemental benefits under
this title. The assistance described in clause (A) shall be provided in a
manner so that no such premium amount is deducted from monthly benefits or
transfers under section 1840.
`SEC. 2242. ASSISTANCE FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH INCOME BELOW THE TWICE THE
POVERTY LINE ENROLLED ON A NON-EMPLOYMENT BASIS.
 `(a) NON-MEDICARE POPULATION- In the case of an individual who is not a
 medicare beneficiary, who is enrolled under this title on a non-employment
 basis, and whose family adjusted total income exceeds 100 percent but
 is less than 200 percent, of the official poverty line, the low-income
 assistance under this part shall consist of the following:
 `(1) PREMIUMS- The beneficiary premium amount under section 2231(a)
 shall be reduced by the subsidy percentage (as defined in subsection (c))
 of the premium amount otherwise applied. Any reduction in premium under
 this paragraph shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $5.
 `(2) DEDUCTIBLE- The deductible under section 2222 shall be reduced by
 the subsidy percentage of the deductible otherwise applied. Any reduction
 in the deductible under this paragraph shall be rounded to the nearest
 multiple of $10.
 `(3) COINSURANCE- The percentage coinsurance applied under section 2223
 shall be reduced by the subsidy percentage multiplied by the percentage
 coinsurance otherwise applied.
 `(b) PREMIUM SUBSIDY FOR MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES- In the case of a low-income
 medicare beneficiary--
 `(1) who is not enrolled under a qualified employer health plan or under
 this title on an employment basis, and
 `(2) whose family adjusted total income exceeds 100 percent of the official
 poverty line,
the low-income assistance under this part for a month shall consist of
payment for premiums imposed under part A (if any) or part B of title XVIII,
but only to the extent that such premiums (and any premium imposed for
enrollment under this title) does not exceed 1/12 of 5 percent of the
individual's adjusted total income (as defined in section 2247, subject
to section 2231(a)(1)(C)(ii)) for the year in which the month occurs. Such
assistance shall be effected in a manner so that no such premium amount is
deducted from monthly benefits or transfers under section 1840.
 `(c) SUBSIDY PERCENTAGE DEFINED-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In this section and section 2243, the term `subsidy
 percentage' means the number of percentage points by which the family's
 adjusted total income (expressed as a percent of the applicable official
 poverty line) is less than 200 percent.
 `(2) ROUNDING FOR COINSURANCE- For purposes of subsection (a)(3) and section
 2243(c)(2), the subsidy percentage (as applied to the coinsurance percentage)
 shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of 5 percent.
`SEC. 2243. ASSISTANCE FOR INDIVIDUALS COVERED UNDER QUALIFIED EMPLOYER
HEALTH PLANS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- In the case of an eligible individual who is enrolled
 under a qualified employer health plan or is enrolled under this title on
 an employment basis, low-income assistance under this part shall consist of--
 `(1) payment (in a manner specified by the Secretary) of the premium
 subsidy under subsection (b) to the individual or another family member,
 or, in the case described in subsection (b)(4), the employer, and
 `(2) payment to the plan of the deductible and coinsurance subsidy under
 subsection (c).
Such subsidies shall apply to premiums, deductibles, and coinsurance for
the individual and family member covered on an employment basis under the
plan or under this title.
 `(b) PREMIUM SUBSIDY-
 `(1) AMOUNT- The amount of the premium subsidy under this subsection is
 the subsidy percentage (as defined in section 2242(c)) of the employee
 share of the premium. Any premium subsidy under this paragraph which is
 not a multiple of $5 shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $5.
 `(2) USE OF LEAST EXPENSIVE QUALIFIED PLAN- In applying paragraph (1),
 the amount of the premium subsidy shall be based on the qualified employer
 health plan available to the employee with the smallest premium payment
 required of the employee (for the type of family enrollment with which
 the employee is enrolled).
 `(3) FREQUENCY OF PAYMENT- Except as provided in paragraph (4), the
 premium subsidy under this subsection shall be paid not less frequently
 than quarterly or, if the amount of the premium subsidy on a monthly basis
 exceeds $20, monthly.
 `(4) OPTIONAL, DIRECT COORDINATION WITH EMPLOYERS- In the case of an
 employee--
 `(A) who is enrolled under a covered employer health plan,
 `(B) who is entitled to assistance under this part,
 `(C) whose employer agrees to enter into an arrangement with the Secretary
 under this paragraph, and
 `(D) who assigns (in the manner specified by the Secretary) rights to
 premium subsidies under this subsection to the employer,
the Secretary shall enter into an arrangement with the employer under which
(i) the employer agrees to reduce premiums otherwise imposed with respect to
the individual by the amount of the subsidy, and (ii) the Secretary agrees
to make payment (not less often than monthly) to the employer of the amount
of such premium subsidy.
 `(c) DEDUCTIBLE AND COINSURANCE SUBSIDY-
 `(1) DEDUCTIBLE SUBSIDY AMOUNT- The amount of the deductible subsidy under
 this subsection is the subsidy percentage of the deductible otherwise
 applied. Any deductible subsidy under this paragraph that is not a multiple
 of $10 shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $10.
 `(2) COINSURANCE SUBSIDY AMOUNT- The amount of the coinsurance subsidy under
 this subsection is the product of the subsidy percentage, the percentage
 coinsurance otherwise applied, and the payment amount permitted for basic
 health services.
 `(3) DIRECT COORDINATION BY PLAN REQUIRED- Each qualified employer health
 plan shall provide for--
 `(A) acceptance of information, electronically, from the Secretary on
 the amount of the deductible and coinsurance subsidy for individuals
 (and family members),
 `(B) a reduction in the deductibles and coinsurance otherwise imposed to
 reflect the deductible and coinsurance subsidies to which the individual
 and family members are entitled,
 `(C) reasonably prompt payment of bills for which such charges have been
 made, and
 `(D) transmission of such information as is necessary to indicate the
 amount of subsidy provided under the plan for specified individuals.
In return, the Secretary shall provide for payment, not less often than
monthly, to the plan of the amount of payments made by such a plan for
deductible and coinsurance subsidies under this subsection.
`SEC. 2244. APPLICATIONS FOR ASSISTANCE.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Subject to section 2245, any individual who seeks
 assistance under this part (with respect to himself or herself or a
 family member) shall submit a written application, by person or mail,
 to the Secretary. The application may be submitted with an application to
 enroll under this title on a non-employment basis or separately.
 `(b) BASIS FOR DETERMINATION- Subject to section 2245 and reconciliation
 under such section, eligibility for assistance under this part shall be
 based on 4 times the family adjusted total income (as defined in section
 2247, subject to section 2231(a)(1)(C)(ii)) during the 3 months preceding
 the month in which the application is filed.
 `(c) FORM AND CONTENTS- An application for assistance under this part
 shall be in a form and manner specified by the Secretary and shall require--
 `(1) the provision of information necessary to make the determinations
 described in subsection (b),
 `(2) the provision of information respecting any covered employer health
 plan in which the individual is enrolled, and
 `(3) the individual (if enrolled under such a plan) to assign rights for
 deductible and coinsurance subsidies under this part to such plan.
Such form also shall include an option to execute, as part of completing the
form and in order to meet the condition described in section 2243(b)(4)(D),
an assignment of an individual's right for premium subsidies under this part
to an employer.
 `(d) FREQUENCY OF APPLICATIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- An application for assistance under this part may be
 filed at any time during the year and may be resubmitted (but, except as
 provided in paragraph (3), not more frequently than once every 3 months)
 based upon a change of income or family composition.
 `(2) NEED TO REAPPLY- In the case of an individual who--
 `(A) is entitled to assistance under this section in September of a year, and
 `(B) wishes to remain eligible for benefits for months beginning with
 January of the following year,
the individual (or a family member) must file with the Secretary in October
of that preceding year a new application for assistance. If an individual
that fails to file a new application under this paragraph, an application
for such assistance with respect to any family member may not be filed during
November or December of that preceding year.
 `(3) CORRECTION OF INCOME- Nothing in paragraph (1) shall be construed
 as preventing an individual or family from, at any time, submitting an
 application to reduce the amount of assistance under this part based upon
 an increase in income from that stated in the previous application.
 `(e) TIMING OF ASSISTANCE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- If an application for assistance under this part is filed--
 `(A) on or before the 15th day of a month, assistance under this part shall
 be available for premiums for months after such month and, with respect
 to the deductible and coinsurance, for expenses incurred after such month; or
 `(B) after the 15th day of a month, assistance under this part shall be
 available for premiums for months after the month following such month
 and, with respect to the deductible and coinsurance, for expenses incurred
 after such following month.
 `(2) WELFARE RECIPIENTS- In the case of an individual or family with
 respect to whom an application for assistance is not required because of
 section 2246, in applying paragraph (1), the date of approval of aid or
 benefits described in such section shall be considered the filing of an
 application for assistance under this part.
 `(f) VERIFICATION- The Secretary shall provide for verification, on a sample
 basis or other basis, of the information supplied in applications under
 this part. This verification shall be separate from the reconciliation
 provided under section 2245.
 `(g) HELP IN COMPLETING APPLICATIONS- The Secretary shall provide, from
 funds appropriated to carry out this title, for grants to public or private
 nonprofit entities that will make available assistance to individuals
 and families in filing applications for assistance under this part. The
 Secretary shall make grants in a manner that provides such assistance
 at a variety of sites (such as low-income housing projects and shelters
 for homeless individuals) that are readily accessible to individuals and
 families eligible for assistance under this part.
 `(h) PENALTIES FOR INACCURATE INFORMATION-
 `(1) INTEREST FOR UNDERSTATEMENTS- Each individual who knowingly
 understates income reported in an application for assistance under this
 part or otherwise makes a material misrepresentation of information in
 such an application shall be liable to the Federal Government for excess
 payments made based on such understatement or misrepresentation, and for
 interest on such excess payments at a rate specified by the Secretary.
 `(2) PENALTIES FOR MISREPRESENTATION- Each individual who knowingly
 misrepresents material information in an application for assistance
 under this part shall be liable to the Federal Government for $1,000
 or, if greater, three times the excess payments made based on such
 misrepresentation.
 `(i) FILING OF APPLICATION DEFINED- Except as provided in subsection
 (e)(2), for purposes of this part, an application under this part is
 considered to be `filed' on the date on which the complete application,
 including all documentation required to act on the application, has been
 filed with the Secretary.
`SEC. 2245. RECONCILIATION OF PREMIUM ASSISTANCE THROUGH USE OF INCOME
STATEMENTS.
 `(a) REQUIREMENT FOR FILING OF INCOME STATEMENT- Subject to section 2246,
 in the case of a family which is receiving low-income assistance under this
 part for any month in a year, a member of the family shall file with the
 Secretary, by not later than April 15 of the following year, a statement
 that verifies the family's total adjusted family income for the taxable year
 ending during the previous year. Such a statement shall provide information
 necessary to determine the family adjusted total income during the year and
 the number of family members in the family as of the last day of the year.
 `(b) RECONCILIATION OF PREMIUM ASSISTANCE BASED ON ACTUAL INCOME- Based
 on and using the income reported in the statement filed under subsection
 (a) with respect to a family or individual, subject to section 2246, the
 Secretary shall compute the amount of assistance that should have been
 provided under this part with respect to premiums for the family in the
 year involved. If the amount of such assistance computed is--
 `(1) greater than the amount of premium assistance provided, the Secretary
 shall provide for payment (directly or through a credit against future
 premiums owed) to the family or individual involved of an amount equal to
 the amount of the deficit, or
 `(2) less than the amount of assistance provided, the Secretary shall
 require the family or individual to pay (directly or through an increase
 in future premiums owed) to the Secretary (to the credit of the program
 under this title) an amount equal to the amount of the excess payment.
 `(c) DISQUALIFICATION FOR FAILURE TO FILE- Subject to section 2246, in
 the case of any family that is required to file an information statement
 under subsection (a) in a year and that fails to file such a statement by
 the deadline specified in such subsection, no member of the family shall
 be eligible for assistance under this part after May 1 of such year. The
 Secretary shall waive the application of this subsection if the family
 establishes, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, good cause for the
 failure to file the statement on a timely basis.
 `(d) PENALTIES FOR FALSE INFORMATION- Any individual that provides false
 information in a statement under subsection (a) is subject to a criminal
 penalty to the same extent as a criminal penalty may be imposed under section
 1128B(a) with respect to a person described in clause (ii) of such section.
 `(e) NOTICE OF REQUIREMENT- The Secretary shall provide for written notice,
 in March of each year, of the requirement of subsection (a) to each family
 which received assistance under this part in any month during the preceding
 year and to which such requirement applies.
 `(f) TRANSMITTAL OF INFORMATION- The Secretary of the Treasury shall transmit
 annually to the Secretary such information relating to the adjusted total
 income of individuals for the taxable year ending in the previous year as may
 be necessary to verify the reconciliation of assistance under this section.
 `(g) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this section shall be construed as authorizing
 reconciliation of assistance provided with respect to deductibles and
 coinsurance.
`SEC. 2246. TREATMENT OF CERTAIN CASH ASSISTANCE RECIPIENTS.
 `In the case of a family that has been determined to be eligible for aid
 under part A or E of title IV or an individual who has been determined to
 be eligible for supplemental security income benefits under title XVI--
 `(1) the family or individual is deemed, without the need to file an
 application for assistance under section 2244, to have adjusted total
 income below 100 percent of the official poverty line applicable to a
 family of the size involved,
 `(2) the family or individual need not file a statement under section
 2245(a), and
 `(3) the assistance received by the family is not subject to reconciliation
 under section 2245(b).
`SEC. 2247. COMPUTATION OF FAMILY ADJUSTED TOTAL INCOME.
 `In this part:
 `(1) ADJUSTED TOTAL INCOME- The term `adjusted total income' means--
 `(A) adjusted gross income (as defined in section 62(a) of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986), determined without the application of paragraphs
 (6) and (7) of such section and without the application of section 162(l)
 of such Code, plus
 `(B) the amount of social security benefits (described in section 86(d)
 of such Code) which is not includable in gross income under section 86 of
 such Code.
 `(2) FAMILY ADJUSTED TOTAL INCOME- Except as provided in section
 2231(a)(1)(C)(ii), the term `family adjusted total income' means, with
 respect to an individual, the sum of the adjusted total income for the
 individual and all the other family members.
 `(3) FAMILY SIZE- The family size to be applied under this part, with respect
 to family adjusted total income, is the number of individuals included
 in the family for purposes of coverage of health insurance benefits under
 this title or under a qualified employer health plan (as the case may be).
`Part F--Qualified Health Plans
`SEC. 2251. CERTIFICATION OF QUALIFIED HEALTH PLANS.
 `(a) QUALIFIED HEALTH PLAN DEFINED- For purposes of this title, the term
 `qualified health plan'--
 `(1) means a health plan that the Secretary certifies, upon application
 by the plan, to meet the requirements of this part, and
 `(2) includes, unless the context indicates otherwise, the public health
 insurance plan under this title.
 `(b) DEEMED CERTIFICATION- The Secretary shall establish a procedure
 under which an insured health plan (as defined by the Secretary), other
 than a public employee health plan, issued in a State shall be deemed
 to be certified under subsection (a)(1) with respect to that State if the
 applicable regulatory authority (as defined in section 2281(c)(1)) certifies
 that the plan meets the requirements for certification under this part.
 `(c) REVIEW AND RECERTIFICATION- The Secretary shall establish procedures for
 the periodic review and recertification of plans as qualified health plans.
 `(d) TERMINATION OF CERTIFICATION- The Secretary shall terminate the
 certification of a qualified health plan if the Secretary determines--
 `(1) in the case of a plan deemed certified under subsection (b), that
 the applicable regulatory authority has terminated its certification of
 the plan, or
 `(2) in the case of any plan, that the plan no longer meets the requirements
 for certification.
 Before effecting either such termination, the Secretary shall provide the
 plan notice and opportunity for a hearing on the proposed termination.
`SEC. 2252. TREATMENT OF FAMILY AS A UNIT; COVERAGE PERIOD; HEALTH PLAN CARDS.
 `(a) TREATMENT OF FAMILY AS A UNIT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (2), enrollment of a individual in a
 qualified health plan shall include enrollment of the other family members
 (as defined in section 2282(1)) of the individual.
 `(2) TREATMENT OF INELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS- Nothing in paragraph (1) shall
 be construed as requiring a qualified health plan (or permitting the public
 health insurance plan) to enroll individuals who are not eligible individuals
 (as defined in section 2201(d)).
 `(b) BEGINNING OF COVERAGE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In the case of an individual enrolled under any qualified
 health plan, subject to subsection (c), the benefits under the plan shall
 first become available for services furnished beginning on the first day
 of the month following the month of enrollment.
 `(2) SPECIAL RULES- The Secretary shall provide for such standards as may be
 necessary to provide for the allocation of responsibility among qualified
 health plans in the case of an inpatient hospital stay, or other services
 provided over a period of time and for which a single payment amount is
 established, that begins during the period of coverage under one qualified
 health plan and ends during a period of coverage under another qualified
 health plan.
 `(c) STANDARDS TO REFLECT CHANGES IN FAMILY AND EMPLOYMENT STATUS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Under standards established by the Secretary consistent
 with this subsection, qualified health plans shall provide for appropriate
 changes in the coverage of family members to take into account--
 `(A) changes in family composition or status, including marriage, divorce
 (or legal separation), birth or adoption of children, and the aging of
 children into adulthood, and
 `(B) changes in employment status.
 `(2) MONTHLY CHANGES- Except as specifically provided in this subsection,
 such standards shall be designed--
 `(A) to effect a change in enrollment (or status of enrollment) as of the
 first day of the first month (or, in order to provide for notice and an
 opportunity for coordination among plans, a later month) following the
 date of the event causing the change,
 `(B) to prevent any periods of noncoverage under any qualified health
 plans, and
 `(C) to provide, in cases of a change of family status such as marriage,
 divorce, or legal separation, for accounting and crediting of cost-sharing
 among family members (described in section 2257(c)) in an equitable and
 administrable manner.
 `(3) TREATMENT OF NEWBORNS-
 `(A) BIRTH TO WOMAN DURING PERIOD OF COVERAGE- Any child born to a woman
 during the period of coverage under a qualified health plan shall, as
 of the date of birth, be automatically enrolled and covered for benefits
 under the plan.
 `(B) BIRTH TO WOMAN WITHOUT COVERAGE- Any child born in the United States
 to a woman who is not, at the time of birth, enrolled under a qualified
 health plan shall be automatically enrolled and covered for benefits under
 this title as of the date of birth if an application for such enrollment
 is made not later than 60 days after the date of birth or, if later,
 the end of the year in which the child is born.
 `(C) EXCEPTION- Subparagraphs (A) and (B) shall not apply in such cases,
 specified by the Secretary, in which the newborn child should be covered
 under the health plan of the father or another individual.
 `(4) ADOPTION-
 `(i) TREATMENT OF VOLUNTARILY RELINQUISHMENT- Any child who is voluntarily
 relinquished to a public or private agency shall upon the application by
 the agency be enrolled under this title and covered as of the date of the
 relinquishment, until the date of the child's placement for adoption.
 `(ii) TREATMENT OF ADOPTED CHILDREN- Any child who is placed for adoption
 with an individual during the period the individual is enrolled and covered
 under a qualified health plan shall, as of the date of the placement for
 adoption, be treated as the child of the individual and be automatically
 enrolled and covered under such plan.
 `(5) PLACEMENT IN CUSTODY OF PUBLIC AGENCY PURSUANT TO COURT ORDER
 OR OTHERWISE- Any child who is removed from the family and placed in
 the temporary custody of a public agency pursuant to a court order or
 otherwise shall, upon application by the public agency on or after the
 date of the removal and placement with the public agency, be deemed to
 be automatically enrolled and covered for benefits under this title as of
 the date of the application, until the child is returned to the family or
 placed for adoption.
 `(6) TREATMENT OF LEGAL WARDS, FOSTER CHILDREN, ETC- In cases not described
 in paragraphs (4) or (5), the Secretary shall establish standards relating
 to the time an individual described in section 2282(5)(B)(ii) is treated
 as the child of the person with custody and such other standards as may
 be necessary to assure the proper coordination of enrollment of children
 and other individuals among qualified health plans.
 `(d) HEALTH PLAN CARDS- In conjunction with enrollment of individuals
 under a qualified health plan, the plan shall provide for the issuance of
 a card which may be used for purposes of identification of such enrollment
 and the processing of claims for benefits under the plan. Such card shall--
 `(1) identify (as appropriate) the types of benefits to which the individual
 is entitled under the plan, and
 `(2) contain such other information as the Secretary (and the plan)
 shall specify.
`SEC. 2253. REQUIREMENTS RESPECTING BASIC BENEFITS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Each qualified health plan must provide for benefits for
 at least all basic health services (as defined in section 2212(b)).
 `(b) TREATMENT OF ADDITIONAL BENEFITS- Nothing in this section shall be
 construed as preventing a qualified health plan from including benefits
 in addition to benefits for basic health services.
 `(c) TREATMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN- In applying subsection
 (a) with respect to the public health insurance plan, the provisions of
 part B are deemed to supersede such subsection.
`SEC. 2254. REQUIREMENTS RESPECTING LIMITS ON PREEXISTING CONDITION EXCLUSIONS
AND COVERAGE STANDARDS FOR BASIC HEALTH SERVICES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided under subsection (b), a qualified
 health plan--
 `(1) may not deny, limit, or condition the coverage under (or benefits of)
 the plan with respect to basic health services based on the health status,
 claims experience, receipt of health care, medical history, or lack of
 evidence of insurability, of an individual, and
 `(2) may not provide for exclusions from coverage for basic health services
 that are more restrictive than the exclusions for such services under
 this title.
 `(b) TREATMENT OF PREEXISTING CONDITION EXCLUSIONS FOR ALL SERVICES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this subsection,
 a qualified health plan (other than the public health insurance plan)
 may exclude coverage with respect to services related to treatment of a
 preexisting condition, but the period of such exclusion may not exceed
 6 months.
 `(2) NONAPPLICATION TO NEWBORNS AND SUNSET OF PREEXISTING CONDITION
 EXCLUSIONS FOR BASIC HEALTH SERVICES- The exclusion of coverage permitted
 under paragraph (1) shall not apply to--
 `(A) services furnished to newborns, or
 `(B) basic health services furnished on or after July 1 of the 6th year
 beginning after the date of the enactment of this title.
 `(3) CREDITING OF PREVIOUS COVERAGE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- If an individual is in a period of continuous coverage
 (as defined in subparagraph (B)(i)) with respect to particular services
 as of the date of initial coverage under a plan, any period of exclusion
 of coverage with respect to a preexisting condition for such services or
 type of services shall be reduced by 1 month for each month in the period
 of continuous coverage.
 `(B) DEFINITIONS- In this paragraph:
 `(i) PERIOD OF CONTINUOUS COVERAGE- The term `period of continuous coverage'
 means, with respect to particular services, the period beginning on the
 date an individual is enrolled under a health plan or program (including
 a qualified health plan, a Federal health plan, the medicare program, a
 State plan under title XIX, or a State general medical assistance program)
 which provides the same or substantially similar benefits with respect to
 such services and ends on the date the individual is not so enrolled for
 a continuous period of more than 3 months.
 `(ii) PREEXISTING CONDITION- The term `preexisting condition' means, with
 respect to coverage under a plan, a condition which has been diagnosed or
 treated during the 3-month period ending on the day before the first date
 of such coverage, except that such term does not include a condition which
 was first diagnosed or treated during a period of continuous coverage.
 `(C) STANDARDS FOR SIMILAR BENEFITS- The Secretary, in consultation with
 the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, shall establish such
 criteria for determining if benefits are substantially similar as may be
 necessary to carry out this subsection.
`SEC. 225. REQUIREMENTS RESPECTING LIMITS ON COST-SHARING.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b), a qualified health
 plan may not impose deductibles, copayments, or coinsurance with respect to
 basic health services in excess of the deductible and coinsurance permitted
 under part C with respect to such services (not taking into account any
 low-income assistance provided under part E).
 `(b) EXCEPTION FOR MANAGED CARE PLANS- In the case of a qualified health
 plan that is a managed care plan (as defined in section 2281(c)(3)), the
 limitations on deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance under paragraph (1)
 shall not apply to services furnished other than by participating providers,
 except that such limitations shall continue to apply to services that
 are medically necessary and that are required to be provided immediately
 because of an unforeseen illness, injury, or condition.
 `(c) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing
 a qualified health plan from providing for deductibles, coinsurance, and
 copayments or other restrictions with respect to services other than basic
 health services that are different from those permitted with respect to
 basic health services.
 `(d) TREATMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN- In applying subsection
 (a) with respect to the public health insurance plan, the provisions of
 part C are deemed to supersede such subsection.
`SEC. 2256. ADEQUACY OF PAYMENTS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- A qualified health plan shall establish adequate payment
 rates for basic health services.
 `(b) TEST IF RATES BELOW PUBLIC PLAN RATES- If a qualified health plan
 provides payment rates for basic health services that, in the aggregate,
 are less than the payment rates provided under the public health insurance
 plan, the plan is not considered to meet the requirement of subsection
 (a) unless it demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that its
 enrollees, in order to obtain medically necessary basic health services, are
 not required to incur out-of-pocket expenditures (for other than premiums)
 substantially in excess of the out-of-pocket expenditures the enrollees
 would have incurred if enrolled under the public health insurance plan.
 `(c) MANAGED CARE PLANS- A qualified health plan (other than the public
 health insurance plan) may limit the number of providers or practitioners
 for which benefits for basic health services are paid only if the plan is
 a managed care plan.
 `(d) TREATMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN- In applying subsection
 (a) with respect to the public health insurance plan, the provisions of
 part C are deemed to supersede such subsection.
`SEC. 2257. COORDINATION AND PORTABILITY OF HEALTH COVERAGE UNDER QUALIFIED
HEALTH PLANS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Each qualified health plan shall provide for coordination
 of--
 `(1) enrollment and termination of enrollment among the qualified health
 plans and title XVIII, and
 `(2) application of deductibles and limitations on cost-sharing among such
 qualified health plans,
in accordance with standards established by the Secretary consistent with
this section.
 `(b) REQUIREMENT OF NOTICES WITH RESPECT TO COVERAGE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each qualified health plan shall provide notice at the
 time an individual's coverage under the plan begins or is terminated. Such
 notice shall be provided (in a form and manner and at a time specified by
 the Secretary)--
 `(A) to the individual (or in the case of enrollment only of a child or
 children, to the parent enrolling the child or children), and
 `(B) effective (on the date specified in paragraph (2)) to the Secretary.
The notice under this paragraph shall include the names and other identifying
information of family members whose coverage is affected by the change.
 `(2) DATE OF REQUIREMENT FOR NOTICE TO PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN- The
 date specified in this paragraph is January 1 of the 6th year beginning
 after the date of the enactment of this title.
 `(3) NOTICE TO BENEFICIARY AND OTHER QUALIFIED HEALTH PLANS UPON OBTAINING
 COVERAGE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- In the case of an individual who begins coverage under
 a qualified employer health plan (or under this title on an employment
 basis), when the Secretary receives notice under paragraph (1)(B)--
 `(i) if, at the time of obtaining such coverage, the individual is enrolled
 on a non-employment basis in the public health insurance plan for basic
 health services or for medicare supplemental benefits, the Secretary shall
 notify the individual that coverage for such services on such a basis or
 for such benefits shall be terminated effective on the date of coverage
 under such a plan, and
 `(ii) the Secretary shall provide for notice to any other qualified health
 plan in which the Secretary knows the individual is enrolled of the fact
 of such new coverage.
 `(B) TREATMENT OF EPSDT SERVICES- In the case of notice under subparagraph
 (A)(i), if the individual was enrolled for benefits under this title
 for EPSDT services, the notice shall include a statement that, unless
 the individual indicates otherwise, the benefits with respect to such
 services shall continue under this title and will not be terminated under
 such subparagraph. Such continuation is subject to the continued payment
 of any premiums due.
 `(4) NOTICES OF TERMINATION- Each notice of termination under paragraph
 (1) shall include--
 `(A) the effective date of the termination,
 `(B) in the case of notice to the Secretary, sufficient information to
 permit enrollment of the individuals affected under the public health
 insurance plan, and
 `(C) in the case of an individual whose coverage under the plan is terminated
 other than at the end of a calendar year, the accounting statement produced
 under subsection (c)(2).
 `(c) ACCOUNTING FOR COST-SHARING-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each qualified health plan shall provide for an ongoing
 accounting, for each enrollee (and enrolled family members) on a calendar
 year basis, of expenses incurred for basic health services that are
 counted towards the deductible established under section 2222 and that are
 counted towards the cost-sharing limit established under section 2224. The
 amount credited for each account shall be determined in accordance with
 standards established by the Secretary in order to provide consistency
 among qualified health plans and to promote portability of benefits across
 qualified health plans.
 `(2) STATEMENT OF ACCOUNT BALANCE- In the case of an individual whose
 coverage under the plan is terminated other than at the end of a calendar
 year, the qualified health plan shall produce an accounting statement
 (in a uniform manner established by the Secretary) of the amounts that
 are credited under the plan towards such deductible and cost-sharing
 limitations for the year for each enrollee (and family members) involved,
 in accordance with the accounting under paragraph (1).
 `(3) CREDITING OF PREVIOUS EXPENSES TOWARDS DEDUCTIBLES AND COINSURANCE-
 Each qualified health plan shall, in the case of an individual who is
 enrolled under the plan after the beginning of a year, credit, against the
 deductible and cost-sharing limit for basic health services under its plan,
 the amounts previously accounted against the deductible and cost-sharing
 limit under another qualified health plan for the calendar year. The credit
 under this subparagraph shall be based on the accounting statement produced
 under paragraph (2).
 `(d) COVERAGE UNDER PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this subsection, the public health
 insurance plan shall enroll each eligible individual whose coverage under
 another qualified health plan or under title XVIII is terminated, effective
 on the date following the effective date of termination of coverage under
 such plan.
 `(2) TREATMENT OF MEDICARE ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS- Except as provided in
 paragraphs (3) and (4), in the case of an individual who--
 `(A) is eligible for enrollment under part B of title XVIII,
 `(B) is not so enrolled because of enrollment under a qualified health
 plan, but
 `(C) whose enrollment under such a plan is terminated,
the Secretary shall provide, upon the effective date of such termination,
for enrollment of the individual under such part.
 `(3) OBTAINING ALTERNATE COVERAGE- Paragraphs (1) and (2) shall not apply
 if the individual provides satisfactory evidence that the individual has
 obtained coverage through another qualified health plan or is a medicare
 beneficiary.
 `(4) NO AUTOMATIC ENROLLMENT DURING TRANSITION- Paragraphs (1) and (2)
 shall not apply to terminations occurring before January 1 of the 6th year
 beginning after the date of the enactment of this title.
`SEC. 2258. CONSUMER PROTECTIONS.
 `(a) DISCLOSURES REQUIREMENTS-
 `(1) FOR PLANS SOLD TO INDIVIDUALS- In the case of a qualified health
 plan that is offered to an individual, other than as enrollment under a
 qualified employer health plan, the plan may not be issued or sold to the
 individual unless the individual has been provided a written statement
 containing at least the following:
 `(A) A description of the benefits covered in the plan and cost-sharing
 required with respect to such benefits.
 `(B) A comparison of the benefits and cost-sharing described in subparagraph
 (A) with the benefits and cost-sharing available to individuals enrolled
 in the public health insurance plan under this title (not taking into
 account any low-income assistance under part E).
 `(C) The premiums charged under the plan, and a comparison of such premiums
 with the premiums charged for enrollment under this title (not taking into
 account any low-income assistance under part E).
 `(D) A statement that no low-income assistance is available under part
 E with respect to individuals who purchase such a plan, but that such
 assistance may be available under such part with respect to individuals who
 are enrolled under the public health insurance plan or under a qualified
 employer health plan.
 `(E) A statement that, effective on January 1 of the 6th year beginning
 after the date of the enactment of this title, most individuals who are
 not full-time employees (or their family members) are eligible to enroll
 on a non-employment basis under the public health insurance plan.
 `(F) A description of any pre-existing condition limitations that are
 applied under the plan, either with respect to basic health services or
 other health services.
 `(G) If the plan restricts the providers or practitioners from which
 individuals may obtain covered benefits or is a managed care plan, a
 statement describing (i) how the choice of providers practitioners affects
 payment of benefits under the plan and (ii) the coverage under the plan
 of out-of-area services and of emergency services and urgently needed care.
 `(H) If the plan includes a utilization review program, a statement (in
 accordance with any standards established under section 2332) describing
 such program.
 `(2) FOR EMPLOYER PLANS-
 `(A) MANAGED CARE PLAN- In the case of a qualified health plan that is
 offered to an employer as a qualified employer health plan and that--
 `(i) restricts the providers or practitioners from which enrollees may
 obtain covered benefits, or
 `(ii) is a managed care plan,
the plan may not be issued or sold to the employer unless the covered employees
have been provided, by the plan or employer, a statement that describes (I)
how the choice of providers or practitioners affects payment of benefits
under the plan and (II) the coverage under the plan of out-of-area services
and of emergency services and urgently needed care.
 `(B) NOTICE OF AVAILABILITY OF LOW-INCOME ASSISTANCE- At the time of
 enrollment of an employee under a qualified employer health plan, the
 plan (directly or through the employer) shall provide the employee with a
 notice (in a form specified by the Secretary) of the low-income assistance
 available under part E with respect to enrollment under the plan.
 `(3) STANDARD FORMAT- The disclosures under paragraphs (1) and (2) shall be
 made in a uniform format established by the Secretary, after consultation
 with the National Association of Insurance Commissioners.
 `(4) VIOLATIONS- Any entity that issues or sells a qualified health plan
 in violation of paragraph (1) or (2) is subject to a civil money penalty
 of an amount not to exceed $5,000 with respect to each such issuance or
 sale. The provisions of section 1128A (other than the first sentence of
 subsection (a) and other than subsection (b)) shall apply to a civil money
 penalty under the previous sentence in the same manner as such provisions
 apply to a penalty or proceeding under section 1128A(a).
 `(6) TREATMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN- This subsection shall not
 apply to the public health insurance plan.
 `(b) EFFECTIVE GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each qualified health plan shall provide for meaningful
 procedures for hearing and resolving grievances between the plan and
 individuals enrolled under the plan.
 `(2) TREATMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN- In applying paragraph (1)
 with respect to the public health insurance plan, the provisions of part
 G are deemed to supersede such paragraph.
 `(c) RESTRICTION ON CERTAIN PHYSICIAN INCENTIVE PLANS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A health plan is not a qualified health plan if it
 operates a physician incentive plan (as defined in paragraph (2)) unless the
 requirements specified in clauses (i) through (iii) of section 1876(i)(8)(A)
 are met (in the same manner as they apply to eligible organizations under
 section 1876).
 `(2) PHYSICIAN INCENTIVE PLAN DEFINED- In this subsection, the term
 `physician incentive plan' means any compensation or other financial
 arrangement between the qualified health plan and a physician or physician
 group that may directly or indirectly have the effect of reducing or limiting
 services provided with respect to individuals enrolled under the plan.
 `(d) ENROLLEE FINANCIAL PROTECTION-
 `(1) SOLVENCY PROTECTION FOR INSURED PLANS- In the case of a qualified
 health plan that is an insured plan (as defined by the Secretary) and
 is issued in a State, in order for the plan to be certified under this
 part the Secretary must finds that the State has established satisfactory
 protection of enrollees with respect to potential insolvency.
 `(2) PROTECTION AGAINST PROVIDER CLAIMS- In the case of a failure of
 a qualified health plan to make payments with respect to basic health
 services, under standards established by the Secretary, an individual who
 is enrolled under the plan is not liable to any health care provider or
 practitioner with respect to the provision of basic health services for
 payments in excess of the amount for which the enrollee would have been
 liable if the plan were to have made payments in a timely manner.
`SEC. 2259. PREEMPTION OF CERTAIN STATE AND FEDERAL REQUIREMENTS.
 `(a) BENEFIT AND COVERAGE RULES- Effective as of January 1 of the applicable
 year (as defined in subsection (b)), no State shall establish or enforce
 any law or regulation that--
 `(1) requires the offering, as part of a qualified health plan, of any
 services, category of care, or services of any class or type of provider that
 is different from the benefits required to be provided under section 2253,
 `(2) specifies the individuals to be covered under a qualified health plan
 or the duration of such coverage, or
 `(3) effective as of January 1 of the 6th year beginning after the date
 of the enactment of this Act, requires a right of conversion from a group
 qualified health plan to an individual qualified health plan.
 `(b) APPLICABLE YEAR DEFINED- In this section, the term `applicable year'
 means, with respect to--
 `(1) a qualified employer health plan offered to a small employer, the
 3rd year beginning after the date of the enactment of this title,
 `(2) any other qualified employer health plan, the 4th year beginning
 after the date of the enactment of this title, or
 `(3) any other qualified health plan, the 5th year beginning after the
 date of the enactment of this title.
 `(c) REFERENCE TO STATE PAYMENT RULE- For provision relating to permitting
 recognition of State payment with respect to qualified health plans,
 see section 301(d).
 `(d) EFFECTIVE DATE OF REPEAL OF DUAL CHOICE MANDATE- Section 7(b) of
 Public Law 100-517 is amended by striking `Effective 7 years after the date
 of the enactment of this Act' and inserting `Effective on January of the
 applicable year (as defined in section 2259(b) of the Pepper Commission
 Health Care Access and Reform Act of 1991'.
 `(e) STATE DEFINED- In this section, the term `State' means the 50 States
 and the District of Columbia.
`Part G--Administrative Provisions
`SEC. 2261. AGREEMENTS WITH HOSPITALS; PARTICIPATING PHYSICIANS; TREATMENT
OF INDIAN HEALTH SERVICES FACILITIES.
 `(a) REQUIREMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Any hospital shall be qualified to participate under this
 title and shall be eligible for payments under this title if--
 `(A) it has in effect a participation agreement under section 1866(a)(1), and
 `(B) it files with the Secretary a participation agreement meeting the
 requirements of subsection (b).
 `(b) ELEMENTS OF AGREEMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this subsection, a participation
 agreement under this subsection shall provide terms, specified by the
 Secretary, that are the same terms as that required of hospital participation
 agreements under section 1866(a)(1).
 `(2) MODIFIED COPAYMENTS- Instead of the limitation on charges specified
 under paragraphs (1)(A) and (2) of section 1866(a), the agreement shall
 not permit the hospital to charge more than the applicable deductible and
 coinsurance permitted under this title.
 `(3) ACCEPTANCE OF PAYMENT LIMITS- Each agreement shall require the hospital
 not to impose charges, in the case of a qualified employer health plan with
 respect to which the option described in section 2314(a) has been offered and
 accepted, that exceed the amount of charges permitted to be imposed under
 this title. The previous sentence shall not be construed as prohibiting
 a qualified health plan from negotiating or otherwise providing payment
 rates that are less than the payment rates established under this title.
 `(c) PHYSICIAN PARTICIPATION AGREEMENTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this subsection, the Secretary
 shall provide for participating physician agreements under this title in
 the same manner as such agreements are provided for under title part B of
 title XVIII pursuant to section 1842(h).
 `(2) LIMITATION ON CHARGES TO OTHER ENTITIES- A participating physician
 agreement under this subsection shall provide that the physician agrees,
 in the case of a qualified employer health plan with respect to which
 the option described in section 2314(a) has been offered and accepted,
 not to impose charges with respect to basic health services in the same
 manner as they apply to the imposition of charges under the public health
 insurance plan. The previous sentence shall not be construed as prohibiting
 a qualified health plan from negotiating or otherwise providing payment
 rates that are less than the payment rates established under this title.
 `(d) INDIAN HEALTH SERVICE FACILITIES- The provisions of section 1880
 (relating to Indian health service facilities) shall apply to this title
 in the same manner as they apply under title XVIII.
`SEC. 2262. HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS AND COMPETITIVE MEDICAL PLANS.
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this subsection, section 1876 shall
 apply to individuals entitled to benefits under this title in the same
 manner as such section applies to individuals entitled to benefits under
 part A, and enrolled under part B, of title XVIII.
 `(2) APPLICATION- In applying section 1876 under this section--
 `(A) the provisions of such section relating only to individuals enrolled
 under part B of title XVIII shall not apply;
 `(B) any reference to a Trust Fund established under title XVIII and to
 benefits with respect to any services under such title is deemed a reference
 to the Public Health Insurance Trust Fund and to health insurance benefits
 with respect to basic health services under this title;
 `(C) the adjusted average per capita cost shall be determined on the basis
 of benefits under this title;
 `(D) subsections (e), (f), (g)(2), and (h) shall not apply; and
 `(E) in applying subsection (c)(3)(B), an eligible organization may
 require a minimum period of enrollment (of not greater than 12 months)
 during which an individual may not terminate enrollment unless enrollment
 under this title is terminated.
`SEC. 2263. USE OF FISCAL AGENTS.
 `(a) USE OF FISCAL AGENTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this section, the Secretary shall
 provide for the administration of this title through the use of fiscal
 intermediaries and carriers in the same manner as title XVIII is carried
 out through the use of such fiscal intermediaries and carriers.
 `(2) SPECIAL RULES- In the administration of this title, the Secretary
 shall--
 `(A) to the maximum extent practicable, use--
 `(i) the same fiscal intermediaries and carriers with respect to medicare
 supplemental benefits, and
 `(ii) a single carrier with respect to all basic health services and EPSDT
 services in an area; and
 `(B) establish performance standards at least as rigorous as the performance
 standards applied in the administration of title XVIII.
 `(3) SEPARATE CONTRACTS- Contracts with fiscal intermediaries and carriers
 entered into pursuant to this subsection for an area need not be with
 the same intermediary or carrier with an agreement under section 1816
 or a contract under section 1842 for the area. However, nothing in this
 section shall be construed as preventing such an organization with such
 an agreement or contract under such section from entering into a contract
 under this section.
 `(b) REQUIRING USE OF ELECTRONIC BILLING- Effective for claims submitted
 on or after January 1 of the 6th year beginning after the date of the
 enactment of this title, payment shall only be made under this title on
 the basis of bills or charges that are submitted electronically in a manner
 specified by the Secretary.
`SEC. 2264. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION.
 `(a) THROUGH HEALTH CARE FINANCING ADMINISTRATION- Except as otherwise
 provided in this title, this title shall be administered by the Health
 Care Financing Administration.
 `(b) REGULATIONS; TITLE II PROVISIONS; ADMINISTRATION- The provisions of
 sections 1871, 1872, and 1874 (relating to regulations, application of
 certain provisions of title II, and administration) shall apply to this
 title in the same manner as they apply to title XVIII.
 `(c) TREATMENT OF AMOUNTS DUE- In bankruptcy and reorganization proceedings,
 amounts owed to the public health insurance plan under this title shall
 be treated in the same manner as amounts owed to the Federal Government
 under the Federal Insurance Contributions Act.
`SEC. 2265. DETERMINATIONS; APPEALS; PROVIDER REIMBURSEMENT REVIEW BOARD.
 `(a) DETERMINATIONS- The determination of whether an individual is entitled
 to benefits under this title, and the determination of the amount of
 benefits under this title, and any other determination with respect to
 a claim for benefits with respect to inpatient hospital services under
 this title shall be made by the Secretary in accordance with regulations
 prescribed by the Secretary.
 `(b) HEARINGS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Any individual dissatisfied with any determination under
 subsection (a) shall be entitled to a hearing thereon by the Secretary to
 the same extent as is provided in section 205(b) and to judicial review of
 the Secretary's final decision after such hearing as is provided in section
 205(g). Sections 206(a), 1102, and 1871 (as incorporated by reference by
 section 2264) shall not be construed as authorizing the Secretary to prohibit
 an individual from being represented under this subsection by a person
 that furnishes or supplies the individual, directly or indirectly, with
 services or items solely on the basis that the person furnishes or supplies
 the individual with such a service or item. Any person that furnishes
 services or items to an individual may not represent an individual under
 this subsection with respect to the issue described in section 1879(a)(2)
 unless the person has waived any rights for payment from the beneficiary
 with respect to the services or items involved in the appeal. If a person
 furnishes services or items to an individual and represents the individual
 under this subsection, the person may not impose any financial liability
 on such individual in connection with such representation.
 `(2) LIMITATION- Notwithstanding paragraph (1), a hearing shall not be
 available to an individual if the amount in controversy is less than
 $500 and judicial review shall not be available to the individual if the
 amount in controversy is less than $1,000. In determining the amount in
 controversy, the Secretary, under regulations, shall allow two or more
 claims to be aggregated if the claims involved the delivery of similar or
 related services to the same individual or involve common issues of law
 and fact arising from services furnished to two or more individuals.
 `(3) EXPEDITED REVIEW- In an administrative hearing pursuant to paragraph
 (1), where the moving party alleges that there are no material issues of
 fact in dispute, the administrative law judge shall make an expedited
 determination as to whether any such facts are in dispute and, if not,
 shall determine the case expeditiously.
 `(c) PROVIDER REIMBURSEMENT REVIEW BOARD- The provisions of section 1878
 (relating to the Provider Reimbursement Review Board) shall apply under
 this title in the same manner as they apply under title XVIII.
`SEC. 2266. PROGRAM INTEGRITY.
 `Sections 1124, 1124A, 1126, and 1128 through 1128B (relating to fraud
 and abuse) shall apply to this title in the same manner as they apply to
 title XVIII.
`SEC. 2267. INFORMATION BY TELEPHONE.
 `The Secretary shall provide information via a toll-free telephone number
 on the public health insurance plan, including information concerning--
 `(1) the requirement of section 2204, and
 `(2) low-income assistance under part E.
`SEC. 2268. INCORPORATION OF MISCELLANEOUS MEDICARE PROVISIONS.
 `(a) OVERPAYMENTS ON BEHALF OF INDIVIDUALS AND SETTLEMENT OF CLAIMS FOR
 BENEFITS ON BEHALF OF DECEASED INDIVIDUALS- The provisions of section 1870
 (relating to overpayments on behalf of individuals and settlement of claims
 for benefits on behalf of deceased individuals), other than subsection
 (b), shall apply under this title in the same manner as they apply under
 title XVIII.
 `(b) LIMITATION ON CERTAIN PHYSICIAN REFERRALS- The provisions of section
 1877 (relating to limitation on certain physician referrals) shall apply
 under this title in the same manner as they apply under title XVIII.
`Part H--Definitions and Miscellaneous
`SEC. 2281. INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN DEFINITIONS USED IN OTHER HEALTH-RELATED
TITLES.
 `(a) INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN MEDICARE DEFINITIONS- In this title, except
 as otherwise provided, the definitions of the following terms contained
 in section 1861 apply for purposes of this title in the same manner as
 they apply for purposes of title XVIII:
 `(1) ARRANGEMENTS- The term `arrangements', as defined in section 1861(w).
 `(2) CERTIFIED NURSE-MIDWIFE SERVICES AND CERTIFIED NURSE-MIDWIFE- The
 terms `certified nurse-midwife services' and `certified nurse-midwife',
 as defined in section 1861(gg).
 `(3) CLINICAL SOCIAL WORKER AND CLINICAL SOCIAL WORKER SERVICES- The terms
 `clinical social worker' and `clinical social worker services', as defined
 in section 1861(hh).
 `(4) DISCHARGE PLANNING PROCESS- The description of the discharge planning
 process, under section 1861(ee).
 `(5) DRUGS AND BIOLOGICALS- The terms `drugs' and `biologicals', as defined
 in section 1861(t).
 `(6) HOSPITAL- The term `hospital', as defined in section 1861(e).
 `(7) INPATIENT HOSPITAL SERVICES- The term `inpatient hospital services',
 as defined in section 1861(b).
 `(8) INSTITUTIONAL PLANNING- The description of overall plans and budgets
 of providers of services, under section 1861(z).
 `(9) MEDICAL AND OTHER HEALTH SERVICES- The term `medical and other health
 services' means, subject to the second, third, and fourth sentences
 of section 1861(s), the items and services described in paragraph (1),
 subparagraphs (A), (B), (C), (E), (H), and (K) through (N) of paragraph
 (2), or in paragraphs (3), (4), or (5) of such section.
 `(10) PHYSICIAN- The term `physician', as defined in section 1861(r).
 `(11) PHYSICIANS' SERVICES- The term `physicians' services', as defined
 in section 1861(q).
 `(12) REASONABLE COST- The term `reasonable cost', as defined in section
 1861(v).
 `(13) RURAL HEALTH CLINIC SERVICES- The terms `rural health clinic services',
 `rural health clinic', `physician assistant', and `collaboration', as
 defined in section 1861(aa).
 `(14) QUALIFIED PSYCHOLOGIST SERVICES- The term `qualified psychologist
 services', as defined in section 1861(ii).
 `(15) SCREENING MAMMOGRAPHY- The term `screening mammography', as defined
 in section 1861(jj).
 `(16) SCREENING PAP SMEAR- The term `screening pap smear', as defined
 in section 1861(nn), except that the matter after `results of the test'
 shall be deemed, for purposes of this title, to have been deleted.
 `(17) SERVICES OF A CERTIFIED REGISTERED NURSE ANESTHETIST AND CERTIFIED
 REGISTERED NURSE ANESTHETIST- The terms `services of a certified registered
 nurse anesthetist' and `certified registered nurse anesthetist', as defined
 in section 1861(bb).
 `(18) STATE AND UNITED STATES- Except as provided in section 2259(e),
 the terms `State' and `United States', as defined in section 1861(x).
 `(b) INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN EMPLOYMENT-RELATED DEFINITIONS IN TITLE
 XXI- In this title, except as otherwise provided, the definitions of the
 following terms contained in title XXI apply for purposes of this title:
 `(1) COVERED EMPLOYER HEALTH PLAN- The term `covered employer health plan'
 as defined in section 2121(b).
 `(2) EMPLOYEE- The term `employee' as defined in section 2181(a)(1).
 `(3) EMPLOYER- The term `employer' as defined in section 2181(a)(1).
 `(4) FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE- The term `full-time employee' as defined in
 section 2181(b)(1).
 `(5) LARGE EMPLOYER- The term `large employer' as defined in section
 2181(c)(3).
 `(6) PART-TIME EMPLOYEE- The term `part-time employee' as defined in
 section 2181(b)(2).
 `(7) QUALIFIED EMPLOYER HEALTH PLAN- The term `qualified employer health
 plan' as defined in section 2121(a).
 `(8) SEASONAL OR TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE- The term `seasonal or temporary
 employee' as defined in section 2181(b)(3).
 `(9) SMALL EMPLOYER- The term `small employer' as defined in section
 2181(c)(2).
 `(10) VERY SMALL EMPLOYER- The term `very small employer' as defined in
 section 2181(c)(1).
 `(11) WAGES- The term `wages' as defined in section 2181(a)(1).
 `(c) INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN INSURANCE REFORM RELATED DEFINITIONS IN TITLE
 XXIII- In this title, except as otherwise provided, the definitions of the
 following terms contained in title XXIII apply for purposes of this title:
 `(1) APPLICABLE REGULATORY AUTHORITY- The term `applicable regulatory
 authority' as defined in section 2304(c)(1).
 `(2) EMPLOYMENT-RELATED HEALTH PLAN- The term `employment-related health
 plan' as defined in section 2304(a)(2).
 `(3) MANAGED CARE PLAN- The term `managed care plan' as defined in section
 2331(c)(1).
 `(4) PARTICIPATING PROVIDER- The term `participating provider' as defined
 in section 2331(d)(2).
`SEC. 2282. DEFINITIONS RELATING TO FAMILIES.
 `In this title:
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), the terms `family'
 and `family member' mean an individual and the individual's spouse, and
 includes all the individual's children.
 `(2) TREATMENT OF FAMILIES WITH MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES FOR COVERAGE PURPOSES-
 In the case of a family with a medicare beneficiary, if coverage is provided
 to family members other than on the basis of employment of a family member,
 the beneficiary shall not be treated under this title as a member of the
 family for purposes of determining eligibility for coverage but shall be
 treated as a separate individual. However, except as provided in section
 2242(b)(2), for purposes of applying part E, a medicare beneficiary shall
 continue to be treated as a member of the beneficiary's family.
 `(3) SPOUSE- The term `spouse' means, with respect to an individual,
 the individual to which the individual is married.
 `(4) MARRIED; UNMARRIED- Marital status shall be determined in accordance
 with section 7703 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 `(5) CHILD- The term `child' means, with respect to a person who is not
 a child, an individual--
 `(A) who (i) is unmarried and under 18 years of age, (ii) is unmarried and
 under 23 years of age and a full-time student, or (iii) is an unmarried,
 dependent child, regardless of age, who is incapable of self-support
 because of mental or physical disability which existed before age 22;
 `(B)(i) who is the child of the person or the person's spouse, or
 `(ii) who is the legal ward of the person or the person's spouse; and
 `(C) who is not in the legal custody of another individual.
The Secretary shall establish, by regulation, such rules as are appropriate
with respect to the treatment of foster children, emancipated minors, children
in the process of adoption, and other unmarried individuals under 23 years
of age under similar circumstances as children for purposes of this title.
 `(6) ADULT- The term `adult' means an individual who is not a child.
`SEC. 2283. OTHER DEFINITIONS.
 `In this title:
 `(1) MEDICARE BENEFICIARY; LOW-INCOME MEDICARE BENEFICIARY-
 `(A) The term `medicare beneficiary' means an individual entitled to
 benefits under part A of title XVIII.
 `(B) The term `low-income medicare beneficiary' means a medicare beneficiary
 whose family adjusted total income (as defined in section 2247(2)), as
 determined based upon an application under part E, is less than 200 percent
 of the official poverty line applicable to a family of the size involved.
 `(2) OFFICIAL POVERTY LINE- The term `official poverty line' means,
 for an individual in a family, the official poverty line (as defined by
 the Office of Management and Budget, and revised annually in accordance
 with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981)
 applicable to a family of the size involved.
 `(3) PREGNANT WOMAN- The term `pregnant woman' means a woman who has
 been certified by a physician (in a manner specified by the Secretary) as
 being pregnant, until the last day of the month in which the 60-day period
 (beginning on the date of termination of the pregnancy) ends.
 `(4) PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN- The term `public health insurance plan'
 means the program of health insurance provided under this title.
`SEC. 2284. GLOSSARY OF DEFINED TERMS USED IN TITLE AND CONTAINED IN THIS
TITLE OR RELATED TITLES.
 `ADJUSTED TOTAL INCOME- The term `adjusted total income' is defined in
 section 2247(1).
 `ADULT- The term `adult' is defined in section 2282(6).
 `APPLICABLE REGULATORY AUTHORITY- The term `applicable regulatory authority'
 is defined in section 2304(c)(1).
 `BASIC HEALTH SERVICES- The term `basic health services' is defined in
 section 2211(b).
 `BENEFICIARY CLASS- Beneficiary classes are described in section 2231(d).
 `BENEFIT PACKAGE- Benefit packages are listed in section 2231(c).
 `CHILD- The term `child' is defined in section 2282(5).
 `COMMUNITY- The term `community' is defined in section 2231(e).
 `COVERED EMPLOYER HEALTH PLAN- The term `covered employer health plan'
 is defined in section 2121(b).
 `ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL- The term `eligible individual' is defined in section
 2201(d).
 `EMPLOYEE- The term `employee' is defined in section 2181(a)(1).
 `EMPLOYER- The term `employer' is defined in section 2181(a)(1).
 `EMPLOYMENT BASED ENROLLMENT- Employment based enrollment is described in
 section 2201(a)(1)(B)(i).
 `EMPLOYMENT-RELATED HEALTH PLAN- The term `employment-related health plan'
 is defined in section 2301(A)(2).
 `ENROLLMENT UNDER A QUALIFIED EMPLOYER HEALTH PLAN- Conditions under which
 an individual is considered to be enrolled under a qualified employer
 health plan are described in section 2201(a)(1)(C).
 `EPSDT SERVICES- The term `EPSDT services' is defined in section 2212(b).
 `FAMILY, FAMILY MEMBER- The terms `family' and `family member' are defined
 in section 2282(1).
 `FAMILY ADJUSTED TOTAL INCOME- The term `family adjusted total income'
 is defined in section 2247(2).
 `FEDERAL HEALTH PLAN- The term `Federal health plan' is defined in section
 2204(f).
 `FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE- The term `full-time employee' is defined in section
 2181(b)(1).
 `HOSPITAL- The term `hospital' is defined in section 2281(6).
 `INPATIENT HOSPITAL SERVICES- The term `inpatient hospital services'
 is defined in section 2281(7).
 `LARGE EMPLOYER- The term `large employer' is defined in section 2181(c)(3).
 `LOW-INCOME MEDICARE BENEFICIARY- The term `low-income medicare beneficiary'
 is defined in section 2283(1)(B).
 `MANAGED CARE PLAN- The term `managed care plan' is defined in section
 2331(c)(1).
 `MARRIED- The marital status of an individual is determined in accordance
 with section 2282(4).
 `MEDICAL AND OTHER HEALTH SERVICES- The term `medical and other health
 services' is defined in section 2281(9).
 `MEDICARE BENEFICIARY- The term `medicare beneficiary' is defined in
 section 2283(1)(A).
 `MEDICARE SUPPLEMENTAL BENEFITS- The term `medicare supplemental benefits'
 is defined in section 2213(b).
 `NON-EMPLOYMENT BASED ENROLLMENT- Non-employment based enrollment is
 described in section 2201(a)(1)(B)(ii).
 `OFFICIAL POVERTY LINE- The term `official poverty line' is defined in
 section 2283(2).
 `PART-TIME EMPLOYEE- The term `part-time employee' is defined in section
 2181(b)(2).
 `PARTICIPATING PROVIDER- The term `participating provider' is defined in
 section 2331(d)(2).
 `PERIOD OF CONTINUOUS COVERAGE- The term `period of continuous coverage'
 is defined in section 2254(b)(3)(B)(i).
 `PHYSICIAN- The term `physician' is defined in section 2281(10).
 `PHYSICIAN INCENTIVE PLAN- The term `physician incentive plan' is defined
 in section 2258(c)(2).
 `PHYSICIANS' SERVICES- The term `physicians' services' is defined in
 section 2281(11).
 `PREEXISTING CONDITION- The term `preexisting condition' is defined in
 section 2254(b)(3)(B)(ii).
 `PREGNANT WOMAN- The term `pregnant woman' is defined in section 2283(3).
 `PREVENTIVE SERVICES- The term `preventive services' is defined in section
 2211(c).
 `PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN- The term `public health insurance plan'
 is defined in section 2283(4).
 `PUBLIC PLAN ELECTION- The term `public plan election' is defined in
 section 2105(a).
 `QUALIFIED EMPLOYER HEALTH PLAN- The term `qualified employer health plan'
 is defined in section 2121(a).
 `QUALIFIED HEALTH PLAN- The term `qualified health plan' is defined in
 section 2251(a).
 `SCREENING MAMMOGRAPHY- The term `screening mammography' is defined in
 section 2281(15).
 `SCREENING PAP SMEAR- The term `screening pap smear' is defined in section
 2281(16).
 `SEASONAL OR TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE- The term `seasonal or temporary employee'
 is defined in section 2181(b)(3).
 `SMALL EMPLOYER- The term `small employer' is defined in section 2181(c)(2).
 `SPOUSE- The term `spouse' is defined in section 2282(3).
 `STATE- The term `State' is defined in sections 2259(e) and 2281(18).
 `SUBSIDY PERCENTAGE- The term `subsidy percentage' is defined in section
 2242(c).
 `TRANSITION PERIOD- The term `transition period' is defined in section
 2231(b)(4).
 `UNITED STATES- The term `United States' is defined in section 2281(19).
 `UNMARRIED- The marital status of an individual is determined in accordance
 with section 2282(4).
 `UTILIZATION REVIEW PROGRAM- The term `utilization review program' is
 defined in section 2332(c).
 `VERY SMALL EMPLOYER- The term `very small employer' is defined in section
 2181(c)(1).
 `WAGES- The term `wages' is defined in section 2181(a)(1).
`SEC. 2285. AUTHORIZING RECIPROCAL COVERAGE OF FOREIGN NATIONALS.
 `Effective January 1 of the 6th year beginning after the date of the
 enactment of this title, the Secretary may make benefits available under
 this title with respect to basic health services for individuals who--
 `(1) are not eligible individuals described in section 2201(d),
 `(2) are in the United States, and
 `(3) are nationals of a foreign state which provides health benefits to
 nationals of the United States who are in that state,
if the Secretary determines that such benefits with respect to such services
would be available to nationals of the United States under comparable
circumstances in the foreign state.
`SEC. 2286. NONAPPLICATION TO RESIDENTS OF PUERTO RICO AND TERRITORIES.
 `The provisions of this title shall not apply to an individual who is not
 a resident of one of the 50 States or the District of Columbia.'.
TITLE III--QUALITY ASSURANCE AND COST CONTAINMENT
SEC. 301. APPLICATION OF PAYMENT RATES UNDER PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN
UNDER QUALIFIED EMPLOYER HEALTH PLANS.
 (a) REFERENCE TO OPTION- For a provision that contains costs for small
 employers by permitting them to elect to use payment rates under the public
 health insurance plan in their qualified employer health plans, see section
 2314 of the Social Security Act (as added by section 401 of this Act).
 (b) REFERENCE TO REQUIREMENT FOR MEDICARE PARTICIPATING PROVIDERS TO
 PARTICIPATE UNDER PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN- For a provision that requires
 medicare providers of services and participating physicians to participate
 under the public health insurance plan, see section 703 of this Act.
 (c) REFERENCE TO REQUIREMENT FOR PUBLIC PLAN PARTICIPATING PROVIDERS TO
 LIMIT CHARGES IN THE CASE OF ELECTING EMPLOYERS- For a provision that
 requires providers of services and physicians participating in the public
 health insurance plan to agree not to charge electing small employers in
 excess of charges permitted under the plan, see section 2261 of the Social
 Security Act (as added by section 201 of this Act).
 (d) USE OF STATE UNIFORM PAYMENT RULES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Nothing in title XXII of the Social Security Act or in
 this Act shall be construed as preventing a State from establishing uniform
 payment rates for one or more services under qualified health plans. Such
 payment rates may, subject to paragraph (2), apply to the medicare program
 under title XVIII of such Act or the public health insurance plan under
 title XXII of such Act, or both.
 (2) APPROVAL OF PUBLIC PROGRAMS- The Secretary may waive the requirements
 of titles XVIII and XXII of the Social Security Act insofar as they prevent
 the use of State uniform payment rates, so long as the Secretary determines--
 (A) that the aggregate payments (determined for a period of at least 3
 years) under each respective title will not exceed the aggregate payments
 that would have been made under such title in the absence of such waiver, and
 (B) the payment system will not preclude an eligible organization (as
 defined in section 1876(b) of such Act) from negotiating directly with
 providers and practitioners with respect to the organization's rate of
 payment for services.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as affecting the Secretary's
authority under other law to use State payment rates under title XVIII.
SEC. 302. FAVORABLE TREATMENT OF MANAGED CARE.
 For section providing favorable treatment of managed care, see section 421.
SEC. 303. APPLICATION OF OUTCOMES RESEARCH TO PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN.
 (a) EXPANSION OF RESEARCH TO INCLUDE PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN- Section
 1142 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320b-12), relating to research
 on outcomes of health care services and procedures, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1)(B), by inserting `and of the public health
 insurance plan under title XXII' after `title XVIII';
 (2) in subsection (b)(3)--
 (A) by inserting `AND PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN' after `MEDICARE
 PROGRAM', and
 (B) by inserting before the period at the end the following: `, and the needs
 and priorities of the public health insurance plan under title XXII'; and
 (3) in subsection (h), by inserting `or under title XXII' after `title
 XVIII'.
 (b) EXPANSION AND MODIFICATION OF FUNDING TO INCLUDE PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE
 TRUST FUND-
 (1) INCREASE IN FUNDING- Subsection (i)(1) of such section is amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (D), by striking `$148,000,000 for fiscal year 1993;
 and' and inserting `$300,000,000 for fiscal year 1993;',
 (B) in subparagraph (E), by striking `$185,000,000 for fiscal year 1994.' and
 inserting `$400,000,000 for fiscal year 1994; and', and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 `(F) $500,000,000 for fiscal year 1995.'.
 (2) ALLOCATION TO PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN- Subsection (i)(2) of such
 section is amended--
 (A) by striking `and 1994' and inserting `1994, and 1995',
 (B) in subparagraph (A), by striking `60 percent' and inserting `30 percent',
 (C) in subparagraph (B), by striking `40 percent' and inserting `20
 percent', and
 (D) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 `(C) 50 percent from the Public Health Insurance Trust Fund (established
 under section 2233).'.
 (c) DEVELOPMENT OF MENTAL HEALTH PRACTICE PARAMETERS- The Administrator
 for Health Care Policy and Research, working with the National Institute of
 Mental Health and mental health providers, shall develop outcomes research
 and practice parameters for mental health services, including at least
 the diagnosis and treatment of childhood attention deficit disorders and
 manic depression, required of qualified health plans under title XXII of
 the Social Security Act.
SEC. 304. APPLICATION OF PEER REVIEW PROGRAM UNDER THE PUBLIC HEALTH
INSURANCE PLAN.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title XXII of the Social Security Act is amended by
 redesignating section 2268 as section 2269 and by inserting after section
 2267 the following new section:
`SEC. 2268. APPLICATION OF PEER REVIEW PROGRAM.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this section,
 part B of title XI (relating to peer review of the utilization and quality
 of health care services) shall apply to this title in the same manner as
 it applies to title XVIII, and, for such purposes, any reference in such
 part to a provision in such title is deemed a reference to the appropriate
 provision (as identified by the Secretary) in this title.
 `(b) CONTRACTS-
 `(1) SEPARATE CONTRACTS- Contracts with utilization and quality control
 peer review organizations entered into pursuant to subsection (a) for an
 area need not be with the same organization with a contract under section
 1153 for the area. However, nothing in this section shall be construed as
 preventing such an organization with a contract under such section from
 entering into a contract under this section.
 `(2) FUNCTIONS- The duties required of peer review organizations under
 contracts under this section shall be adapted to services and populations
 served under this title.
 `(c) FUNDING-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In applying section 1159 under subsection (a), expenses
 incurred in the administration of contracts under this section shall be
 payable from funds in the Public Health Insurance Trust Fund.
 `(2) USE OF SIMILAR FUNDING MECHANISMS- The provisions of section
 1866(a)(1)(F) shall apply to agreements with hospitals under section 2261
 with respect to peer review organizations with contracts under this section
 in the same manner as they apply to agreements with hospitals under section
 1866(a)(1) with respect to peer review organizations with contracts under
 part B of title XI.
 `(d) NO REQUIREMENT FOR SECOND OPINION IN CERTAIN SURGICAL PROCEDURES-
 Section 1164 shall not apply with respect to contracts under this section.'.
SEC. 305. MEDICAL MALPRACTICE.
 (a) DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS- The Administrator for Health Care Policy and
 Research (established under section 901 of the Public Health Service Act)
 shall design, implement, and evaluate studies on medical malpractice issues
 and demonstration projects related to medical malpractice reform for the
 purpose of making recommendations to Congress under subsection (b). The
 studies and projects shall be designed to assure a system for compensation
 for persons injured as a result of adverse medical occurrences that--
 (1) assures appropriate compensation,
 (2) reduces the practice of defensive medicine,
 (3) assures the availability and affordability of insurance for all types
 of providers and practitioners against claims, and
 (4) provides incentives to provide quality care and to reduce the number
 and severity of such occurrences.
 (b) RECOMMENDATIONS- Based on such studies and demonstration projects,
 the Administrator shall make recommendations to Congress respecting--
 (1) incentives to improve the quality of care, and
 (2) cost-effective methods of providing efficient and appropriate
 compensation to individuals injured in adverse medical occurrences.
 (c) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 for each of fiscal years 1992 through 1996, such sums as may be necessary
 to carry out this section.
SEC. 306. REPORT ON REQUIRING USE OF UNIFORM CLAIMS FORMS.
 Not later than January 1 of the 2nd year beginning after the date of the
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall
 submit to Congress a report on requiring that all claims submitted under
 all qualified health plans (including under titles XVIII, XIX, or XXII of
 the Social Security Act or under a qualified employer health plan) be on
 a uniform claims form which includes clinical data stated using uniform
 definitions and standards (such as those developed under section 1142(d)
 of the Social Security Act).
TITLE IV--GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE REFORM
Subtitle A--General Reforms
SEC. 401. GENERAL REFORMS.
 The Social Security Act is amended by adding at the end the following
 new title:
`TITLE XXIII--GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE STANDARDS
`Part A--General Standards; Definitions
`SEC. 2301. APPLICATION OF REQUIREMENTS TO EMPLOYMENT-RELATED HEALTH PLANS.
 `(a) INSURED PLANS-
 `(1) PLAN UNDER STATE REGULATORY PROGRAM OR CERTIFIED BY THE SECRETARY-
 No insured employment-related health plan may be issued in a State on or
 after the effective date specified in subsection (d) (and no new contract
 may be offered under such plan with respect to any employer beginning on
 or after such effective date) unless--
 `(A) the Secretary determines that the State has established a regulatory
 program that provides for the application and enforcement of the applicable
 standards established under section 2302 (to carry out the requirements
 of this title) and that meets the requirements of section 2302(b) by such
 effective date, or
 `(B) if the State has not established such a program, the plan has been
 certified by the Secretary (in accordance with such procedures as the
 Secretary establishes) as meeting the applicable standards established
 under section 2302 by such effective date.
 `(2) PLAN DISAPPROVED UNDER LOOK-BEHIND AUTHORITY- If the Secretary
 determines, under section 2302(c), that an employment-related health
 plan does not meet the applicable requirements of this title on or after
 such effective date, regardless of whether or not the State has taken any
 action with respect to such noncompliance, no new contracts may be offered
 to employers under the plan on or after the date of the determination.
 `(b) SELF-INSURED PLANS-
 `(1) NEW PLANS- No self-insured employment-related health plan may
 be offered on or after the effective date specified in subsection (d)
 unless the plan has been certified by the Secretary (in accordance with
 such procedures as the Secretary establishes) as meeting the applicable
 standards established under section 2302 by such effective date.
 `(2) PLAN DISAPPROVED UNDER LOOK-BEHIND AUTHORITY- If the Secretary
 determines that a self-insured employment-related health plan does not meet
 the applicable requirements of this title on or after such effective date,
 no coverage may be provided under the plan to individuals not enrolled
 as of the date of the determination and the plan may not be continued
 for plan years beginning after the date of such determination until the
 Secretary determines that such plan is in compliance with such requirements.
 `(c) SANCTIONS-
 `(1) USE OF CEASE AND DESIST ORDER PROCESS- Except as provided in this
 subsection, the provisions of section 2108 shall apply to violations by
 plans of subsection (a) or (b) in the same manner as such provisions apply
 to violations by employers of the requirements of section 2101 of such Act.
 `(2) AMOUNT OF CIVIL MONEY PENALTY- The amount of any civil money penalty
 imposed under paragraph (1) shall not exceed $25,000 for each employer
 with respect to which a violation occurs. Such amount may take into account
 the penalties imposed by a State with respect to the same such violation.
 `(3) NOTICE TO EMPLOYER IN THE CASE OF INSURED PLANS- As part of any order
 issued under paragraph (1) in the case of an insured employment-related
 health plan, the order shall require notice to be provided to each employer
 which meets the requirement of section 2101 through coverage under the
 plan of the findings in the order.
 `(4) LOSS OF STATUS AS QUALIFIED EMPLOYER HEALTH PLAN-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- If an employment-related health plan is determined to be
 in violation of subsection (a) or (b) and is not determined to have come
 into compliance with the applicable standards within 6 months after the
 date of the initial determination of such a violation, the plan shall no
 longer be treated as a qualified employer health plan under title XXII as
 of the end of such 6-month period.
 `(B) NO ENFORCEMENT OF INSURANCE CONTRACTS- In the case of an employer
 that is required, under part A of title XXII, to provide enrollment under
 a qualified employer health plan and that meets such requirement through
 an insured plan that is determined to be in violation of subsection (a)--
 `(i) if such plan is not brought into compliance within 30 days after the
 date of the violation, the employer may terminate by notice the contract
 with the plan and is not liable for payment of any additional amounts
 under the plan, and
 `(ii) if such plan no longer qualifies as a qualified employer health
 plan, such contract shall be terminated and the employer is not liable for
 payment of any amounts for periods in which the plan no longer qualifies
 as a qualified employer health plan.
 `(5) REFERENCE TO EXCISE TAX- For excise tax on violations of requirements
 of this title, see section 4980C of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
 as added by section 604 of this Act.
 `(d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The effective date specified in this subsection is
 January 1 of the third year that begins after the date of the enactment
 of this Act.
`SEC. 2302. ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS-
 `(1) NAIC- The Secretary shall request the NAIC--
 `(A) to develop specific standards, in the form of a model Act and model
 regulations, to implement the requirements of this title, and
 `(B) to report to the Secretary on such development,
by not later than October 1 of the year following the year in which this
title is enacted. If the NAIC develops such standards within such period
and the Secretary finds that such standards implement the requirements of
this title, such standards shall be the standards applied under section 2301.
 `(2) SECRETARY- If the NAIC fails to develop and report on such standards
 by such date or the Secretary finds that such standards do not implement
 the requirements of this title, the Secretary shall develop and publish,
 by not later than November 15 of the year following the year in which
 this title is enacted, such standards. Such standards shall then be the
 standards applied under section 2301.
 `(b) Additional Elements of Regulatory Programs-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A State regulatory program shall include the following:
 `(A) The enforcement under the program--
 `(i) shall be designed in a manner so as to secure compliance with the
 standards within 30 days after the date of a finding of noncompliance with
 such standards, and
 `(ii) shall provide for notice to the Secretary in cases where such
 compliance is not secured within such 30-day period.
 `(B) A toll-free telephone which provides for--
 `(i) a system for the receipt and disposition of consumer complaints or
 inquiries regarding compliance of health plans with the requirements of
 this title, and
 `(ii) information to small employers about carriers that offer small
 employer health plans in the area covered by the regulatory authority.
Such system shall provide for the recording of consumer complaints in
accordance with a uniform methodology developed by the NAIC and recognized
by the Secretary.
 `(2) SECRETARIAL AUTHORITY- In the case of a State without a regulatory
 program approved under subsection (a), the Secretary shall provide for the
 establishment of the toll-free telephone information and complaint system
 described in paragraph (1).
 `(c) SECRETARIAL REVIEW-
 `(1) PERIODIC REVIEW OF STATE REGULATORY PROGRAMS- The Secretary periodically
 shall review State regulatory programs to determine if they continue to
 meet the standards referred to in subsection (a) and the requirements of
 subsection (b). If the Secretary finds that a State regulatory program
 no longer meets such standards and requirements, before making a final
 determination, the Secretary shall provide the State an opportunity to adopt
 such a plan of correction as would permit the program to continue to meet
 such standards and requirements. If the Secretary makes a final determination
 that the State regulatory program, after such an opportunity, fails to meet
 such standards and requirements, the Secretary shall assume responsibility
 under section 2301(a)(1)(B) with respect to plans in the State.
 `(2) LOOK-BEHIND AUTHORITY- In the case of a State with a regulatory
 program found by the Secretary to meet the standards and requirements
 under this title, the Secretary nonetheless is authorized to determine
 whether or not individual insured employment-related health plans in the
 State have failed to comply with the applicable requirements of this title.
 `(d) GAO AUDITS- The Comptroller General shall conduct periodic audits on
 a sample of State regulatory programs to determine their compliance with
 the requirements of this section. The Comptroller General shall report to
 the Secretary and Congress on the findings in such audits.
`SEC. 2303. REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL EMPLOYMENT-RELATED HEALTH PLANS.
 `(a) NO DISCRIMINATION BASED ON HEALTH STATUS FOR CERTAIN SERVICES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided under paragraph (2), an
 employment-related health plan may not deny, limit, or condition the
 coverage under (or benefits of) the plan with respect to basic health
 services based on the health status, claims experience, receipt of health
 care, medical history, or lack of evidence of insurability, of an individual.
 `(2) TREATMENT OF PREEXISTING CONDITION EXCLUSIONS FOR ALL SERVICES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this paragraph,
 an employment-related health plan may exclude coverage with respect to
 services related to treatment of a preexisting condition, but the period
 of such exclusion may not exceed 6 months.
 `(B) NONAPPLICATION TO NEWBORNS AND SUNSET OF PREEXISTING CONDITION
 EXCLUSIONS FOR BASIC HEALTH SERVICES- The exclusion of coverage permitted
 under subparagraph (A) shall not apply to--
 `(i) services furnished to newborns, or
 `(ii) basic health services furnished on or after July 1 of the 6th year
 beginning after the date of the enactment of this title.
 `(C) CREDITING OF PREVIOUS COVERAGE-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- If an individual is in a period of continuous coverage
 (as defined in clause (ii)(I)) with respect to particular services as
 of the date of initial coverage under a plan, any period of exclusion of
 coverage with respect to a preexisting condition for such services or type
 of services shall be reduced by 1 month for each month in the period of
 continuous coverage.
 `(ii) DEFINITIONS- In this subparagraph:
 `(I) PERIOD OF CONTINUOUS COVERAGE- The term `period of continuous coverage'
 means, with respect to particular services, the period beginning on the
 date an individual is enrolled under a health plan or program (including
 a qualified health plan, a Federal health plan, the medicare program, a
 State plan under title XIX, or a State general medical assistance program)
 which provides the same or substantially similar benefits with respect to
 such services and ends on the date the individual is not so enrolled for
 a continuous period of more than 3 months.
 `(II) PREEXISTING CONDITION- The term `preexisting condition' means, with
 respect to coverage under a plan, a condition which has been diagnosed or
 treated during the 3-month period ending on the day before the first date
 of such coverage, except that such term does not include a condition which
 was first diagnosed or treated during a period of continuous coverage.
 `(iii) STANDARDS FOR SIMILAR BENEFITS- The standards established under
 section 2302 shall establish such criteria for determining if benefits
 are substantially similar as may be necessary to carry out this subparagraph.
 `(b) PERMITTING COVERAGE DURING WAITING PERIOD-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- If an employment-related health plan imposes a waiting
 period before an eligible individual may be covered under the plan,
 the plan--
 `(A) must make available to the individual coverage (including coverage
 of dependents) equivalent to the coverage available to the employee upon
 the completion of any applicable waiting period, and
 `(B) may not impose for such coverage charges that exceed the cost under the
 plan of providing such coverage (determined, in the case of a self-insured
 plan, on an average, per participant cost basis) with respect to the
 employee if such waiting period did not apply.
Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as requiring a health plan to
make coverage available to an individual who no longer has an employment
relationship (or who is the spouse or dependent of such an individual)
with respect to the plan.
 `(2) ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL DEFINED- In paragraph (1), the term `eligible
 individual' means, with respect to a health plan, an individual who, but for
 a waiting period, would be eligible for immediate coverage under the plan.
`SEC. 2304. DEFINITIONS.
 `(a) HEALTH PLAN AND OTHER DEFINITIONS RELATING TO HEALTH PLANS- In
 this title:
 `(1) HEALTH PLAN- The term `health plan' means any hospital or medical
 expense incurred policy or certificate, hospital or medical service plan
 contract, health maintenance subscriber contract, other employee welfare
 plan (as defined in the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1964),
 or any other health insurance arrangement, and includes an employment-related
 reinsurance plan (as defined in paragraph (3)), but does not include--
 `(A) accident-only, credit, dental, or disability income insurance,
 `(B) coverage issued as a supplement to liability insurance,
 `(C) worker's compensation or similar insurance, or
 `(D) automobile medical-payment insurance.
 `(2) EMPLOYMENT-RELATED HEALTH PLAN- The term `employment-related health
 plan' means any health plan provided or arranged for or contributed to by the
 employer or an employment-related organization to provide health benefits
 (directly or indirectly) for the employer's employees and dependents,
 and includes (but only for purposes of sections 2313 unless the context
 otherwise requires) an employment-related reinsurance plan.
 `(3) EMPLOYMENT-RELATED REINSURANCE PLAN- The term `employment-related
 reinsurance plan' means any reinsurance or similar mechanism that underwrites
 a portion of the risk for an employment-related health plan, if the
 mechanism is offered directly to an employer or employment-related group.
 `(4) INSURED EMPLOYMENT-RELATED HEALTH PLAN- The term `insured
 employment-related health plan' means an employment-related health plan that
 is not a self-insured employment-related health plan or an employment-related
 reinsurance plan.
 `(5) MANAGED CARE PLAN- The term `managed care plan' has the meaning given
 such term in section 2331(c)(1).
 `(6) SELF-INSURED EMPLOYMENT-RELATED HEALTH PLAN- The term `self-insured
 employment-related health plan' means an employment-related health plan which
 is an employee welfare benefit plan (as defined in the Employee Retirement
 Income Security Act of 1964) and in which the employer or employment-related
 group assumes the underwriting risk for the plan (whether or not there is
 any reinsurance or similar mechanism to underwrite a portion of that risk).
 `(7) SMALL EMPLOYER HEALTH PLAN- The term `small employer health plan'
 means an employment-related health plan insofar as it offers benefits
 with respect to any small employer, as defined in subsection (c)(8),
 or the employees of a small employer.
 `(b) CARRIER; HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION; AND OTHER DEFINITIONS
 RELATING TO CARRIERS- In this part:
 `(1) CARRIER- The term `carrier' means any person that offers a health plan,
 whether through insurance or otherwise, including a licensed insurance
 company, a prepaid hospital or medical service plan, a health maintenance
 organization, a self-insurer carrier, a reinsurance carrier, and a multiple
 employer welfare arrangement.
 `(2) HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION- The term `health maintenance
 organization' has the meaning given the term `eligible organization'
 in section 1876(b).
 `(3) REINSURANCE CARRIER- The term `reinsurance carrier' means the entity
 assuming responsibility for underwriting under an employment-related
 reinsurance plan, but does not include a carrier insofar as it directly
 offers a health plan.
 `(4) SELF-INSURER CARRIER- The term `self-insurer carrier' means a carrier
 that is not a licensed insurance company, a prepaid hospital or medical
 service plan, or a health maintenance organization, that offers a health
 plan directly with respect to an employment-related group.
 `(5) SMALL EMPLOYER CARRIER- The term `small employer carrier'--
 `(A) means any carrier which offers small employer health plans, and
 `(B) includes (unless the context otherwise requires)--
 `(i) a self-insurer carrier offering such a plan, or
 `(ii) a reinsurance carrier offering a small employer health plan that is
 an employment-related reinsurance plan.
 `(c) GENERAL DEFINITIONS- In this part:
 `(1) APPLICABLE REGULATORY AUTHORITY- The term `applicable regulatory
 authority' means, with respect to a health plan offered in a State, the
 State commissioner or superintendent of insurance or other State authority
 responsible for regulation of health insurance, or, if the Secretary is
 exercising authority under section 2301(a)(1)(B) in the State, the Secretary.
 `(2) BLOCK OF BUSINESS- The term `block of business' means all, or a distinct
 grouping of, small employers as shown on the records of the small employer
 carrier, if established consistent with section 2312(b)(3).
 `(3) COMMUNITY- The term `community' has the meaning given such term in
 section 2231(e).
 `(4) FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE- The term `full-time employee' has the meaning
 given such term in section 2181(b)(1).
 `(5) NAIC- The term `NAIC' means the National Association of Insurance
 Commissioners.
 `(6) REFERENCE PREMIUM RATE- The term `reference premium rate' means,
 for each block of business for a rating period in a community, the lowest
 premium rate charged or which could have been charged by the small employer
 carrier to small employers in that block under a rating system for that
 block of business in the community for health plans with the same or similar
 coverage. The reference premium rate is determined without regard to any
 adjustment for age or sex described in section 2312(c) and without regard
 to any adjustment effected under section 2312(d).
 `(8) SMALL EMPLOYER- The term `small employer' has the meaning given such
 term in section 2181(c)(2).
 `(9) STATE- The term `State' means the 50 States and the District of
 Columbia.
`Part B--Small Employer Health Insurance Reform
`SEC. 2311. ENROLLMENT PRACTICE AND GUARANTEED RENEWABILITY REQUIREMENTS
FOR SMALL EMPLOYER HEALTH PLANS.
 `(a) REGISTRATION WITH APPLICABLE REGULATORY AUTHORITY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each small employer carrier (as defined in section
 2304(b)(5)) shall register with the applicable regulatory authority for
 each State in which it issues or offers a small employer health plan.
 `(2) NO PREEMPTION OF STATE INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS- Nothing in paragraph
 (1) shall be construed as preventing the applicable regulatory authority
 from requiring, in the case of carriers that are not self-insurance
 carriers, such additional information in conjunction with, or apart from,
 the registration required under paragraph (1) as the applicable regulatory
 authority may be authorized to require under State law.
 `(b) GUARANTEED ISSUE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this subsection, a
 carrier that offers a health plan (including a reinsurance plan, but only
 if offered to a self-insured employment-related health plan) to small
 employers located in a community must offer the same plan to any other
 small employer located in the community.
 `(2) TREATMENT OF HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS-
 `(A) GEOGRAPHIC LIMITATIONS- A health maintenance organization may deny
 coverage under a plan to a small employer whose employees are located
 outside the service area of the organization, but only if such denial is
 applied uniformly without regard to health status or insurability.
 `(B) SIZE LIMITS- A health maintenance organization may apply to the
 applicable regulatory authority to cease enrolling new small employer groups
 in its small employer health plan (or in a geographic area served by the
 plan) if it can demonstrate that its financial or administrative capacity to
 serve previously enrolled groups and individuals (and additional individuals
 who will be expected to enroll because of affiliation with such previously
 enrolled groups) will be impaired if it is required to enroll new groups.
 `(3) GROUNDS FOR REFUSAL TO ISSUE OR RENEW-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- A carrier may refuse to issue or renew or terminate a
 plan only for--
 `(i) nonpayment of premiums,
 `(ii) fraud or misrepresentation, and
 `(iii) failure to meet minimum participation rates (consistent with
 subparagraph (B)).
 `(B) MINIMUM PARTICIPATION RATES- A carrier may require, with respect to
 a small employer health plan, that a minimum percentage of full-time,
 permanent employees eligible to enroll under the plan be enrolled, so
 long as such percentage is enforced uniformly for all employment groups
 of comparable size.
 `(c) MINIMUM PLAN PERIOD- A carrier may not offer to, or issue with respect
 to, a small employer a small employer health plan with a term of less than
 12 months.
 `(d) GUARANTEED RENEWABILITY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL-
 `(A) GENERAL RULE- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this subsection,
 each small employer health plan must be renewed, at the option of the
 employer or employment-related organization described in section 2304(a)(2),
 unless the plan is terminated for the reasons specified in subsection
 (a)(3)(A) or under subparagraph (B).
 `(B) TERMINATION OF BLOCK OF BUSINESS- A carrier need not renew a health
 plan with respect to such an employer or employment-related organization
 if the carrier--
 `(i) is terminating the block of business that includes the plan, and
 `(ii) provides notice to the employer or organization covered under the
 plan of such termination at least 90 days before the date of expiration
 of the plan.
In the case of such a termination, the insurer may not provide for issuance
of any small employer health plan in any block of business during the 5-year
period beginning on the date of termination of such block of business.
 `(C) CONSTRUCTION RESPECTING ADDITIONAL STATE DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS-
 Subparagraph (B)(ii) shall not be construed as preventing the applicable
 regulatory authority from specifying the information to be included in the
 notice under such subparagraph or in requiring such notice to be provided
 at an earlier date.
 `(2) NOTICE AND SPECIFICATION OF RATES AND ADMINISTRATIVE CHANGES-
 `(A) NOTICE- The small employer carrier of a small employer health plan shall
 provide for notice, at least 30 days before the date of expiration of the
 health plan, of the terms for renewal of the plan. Except with respect to
 rates and administrative changes, the terms of renewal (including benefits)
 shall be the same as the terms of issuance.
 `(B) RENEWAL RATES SAME AS ISSUANCE RATES- The carrier may change the
 terms for such renewal, but the premium rates charged with respect to such
 renewal shall be the same as that for a new issue.
 `(C) RATES CANNOT CHANGE MORE OFTEN THAN MONTHLY-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- A small employer carrier may not change the premium rates
 established with respect to any block of business for a small employer
 health plan more often than monthly.
 `(ii) APPLICATION OF NEW RATES- In the case of a plan issued which becomes
 effective in a month, the premium rates established under clause (i) for
 that month shall apply to all months during the 12-month period beginning
 with that month. In the case of a plan renewal which is effective for a
 12-month period beginning with a month, the premium rates established
 under clause (i) with respect to that month shall apply to all months
 during 12-month renewal period.
 `(3) PERIOD OF RENEWAL- The period of renewal of each small employer health
 plan shall be for a period of not less than 12 months.
 `(e) EXCEPTION FOR SELF-INSURED CARRIERS- The requirements of this section
 (other than subsection (a)) shall not apply to self-insured carriers and
 self-insured employment-related health plans.
`SEC. 2312. RATING PRACTICES FOR SMALL EMPLOYER HEALTH PLANS.
 `(a) COHESIVE RATING SYSTEM AND ACTUARIAL CERTIFICATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The premiums (including reference premium rate, as
 defined in section 2304(c)(6), age-sex adjustments under subsection (c),
 and reductions provided under subsection (d)) for all small employer health
 plans of the same entity shall--
 `(A) be established based on a single cohesive rating system which is
 applied consistently for all employer groups and is designed not to treat
 groups, after the second effective year (as defined in subsection (f)),
 differently based on health status or risk status; and
 `(B) be actuarially certified annually.
 `(2) ACTUARIAL CERTIFIED DEFINED- For purposes of paragraph (1)(B), a plan is
 considered to be `actuarially certified' if there is a written statement,
 by a member of the American Academy of Actuaries or other individual
 acceptable to the applicable regulatory authority that a small employer
 carrier is in compliance with this section, based upon the individual's
 examination, including a review of the appropriate records and of the
 actuarial assumptions and methods utilized by the carrier in establishing
 premium rates for applicable health plans.
 `(b) USE OF COMMUNITY-RATING-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2) and subsection (c):
 `(A) COMMUNITY RATING WITHIN A BLOCK OF BUSINESS- The reference premium
 rate charged for a small employer health plan with similar benefits in
 a community within a block of business for a type of family enrollment
 (described in subsection (e)) shall be the same for all small employers.
 `(B) LIMITING VARIATION ON REFERENCE PREMIUM RATES AMONG BLOCKS OF BUSINESS-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in clause (iii), the reference premium
 rate charged for small employer health plans with similar benefits in any
 community for a type of family enrollment for the most expensive block of
 business shall not exceed 120 percent of such rate charged for such plan for
 the same type of family enrollment for the least expensive block of business.
 `(ii) ROLE OF REGULATORY AUTHORITY- An applicable regulatory authority
 that is a State may reduce or eliminate the percent variation otherwise
 permitted under clause (i).
 `(iii) EXCEPTION- Clause (i) shall not apply to a block of business--
 `(I) if the block is one for which the carrier does not reject, and never
 has rejected, small employers included within the definition of employers
 eligible for the block of business or otherwise eligible employees and
 dependents who enroll on a timely basis,
 `(II) the carrier does not involuntarily transfer, and never has
 involuntarily transferred, a health plan into or out of the block of
 business, and
 `(III) that block of business was available for purchase as of the date
 of the enactment of this title.
 `(2) TRANSITION- Notwithstanding paragraph (1)--
 `(A) during the first effective year (as defined in subsection (f)), the
 premium rate for any employer may be as much as, but may not exceed, 150
 percent of the reference premium rate for such plans in the same community
 for similar benefits in the same block of business, or
 `(B) during the second effective year, the premium rate for any employer
 may be as much as, but may not exceed, 122 percent of the reference premium
 rate for such plans in the same community for similar benefits in the same
 block of business.
 `(3) ESTABLISHMENT OF BLOCKS OF BUSINESS- For the purpose of establishing
 premiums for small employer health plans with similar coverage, the small
 employer carrier may establish blocks of business based only on one or
 more of the following characteristics:
 `(A) Plans that are marketed by clearly different sales forces.
 `(B) Plans that have been acquired from another carrier as a distinct group.
 `(C) Plans that are managed care plans.
 `(D) Plans within another distinct group, if the applicable regulatory
 authority finds that establishment of such a group will enhance the
 efficiency and fairness of the small employer insurance marketplace.
 `(c) AGE AND SEX ADJUSTMENT TO COMMUNITY-RATING-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (2), a small employer health plan
 may provide for an adjustment to the reference premium rate based on age
 and gender of covered individuals. Any such adjustment shall be applied
 consistently to all small employers.
 `(2) LIMITATION ON ADJUSTMENT-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The adjustment under paragraph (1) may not result, with
 respect to small employer health plans with similar benefits in the same
 block of business in a community, in a premium rate for the most expensive
 age-sex group exceeding the applicable percent (as defined in subparagraph
 (B)) of the premium rate for the least expensive age-sex group.
 `(B) APPLICABLE PERCENT DEFINED- In subparagraph (A) but subject to
 subparagraph (C), the term `applicable percent' means--
 `(i) for the first effective year (as defined in subsection (e)), 200
 percent,
 `(ii) for the second effective year, 150 percent, and
 `(iii) for any subsequent year, 110 percent.
 `(C) ROLE OF REGULATORY AUTHORITY- An applicable regulatory authority that
 is a State may reduce or eliminate the applicable percent otherwise applied.
 `(d) ADJUSTMENT IN RATES PERMITTED IN CASE OF MEDICARE REIMBURSEMENT
 ELECTION- A small employer health plan may compute premiums based upon
 a percentage of the reference premium rate otherwise applicable if the
 employer or employment-related organization to which the plan is being
 offered makes the reimbursement election described in section 2123. Any
 such adjustment shall be applied consistently to all small employers.
 `(e) TYPES OF FAMILY ENROLLMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each small employer health plan shall permit enrollment of
 (and shall compute premiums separately for) individuals based on each of
 the following beneficiary classes:
 `(A) 1 adult.
 `(B) A married couple without children.
 `(C) 1 adult and 1 child.
 `(D) A married couple with 1 or more children, or 1 adult with 2 or more
 children.
 `(2) APPLICATION OF DEFINITIONS- The definitions in section 2281(b) shall
 apply for purposes of this subsection.
 `(f) EFFECTIVE YEARS DEFINED- In this section, the terms `first effective
 year' and `second effective year' mean the third and fourth years beginning
 after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 `(g) EXCEPTION FOR SELF-INSURED CARRIERS- The requirements of this section
 shall not apply to self-insured carriers and self-insured employment-related
 health plans, but does apply to reinsurance carriers and employment-related
 reinsurance plans offered to such carriers or underwriting such self-insured
 plans.
`SEC. 2313. BASIC BENEFIT PACKAGE FOR SMALL EMPLOYER HEALTH PLANS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL-
 `(1) BENEFITS AND COST-SHARING IN QUALIFIED HEALTH PLANS- Except as provided
 in paragraph (2), no small employer health plan may be issued to a small
 employer by a carrier unless--
 `(A) the plan provides for benefits for all basic health services (as
 defined in section 2211(b));
 `(B) the plan does not impose cost-sharing with respect to basic health
 services in excess of the deductibles and coinsurance permitted under title
 XXII with respect to such services (not taking into account any low-income
 assistance under part E of such title); and
 `(C) the carrier makes available to the employer a small employer health
 plan that, subject to paragraph (2)(C), only provides the benefits for basic
 health services and the maximum cost-sharing consistent with subparagraphs
 (A) and (B).
 `(2) EXCEPTIONS-
 `(A) NO APPLICATION TO REINSURANCE PLANS- Paragraph (1) shall not apply
 to employment-related reinsurance plans.
 `(B) REQUIRED OFFERING DOES NOT APPLY TO SELF-INSURED PLANS AND HMO'S-
 Paragraph (1)(C) shall not apply to a self-insured plan or the plan of a
 health maintenance organization.
 `(C) ADDITIONAL, OPTIONAL MINIMUM SERVICES- In meeting the requirement of
 paragraph (1)(C), a small employer health plan may include such additional
 items and services as the small employer carrier can demonstrate to the
 satisfaction of the applicable regulatory authority that inclusion of
 such items and services will facilitate appropriate hospital discharges
 or avoid unnecessary hospitalization.
 `(b) MANAGED CARE OPTION- If a carrier (other than a health maintenance
 organization or reinsurance carrier) offers to employers, that are not
 small employers, in a community a qualified employer health plan that is
 a managed care plan, the carrier must make available in the community a
 small employer health plan that is such a managed care plan .
 `(c) EXCEPTION FOR REINSURANCE CARRIERS AND PLANS- The requirements of
 this section shall not apply to reinsurance carriers and employment-related
 reinsurance plans.
 `(d) STANDARDIZATION OF BENEFIT PACKAGES- The NAIC shall develop a model to
 standardize benefits to be made available under small employer health plans
 in order to promote consumer understanding and comparison among such plans.
`SEC. 2314. PUBLIC PLAN REIMBURSEMENT OPTION FOR SMALL EMPLOYER HEALTH PLANS.
 `(a) OPTION MUST BE OFFERED- Each small employer carrier offering a small
 employer health plan to a small employer shall offer the employer the option
 of having payment under the plan made for basic health services at rates
 no higher than the payment rates established under title XXII for such
 services. The provisions of section 1848(g)(3) shall not be considered to
 apply under this subsection.
 `(b) APPLICATION OF PUBLIC PLAN BILLING LIMITATIONS- In the case of a small
 employer that elects the option offered under subsection (a) with respect
 to a small employer health plan, the limitations on charges that may be
 made under the public health insurance plan shall apply to individuals
 receiving benefits under the plan. The sanctions imposed under the medicare
 program (and title XI), including exclusion under such program and the
 imposition of civil money penalties for violations of such limitations,
 apply to violations of the limitations imposed under this subsection.
 `(c) EXCEPTION FOR REINSURANCE PLAN- Subsection (a) shall not apply to
 employment-related reinsurance plans.
`SEC. 2315. MISCELLANEOUS DISCLOSURE AND RECORD-KEEPING REQUIREMENTS FOR
SMALL EMPLOYER HEALTH PLANS.
 `(a) DISCLOSURE TO EMPLOYERS-
 `(1) GENERAL DISCLOSURE- Each small employer carrier shall disclose to each
 small employer before issuing a small employer health plan the following:
 `(A) The availability (pursuant to the requirement of section 2313(a)(1)(C))
 of a plan including only basic benefits .
 `(B) Whether any plan that is a managed care plan or provides for a
 utilization review program, or both, is available, as required under
 section 2313(b).
 `(C) The option of electing the reimbursement rules, as required under
 section 2314.
 `(D) The limits, imposed under section 2312, on the premiums permitted to
 be charged for such plans.
 `(E) The rights of guaranteed issue and renewability provided under
 section 2311.
Such disclosure shall be in addition to any disclosure required generally
of qualified health plans under section 2257(a).
 `(2) SPECIFIC DISCLOSURE UPON REQUEST- Each small employer carrier shall
 disclose to each small employer, upon request, information concerning the
 blocks of business established with respect to small employer health plans
 and the applicable premiums for such plans.
 `(3) STANDARD FORMAT- The disclosure under paragraph (1) shall be made
 in a uniform format established by the Secretary, after consultation with
 the NAIC.
 `(4) EXCEPTIONS- Paragraph (1) (other than subparagraphs (D) and (E))
 shall not apply to a small employer reinsurance carrier with respect to
 an employment-related reinsurance plan.
 `(b) INFORMATION FILED WITH APPLICABLE REGULATORY AUTHORITY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each small employer carrier shall disclose to the
 applicable regulatory authority, in a manner specified by the Secretary,
 information 3concerning--
 `(1) blocks of business established, and
 `(2) applicable premiums for small employer health plans.
 `(2) ADDITIONAL INFORMATION- Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as
 limiting the information which an applicable regulatory authority may require
 to be reported by small employer carriers (other than self-insured carriers).
`SEC. 2316. NONAPPLICATION IN PUERTO RICO AND THE TERRITORIES.
 `This part shall not apply outside the 50 States or the District of
 Columbia.'.
Subtitle B--Reinsurance Systems
SEC. 411. ENCOURAGING DEVELOPMENT OF REINSURANCE SYSTEMS.
 Title XXIII of the Social Security Act, as added by section 401, is amended
 by inserting after part B the following new part:
`Part C--Encouraging Development of Reinsurance Systems
`SEC. 2321. ENCOURAGING DEVELOPMENT OF REINSURANCE SYSTEMS.
 `(a) DEVELOPMENT OF MODELS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Not later than October 1 of the year following the year
 in which this title is enacted, the NAIC shall develop several models of
 legislation for the enactment of reinsurance systems that may be used by
 States with respect to health insurance policies (including small employer
 health plans).
 `(2) SPECIFIC MODELS- Such models shall include at least 1 of each of the
 following 3 models:
 `(A) A model providing for voluntary participation by insurers.
 `(B) A model providing for insurer participation on a retrospective basis.
 `(C) A model providing for the case management of services for individual
 claims or groups which are reinsured through the system.
 `(3) TERMS OF MODELS- Each of the models--
 `(A) shall be consistent with the provisions of this title (including
 those relating to community-rated premiums), and
 `(B) shall include deductibles and coinsurance which (i) limit the amount
 of risk ceded to the reinsurance system and (ii) to encourage insurers to
 manage health care costs.
 `(b) PROTECTION OF HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS UNDER REINSURANCE
 SYSTEMS- No State may establish or enforce a reinsurance system with respect
 to health insurance policies unless the system provides for an adjustment in
 reinsurance premiums (or, in the event of losses to the system, assessments)
 charged to health maintenance organizations that takes into account--
 `(1) the higher premiums charged by such organizations due to the greater
 coverage provided by such organizations as required by law,
 `(2) the limitations under title XIII of the Public Health Service Act on
 the amount of risk which such an organization can reinsure, and
 `(3) the ability of such organizations to manage risk internally.
 `(c) EFFECTIVE DATE- This section shall take effect on the date of the
 enactment of this title.'.
Subtitle C--Encouraging Establishment of Managed Care
SEC. 421. FAVORABLE TREATMENT OF MANAGED CARE PLANS AND UTILIZATION REVIEW
PROGRAMS.
 Title XXIII of the Social Security Act is further amended by adding at
 the end the following new part:
`Part C--Favorable Treatment of Managed Care
`SEC. 2331. FAVORABLE TREATMENT OF MANAGED CARE PLANS.
 `(a) MANAGED CARE PLAN DEFINED-
 `(1) DEFINED- In this section, the term `managed care plan' means a
 qualified health plan--
 `(A) in which the carrier--
 `(i) utilizes explicit standards for the selection and recertification of
 participating providers,
 `(ii) has organizational arrangements, established in accordance with
 regulations of the Secretary, for an ongoing quality assurance program
 for its health services, which program (I) stresses health outcomes, and
 (II) provides review by physicians and other health professionals of the
 process followed in the provision of health services, and
 `(iii) contains significant incentives to use the participating providers
 and procedures provided for by the plan; and
 `(B) which, if it limits coverage of services to those provided by
 participating providers or permits deductibles and coinsurance with respect
 to basic health services provided by persons who are not participating
 providers which are in excess of those permitted under qualified health
 plans under title XXII--
 `(i) has a sufficient number and distribution of participating providers
 to assure that all covered items and services are (i) available and
 accessible to each enrollee, within the area served by the plan, with
 reasonable promptness and in a manner which assures continuity, and (ii)
 when medically necessary, available and accessible twenty-four hours a
 day and seven days a week, and
 `(ii) provides benefits for covered items and services not furnished by
 participating providers if the items and services are medically necessary and
 immediately required because of an unforeseen illness, injury, or condition.
 `(2) DETERMINATION OF MANAGED CARE PLANS-
 `(A) INSURED PLANS- In the case of a health plan that is offered by an
 entity that is subject to regulation by an applicable regulatory authority
 (as defined in section 2704(c)), consistent with procedures established
 by the Secretary in consultation with such authorities, such authorities
 shall be responsible for certifying for purposes of this title and the
 Social Security Act whether the health plan is a managed care plan.
 `(B) SELF-INSURED PLANS- In the case of other health plans, the Secretary
 shall be responsible for certifying for purposes of this title and the
 Social Security Act whether the health plan is a managed care plan.
 `(b) CONDITION OF STATE FUNDING-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- No amounts shall be made available under title IV, V,
 or XX of this Act to a State in any fiscal year (beginning with the first
 fiscal year beginning after the date of the enactment of this section)
 unless the State is in compliance with subsection (a).
 `(2) DEEMED ELECTION; IMPLIED PREEMPTION-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- A State is deemed to have elected subsection (a) to be
 in effect in the State as of the beginning of a fiscal year, unless the
 chief executive officer of a State indicates in writing that the State
 will not comply with this section. Such an election shall have the effect
 of preempting the establishment or enforcement of any State law that is
 in violation of subsection (a).
 `(B) CHANGES- A State is deemed not to have such an election in effect as
 of the date the Secretary determines that the State is enforcing any law
 or regulation in violation of subsection (a).
 `(c) LIMITATION ON RESTRICTIONS ON MANAGED CARE PLANS- In order to comply
 with the requirements of this subsection, a State may not by law or
 regulation prohibit or unreasonably limit any of the following:
 `(1) A State may not prohibit or unreasonably limit a managed care plan
 from including incentives for enrollees to use the services of participating
 providers.
 `(2) A State may not prohibit or unreasonably limit a managed care plan from
 limiting coverage of services to those provided by a participating provider.
 `(3)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), a State may not prohibit or unreasonably
 limit the negotiation of rates and forms of payments for providers under
 a managed care plan.
 `(B) Subparagraph (A) shall not apply where the amount of payments with
 respect to a block of services or providers is established under a Statewide
 system applicable to all non-Federal payors with respect to such services
 or providers.
 `(4) A State may not prohibit or unreasonably limit a managed care plan
 from limiting the number of participating providers.
 `(5) A State may not prohibit or unreasonably limit a managed care plan
 from requiring that services be provided (or authorized) by a primary care
 physician selected by the enrollee from a list of available participating
 providers.
 `(d) ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS-
 `(1) APPLICATION OF OTHER DEFINITIONS- In this part, the definitions
 contained in sections 2304 shall also apply.
 `(2) PARTICIPATING PROVIDER- The term `participating provider' means an
 entity which provides, sells, or leases health care services under a contract
 with a managed care plan, which contract does not permit deductibles and
 coinsurance in excess of those permitted under a qualified health plan
 under title XXII with respect to basic health services.
`SEC. 2332. FAVORABLE TREATMENT OF UTILIZATION REVIEW PROGRAMS.
 `(a) PREEMPTION OF STATE LAWS RESTRICTING UTILIZATION REVIEW PROGRAMS THAT
 MEET FEDERAL STANDARDS-
 `(1) CERTIFICATION PROCESS- The Secretary shall establish a process
 whereby health plans that include utilization review programs (as defined
 in subsection (c)) may apply to the Secretary for a certification that
 the programs meet the standards established under subsection (b). The
 Secretary may not provide for such a certification unless the program
 meets such standards.
 `(2) RESULTS OF CERTIFICATION- In the case of a utilization review program
 certified under paragraph (1), no State law or regulation shall prohibit
 or regulate activities under such program, except insofar as such law or
 regulation is consistent with the standards established under paragraph (1).
 `(b) ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS FOR UTILIZATION REVIEW PROGRAMS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall provide, by regulation, for the
 establishment of Federal standards for utilization review programs of
 qualified health plans and of employment-related health plans. Such
 standards shall be designed to assure, within a plan, the cost-effective
 and medically appropriate use of services.
 `(2) CONTENTS OF STANDARDS- Such standards shall be established with respect
 to at least each of the following aspects of utilization review programs:
 `(A) The qualification of those who may perform utilization review
 activities.
 `(B) The standards to be applied in performing utilization review.
 `(C) The timeliness in which utilization review determinations are to
 be made.
 `(D) An appeals process which provides a fair opportunity for individuals
 adversely affected by a utilization review determination to have such a
 determination reviewed.
 `(E) Protection for the confidentiality of individually-identifiable
 information used in the process.
 `(3) USE OF GUIDELINES- Such standards shall, to the maximum extent feasible,
 be consistent with practice guidelines developed by the Agency for Health
 Care Policy and Research.
 `(4) EXPERIENCE WITH PEER REVIEW ORGANIZATIONS- In the development of
 the standards, the Secretary shall consider the experience obtained in
 the peer review program under part B of title XI and in the activities of
 fiscal intermediaries and carriers under title XVIII.
 `(5) DEADLINE- Standards shall first be established under this subsection
 by not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this title. The
 Secretary may revise the standards from time to time as required to assure,
 within health plans, the cost-effective and medically appropriate use
 of services.
 `(c) UTILIZATION REVIEW PROGRAM DEFINED- In this section, the term
 `utilization review program' means a system of reviewing the medical
 necessity and appropriateness of patient services (which may include
 inpatient and outpatient services) using specified guidelines. Such a
 system may include preadmission certification, the application of practice
 guidelines, continued stay review, discharge planning, preauthorization
 of ambulatory procedures, and retrospective review.'.
TITLE V--EXPANSION OF PRIMARY CARE AND PUBLIC HEALTH DELIVERY CAPACITY IN
MEETING HEALTH OBJECTIVES
SEC. 501. EXTENSION OF AUTHORIZATIONS FOR PRIMARY CARE AND PUBLIC HEALTH
PROGRAMS THROUGH THE YEAR 2000.
 (a) IMMUNIZATION PROGRAMS- Section 317(j)(1)(A) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 247b(j)(1)(A)) is amended by striking `1995' and inserting `2000'.
 (b) TUBERCULOSIS PREVENTION AND CONTROL- Section 317(j)(2) of such Act
 (42 U.S.C. 247b(j)(2)) is amended by striking `1995' and inserting `2000'.
 (c) LEAD POISONING PREVENTION- Section 317A(j) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 247b-1(j)) is amended by adding before the period at the end the
 following: `and such sums as may be necessary for each succeeding fiscal
 year through fiscal year 2000'.
 (d) PROJECTS AND PROGRAMS FOR THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF SEXUALLY
 TRANSMITTED DISEASES- Section 318(d)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 247c(d)(1))
 is amended by striking `and 1991' and inserting `through 2000'.
 (e) MIGRANT HEALTH CENTERS- Section 329(h)(1)(A) of the Public Health
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254b(h)(1)(A)) is amended by striking `1994' and
 inserting `2000'.
 (f) COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTERS- Section 330(g)(2)(A) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 254c(g)(2)(A)) is amended by striking `1994' and inserting `2000'.
 (g) HOMELESS PROGRAMS- Section 340(q)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 256(q)(1))
 is amended by striking `and 1994' and inserting `through 2000'.
 (h) PUBLIC HOUSING PROGRAMS- Section 340A(p)(1) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 256a(p)(1)) is amended by striking `and 1993' and inserting
 `through 2000'.
 (i) FAMILY PLANNING SERVICES- Section 1001(d) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 300(d))
 is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' after `1984;', and
 (2) by inserting before the period at the end the following: `; and such
 sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 1992 through 2000'.
 (j) EARLY INTERVENTION SERVICES FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH HIV DISEASE- Section
 2655 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 300ff-55) is amended by striking `1995' and
 inserting `2000'.
SEC. 502. EXPANDING PRIMARY CARE AND PUBLIC HEALTH DELIVERY CAPACITY.
 Section 2243 of the Social Security Act, as added by section 201 of this
 Act, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(d) ALLOCATION FOR PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT GRANTS FOR PRIMARY CARE
 CENTERS AND PUBLIC HEALTH CLINICS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- From the amounts provided under paragraph (3) the Secretary
 shall make grants to public and private nonprofit private entities for
 projects to plan and develop primary care centers and public health clinics
 which will serve medically underserved populations. The funds provided
 under such a grant may be used for the same purposes for which a grant
 may be made under section 330(c) of the Public Health Service Act.
 `(2) PROCESS OF AWARDING GRANTS- The provisions of section 330(e)(1) of the
 Public Health Service Act shall apply to a grant under this subsection in the
 same manner as they apply to a grant under subsection (c) of such section.
 `(3) EXPENDITURES FROM TRUST FUND-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Expenditures, within the range specified in subparagraph
 (B), necessary to provide all grants under paragraph (1) in order to
 adequately serve medically underserved populations which are enrolled
 under this title or are receiving low-income assistance under part E,
 shall be made from the Trust Fund each fiscal year (before fiscal year 2001).
 `(B) RANGE OF FUNDS- The amount of expenditures under this subsection for
 any fiscal year shall be not less than 1/2 percent, or greater than 1
 percent, of the amounts the Secretary estimates will be expended from the
 Trust Fund in the fiscal year for low-income assistance under part E.
 `(C) FUNDS SUPPLEMENTAL TO OTHER FUNDS- The funds provided under this
 subsection with respect to primary care centers and public health clinics
 are in addition to, and not in replacement of, funds made available to
 such centers and clinics under sections 317, 317A, 318, 329, 330, 340,
 340A, 1001, and 2655 of the Public Health Service Act or any other law.
 `(4) PRIMARY CARE CENTER DEFINED- In this subsection, the term `primary
 care center' means--
 `(A) a migrant health center (as defined in section 329(a)(1) of the Public
 Health Service Act),
 `(B) a community health center (as defined in section 330(a) of such Act), or
 `(C) an entity qualified to receive a grant under section 340, 340A, 1001,
 or 2655 of such Act.
 `(5) PUBLIC HEALTH CLINIC DEFINED- In this subsection, the term `public
 health clinic' means an entity qualified to receive a grant under section
 317, 317A, or 318 of the Public Health Service Act.
 `(6) MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED POPULATION DEFINED- In this subsection, the
 term `medically underserved population' has the meaning given such term
 in section 330(b)(3) of the Public Health Service Act.'.
SEC. 503. ANNUAL REPORT ON IMPACT OF ACT IN MEETING GOALS AND OBJECTIVES
STATED IN `HEALTHY PEOPLE, 2000'.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of Health and Human Services every 5 years,
 beginning with 1996, shall submit to Congress a report on the impact of
 this Act in meeting the following Goals for the Nation stated in `Healthy
 People, 2000' (and in meeting the specific national health promotion and
 disease prevention objectives stated in such report):
 (1) To increase the span of healthy life for Americans.
 (2) To reduce health disparities among Americans.
 (3) To achieve access to preventive services for all Americans.
 (b) RECOMMENDATIONS- Each report under subsection (a) shall include such
 recommendations with respect to changes in the benefits and payment policies
 under qualified health plans as will best promote achievement of national
 health promotion and disease prevention goals and objectives.
TITLE VI--FINANCING AND TAX-RELATED PROVISIONS
SEC. 601. PROGRESSIVE FINANCING OF PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN.
 The public health insurance plan shall be funded through one or more
 funding means in a manner that--
 (1) is progressive in the aggregate,
 (2) is sufficient, each year, over time, and in the aggregate, to cover
 the net costs of the plan, and
 (3) is not derived from any one age group of society.
SEC. 602. STATE MAINTENANCE OF EFFORT PAYMENTS.
 (a) CONDITION OF CONTINUED FEDERAL PAYMENTS- Notwithstanding any other
 provision of the Social Security Act, as a condition of payment to a State
 for a calendar quarter beginning on or after January 1 of the 2nd year
 beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act under title IV,
 V, XIX, or XX of the Social Security Act, the State must provide (in a
 manner and at a time specified by the Secretary) for payment to the Public
 Health Insurance Trust Fund (established under section 2233 of such Act)
 of the amount specified in subsection (b) for the quarter.
 (b) MAINTENANCE OF EFFORT AMOUNT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The amount of payment specified in this subsection for a
 State for a calendar quarter is equal to the State hypothetical savings
 specified in paragraph (2) increased by the compounded sum of the increase
 in the consumer price index for all urban consumers (U.S. City average,
 as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the Department of Labor)
 for each year after fiscal 1991 and up to the fiscal year in which the
 quarter occurs.
 (2) STATE SAVINGS- A State hypothetical savings specified in this paragraph
 for a calendar quarter is 1/4 of the amount by which the payments (net
 of Federal payments) made by a State under its State plan under title XIX
 of the Social Security Act for fiscal year 1991 for medical assistance
 would have been reduced if the law (as amended by this Act and in effect
 during such quarter) has been in effect during all of fiscal year 1991.
 (c) STATE DEFINED- In this section, the term `State' means the 50 States
 and the District of Columbia.
SEC. 603. FULL DEDUCTION FOR QUALIFIED HEALTH PLAN INSURANCE COSTS OF
SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Paragraph (1) of section 162(l) of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (relating to special rules for health insurance costs of
 self-employed individuals) is amended--
 (1) by striking `25 percent of', and
 (2) by inserting `which is certified as a qualified health plan under part
 F of title XXII of the Social Security Act (including the public health
 insurance plan under such title) and' after `for insurance'.
 (b) DEDUCTION MADE PERMANENT- Subsection (l) of section 162 of such Code
 is amended by striking paragraph (6).
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 604. EXCISE TAX FOR VIOLATION OF HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Chapter 43 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating
 to qualified pension, etc., plans) is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following new section:
`SEC. 4980C. VIOLATION OF HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
 `(a) IMPOSITION OF TAX- There is hereby imposed a tax on an entity's
 violation of subsection (a) of section 2301 of the Social Security Act. The
 determination of whether there has been such a violation shall be made by
 the Secretary of Health and Human Services under such section.
 `(b) AMOUNT OF TAX- The tax imposed by subsection (a) shall be equal to
 25 percent of the amounts received by the entity (during the period such
 a violation persists) for providing any health plan for all blocks of
 business in all communities.
 `(c) LIABILITY FOR TAX- The tax imposed by this section shall be paid by
 the entity.
 `(d) EXCEPTIONS-
 `(1) CORRECTIONS WITHIN 30 DAYS- No tax shall be imposed by subsection
 (a) by reason of any violation if--
 `(A) such violation was due to reasonable cause and not to willful
 neglect, and
 `(B) such violation is corrected within the 30-day period beginning on
 earliest date the entity knew, or exercising reasonable diligence could
 have known, that such a violation was occurring.
 `(2) WAIVER BY SECRETARY- In the case of a violation which is due to
 reasonable cause and not to willful neglect, the Secretary may waive part
 or all of the tax imposed by subsection (a) to the extent that payment of
 such tax would be excessive relative to the violation involved.
 `(e) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section, the definitions in title
 XXIII of the Social Security Act shall apply under this section.'.
 (2) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for chapter 43 of such Code
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`Sec. 4980C. Violation of health plan requirements.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsection (a) shall become
 effective on January 1 of the 4th year beginning after the date of the
 enactment of this Act.
SEC. 605. REFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR QUALIFIED PLAN COSTS OF VERY SMALL EMPLOYERS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to refundable credits) is amended
 by redesignating section 35 as section 36 and by inserting after section
 34 the following new section:
`SEC. 35. QUALIFIED HEALTH PLAN COSTS OF VERY SMALL EMPLOYERS.
 `(a) ALLOWANCE OF CREDIT- In the case of a very small employer, there shall
 be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this subtitle for the
 taxable year an amount equal to 40 percent of the amount paid or incurred
 by the taxpayer during the taxable year for any qualified employer health
 plan providing coverage to employees of such employer.
 `(b) SMALL EMPLOYER- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The term `very small employer' means any person engaged
 in the active conduct of a trade or business during the taxable year if--
 `(A) the average number of full-time employees (or their equivalent)
 during the taxable year of such person does not exceed 24, and
 `(B) the average annual rate of pay (taking into account only wages as
 defined in section 51(c) without regard to paragraph (4) thereof) of the
 employees of such person is $18,000 or less.
 `(2) CONTROLLED GROUPS- For purposes of this section--
 `(A) all employers treated as a single employer under subsection (a) or
 (b) of section 52 shall be treated as a single employer, and
 `(B) the credit (if any) allowable under this section with respect to each
 such employer shall be such employer's proportionate share of the payments
 giving rise to such credit.
 `(c) QUALIFIED EMPLOYER HEALTH PLAN- For purposes of this section, the term
 `qualified employer health plan' means any plan meeting the requirements
 of subtitle B of title XXI of the Social Security Act.
 `(d) APPLICATION OF SECTION- This section shall apply only to taxable
 years beginning in the 5-year period which begins with the 3rd calendar
 year beginning after the date of the enactment of this section.'.
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- Paragraph (2) of section 1324(b) of title 31,
 United States Code, is amended by inserting before the period `or from
 section 35 of such Code'.
 (c) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for such subpart C is amended
 by striking the last item and inserting the following new items:
`Sec. 35. Qualified health plan costs of very small employers.
`Sec. 36. Overpayments of tax.'.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after the close of the 1st calendar year beginning
 after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (d) STUDY OF EXTENSION OF CREDIT FOR EMPLOYERS OF 10 OR FEWER EMPLOYEES- The
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, in cooperation with the Secretary of
 the Treasury, shall review the impact of this Act, and the credit provided by
 the amendments made by this section, on employers of 10 or fewer full-time
 employees. Not later than 7 years after the date of the enactment of this
 Act the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on such impact and on
 whether the credit provided by the amendments made by this section should
 be expended for very small employers with 10 or fewer full-time employees.
SEC. 606. REPEAL OF COBRA CONTINUATION REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 4980B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is
 repealed.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Section 414 of such Code is amended--
 (1) in subsection (n)(3)(C), by striking `505, and 4980B' and inserting
 `and 505', and.
 (2) in subsection (t)(2), by striking `505, or 4980B' and inserting `or 505'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The repeal effected by subsection (a) shall apply to--
 (A) health plans with respect to employees of large employers as of January
 1 of the 4th year beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act,
 (B) health plans with respect to employees of small employers that are
 not very small employers as of January 1 of the 5th year beginning after
 the date of the enactment of this Act, and
 (C) health plans with respect to employees of very small employers as of
 January 1 of the 6th year beginning after the date of the enactment of
 this Act.
 (2) DEFINITIONS- The terms `large employer', `small employer', and `very
 small employer' have the meanings given such terms in 2181(c) of the Social
 Security Act.
 (c) NOTICE OF BENEFITS UNDER PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN- In the case of
 continuation coverage which is in effect on the date of the repeal under
 subsection (a) but which is to be discontinued after such date (and before
 the date required under law in effect before the date of the enactment of
 this Act) such continuation may not be discontinued without 30-days notice
 to the individual of such discontinuation. Such notice shall include such
 information respecting continuation of coverage through enrollment under
 the public health insurance plan as the Secretary of Health and Human
 Services shall specify.
TITLE VII--MEDICARE AND MEDICAID AMENDMENTS
Subtitle A--Medicare
SEC. 701. PROTECTION FOR LOW-INCOME MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES.
 (a) REFERENCE TO PROVISION- For provision making assistance available
 to low-income medicare beneficiaries in meeting medicare cost-sharing,
 see part E of title XXII of the Social Security Act, as added by section
 201 of this Act.
 (b) CLARIFYING APPLICATION OF BILLING LIMITS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 1848(g)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395w-4(g)(3)(A)) is amended by striking `any medical assistance'
 and all that follows through `title XIX' and inserting `low-income assistance
 under part E of title XXII'.
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall take effect
 on January 1 of the 6th year beginning after the date of the enactment of
 this Act.
SEC. 702. PHASED-IN REQUIREMENT OF PART B ENROLLMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1811 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395c)
 is amended by inserting `(a)' after `1811.' and by adding at the end the
 following new subsection:
 `(b) Notwithstanding sections 226 and 226A and any other provision of
 this title, effective for services furnished on or after January 1 of the
 6th year beginning after the date of the enactment of this subsection,
 payment may not be made under this part for items and services during any
 period in which the individual is not enrolled under part B or under a
 qualified health plan (as defined in section 2251). For purposes of the
 previous sentence, entitlement to benefits under this part (but for this
 subsection) shall not be considered enrollment in a qualified health plan.'.
 (b) CLARIFICATION OF COVERAGE PERIOD- Section 1838(b) of the Social Security
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395q(b)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(b)(1) An individual's coverage period shall continue until the individual's
 enrollment is terminated by the filing of notice that the individual--
 `(A) no longer wishes to participate in the insurance program established
 by this part,
 `(B) is covered under a qualified health plan, and
 `(C) has notified the plan that the individual is entitled to benefits
 under part A of this title.
 `(2) The termination of coverage under paragraph (1) shall take effect at
 the close of the month following the month in which the notice is filed.
 `(3) Such termination shall no longer be effective at such time as the
 individual is eligible to be enrolled under this part and is no longer
 covered under a qualified health plan.'.
 (c) ELIMINATION OF LATE ENROLLMENT PENALTIES- Section 1839 of such Act is
 amended by striking subsection (b).
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsections (b) and (c) shall take
 effect January 1 of the 6th year beginning after the date of the enactment
 of this Act and shall apply to premiums beginning with such January.
SEC. 703. CHANGES IN PARTICIPATION AGREEMENTS.
 (a) PROVIDERS OF SERVICES- Section 1866(a)(1) of the Social Security Act
 is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of subparagraph (P),
 (2) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (Q) and inserting
 `, and', and
 (3) by inserting after subparagraph (Q) the following new subparagraph:
 `(R) to have entered into a participation agreement under title XXII of
 this Act.'.
 (b) PHYSICIANS- Section 1842(h)(1) of such Act is amended by adding at the
 end the following: `No such agreement with a physician shall be entered into
 and continued in effect on or after January 1 of the third year beginning
 after the date of the enactment of this sentence unless the physician has
 entered into a comparable agreement for purposes of title XXII.'
SEC. 704. ASSURING COORDINATION OF ENROLLMENT WITH QUALIFIED HEALTH PLANS.
 (a) NOTICES- Section 1837 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395p)
 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(j) The Secretary shall provide for notices of coverage under this part
 (and part A) in the same manner as qualified health plans are required to
 provide notices of coverage under section 2257(b).'.
 (b) TREATMENT OF SECONDARY PAYMENT IN CASE OF PART-TIME EMPLOYMENT-
 Section 1862(b)(1)(A)(i)(I) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y(b)(1)(A)(i)(I))
 is amended by inserting `other than on a part-time basis (as defined in
 section 2181(b)(2))' after `individual's spouse)'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATES- (1) The amendment made by subsection (a) shall
 take effect on the date specified in section 2257(b)(2) of the Social
 Security Act.
 (2) The amendment made by subsection (b) shall apply to employment occurring
 on or after January 1 of the 4th year beginning after the date of the
 enactment of this Act.
SEC. 705. MISCELLANEOUS.
 (a) TREATMENT OF NONPROFIT HOSPITAL PHILANTHROPY- Section 1134 of the
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320b-4) is amended by striking `and XIX'
 and inserting `, XIX, and XXII'.
 (b) HOSPITAL PROTOCOLS FOR ORGAN PROCUREMENT- Section 1138(b) of the Social
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320b-8(b)) is amended by striking `or XIX' and
 insert `, XIX, or XXII'.
 (c) WITHHOLDING OF PAYMENTS FROM CERTAIN PROVIDERS- Section 1885 of such
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395vv) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new subsection:
 `(d) Subsections (a) through (c) shall apply to the public health insurance
 plan under title XXII, the Secretary, and the Public Health Insurance
 Trust Fund in the same manner as such subsections apply to title XIX, the
 State agency, and the appropriate State agency paid funds under subsection
 (c), respectively.'.
Subtitle B--Medicaid
SEC. 711. COORDINATION WITH PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) LIMITING FEDERAL FINANCIAL PARTICIPATION FOR SERVICES COVERED UNDER
 PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN- Section 1903(i) of the Social Security Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1396b(i)) is amended--
 (A) in the paragraph (10) inserted by section 4401(a)(1)(B) of Omnibus
 Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990, by striking all that follows `1927(g)'
 and inserting a semicolon;
 (B) by redesignating the paragraph (10) added by section 4701(b)(2)
 as paragraph (11), by transferring and inserting it after the paragraph
 (10) inserted by section 4401(a)(1)(B) of Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
 Act of 1990, and by striking all that follows `with respect to hospitals
 or facilities' and inserting a semicolon;
 (C) by transferring and inserting the paragraph (12) inserted by section
 4752(a)(2) of Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 after paragraph
 (11), as redesignated by subparagraph (B), and by striking the period at
 the end and inserting a semicolon;
 (D) by redesignating the paragraph (14) inserted by section 4752(e) of
 Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 as paragraph (13), by transferring
 and inserting it after paragraph (12), and by striking the period at the
 end and inserting a semicolon;
 (E) by redesignating the paragraph (11) inserted by section 4801(e)(16)(A) of
 Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 as paragraph (14), by transferring
 and inserting it after paragraph (13), and by striking the period at the
 end and inserting `; or'; and
 (F) by inserting after paragraph (14), as so redesignated, the following
 new paragraph:
 `(15) with respect to items and services (including medicare cost-sharing)
 for which payment is made under the public health insurance plan under
 title XXII.'.
 (2) CLARIFICATION OF NONDUPLICATION OF MEDICAL ASSISTANCE WITH BENEFITS
 UNDER PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN- Title XIX of such Act is amended by
 adding at the end the following new section:
`NONDUPLICATION OF BENEFITS WITH PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN
 `SEC. 1931. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, a State is not
 required under its plan under section 1901(a) to provide medical assistance
 for items and services (including medicare cost-sharing) for which payment
 is made under the public health insurance plan under title XXII.'.
 (3) CLARIFICATION OF APPLICATION OF THIRD-PARTY PAYOR RULES TO QUALIFIED
 HEALTH PLANS- Section 1902(a)(25)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(25)(A))
 is amended by inserting `and qualified health plans certified under part
 F of title XXII' after `health insurers'.
 (b) CONTINUATION OF MEDICAID BENEFITS NOT COVERED UNDER PUBLIC HEALTH
 INSURANCE PLAN- Nothing in this Act shall be construed as--
 (1) changing the eligibility of individuals for medical assistance under
 title XIX of the Social Security Act, or
 (2) subject to the amendments made by subsection (a), changing the amount,
 duration, or scope of medical assistance required (or permitted) to be
 provided under such title.
 (c) REFERENCE TO STATE MAINTENANCE OF EFFORT REQUIREMENT- For provision
 requiring State payments to the public health insurance plan in order to
 continue to qualify for payments under certain Social Security Act programs,
 see section 602 of this Act.
TITLE VIII--CONFORMING CHANGES TO ERISA
SEC. 801. REPEAL OF COBRA CONTINUATION REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Part 6 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement
 Income Security Act of 1974 is repealed.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The repeal effected by subsection (a) shall apply to health
 plans with respect to employees of any employer as of January 1 of the
 6th year beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act,
 (2) DEFINITIONS- The terms `large employer', `small employer', and `very
 small employer' have the meanings given such terms in title 2181(c) of
 the Social Security Act.
 (c) NOTICE OF BENEFITS UNDER PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN- In the case of
 continuation coverage which is in effect on the date of the repeal under
 subsection (a) but which is to be discontinued after such date (and before
 the date required under law in effect before the date of the enactment of
 this Act) such continuation may not be discontinued without 30-days notice
 to the individual of such discontinuation. Such notice shall include such
 information respecting continuation of coverage through enrollment under
 the public health insurance plan as the Secretary of Health and Human
 Services shall specify.