S 1719 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1719
To protect consumers by regulating prerecorded telephone advertising.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
September 17 (legislative day, SEPTEMBER 10), 1991
Mr. SPECTER introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
A BILL
To protect consumers by regulating prerecorded telephone advertising.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Prerecorded Telephone Solicitation Consumer
 Rights Act'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that:
 (1) Over 300,000 telemarketing agents make eighteen million telemarketing
 calls a day.
 (2) An automatic dialing recorded message program can make sixty random
 sales calls in an hour.
 (3) Unrestricted telemarketing is an intrusive invasion of privacy, and
 a risk to public safety when an emergency or medical assistance is called.
 (4) There already exists a service which has a restricted telephone list,
 but this option is not widely publicized, only has four hundred thousand
 names on it, and lacks enforcement mechanisms.
 (5) Forth-two States introduced some type of legislation affecting how
 telephone sales operations do business and twenty-one States have passed laws
 restricting auto-dialed telephone solicitations, but many telemarketers can
 circumvent these restrictions through interstate operations, and thus Federal
 legislation is necessary to control prerecorded telephone advertising.
SEC. 3. RESTRICTIONS ON THE USE OF PRERECORDED COMMERCIAL TELEPHONE CALLS.
 (a) AMENDMENT- Title II of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 201)
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 228. RESTRICTIONS ON THE USE OF PRERECORDED COMMERCIAL TELEPHONE CALLS.
 `(a) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section--
 `(1) The term `automatic dialing recorded message programs (ADRMP's)'
 means equipment which has the capacity--
 `(A) to store or produce telephone numbers to be called, using a random
 or sequential number generator;
 `(B) to dial such numbers; and
 `(C) to transmit a voice-recorded message.
 `(2) The term `unsolicited prerecorded telephone solicitation' means a
 prerecorded telephone call by a person for the purpose of encouraging the
 purchase or rental of, or investment in, property, goods, or services,
 or for other commercial purposes, which is transmitted to any person
 without that person's prior express invitation or permission. Such term
 does not include calls or messages made by or on behalf of a tax exempt
 nonprofit organization.
 `(b) RESTRICTIONS- It shall be unlawful for any person within the United
 States--
 `(1) to make any call using any automatic dialing recorded message program
 system (ADRMP's) or an artificial or prerecorded voice--
 `(A) to any emergency telephone line or pager of any hospital, medical
 physician or services office, health care facility, or fire protection or
 law enforcement agency;
 `(B) to any telephone number assigned to paging or cellular telephone
 service; or
 `(C) to any restricted telephone number on the national database list,
 as provided in subsection (c).
 `(c) PROTECTION OF SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY RIGHTS-
 `(1) RULEMAKING PROCEEDING REQUIRED- Within one hundred and twenty days
 after the date of enactment of this section, the Commission shall initiate a
 rulemaking proceeding concerning the need to protect residential telephone
 subscribers' privacy rights to avoid receiving unsolicited prerecorded
 telephone solicitations to which they object. The proceeding shall--
 `(A) further define `unsolicited prerecorded telephone solicitation'
 consistent with subsection (a)(2);
 `(B) compare and evaluate alternative methods and procedures, including
 the use of telephone electronic databases, telephone network technologies,
 special directory markings, industry and company based `do not call'
 systems, and any other alternatives, individually or in combination, for
 protecting such privacy rights, in terms of their cost effectiveness and
 their other advantages and disadvantages;
 `(C) evaluate the categories of public and private entities that would
 have the capacity to establish and administer such methods and procedures;
 `(D) consider whether such methods and procedures may apply for local
 telephone solicitations, such as those of small businesses or holders of
 second class mail permits; and
 `(E) develop proposed regulations to implement the methods and procedures
 that the Commission determines are most effective and efficient to accomplish
 the purposes of this section.
 `(2) REGULATIONS- Not later than two hundred and forty days after the date
 of enactment of this section, the Commission shall conclude the rulemaking
 proceeding initiated under paragraph (1) and shall prescribe regulations
 to implement methods and procedures for protecting the privacy rights
 described in such paragraph in an efficient, effective and economic manner
 and without the imposition of any additional charge to telephone subscribers.
 `(d) TECHNICAL AND PROCEDURAL STANDARDS-
 `(1) PROHIBITION- It shall be unlawful for any person within the United
 States--
 `(A) to initiate any telephone call using any automatic telephone dialing
 system that does not comply with the technical and procedural standards
 proscribed under this subsection, or to use any automatic telephone system
 (to transmit prerecorded telephone solicitations) in a manner that does
 not comply with such standards.
 `(2) ARTIFICIAL OR PRERECORDED VOICE SYSTEMS- The Commission shall prescribe
 technical and procedural standards for systems that are used to transmit
 any artificial or prerecorded voice message via telephone. Such standards
 shall require that--
 `(A) all artificial or prerecorded telephone messages (i) shall, at
 the beginning of the message state clearly the identity of the business
 initiating the call, and (ii) shall, during or after the message, state
 clearly the telephone number or address of such business; and
 `(B) any such system will automatically release the called party's line
 within five seconds of the time the system receives notification that the
 called party hung up, to allow the called party's line to be used to make
 or receive calls.
 `(e) STATE LAW NOT PREEMPTED- Nothing in this section or in the regulations
 prescribed under this section shall preempt any State law that imposes more
 restrictive intrastate requirements or regulations on, or which prohibits--
 `(1) the use of automatic telephone dialing systems to transmit prerecorded
 telephone solicitations; and
 `(2) the use of artificial voice or recorded messages.
 `(f) PREEMPTION OF INCONSISTENT INTERSTATE COMMUNICATION LAWS- This section
 preempts any provisions of State law concerning interstate communications
 that are inconsistent with the interstate communications provisions of
 this section.'
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 2(b) of the Communications Act of 1934
 (47 U.S.C. 152(b)) is amended by striking `and 225' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `, 225, and 228'.