HR 1255 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1255
To amend the Social Security Act to make health insurance widely available
to individuals, based on income and assets, under a competitive system.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
March 5, 1991
Mr. PEASE introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the
Committees on Ways and Means and Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Social Security Act to make health insurance widely available
to individuals, based on income and assets, under a competitive system.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Universal Health Insurance Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. AMENDMENT TO SOCIAL SECURITY ACT.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT OF UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM- The Social Security
 Act is amended by adding at the end the following new title:
`TITLE XXI--BASIC HEALTH INSURANCE
`SEC. 2101. APPROPRIATION.
 `(a) APPROPRIATION- For the purpose of carrying out this title, there
 are hereby authorized to be appropriated for each fiscal year, out of any
 moneys in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated--
 `(1) amounts equivalent to 100 percent of the excise taxes imposed by
 section 5701(g) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, and
 `(2) such additional amounts as may be required to carry out the purposes
 of this title.
 `(b) TRANSFER OF CIGARETTE TAXES- The amounts appropriated by subsection
 (a)(1) shall be transferred from time to time from the general fund of
 the Treasury to the Secretary for use under this title, such amounts to
 be determined on the basis of estimates by the Secretary of the Treasury
 of the taxes, specified in subsection (a)(1), paid to or deposited into
 the Treasury. Proper adjustments shall be made in amounts subsequently
 transferred to the extent prior estimates were in excess of or were less
 than the taxes specified in such subsection.
 `(c) USE OF FUNDS- The sums made available under this section shall be
 used for making payments to health insurance carriers for health insurance
 coverage contracted for by the Secretary under this title.
`SEC. 2102. ESTABLISHMENT OF SERVICE AREAS, BENEFITS, AND SELECTION OF
CARRIERS THROUGH COMPETITIVE BIDDING.
 `(a) DESIGNATION OF SERVICE AREAS- The Secretary shall provide for the
 designation of one or more service areas in each State for the delivery of
 health care services under this title. Such areas shall be designated in
 such a manner as to assure and facilitate the effective and costefficient
 operation of the program under this title.
 `(b) ESTABLISHMENT OF BENEFIT STANDARDS- (1) The Secretary shall provide
 for the establishment of benefit standards to be used under this title.
 `(2) In establishing such standards the Secretary shall consider and
 include coverage for services of the types normally provided in health
 insurance plans offered by the Federal, State, and local governments and
 by major private employers, and shall include benefits with respect to--
 `(A) inpatient and outpatient hospital services and physicians' services;
 `(B) maternity, prenatal, and postnatal care;
 `(C) diagnostic services; and
 `(D) protecting covered individuals against catastrophic medical expenses.
 `(3) Such benefits standards shall be grouped into a single, standard
 level of coverage and shall be made available on the basis of enrollment
 of family members as well as individuals.
 `(4) The Secretary shall specify such details concerning these benefits,
 coverage, and administration of qualified insurance plans as may be
 appropriate to carry out this title.
 `(c) BIDDING TO ADMINISTER PROGRAM- (1) The Secretary shall notify,
 and otherwise advertise to, all insurance carriers qualified to do
 business under State law concerning the program under this title and their
 eligibility to bid to contract for administration of the program in one
 or more service areas.
 `(2) Each insurance carrier desiring to be the recognized carrier or a
 participating carrier for a service area for a fiscal year must submit,
 in accordance with terms and conditions established by the Secretary,
 a bid of the monthly cost of individual and family enrollments in that
 area for that year.
 `(d) SELECTION OF RECOGNIZED AND PARTICIPATING CARRIERS- (1) From the bids
 properly submitted by qualified insurance carriers for each service area
 and taking into account such information as is necessary to assure that
 the carrier is reasonably capable of serving as the recognized carrier
 for that area, the Secretary shall recognize the qualified carrier with
 the lowest bid as the recognized carrier for that area for that year.
 `(2) The Secretary shall provide that the recognized carrier for the area
 for a year shall be guaranteed at least 60 percent of the total enrollment
 under this title in that area for that year, except that no carrier may
 be guaranteed under this paragraph to receive more than one-third of the
 total enrollment under this title in all service areas in any year.
 `(3) Consistent with the preceding provisions of this subsection, any
 qualified carrier that has submitted a bid for a service area for a year
 may participate in the program under this title, but only at the same
 rates and conditions as the recognized carrier for that area for that year.
 `(4) The Secretary shall enter into a contract with each recognized carrier
 (and each other qualified carrier that complies with paragraph (3)) for an
 area to serve that area as a participating carrier for a period of one year.
 `(e) OUTREACH- The Secretary shall provide for a program of outreach which--
 `(1) educates individuals, who are eligible to enroll with a participating
 carrier under this title, concerning--
 `(A) the need for health insurance coverage, and
 `(B) the benefits available through enrolling with a carrier under this
 title, and
 `(2) encourages such individuals who do not otherwise have health insurance
 coverage to enroll under this title for such coverage.
`SEC. 2103. ELIGIBILITY AND ENROLLMENT WITH PARTICIPATING CARRIERS.
 `(a) INDIVIDUALS ELIGIBLE TO ENROLL- Each individual who is a national
 of the United States (or an alien lawfully admitted to the United States
 for permanent residence or otherwise lawfully residing permanently in the
 United States under color of law) and who resides in a service area is
 eligible to apply to the Secretary for certification of eligibility to
 enroll with a participating carrier under this title.
 `(b) Verification of Income and Assets of Applicants-
 `(1) DESIGNATION OF NONGOVERNMENTAL VERIFICATION AGENCIES AND ORGANIZATIONS-
 The Secretary shall provide for the designation of one or more
 nongovernmental agencies or organizations (independent of the Secretary)
 (hereinafter in this section referred to as a `verification agency') in
 each service area to provide for verification of the income and net assets
 of individuals who reside in the area and are applying for certification
 of eligibility under this section.
 `(2) REQUIREMENT TO APPLY FOR VERIFICATION OF INCOME AND ASSETS-
 An individual is not eligible to enroll with a participating carrier
 under this title for a period (referred to in section 2105(3)) unless the
 individual has submitted, to the verification agency for the area in which
 the individual resides, such information as may be necessary to verify
 the income and net assets of the individual with respect to that period.
 `(3) TREATMENT OF APPLICATION AND WRITTEN CERTIFICATION- Each verification
 agency shall treat the information submitted under paragraph (2) as
 confidential and shall provide a written certification of the individual's
 income and net assets to the individual, to the Secretary, and to the
 participating carrier for the area involved. Such written certification
 shall serve as the basis for the individual's monthly payment amount under
 subsection (c).
 `(c) INDIVIDUAL MONTHLY PAYMENT AMOUNT- In the case of an individual who
 is eligible for benefits under this title and who has received a written
 certification of income and assets under subsection (b)(3), the Secretary
 shall issue to the individual a certificate indicating the individual's
 eligibility to enroll under this title and specifying the individual's
 monthly payment amount determined as follows:
If the amount of the individual's certified income and net assets are--
The individual's monthly payment amount is 1/12 of--
not more than $10,000
6 percent of the individual's income and net assets.
more than $10,000, but not more than $20,000
$600, plus 7 percent of the amount by which the individual's income and net
assets exceed $10,000.
more than $20,000
$1300, plus 8 percent of the amount by which the individual's income and
net assets exceed $20,000.
In this subsection, the term `income and net assets' means, with respect to
an individual, the sum of the amount of the individual's certified income
(including the certified income of immediate family members, if the enrollment
will include such members), and the amount of the individual's certified
net assets (including the net assets of immediate family members if the
enrollment will include such members).
 `(d) PAYMENT OF MONTHLY INDIVIDUAL PAYMENT AMOUNTS BY EMPLOYERS- Nothing
 in this title shall be construed as preventing an employer from paying
 part or all of the cost of monthly individual payment amounts computed
 under subsection (c).
`SEC. 2104. TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF ENROLLMENT AND COVERAGE AND PAYMENT TO
PARTICIPATING CARRIERS.
 `(a) ENROLLMENT- Each individual with an eligibility certification issued
 under this section may enroll, in accordance with procedures established
 by the Secretary, with any participating carrier for the service area in
 which the individual resides upon payment in monthly installments of the
 individual monthly payment amount (computed under section 2103(c)) for
 that individual. Such procedures may provide, after the initial period
 of operation of the program, for such reasonable limits on periods of
 enrollment and for such minimum periods of enrollment as may be appropriate
 to prevent program abuse.
 `(b) PAYMENT TO PARTICIPATING CARRIER- Under a participating insurance
 plan, the Secretary shall provide, on a monthly basis, for payment to the
 participating carrier (or for payment from the carrier to the Secretary)
 of an amount equal to the sum of the following two amounts:
 `(1) With respect to individual enrollments in the month under this title,
 the amount by which--
 `(A) the product of the number of individuals so enrolled with the
 participating carrier in the month under this title and the monthly cost
 recognized under section 2102(c)(2), exceeds
 `(B) the monthly individual payment amounts collectable with respect to
 such enrollees in such month.
 `(2) With respect to family enrollments in the month under this title,
 the amount by which--
 `(A) the product of the number of families so enrolled with the participating
 carrier in the month under this title and the monthly cost recognized
 under section 2102(c)(2), exceeds
 `(B) the monthly individual payment amounts collectable with respect to
 such families in such month.
 `(c) SECONDARY COVERAGE AND NO PREEXISTING CONDITION LIMITATION- Coverage
 under an insurance plan offered under this title by a participating
 carrier shall--
 `(1) be secondary in payment to any insurance or benefit plan (including
 a group health plan described in section 162(i)(3) of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986, the insurance programs under title XVIII of this Act, a State
 plan under title XIX of this Act, an automobile or liability insurance plan,
 and no fault insurance) which provides medical benefits; and
 `(2) not require any evidence of medical insurability of any individual
 to be covered or restrict the coverage of items or services because of a
 preexisting condition or previous treatment for a condition.
 `(d) DISCOUNTS FOR LOW UTILIZERS- After the first year of the program
 under this title, each participating carrier must provide, in accordance
 with guidelines of the Secretary, for a method of reducing the individual
 monthly payment amounts for enrollees who make little or no use of the
 covered services so as to reflect the savings to the program under this
 title of such nonuse.
`SEC. 2105. DEFINITIONS.
 `For purposes of this title:
 `(1) INCOME- The term `income' means adjusted gross income and also includes
 (to the extent not included in adjusted gross income) nontaxable interest
 and dividends, old age and disability payments under title II of this Act,
 retirement payments, unemployment compensation, and cash welfare payments
 under title IV or XVI of this Act.
 `(2) NET ASSETS- The term `net assets' means all assets (other than a
 reasonable exclusion for primary residence and personal automobiles,
 as determined by the Secretary) less encumbrances.
 `(3) DETERMINATIONS OF INCOME AND NET ASSETS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall determine the period for which income
 and net assets are determined relative to certification of eligibility to
 enroll with a participating carrier under this title, and shall require
 such determinations (for the purpose of providing continuing eligibility)
 to be made annually.
 `(B) PROCESS FOR REDETERMINATIONS OF INCOME AND ASSETS- The Secretary
 shall provide for a process which permits an individual or family to have
 an immediate redetermination of income and net assets in the case of a
 significant change in family structure or a change in income or assets
 significantly affecting the individual's or family's monthly payment amount
 under section 2102(c).
 `(4) QUALIFIED INSURANCE PLAN- The term `qualified insurance plan' means
 an insurance plan which meets the terms and conditions established by the
 Secretary to be offered under this title.
 `(5) SERVICE AREA- The term `service area' means such an area designated
 under section 2102(a).
`SEC. 2106. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
 `(a) CIVIL MONETARY PENALTY FOR FRAUDULENT AND ABUSIVE ACTIVITIES- The
 Secretary shall provide for such penalties (including a civil monetary
 penalty of up to $10,000 for any violation and the permanent restriction
 from eligibility to enroll or participate in the program under this title)
 for individuals, carriers, and health care providers that knowingly engage
 in fraudulent or program abusive activities under this title.
 `(b) APPLICATION OF CERTAIN CRIMINAL PENALTIES- The provisions of section
 1909 apply to statements and activities under this title in the same manner
 as they apply to statements and activities under title XIX.'.
 (b) INCORPORATING DEFINITION OF STATE- Section 1101(a)(1) of such Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1301(a)(1)), relating to the definition of State, is amended by
 striking out `and XIX' and inserting in lieu thereof `XIX, and XXI' and by
 striking out `title XIX' and inserting in lieu thereof `titles XIX and XXI'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- No benefits may be made available under title XXI
 of the Social Security Act (as added by this Act) for services furnished
 before October 1, 1991.
SEC. 3. INCREASE IN CIGARETTE TAX.
 (a) IMPOSITION OF TAX- Section 5701 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
 (relating to rate of tax on cigars, cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, and
 cigarette papers and tubes) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new subsection:
 `(g) ADDITIONAL TAX ON CIGARETTES- On cigarettes, manufactured in or
 imported into the United States, there shall be imposed, in addition to
 the taxes imposed under subsection (b), the following taxes:
 `(1) SMALL CIGARETTES- On cigarettes, weighing not more than 3 pounds per
 thousand, $8 per thousand.
 `(2) LARGE CIGARETTES- On cigarettes, weighing more than 3 pounds per
 thousand, $16.50 per thousand; except that, it more than 6 1/2 inches
 in length, they shall be taxable at the rate prescribed for cigarettes
 weighing not more than 3 pounds per thousand, counting each 2 3/4 inches,
 or fraction thereof, of the length of each as one cigarette.'
 (b) Floor Stocks-
 (1) IMPOSITION OF TAX- On cigarettes manufactured in or imported into the
 United States, which are removed before October 1, 1991, and held on such
 date for sale by any person, there shall be imposed the following taxes:
 (A) SMALL CIGARETTES- On cigarettes, weighing not more than 3 pounds per
 thousand, $8 per thousand.
 (B) LARGE CIGARETTES- On cigarettes, weighing more than 3 pounds per
 thousand, $8.40 per thousand; except that, if more than 6 1/2 inches
 in length, they shall be taxable at the rate prescribed for cigarettes
 weighing not more than 3 pounds per thousand, counting each 2 3/4 inches,
 or fraction thereof, of the length of each as one cigarette.
 (2) Liability for tax and method of payment-
 (A) LIABILITY FOR TAX- A person holding cigarettes on October 1, 1991, to
 which any tax imposed by paragraph (1) applies shall be liable for such tax.
 (B) METHOD OF PAYMENT- The tax imposed by paragraph (1) shall be treated
 as a tax imposed under section 5701 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
 and shall be due and payable on October 18, 1991, in the same manner as
 the tax imposed under such section is payable with respect to cigarettes
 removed on October 1, 1991.
 (3) CIGARETTE- For purposes of this subsection, the term `cigarette'
 shall have the meaning given to such term by subsection (b) of section
 5702 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (4) EXCEPTION FOR RETAILERS- The taxes imposed by paragraph (1) shall not
 apply to cigarettes in retail stocks held on October 1, 1991, at the place
 where intended to be sold at retail.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply with
 respect to cigarettes removed after September 30, 1991.
SEC. 4. HEALTH PLAN EMPLOYMENT TAX.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Subtitle C of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating
 to employment taxes) in amended by inserting after chapter 23A the following
 new chapter:
`CHAPTER 23B--HEALTH PLAN EMPLOYMENT TAX
`Sec. 3331. Additional tax on FUTA wages.
`Sec. 3332. Exemption where health coverage made available.
`Sec. 3333. Definitions and special rules.
`SEC. 3331. ADDITIONAL TAX ON FUTA WAGES.
 `There is hereby imposed on every employer for each calendar year an
 excise tax, with respect to having individuals in his employ, equal to
 6 percent of the total wages paid by him during the calendar year with
 respect to employment.
`SEC. 3332. EXEMPTION WHERE HEALTH COVERAGE MADE AVAILABLE.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- No tax shall be imposed by section 3331 on wages paid
 to any employee during any period if--
 `(1) such employee is covered during such period under a qualified health
 plan maintained by the employer, or
 `(2) such employee was offered but declined coverage under such a plan
 for such period.
 `(b) QUALIFIED HEALTH PLAN- For purposes of this section, the term `qualified
 health plan' means a health plan that meets the benefit standards established
 by the Secretary of Health and Human Services under section 2102(b) of
 the Social Security Act.
`SEC. 3333. DEFINITIONS AND SPECIAL RULES.
 `(a) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this chapter, the terms `employer',
 `wages', and `employment' have the same respective meanings as when used in
 chapter 23 (relating to Federal Unemployment Tax Act); except that paragraph
 (9) of section 3306(c) shall not apply.
 `(b) CERTAIN FUTA RULES MADE APPLICABLE- For purposes of this chapter,
 rules similar to the rules of sections 3307 and 3308 shall apply.'
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of chapters for subtitle C of such
 Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 23A the
 following new item:
`Chapter 23B. Health plan employment tax.'
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply with
 respect to calendar years after 1991.