HR 3861 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 3861
To prohibit oil and gas leasing, exploration, and development offshore
North Carolina until adequate physical oceanographic, ecological, and
socioeconomic information is available to enable informed decisionmaking,
and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
January 23, 1990
Mr. JONES of North Carolina introduced the following bill; which was referred
jointly to the Committees on Interior and Insular Affairs and Merchant Marine
and Fisheries
A BILL
To prohibit oil and gas leasing, exploration, and development offshore
North Carolina until adequate physical oceanographic, ecological, and
socioeconomic information is available to enable informed decisionmaking,
and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Outer Banks Protection Act'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) the Outer Banks of North Carolina is an area of exceptional environmental
 fragility and beauty;
 (2) the annual economic benefits of commercial and recreational fishing
 activities to North Carolina, which could be adversely affected by oil or
 gas development offshore the State's coast, exceeds $1,000,000,000;
 (3) the major industry in coastal North Carolina is tourism, which is subject
 to potentially significant disruption by offshore oil or gas development;
 (4) the physical oceanographic characteristics of the area offshore North
 Carolina between Cape Hatteras and the mouth of the Chesapeake Bay are not
 well understood, being affected by Gulf Stream western boundary perturbations
 and accompanying warm filaments, warm rings which separate from the Gulf
 Stream, wind stress, outflow from the Chesapeake Bay, Gulf Stream meanders,
 and intrusions of Virginia coastal waters around and over the Diamond shoals;
 (5) the environmental impact statements prepared for Outer Continental
 Shelf lease sales numbered 56 (1981) and 76 (1983) contain insufficient and
 outdated environmental information from which to make a decision on approval
 of additional oil and gas leasing, exploration, and development activities;
 (6) the draft environmental report, dated November 1, 1989, prepared
 pursuant to a July 14, 1989 memorandum of understanding between the State
 of North Carolina, the Department of the Interior, and Mobil Oil Company,
 has not allayed concerns about the adequacy of the environmental information
 available to determine whether to proceed with additional offshore leasing,
 exploration, or development offshore North Carolina; and
 (7) the conclusions of the National Research Council report entitled
 `The Adequacy of Environmental Information for Outer Continental Shelf
 Oil and Gas Decisions: Florida and California', issued in 1989, reinforce
 concerns about the adequacy of the scientific and technical information
 which are the basis for a decision to lease additional tracts or approve
 an exploration plan offshore North Carolina, especially with respect to
 oceanographic, ecological, and socioeconomic information.
SEC. 3. PROHIBITION OF OIL AND GAS LEASING, EXPLORATION, AND DEVELOPMENT.
 (a) PROHIBITION- The Secretary of the Interior shall not--
 (1) issue any new leases;
 (2) approve any plan of exploration;
 (3) approve any permit to drill; or
 (4) permit any drilling,
for oil or gas on any lands of the Outer Continental Shelf offshore North
Carolina.
 (b) BOUNDARIES- For purposes of subsection (a), the lateral seaward boundary
 between areas offshore North Carolina and areas offshore--
 (1) Virginia shall be as provided in the joint resolution entitled `Joint
 resolution granting the consent of Congress to an agreement between the
 States of North Carolina and Virginia establishing their lateral seaward
 boundary' approved October 27, 1972 (86 Stat. 1298); and
 (2) South Carolina shall be as provided in the Act entitled `An Act
 granting the consent of Congress to the agreement between the States
 of North Carolina and South Carolina establishing their lateral seaward
 boundary' approved October 9, 1981 (95 Stat. 988).
 (c) DURATION OF PROHIBITION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The prohibition under subsection (a) shall remain in effect
 until the later of--
 (A) October 1, 1991; or
 (B) 45 days of continuous session of the Congress after submission of
 a certification to the Congress by the Secretary of the Interior, made
 on the basis of the findings and recommendations of the Environmental
 Sciences Review Panel under section 5, that the information available,
 including information acquired pursuant to section 4, is sufficient to
 enable the Secretary to carry out his responsibilities under the Outer
 Continental Shelf Lands Act with respect to authorizing the activities
 described in subsection (a).
 (2) CONTINUOUS SESSION OF CONGRESS- In computing any 45-day period of
 continuous session of Congress under paragraph (1)(B)--
 (A) continuity of session is broken only by an adjournment of the Congress
 sine die; and
 (B) the days on which either House of Congress is not in session because
 of an adjournment of more than 3 days to a day certain are excluded.
SEC. 4. ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL INFORMATION.
 The Secretary of the Interior, in consultation with the Environmental
 Sciences Review Panel established under section 5, shall undertake
 ecological and socioeconomic studies, additional physical oceanographic
 studies, including actual field work and the correlation of existing
 data, and other additional environmental studies, to obtain sufficient
 information about all significant conditions, processes, and environments
 which influence, or may be influenced by, oil and gas leasing, exploration,
 and development activities offshore North Carolina to enable the Secretary
 to carry out his responsibilities under the Outer Continental Shelf Lands
 Act with respect to authorizing the activities described in section 3(a).
SEC. 5. ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCES REVIEW PANEL.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT AND MEMBERSHIP- There shall be established an Environmental
 Sciences Review Panel, to consist of--
 (1) 1 marine scientist selected by the Secretary of the Interior;
 (2) 1 marine scientist selected by the Governor of North Carolina; and
 (3) 1 person each from the disciplines of physical oceanography, ecology,
 and sociology, to be selected jointly by the Secretary of the Interior
 and the Governor of North Carolina from a list of individuals nominated
 by the National Academy of Sciences.
 (b) FUNCTIONS- The Environmental Sciences Review Panel shall--
 (1) consult with the Secretary of the Interior as provided in section 4; and
 (2) prepare, and submit to the Secretary of the Interior, findings and
 recommendations as to the adequacy of physical oceanographic, ecological,
 and socioeconomic information available in enabling the Secretary to carry
 out his responsibilities under the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act with
 respect to authorizing the activities described in section 3(a).
 (c) EXPENSES- Each member of the Environmental Sciences Review Panel shall
 be reimbursed for actual travel expenses and shall receive per diem in
 lieu of subsistence for each day such member is engaged in the business
 of the Environmental Sciences Review Panel.
SEC. 6. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Interior
 to carry out this Act not to exceed $500,000 for fiscal year 1991.