HR 2551 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2551
To amend title XVI of the Social Security Act with respect to establishing
minimum national standards to protect elderly and other residents of board
and care facilities.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
June 5, 1991
Mr. ROYBAL introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the
Committees on Ways and Means and Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend title XVI of the Social Security Act with respect to establishing
minimum national standards to protect elderly and other residents of board
and care facilities.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `National Board and Care Reform Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. MINIMUM NATIONAL STANDARDS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title XVI of the Social Security Act (relating to
 supplemental security income for the aged, blind, and disabled) is amended--
 (1) by amending subsection (e) of section 1616 to read as follows:
 `(e)(1) Each State shall, by not later than 2 years after the date of the
 enactment of this subsection, require that each facility providing food,
 shelter, and personal assistance to more than one recipient of supplemental
 security income benefits or of social security benefits under title II who
 are unrelated to the owner or operator of such facility is in compliance
 with the requirements of section 1635.
 `(2) For the purposes of paragraph (1), the term `personal assistance'
 means, with respect to a resident of a facility, any of the following:
 `(A) Assisting the resident with activities of daily living (as defined in
 section 1861(ll)(3)) or in making appointments or arranging or providing
 transportation.
 `(B) Monitoring the activities of the resident while on the premises of
 the facility to ensure the resident's health, safety, and well-being.
 `(C) Monitoring or otherwise keeping track of the resident's general
 whereabouts while outside the facility.'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new section:
`MINIMUM NATIONAL STANDARDS FOR BOARD AND CARE FACILITIES
 `SEC. 1635. (a) BOARD AND CARE FACILITY DEFINED- In this section, the term
 `board and care facility' means a facility described in section 1616(e)
 to which the requirements of this section apply.
 `(b) REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO RESIDENTS' RIGHTS-
 `(1) RESIDENT RIGHTS- A board and care facility must protect and promote
 the rights of each resident, including each of the following rights:
 `(A) RESIDENT RECORDS- Each facility must maintain and keep current a
 record of the following information on each resident:
 `(i) The resident's name.
 `(ii) The resident's last address.
 `(iii) The name of the person or agency referring the resident to the home.
 `(iv) The name, specialty (if any), telephone number, and emergency
 telephone number of each physician who has treated the resident during
 the preceding 12 months.
 `(v) The date the resident began residing in the facility.
 `(vi) A copy of the resident's current board and care plan or certification
 by physician.
 `(vii) A list of medications taken by the resident including the dosage.
 `(viii) Written acknowledgments that the resident has received copies of
 the rights as provided in this subsection.
 `(ix) A record of all personal property and funds which the resident has
 entrusted to the facility, including copies of receipts of the property.
 `(x) Information about any specific health problems of the resident which
 may be useful in a medical emergency.
 `(xi) The name, address, and telephone number of an individual identified
 by the resident who should be contacted in the event of an emergency or
 death of the resident.
 `(xii) Any other health-related, emergency, or pertinent information which
 the resident requests the facility to keep on record.
 `(xiii) The current admission agreement between the resident and the
 facility.
 `(B) PRIVACY- Each resident must be assured the right to privacy with
 regard to accommodations, medical, and other treatment, written and
 telephone communications, visits, and meetings of family and resident groups.
 `(C) HUMANE CARE AND ENVIRONMENT (DIGNITY AND RESPECT)-
 `(i) Each resident shall have the right to humane care and a humane
 environment including the following:
 `(I) The right to a diet which is consistent with any religious or
 health-related restrictions.
 `(II) The right to refuse a restricted diet.
 `(III) The right to a safe and sanitary living environment.
 `(ii) Each resident shall have the right to be treated with dignity and
 respect, including--
 `(I) the right to be treated in a courteous manner by staff; and
 `(II) the right to receive a response from the facility to any request of
 the resident within a reasonable time.
 `(D) PERSONAL POSSESSIONS- Each resident shall have the right--
 `(i) to wear his or her own clothing;
 `(ii) to determine his or her own dress, hair style, or other personal
 effects according to individual preference;
 `(iii) to retain and use his or her own personal property in the resident's
 own living area so as to maintain individuality and personal dignity; and
 `(iv) to be provided a separate storage area in his or her own living area
 and at least one locked cabinet or drawer for keeping personal property.
 `(E) PERSONAL FUNDS-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- A facility--
 `(I) may not require residents to deposit their personal funds with the
 facility, and
 `(II) once the facility accepts the written authorization of the resident,
 must hold, safeguard, and account to such personal funds under a system
 established and maintained by the facility in accordance with this
 subparagraph.
 `(ii) MANAGEMENT OF PERSONAL FUNDS- Upon a facility's acceptance of written
 authorization of a resident under clause (i)(II), the facility must manage
 and account for the personal funds of the resident deposited with the
 facility as follows:
 `(I) DEPOSIT- The facility must deposit any amount of personal funds in
 excess of $50 with respect to a resident in an interest bearing account (or
 accounts) that is separate from any of the facility's operating accounts and
 credits all interest earned on such separate account to such account. With
 respect to any other personal funds, the facility must maintain such funds
 in a noninterest bearing account or petty cash fund.
 `(II) ACCOUNTING AND RECORDS- The facility must assure a full and complete
 separate accounting of each such resident's personal funds, maintain a
 written record of all financial transactions involving the personal funds
 of a resident deposited with the facility, and afford the resident (or a
 legal representative of the resident) reasonable access to such record.
 `(III) CONVEYANCE UPON DEATH- Upon the death of a resident with such an
 account, the facility must convey promptly the resident's personal funds
 (and a final account of such funds) to the individual administering the
 resident's estate.
 `(F) ACCESS AND VISITATION RIGHTS- Each facility must permit--
 `(i) immediate access to any resident by any representative of the Secretary,
 by any representative of the State, by the State long-term care ombudsman
 (established under section 307(a)(12) of the Older Americans Act of 1965) or
 his or her trained representative, or by the resident's individual physician;
 `(ii) immediate access to a resident, subject to the resident's right to
 deny or withdraw at any time, by immediate family or other relatives of
 the resident;
 `(iii) immediate access to a resident, subject to reasonable restrictions
 and the resident's right to deny or withdraw consent at any time, by others
 who are visiting with the consent of the resident;
 `(iv) reasonable access to a resident by any entity or individual that
 provides health, social, legal, or other services to the resident, subject
 to the resident's right to deny or withdraw consent at any time; and
 `(v) the State long-term care ombudsman and the ombudsman's trained
 representatives, with the permission of the resident (or the resident's
 legal representative) and consistent with State law, to examine a resident's
 clinical records.
 `(G) EMPLOYMENT- Each resident shall have the right to refuse to perform
 services for the facility except as contracted for by the resident and
 the operator of the facility. If the resident is hired by the facility
 to perform services as an employee of the facility, the wage paid to the
 resident shall be consistent with State and Federal law.
 `(H) CONFIDENTIALITY- Each resident shall have the right to confidentiality
 of personal and clinical records.
 `(I) FREEDOM FROM ABUSE AND NEGLECT- Each resident shall have the right to
 be free from physical, mental, or sexual abuse, neglect, corporal punishment,
 and involuntary seclusion.
 `(J) FREEDOM FROM PHYSICAL RESTRAINTS- Physical restraints shall not be used
 on a resident by the staff of a facility except when a resident's actions
 present an imminent danger to himself or herself, or others, and only until
 appropriate action can be taken by medical emergency, or police personnel. It
 is the responsibility of the facility to seek assistance immediately.
 `(K) FREEDOM FROM CHEMICAL RESTRAINTS- Chemical restraints shall not be
 used on a resident by the staff of a facility. The previous sentence shall
 not prohibit a resident from voluntarily taking tranquilizers or other
 medication which is prescribed by a licensed physician.
 `(L) FREEDOM OF RELIGION- Each resident shall have the right to
 practice the religion of his or her choice or to abstain from religious
 practice. Residents shall also be free from the imposition of the religious
 practices of others.
 `(M) CONTROL AND RECEIPT OF HEALTH-RELATED SERVICES- Each resident shall
 have the right to control his or her receipt of health-related services,
 including--
 `(i) the right to retain the services of his or her own personal physician
 and dentist;
 `(ii) the right to select the pharmacy or pharmacist of the resident's
 choice; and
 `(iii) the right to self-administer medications, unless otherwise indicated
 in writing by the resident's physician.
Each resident shall have the right to confidentiality and privacy concerning
his or her medical or dental condition and treatment.
 `(N) GRIEVANCES- Each resident shall have the right to voice grievances
 with respect to treatment or care that is (or fails to be) furnished,
 without discrimination or reprisal for voicing the grievances and the right
 to prompt efforts by the facility to resolve grievances the resident may
 have, including those with respect to the behavior of other residents.
 `(O) PARTICIPATION IN RESIDENT AND FAMILY GROUPS- Each resident shall have
 the right to organize and participate in resident groups in the facility
 and the right of the resident's family to meet in the facility with the
 families of other residents in the facility.
 `(P) PARTICIPATION IN OTHER ACTIVITIES- Each resident shall have the right
 to participate in social, religious, and community activities that do not
 interfere with the rights of other residents in the facility.
 `(Q) EXAMINATION OF SURVEY RESULTS- Each resident shall have the right to
 examine, upon reasonable request, the results of the most recent survey
 of the facility conducted by the Secretary of State with respect to the
 facility and any plan of correction in effect with respect to the facility.
 `(R) OTHER RIGHTS- Each resident shall have any other right established
 by the Secretary or the State.
 `(2) NOTICE OF RIGHTS- Each facility must--
 `(A) inform each resident, orally and in writing at the time of admission
 to the facility, of the resident's legal rights during the stay at the
 facility; and
 `(B) make available to each resident, upon reasonable request, a written
 statement of such rights (which statement is updated upon changes in
 such rights).
The written description of legal rights under this paragraph shall include
a description of the protection of personal funds under paragraph (1)(E)
and a statement that a resident may file a complaint with a State survey and
certification agency respecting resident abuse and neglect and misappropriation
of resident property in the facility. A copy of the list of resident rights
shall be conspicuously posted in the facility at all times.
 `(c) REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO ADMINISTRATION AND OTHER MATTERS-
 `(1) ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS- A board and care facility may not admit or keep
 any resident requiring a level of services or type of service the facility
 does not provide or does not have the staff (in appropriate numbers and
 with appropriate skills) to provide. A facility may not admit or keep any
 resident who requires skilled nursing care. A facility may not admit or
 keep a resident who is bedbound.
 `(2) REQUIREMENTS FOR FACILITY ADMINISTRATOR- Each board and care facility
 must employ at least one full-time administrator who--
 `(A) is 21 years of age or older;
 `(B) has successfully completed a basic initial and ongoing training
 program approved by the Secretary and designed to assure the individual's
 competence to carry out the requirements of this section;
 `(C) meets such minimum educational standards as prescribed by the Secretary;
 `(D) is of good moral and responsible character and has not been convicted
 of any felony or defrauding the Federal Government;
 `(E) has sufficient physical, emotional, and mental capacity to carry out
 the requirements of this section; and
 `(F) has sufficient management and administrative ability to carry out
 the requirements of this section.
 `(3) REQUIREMENTS FOR FACILITY STAFF- Each board and care facility must
 employ sufficient trained staff to fully meet the needs of its residents
 and the requirements of this section. The Secretary, in consultation
 with the States, shall develop a staff-to-resident ratio deemed to meet
 this requirement. There must be at least one staff person present at the
 facility at all times.
 `(4) PHYSICAL STRUCTURE AND FIRE SAFETY- Each board and care facility must
 be maintained internally and externally in good repair and condition and
 be constructed, equipped, and maintained in a manner to protect the health
 and safety of residents, personnel, and the general public. It must--
 `(A) meet the requirements of chapter 21 of the Life Safety Code of 1988,
 as developed by the National Fire Protection Association; and
 `(B) have safe and functioning systems for heating, cooling, hot and cold
 water, electricity, plumbing, garbage disposal, sewage, cooking, laundry,
 elevators, artificial and natural light, ventilation, or any other feature
 of the facility.
 `(5) SANITATION- Each board and care facility must be maintained in a
 clean and sanitary manner, including proper sewage disposal, food handling
 and preparation, and hygiene practices. Each must establish and maintain
 an infection control program designed to provide a safe, sanitary, and
 comfortable environment in which residents reside and to help prevent the
 development and transmission of disease and infection.
 `(6) MEDICATION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS- Each board and care facility
 shall develop and implement a written medication policy and procedure that
 outlines in detail the procedures to be followed regarding the handling
 of medications at the facility, and shall include at least the following
 policies and procedures:
 `(A) WHEN CENTRAL STORAGE OF MEDICATIONS REQUIRED- A medication shall be
 centrally stored if--
 `(i) preservation of the medication requires refrigeration;
 `(ii) the medication has been determined by a physician to be dangerous if
 kept in the personal possession of the resident for whom it was prescribed;
 and
 `(iii) the administrator of the facility or the licensing authority
 determines that failure to store the medication centrally would pose a
 safety hazard because of the physical arrangements and conditions or the
 habits of residents of the facility.
 `(B) REQUIREMENTS FOR CENTRALLY STORED MEDICATIONS- The following
 requirements shall apply to medications which are centrally stored:
 `(i) The medications shall be kept in a safe and locked place that is not
 accessible to persons other than employees responsible for the supervision
 of such medications.
 `(ii) The medications shall be labeled and maintained in compliance with
 label instructions and State and Federal laws.
 `(iii) No person other than the dispensing pharmacist shall alter a
 prescription label.
 `(iv) Each resident's medication shall be stored in its originally received
 container.
 `(v) Medications shall not be transferred between containers.
 `(C) REQUIREMENT FOR LICENSED NURSE IN CERTAIN CASES- The facility must
 assure that a licensed nurse is available to do the following:
 `(i) To administer (or supervise the administration of) medication for a
 resident whose health condition is not stabilized.
 `(ii) To administer (or supervise the administration of) a prescribed
 medication to a resident if the medication is not at a maintenance level and
 requires assessment and judgment by a licensed nurse for safe administration.
 `(iii) To administer injectable medications (including vitamins and insulin)
 which cannot be self-administered by the resident.
 `(D) ASSISTANCE IN MEDICATIONS- The facility is responsible for providing
 the resident who requires medication with necessary assistance in taking
 the medication, including--
 `(i) reminding the resident to take the medication,
 `(ii) removing medi-sets, blister packs, or pill bottles, from storage,
 `(iii) assisting with removal of cap from pill bottle, multidose containers,
 or temporary routine medication containers,
 `(iv) assisting with the removal of a medication from the medi-set, blister
 pack, or pill bottle, for residents with a disability which prevents
 independence in this act, and
 `(v) observing the resident taking the medication.
 `(E) SUPERVISION OF MEDICATIONS- Medications shall not be left at resident's
 bedside or on meal trays. Each medication must be given to the resident
 directly from the medi-set, blister pack, or pill bottle. In assisting
 the resident in this way, the person helping the resident can determine
 whether or not the resident actually ingested the medication.
 `(F) STAFF TRAINING- A registered nurse or pharmacist shall train staff
 who assist residents with medications regarding medication policies and
 procedures.
 `(G) VISITING NURSE REVIEW- Each board and care facility shall provide
 for a visit by a licensed nurse at least every 30 days for the purpose of--
 `(i) monitoring resident's response to medications,
 `(ii) assuring that physicians' orders are current,
 `(iii) assessing and documenting health status of each resident by conducting
 a physical assessment (including identification of symptoms of illness
 and changes in mental or physical health status),
 `(iv) recommending to the administrator of the facility any medication
 needs or other health needs requiring follow-up, and
 `(v) following-up on previous recommendations with the facility
 administrator.
The visiting licensed nurse shall provide the facility with a signed,
written documentation of each such visit, including the date and time of
each such visit, assessments conducted, recommendations made and progress
on previous recommendations, and that the medication orders are current and
that medications taken are consistent with such orders.
 `(H) MEDICAL RECORDS-
 `(i) DOCUMENTATION- The facility shall document in a resident's record any
 medication that should have been taken by a resident but was not given or
 taken, and the reasons for the omission, and any medication being given
 as needed (and the reasons for taking the medication).
 `(ii) SIGNED ORDERS- The facility shall maintain on file signed orders of
 physicians for all medications (including over-the-counter medications)
 and treatments ordered for residents. Such an order may be a copy of the
 prescription for the medication.
 `(iii) NURSE DOCUMENTATION- The facility shall maintain on file the
 documentation under subparagraph (G) by visiting licensed nurses.
 `(7) DIETARY REQUIREMENTS- Each board and care facility must provide
 residents at least three meals daily which fully meet each resident's
 dietary and nutritional needs. Each facility must meet any special dietary
 needs of residents which are prescribed by the resident's physician.
 `(8) ACCESS TO NEEDED HEALTH CARE- Each board and care facility must assure
 its residents access to needed health care in a prompt and efficient manner.
 `(9) RESIDENT ACTIVITIES- Each board and care facility must provide and
 actively promote resident participation in a program of daily activities
 for its residents. The activities shall be designed to provide needed
 stimulation and should to the greatest extent possible involve interaction
 with the outside community. Watching television shall not be deemed,
 by itself, to meet this requirement.
 `(10) COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL, STATE, AND LOCAL LAWS- Each board and care
 facility must operate and provide services in compliance with all applicable
 Federal, State, and local laws and regulations.
 `(d) INSPECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each State shall be responsible for certifying to the
 Secretary, in accordance with inspections conducted under paragraph (3),
 the compliance of board and care facilities with the requirements of
 subsections (b) and (c).
 `(2) EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM- Each State shall conduct periodic educational
 programs for the staff and residents of (and their representatives)
 of board and care facilities in order to present current regulations,
 procedures, and policies under this section.
 `(3) STATE INSPECTIONS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Each board and care facility shall be inspected for
 compliance with the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) not less
 frequently than every 15 months. The statewide average interval between
 such inspections shall not exceed 12 months. Such inspections shall be
 conducted without any prior notice to the facility. Any individual who
 notifies (or causes to be notified) a board and care facility of the time
 or date on which such an inspection is scheduled to be conducted is subject
 to a civil money penalty of not to exceed $2,000. The provisions of section
 1128A (other than subsections (a) and (b)) shall apply to a civil money
 penalty under the previous sentence in the same manner as such provisions
 apply to a penalty or proceeding under section 1128A. The Secretary shall
 review each State's procedures for scheduling and conduct of inspections
 to assure that the State has taken all reasonable steps to avoid giving
 notice of such an inspection through the scheduling procedures and the
 conduct of the inspections themselves.
 `(B) CONDUCT- Inspections shall be conducted by trained professionals. A
 State may not use as an inspector an individual who is serving (or has served
 in the previous 2 years) as a member of the staff of, or as a consultant to,
 the facility being inspected, or who has a personal or familial financial
 interest in the facility being inspected.
 `(C) CONSISTENCY- Each State shall implement programs to measure and reduce
 inconsistency in the application of inspection results among inspectors.
 `(D) INVESTIGATIONS- Each State shall provide for the receipt, review,
 and onsite investigation of complaints of violations of requirements
 by board and care facilities and of allegations of resident neglect and
 abuse and misappropriation of resident property in facilities. Each State
 shall maintain standard procedures and adequate staff to comply with
 this requirement.
 `(E) INSPECTOR TRAINING- The Secretary shall provide for the comprehensive
 training of State inspectors in the conduct of inspections under this
 paragraph. No individual shall conduct inspections under this paragraph
 unless the individual has successfully completed a training and testing
 program in inspection and complaint investigation techniques that has been
 approved by the Secretary.
 `(4) STATE MONITORING AND FACILITY COMPLIANCE- Each State shall maintain
 procedures and adequate staff to monitor, on-site, on a regular, as needed
 basis, a board and care facility's compliance with the requirements of
 subsections (b) and (c), if--
 `(A) the facility has been found not to be in compliance with such
 requirements and is in the process of correcting deficiencies to achieve
 such compliance;
 `(B) the facility was previously found not to be in compliance with such
 requirements, has corrected deficiencies to achieve such compliance,
 and verification of continued compliance is indicated; or
 `(C) the State has reason to question the compliance of the facility with
 such requirements.
A State may maintain and utilize a specialized team (including an attorney,
an auditor, and appropriate health care professional) for the purpose of
identifying, inspecting, gathering and preserving evidence, and carrying
out appropriate enforcement actions with respect to chronically substandard
facilities.
 `(5) FEDERAL VALIDATION INSPECTIONS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall conduct onsite inspections of a
 representative sample of board and care facilities in each State, within
 2 months of the date of inspections conducted under paragraph (3) by the
 State, in a sufficient number to allow inferences about the adequacies of
 each State's inspections conducted under such paragraph. In conducting such
 inspections, the Secretary shall use the same inspection protocols as the
 State. If the State has determined that an individual facility meets the
 requirements of subsections (b) and (c), but the Secretary determines that
 the facility does not meet such requirements, the Secretary's determination
 as to the facility's noncompliance with such requirements is binding and
 supersedes that of the State survey.
 `(B) SCOPE- With respect to each State, the Secretary shall conduct
 inspections under subparagraph (A) each year with respect to at least 5
 percent of the number of board and care facilities inspected by the State in
 the year, but in no case less than 5 board and care facilities in the State.
 `(6) DISCLOSURE OF RESULTS OF INSPECTIONS AND ACTIVITIES-
 `(A) PUBLIC INFORMATION- Each State, and the Secretary, shall make available
 to the public information respecting all inspections and certifications made
 respecting board and care facilities, including statements of deficiencies
 and plans of correction.
 `(B) NOTICE TO OMBUDSMAN- Each State shall notify the State long-term
 ombudsman (established under section 307(a)(12) of the Older Americans
 Act of 1965) of the State's findings of noncompliance with any of the
 requirements of subsections (b) and (c), with respect to a board and care
 facility in the State.
 `(C) ACCESS TO FRAUD CONTROL UNITS- Each State shall provide its State
 medicaid fraud and abuse control unit (established under section 1903(a))
 with access to all information of the State agency responsible for
 inspections and certifications under this subsection.
 `(7) FEDERAL PAYMENT FOR INSPECTIONS AND TRAINING- The Secretary shall pay
 each State for each calendar quarter 90 percent of the sums during such
 quarter (as found necessary by the Secretary) for the proper and efficient
 performance of State activities under this subsection. The Secretary
 shall transfer such sums as are necessary to make these payments from
 the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal
 Disability Insurance Trust Fund, in such proportions as the Secretary
 determines to be appropriate.
 `(e) ENFORCEMENT PROCESS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- If a State finds, on the basis of inspections under
 subsection (d) or otherwise, that a board and care facility no longer
 meets a requirement of subsection (b) or (c), and further finds that the
 facility's deficiencies--
 `(A) immediately jeopardize the health or safety of its residents, the
 State shall take immediate action to remove the jeopardy and correct the
 deficiencies through the remedy specified in paragraph (2)(C), or prohibit
 the facility from keeping or admitting residents receiving social security
 benefits under title II or supplemental security income benefits under this
 title and may provide, in addition, for one or more of the other remedies
 described in paragraph (2); or
 `(B) do not immediately jeopardize the health or safety of its residents,
 the State shall provide for one or more of the remedies described in
 paragraph (2). Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as restricting
 the remedies available to a State to remedy a facility's deficiencies. If
 a State finds that a facility meets the requirements of subsections (b)
 and (c), but, as of a previous period, did not meet such requirements,
 the State may provide for a civil money penalty under paragraph (2)(B)
 for the days in which it finds that the facility was not in compliance
 with such requirements.
 `(2) SPECIFIED REMEDIES- Each State shall establish by law (whether statute
 or regulation) at least the following remedies:
 `(A) Prohibit the facility from keeping or admitting residents receiving
 social security benefits under title II or supplemental security income
 benefits under this title.
 `(B) A civil money penalty assessed and collected, with interest,
 for each day in which the facility is or was out of compliance with a
 requirement of subsection (b) or (c). Funds collected by a State as a
 result of imposition of such a penalty (or as a result of the position by
 the State of a civil money penalty for activities described in subsection
 (d)(3)(A) or paragraph (3)) shall be applied to the protection of the
 health or property of residents of board and care facilities that the
 State or the Secretary finds deficient, including payment for the costs of
 relocation of residents to other facilities, maintenance of operation of a
 facility pending correction of deficiencies or closure, and reimbursement
 of residents for personal funds lost.
 `(C) The appointment of temporary management to oversee the operation of the
 facility and to assure the health and safety of the facility's residents,
 where there is a need for temporary management while--
 `(i) there is an orderly closure of the facility, or
 `(ii) improvements are made in order to bring the facility into compliance
 with all the requirements of subsections (b) and (c).
The temporary management under this clause shall not be terminated under clause
(ii) until the State has determined that the facility has the management
capability to ensure continued compliance with all the requirements of
subsections (b) and (c).
 `(D) The authority, in the case of an emergency, to close the facility,
 to transfer residents in that facility to other facilities, or both.
The State also shall specify criteria, as to when and how each of such remedies
is to be applied, the amounts of any fines, and the severity of each of these
remedies, to be used in the imposition of such remedies. Such criteria shall be
designed so as to minimize the time between the identification of violations
and final imposition of the remedies and shall provide for the imposition
of incrementally more severe fines for repeated or uncorrected deficiencies.
 `(3) PROGRAM TO IDENTIFY UNLICENSED FACILITIES- Each State shall maintain
 a program to aggressively seek out and identify unlicensed board and care
 facilities. This program shall include the gathering and utilization of
 information from the Social Security Administration regarding the location
 of multiple individuals receiving social security benefits under title
 II or supplemental security income benefits under this title who reside
 at the same address. A facility found to be operating without a license
 shall be given 90 days from the date it is identified by the State as
 unlicensed to come into compliance with the requirements of subsections
 (b) and (c). If it fails to comply with such period, the State shall assess
 a civil monetary penalty of $5,000.
 `(4) INCENTIVES FOR HIGH QUALITY CARE- In addition to the remedies specified
 in this paragraph, a State may establish a program to reward, through public
 recognition, incentive payments, or both, board and care facilities that
 provide the highest quality care to residents who are entitled to social
 security benefits under title II or supplemental security income benefits
 under this title.
 `(5) FEDERAL FUNDING FOR ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS AND INCENTIVES- The Secretary
 shall pay each State for each calendar quarter 90 percent of the sums
 expended during such quarter (as found necessary by the Secretary)
 for the proper and efficient performance of State activities under this
 subsection. The Secretary shall transfer such sums as are necessary to
 make these payments from the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust
 Fund and the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund, in such proportions
 as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
 `(6) SECRETARIAL AUTHORITY-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- If the Secretary finds that a board and care facility
 no longer meets the requirements of subsection (b) or (c) and further,
 finds that the facility's deficiencies--
 `(i) immediately jeopardize the health or safety of its residents, the
 Secretary shall take immediate action to remove the jeopardy and correct
 the deficiencies through the remedy specified in subparagraph (B)(iii) and
 may provide, in addition, for one or more of the other remedies described
 in subparagraph (B); or
 `(ii) do not immediately jeopardize the health or safety of its residents,
 the Secretary may impose any of the remedies described in subparagraph (B).
Nothing in this subparagraph shall be construed as restricting the remedies
available to the Secretary to remedy a facility's deficiencies. If the
Secretary finds that a facility meets such requirements but, as of a previous
period, did not meet such requirements, the Secretary may provide for a civil
money penalty under subparagraph (B)(ii) for the days on which he finds that
the facility was not in compliance with such requirements.
 `(B) SPECIFIED REMEDIES- The Secretary may take the following actions with
 respect to a finding that a facility has not met an applicable requirement:
 `(i) RESTRICTION ON ADMISSIONS- Prohibit the facility from keeping or
 admitting residents receiving social security benefits under title II or
 supplemental security income benefits under this title.
 `(ii) AUTHORITY WITH RESPECT TO CIVIL MONEY PENALTIES- The Secretary may
 impose a civil money penalty in an amount not to exceed $10,000 for each day
 of noncompliance. The provisions of section 1128A (other than subsections
 (a) and (b)) shall apply a civil money penalty under the previous sentence
 in the same manner as such provisions apply to a penalty or proceeding
 under section 1128A.
 `(iii) APPOINTMENT OF TEMPORARY MANAGEMENT- In consultation with the State,
 the Secretary may appoint temporary management to oversee the operation
 of the facility and to assure the health and safety of the facility's
 residents, where there is a need for temporary management while--
 `(I) there is an orderly closure of the facility, or
 `(II) improvements are made in order to bring the facility into compliance
 with all the requirements of subsections (b) and (c).
The temporary management under this clause shall not be terminated under
subclause (II) until the Secretary has determined that the facility has the
management capability to ensure continued compliance with all the requirements
of subsections (b) and (c).
The Secretary shall specify criteria, as to when and how each of such remedies
is to be applied, the amounts of any fines, and the severity of each of
these remedies, to be used in the imposition of such remedies. Such criteria
shall be designed so as to minimize the time between the identification of
violations and final imposition of the remedies and shall provide for the
imposition of incrementally more severe fines for repeated or uncorrected
deficiencies. In addition, the Secretary may provide for other specified
remedies, such as directed plans of correction.
 `(7) EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF PROHIBITION OF FEDERALLY SUPPORTED RESIDENTS-
 A finding to impose a penalty under paragraph (2)(A) or (6)(B)(i) under
 this subsection shall terminate when the State or Secretary (or both,
 as the case may be) finds that the facility is in substantial compliance
 with all the requirements of subsections (b) and (c).
 `(f) BOARD AND CARE HOTLINE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall maintain a toll-free hotline--
 `(A) to collect, maintain, and continually update information on board
 and care facilities, and
 `(B) to receive complaints (and answer questions) with respect to such
 facilities.
The information under subparagraph (A) shall include any significant
deficiencies found with respect to the care of residents in the most recent
certification survey, when that survey was completed, whether corrective
actions have been taken or are planned, and the sanctions (if any) imposed
under this section with respect to a facility.
 `(2) INVESTIGATION UNIT- The Secretary shall maintain a unit in the
 Department for investigating complaints with respect to board and care
 facilities. Such unit shall have enforcement authority and access to survey
 and certification reports, information gathered by any private accreditation
 agencies utilized by the Secretary, and consumer medical records.'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- Unless, after receipt of the recommendations under
 section 3(b)(3), the Congress otherwise provides, the amendments made by
 this section shall take effect 2 years after the date of the enactment of
 this Act, without regard to whether or not regulations to implement such
 amendments have been promulgated by such date. Each State shall provide
 for an inspection under section 1635(d)(3) of the Social Security Act of
 each board and care facility in the State by not later than one year after
 the date the amendments made by this section take effect.
SEC. 3. NATIONAL COMMISSION ON BOARD AND CARE FACILITY QUALITY.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall arrange,
 in accordance with subsection (d), for the establishment of a National
 Commission on Board and Care Facility Quality (in this section referred
 to as the `Commission').
 (b) DUTIES- The Commission shall--
 (1) examine existing quality, health, and safety requirements for board
 and care facilities and the enforcement of such requirements for their
 adequacy and effectiveness, with special attention to their effectiveness
 in promoting good personal care;
 (2) examine and make recommendations with respect to the appropriate role
 of the Federal, State, and local governments in assuring the health and
 safety of residents of board and care facilities; and
 (3) make specific recommendations to the Congress and the Secretary,
 by not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act,
 concerning the minimum national standards specified in section 1635 of
 the Social Security Act (including enforcement of such standards), and
 include in the recommendations such changes in the requirements of such
 section as the Commission finds appropriate.
 (c) COMPOSITION- The Commission shall be composed of 15 members, of whom--
 (1) nine shall be members of the Institute of Medicine of the National
 Academy of Sciences with experience in long-term care (no more than 3 of
 whom are physicians), of whom one shall be an expert on the administration
 of drugs to elderly and disabled individuals receiving long-term care
 services and one shall be an expert on the enforcement of life-safety
 codes in long-term care facilities;
 (2) two shall be residents of a board and care facility (or representatives
 of such individuals or organizations which advocate in their behalf),
 at least one of whom is a resident of a nonprofit board and care facility
 (or is a representative of individuals or organizations which advocate in
 behalf of residents of such nonprofit facilities);
 (3) two shall be operators of a board and care facility (or representatives
 of such individuals or organizations which represent their interests), at
 least one of whom is an operator of a nonprofit board and care facility
 (or is a representative of individuals or organizations which represent
 the interests of such nonprofit facilities); and
 (4) two shall be officials of State government (whether elected or appointed)
 with responsibility relating to the health and safety of residents of
 board and care facilities, or representatives of such officials or of
 organizations representing such officials.
 (d) USE OF INSTITUTE OF MEDICINE- The Secretary shall request the National
 Academy of Sciences, through the Institute of Medicine, to establish,
 appoint, and provide administrative support for the Commission under an
 arrangement under which the actual expenses incurred by the Academy in
 carrying out such functions will be paid by the Secretary. If the National
 Academy of Sciences is willing to do so, the Secretary shall enter into
 such an arrangement with the Academy.
 (e) INVOLVEMENT OF OTHERS- The Commission shall conduct its work in a
 manner which provides for the involvement of Members of Congress or their
 representatives, officials of the Department of Health and Human Services,
 and officials of State and local governments who are not members of the
 Commission. In addition, the Commission may consult with any individual or
 organization with expertise in issues relating to the work of the Commission.
 (f) TRANSFER OF FUNDS- The Secretary shall make available $1,500,000 from the
 Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund to carry out this section.
 (g) BOARD AND CARE FACILITY DEFINED- In this section, the term `board and
 care facility' has the meaning given such term in section 1635(a) of the
 Social Security Act.
SEC. 4. SUPPLEMENTAL SECURITY INCOME IMPROVEMENTS AND REFORMS.
 (a) SSI BENEFIT INCREASED FOR BOARD AND CARE FACILITY RESIDENTS- Section
 1611(b) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1682(b)) is amended by adding
 at the end the following:
 `(3) The benefit under this title shall be increased by 10 percent if the
 individual resides in a board and care facility which has been certified
 by the State to meet the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of section
 1635, whether or not the individual has an eligible spouse.'.
 (b) MANDATORY STATE SUPPLEMENTATION FOR RESIDENTS OF CERTIFIED BOARD AND
 CARE FACILITIES- Part A of title XVI of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1382-1382j)
 is amended by adding at the end the following:
`MANDATORY STATE SUPPLEMENTATION FOR RESIDENTS OF CERTIFIED BOARD AND CARE
FACILITIES
 `SEC. 1622. (a) Each State shall make supplementary payments to each
 eligible individual--
 `(1) who resides in the State;
 `(2) who is described in section 1611(b)(3); and
 `(3) whose income (as determined under section 1612 for purposes of the
 supplemental security income program, and including supplementary payments
 made under section 1616) does not exceed the official poverty line (as
 defined by the Office of Management and Budget, and revised annually in
 accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act
 of 1981), applicable to a family of the size involved.
 `(b) The amount of each supplementary payment shall be equal to the amount
 of increase under section 1611(b)(3), or any amount, if any, sufficient
 to increase the income of the individual to the official poverty line
 referred to in subsection (a)(3).
 `(c) During any period in which any State fails to comply with subsections
 (a) and (b), the Secretary shall take only 1 of the following actions with
 respect to the State.
 `(1) Withhold all payments under subsections (d)(7) and (e)(5) of section
 1635.
 `(2) Reduce by 1 percentage point the Federal medical assistance percentage
 applied under section 1903(a).'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 payments for months beginning more than 2 years after the date of the
 enactment of this Act.
SEC. 5. REPRESENTATIVE PAYEE REFORMS.
 (a) REPRESENTATIVE PAYEE PROGRAM UNDER TITLE II- Section 205(j) of the
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 405(j)) is amended--
 (1) by striking the last sentence of paragraph (3)(A);
 (2) by striking subparagraphs (B) through (D) of paragraph (3) and
 redesignating subparagraph (E) as subparagraph (B);
 (3) in paragraph (3)(B) (as redesignated) by striking `Notwithstanding
 subparagraphs (A), (B), (C), and (D), the' and inserting `The'; and
 (4) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (5) and by inserting after
 paragraph (3) the following new paragraph:
 `(4) The Secretary shall establish a system of monitoring and periodic review
 of a statistically significant number of all payments made under this title
 and to identify any need to change any payee (including institutional and
 noninstitutional payees) in accordance with subparagraph (A). Such system
 shall include periodic verification that, where payments are being made
 to a person other than the individual entitled to such payment, such
 individual is alive and is in contact with the payee.';
 (5) in paragraph (5) (as redesignated), by striking `The Secretary shall
 make' in subparagraph (A) and all that follows through `The Secretary shall
 include' in subparagraph (B) and inserting `The Secretary shall include'; and
 (6) by adding at the end of paragraph (5) (as redesignated) the following
 new subparagraph:
 `(B) The Secretary shall also include in the annual report required under
 section 704 information with respect to the implementation of the system
 of monitoring and periodic review described in paragraph (4), including the
 number of cases discovered where payment was being made to an inappropriate
 payee, how any such cases were dealt with by the Secretary, the final
 disposition of such cases, including any criminal penalties imposed,
 and such other information as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.'.
 (b) REPRESENTATIVE PAYEE PROGRAM UNDER TITLE XVI- Section 1631(a)(2)(C)
 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1383(a)(2)(C)) is amended--
 (1) by striking the last sentence of clause (i);
 (2) by striking clauses (ii) through (iv) and redesignating clause (v)
 as clause (ii);
 (3) in clause (ii) (as redesignated) by striking `Notwithstanding clauses
 (i), (ii), (iii), and (iv), the' and inserting `The';
 (4) by redesignating subparagraph (D) as subparagraph (E) and by inserting
 after subparagraph (C) the following new subparagraph:
 `(D) The Secretary shall establish a system of monitoring and periodic
 review of a statistically significant number of all payments made under
 this title for the purpose of ensuring that payments are being made to the
 proper parties in accordance with the provisions of this title and whether
 any need exists to certify or decertify any such payments to relatives or
 other persons in accordance with subparagraph (A), including institutional
 and noninstitutional payees. Such system shall include periodic verification
 that, where payments are being made to a certified payee, the beneficiary
 is alive and remains in contact with the payee.';
 (5) in subparagraph (E) (as redesignated), by striking `The Secretary
 shall make' and all that follows through `The Secretary shall include'
 and inserting `(i) The Secretary shall include'; and
 (6) by adding at the end of subparagraph (E) (as redesignated) the following
 new clause:
 `(ii) The Secretary shall also include in the annual report required under
 section 704 information with respect to the implementation of the system of
 monitoring and periodic review described in subparagraph (D), including the
 number of cases discovered where payment was being made to an inappropriate
 payee, how any such cases were dealt with by the Secretary, the final
 disposition of such cases, including any criminal penalties imposed,
 and such other information as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.'.
 (c) STAFF REQUIRED TO OVERSEE REPRESENTATIVE PAYEE SYSTEM- The Secretary
 of Health and Human Services shall maintain and adequately train full-time
 staff in the national office and in all regional and field offices of the
 Social Security Administration whose only purpose shall be to oversee the
 representative payee system.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE AND INITIAL REPORT-
 (1) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall take effect
 on the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) INITIAL REPORT- The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall, within
 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, make an initial report
 to the Congress on the establishment and implementation of each system
 required by the amendments made by this section. Such report shall include--
 (A) the estimated cost of implementing such system and the number of
 personnel required;
 (B) the numbers and types of beneficiary categories to be monitored, based
 upon type of benefit and the relationship of the payee to the beneficiary;
 (C) the extent to which such system will add to the burden of reporting
 otherwise required under this title by the beneficiary and the payee;
 (D) the methods employed by the Secretary in determining how to select
 cases to be monitored and reviewed so as to ensure that the system will
 focus upon those cases where the risk of fraud or abuse is greatest;
 (E) how often a particular type of case will be reviewed;
 (F) the office or division which will carry out the monitoring and reviews;
 (G) any types or categories of beneficiaries which would be excluded from
 such monitoring and reviews;
 (H) how such system relates to other review systems under title II and XVI
 of the Social Security Act, including any review system for beneficiaries
 in institutions; and
 (I) such other information as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
SEC. 6. MEDICARE DISCHARGE PLANNING REQUIREMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1861(ee)(2) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395x(ee)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the following new
 subparagraph:
 `(H) The hospital shall not discharge a patient to a board and care facility
 which does not meet the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of section
 1635 and, if the hospital finds that such a facility does not meet such
 requirements, reports such fact to the State authority responsible for
 inspections of the facility under section 1635(d)(3).'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on the first day of the first month that begins more than 2 years after
 the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 7. MEDICAID FRAUD CONTROL UNITS.
 (a) ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENT- Section 1903(q) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1396b(q)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(8) The entity maintains and uses policies and procedures for regularly
 monitoring for, and investigating and prosecuting of, violations of all
 applicable State laws regarding and of all aspects of fraud in connection
 with any aspect of the provision of medical assistance to the residents
 of board and care facilities (as defined in section 1635(a)) and the
 activities of such assistance under the State plan under this title.'.
 (b) INCREASE IN MATCHING FUNDS- Section 1903(a)(6) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 1396b(a)(6)) by inserting before the semicolon at the end the
 following: `, except that subparagraph (A) shall apply, without calendar
 quarter restriction and without regard to subsection (b)(3), to activities
 of such a unit in carrying out subsection (q)(8)'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply
 to calendar quarters beginning more than 2 years after the date of the
 enactment of this Act.
SEC. 8. BOARD AND CARE FACILITY IMPROVEMENT GRANT PROGRAMS.
 (a) TRAINING GRANTS- The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall
 establish a system of grants to the States and localities for the purpose of
 training operators and staff of board and care facilities and advocates of
 residents of such facilities. The Secretary shall seek out proposals designed
 to meet the special needs of board and care facilities serving rural areas
 and a significant proportion of low income residents. The Secretary shall
 also develop model training methods and supporting training materials by
 no later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) TEMPORARY EMERGENCY SHELTERS- The Secretary shall establish a system
 of grants to the States, localities, and private nonprofit organizations
 for the purpose of establishing temporary emergency shelters for the abused
 elderly and disabled. The Secretary shall give preference in awarding these
 grants to shelters to house residents of board and care facilities found
 to be endangered by conditions at these facilities. The amount of a grant
 under this section for an emergency shelter program of an organization
 may not exceed 90 percent of the sums expended by the organization in the
 operation of the program.
 (c) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 $10,000,000 for grants under subsection (a) for each of fiscal years 1992,
 1993, and 1994 and $10,000,000 for grants under subsection (b) for each
 of fiscal years 1992, 1993, and 1994.