HR 1683 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1683
To require the Federal Communications Commission to conduct an inquiry into
cellular telecommunications, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
April 10, 1991
Mr. BILBRAY introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To require the Federal Communications Commission to conduct an inquiry into
cellular telecommunications, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Cellular Services Monitoring and Consumer
 Assistance Act of 1990'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) Advancements in radio telephony, known as cellular, have made possible
 ubiquitous mobile telecommunications for transient consumers.
 (2) Demand for cellular service for personal, business, and emergency
 communications is growing rapidly in urban and rural areas throughout the
 United States.
 (3) The Federal Communications Commission, pursuant to titles I, II, and III
 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 151 et seq., 201 et seq., and
 301 et seq.), has jurisdiction with respect to providing for the use of radio
 transmission channels, including those used for cellular mobile services.
 (4) In 1982 the Commission decided to license only two facility-based
 cellular carriers per market; carriers were licensed in all major markets
 shortly thereafter.
SEC. 3. FORMAL COMMISSION PROCEEDING.
 (a) PROCEEDING REQUIRED- The Commission shall initiate an inquiry pursuant
 to titles I, II, and III of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 151
 et seq., 201 et seq., and 301 et seq.), and section 553 of title 5, United
 States Code, for the purpose of determining whether its current policy
 framework is ensuring the availability in rural and urban areas of high
 quality, innovative cellular services at reasonable cost-based rates.
 (b) DEADLINES- The Commission shall initiate the proceeding required under
 subsection (a) of this section within 60 days after enactment of this Act,
 and shall complete the proceeding not later than 9 months after the date
 of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 4. MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) CELLULAR INDUSTRY MONITORING- In the proceeding required under
 section 3 of this Act, the Commission shall formally initiate a docket
 for purposes of monitoring, on an on-going basis, the cellular industry,
 including technological developments therein. At a minimum, the Commission
 shall obtain and make publicly available data concerning cellular licensees--
 (1) wholesale and retail service charges;
 (2) cost allocation and depreciation practices;
 (3) terms and conditions of service, including the provisioning of customer
 premises equipment;
 (4) rates of return on investment and equity.
 (b) CONSIDERATION OF POLICY ALTERNATIVES- The Commission also shall consider
 whether its existing cellular market structure and regulatory policy should
 be amended to contain--
 (1) comprehensive cellular service quality standards designed to achieve high
 transmission quality for all cellular service, including roaming service;
 (2) policies and rules resulting in the licensing of additional
 facilities-based carriers in at least the top 30 cellular markets no later
 than January 1, 1993;
 (3) application the Uniform System of Accounts, as codified at Part 32 of
 the Commission's Rules, to all cellular mobile service licensees; including--
 (A) the actions by the Commission, if any, that would be required to modify
 Part 32 to account for the unique properties of cellular carrier operations,
 or to establish a separate uniform system of accounts substantially similar
 to Part 32 but designed explicitly for cellular licensees; and
 (B) the actions by the Commission, if any, that would be required to
 modify Part 32 of its rules, or such system of accounts established under
 subparagraph (A) of this section, so as to provide for the segregation of
 costs for each of a licensed cellular mobile carrier's services;
 (4) regulations requiring each licensed cellular mobile carrier to file
 annually with the Commission, and with the State Commission of each State
 within which such company provides cellular telephone service, the results
 of an independent audit certifying that the carrier has complied with all
 applicable cost assignment and allocation regulations prescribed pursuant
 to the Act, subject to the following:
 (A) such audit shall be conducted in accordance with procedures prescribed
 by the Commission by regulation, shall be certified by the person conducting
 the audit and by an officer of the carrier designated by the Commission
 by rule, and shall be made publicly available; and
 (B) for purposes of conducting and reviewing such audit, any State Commission
 with jurisdiction over the carrier shall have access to the carrier's
 accounts, books, and records, and to the accounts, books, and records of any
 organization or entity in which it has a financial or management interest;
 (5) the establishment of wholesale and retail cellular mobile service
 operations by all cellular licensees; such operations to keep separate
 records and books of account; and
 [(6) regulations requiring that anything of value obtained by a licensee's
 retail operation from its affiliated wholesale operation must be obtained
 on the same terms and conditions as those offered to nonaffiliated entities.]
SEC. 5. REPORT TO CONGRESS.
 (a) REPORT DEADLINE- Not later than 1 year after the enactment of this
 Act, the Commission shall report to Congress, in writing, the findings and
 conclusions the Commission adopts as a result of the proceeding required
 under section 3 of this Act.
 (b) CONTENTS OF REPORT- Such report shall be signed by all sitting
 Commissioners and shall include--
 (1) an analysis of the status and development of competition in cellular
 mobile services;
 (2) a description and explanation of the monitoring program initiated by
 the Commission;
 (3) a detailed economic and technical discussion of each of the policies
 and rules outlined in section 4 of this Act, and such other subjects as
 the Commission deems appropriate to consider in its inquiry;
 (4) the Commission's recommendation whether adoption of policies and
 rules outlined in section 4 of this Act would further the public interest,
 which shall be explained in detail as to each policy and rule.
SEC. 6. EFFECT OF ACT ON STATE JURISDICTION.
 Nothing in this Act shall be construed to alter, limit, or supersede
 the authority of any State with respect to the regulation of intrastate
 communications services.