HR 5783 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5783
To authorize the Secretary of Health and Human Services to make grants to
States to purchase certain vaccines for children at a federally negotiated
bulk rate and to create State and regional registries of vaccinations of
children, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
August 5, 1992
Ms. SLAUGHTER introduced the following bill; which was referred to the
Committee on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To authorize the Secretary of Health and Human Services to make grants to
States to purchase certain vaccines for children at a federally negotiated
bulk rate and to create State and regional registries of vaccinations of
children, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Vaccine Access and Registry Act'.
SEC. 2. CONGRESSIONAL FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) less than 50 percent of preschool-aged children in the United States
 are fully immunized against vaccine-preventable diseases;
 (2) in the recent 3-year measles epidemic in the United States, more than
 55,000 individuals contracted the disease and 89 died from the disease in
 1990 alone;
 (3) many childhood diseases can be prevented with simple vaccines when
 the vaccines are timely administered;
 (4) Federal funding for public health centers decreased by 35 percent in
 constant dollars between 1981 and 1992;
 (5) nearly 25 percent of the children under age 6 in the United States
 rely on the medicaid program to pay for medical and other health services;
 (6) a measles vaccine that costs $25 can prevent a hospitalization that
 costs $7000;
 (7) States could achieve higher vaccination rates by purchasing vaccines
 against vaccine-preventable childhood diseases in bulk from manufacturers
 and distributing them free of charge to health care providers for the
 immunization of children;
 (8) States could save money by purchasing vaccines in bulk from manufacturers
 and distributing them to health care providers rather than reimbursing the
 providers for the retail cost of the vaccines the providers administer to
 children who receive health services under the medicaid program; and
 (9) State health departments, alone or in cooperation with the health
 departments of neighboring States, could create comprehensive registries to
 track the vaccine-preventable diseases against which a child is immunized
 for the purpose of notifying the child's parents when the child is due
 for a vaccination.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this Act:
 (1) CHILD- The term `child' means an individual who is less than 13 years
 of age.
 (2) FEDERALLY NEGOTIATED BULK RATE- The term `federally negotiated bulk
 rate' means the rate at which the Secretary purchases a vaccine that may
 be furnished to a grant recipient pursuant to sections 317(e) and 317(j)(1)
 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247b(e), 247b(j)(1)).
 (3) HEALTH CARE PROVIDER- The term `health care provider' means any licensed
 health care professional or provider authorized by law to administer a
 vaccine to a child.
 (4) MANUFACTURER- The term `manufacturer' means a person who manufactures,
 imports, processes, or distributes under its label a vaccine.
 (5) PARENT- The term `parent' means a parent or an individual who qualifies
 as a legal guardian under State law.
 (6) SECRETARY- The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Health and
 Human Services.
 (7) STATE- The term `State' means any of the several States, the District
 of Columbia, the Virgin Islands of the United States, the Commonwealth of
 Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
 Islands, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of
 Micronesia, or Palau.
 (8) VACCINE- The term `vaccine' means any of the vaccines that are routinely
 provided to children in order to prevent disease as may be established by
 the Secretary based on the recommendations of the Immunization Practices
 Advisory Committee of the Centers for Disease Control.
TITLE I--UNIVERSAL VACCINE GRANT PROGRAM
SEC. 101. AUTHORITY TO MAKE GRANTS TO STATES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of Health and Human Services may make grants
 under this title to States for the establishment and operation of programs
 to purchase vaccines from manufacturers at the federally negotiated bulk
 rate and distribute them free of charge to health care providers for the
 immunization of children.
 (b) APPLICATIONS-
 (1) SUBMISSION- To apply for a grant under this title for any fiscal year,
 a State shall submit an application to the Secretary in accordance with the
 procedures established by the Secretary. The Secretary shall establish a
 deadline for the submission of applications under this paragraph for each
 fiscal year.
 (2) CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL- The Secretary may not approve an application
 submitted under paragraph (1) unless the application includes assurances
 satisfactory to the Secretary that--
 (A) funds received under this title will be used to supplement, and not
 supplant, non-Federal funds that would otherwise be available for activities
 funded under this title;
 (B) a vaccine purchased with funds received under this title will be
 purchased from a manufacturer only at the federally negotiated bulk rate;
 (C) a vaccine purchased with funds received under this title will only be
 distributed to a health care provider without cost to such provider; and
 (D) a vaccine purchased with funds received under this title will not be
 distributed to a health care provider without requiring the provider to
 give assurances satisfactory to the Secretary that the provider will not--
 (i) charge any person for any cost associated with the vaccine other than
 a fee for administering the vaccine; or
 (ii) refuse to administer the vaccine to a child because of the inability
 of the child or the parent of the child to pay a fee for administering
 the vaccine.
 (3) APPROVAL-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall approve each application submitted
 under paragraph (1) that, in the discretion of the Secretary, satisfies
 the requirements of this subsection.
 (B) PETITIONS FOR RECONSIDERATION AND REAPPLICATIONS-
 (i) IN GENERAL- With respect to an application submitted by a State under
 paragraph (1) that is disapproved under subparagraph (A), the State may
 submit to the Secretary--
 (I) a petition for reconsideration of the application; and
 (II) an application that conforms to the requirements of this section.
 (ii) DEADLINES- The Secretary shall establish a deadline for the submission
 of petitions for reconsideration and reapplications under this subparagraph
 for each fiscal year. The Secretary shall approve or disapprove each such
 petition and reapplication before the termination of the 60-day period
 beginning on the date of such submission.
 (c) ALLOCATION OF FUNDS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Of the total amount appropriated under section 106 for any
 fiscal year, there shall be allocated to each State whose application has
 been approved under subsection (b) an amount that bears the same ratio to
 such total amount as the 5-year birth average of such State bears to the
 total of the 5-year birth averages of all of the participating States.
 (2) DEFINITION- For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `5-year birth
 average' means the arithmetic mean of the number of births that occurred
 in a State in each of the 5 calendar years preceding the calendar year in
 which the State applies for a grant under this title.
SEC. 102. REVIEW AND SANCTIONS.
 The Secretary shall review at least annually the compliance of a State
 receiving a grant under this title with the provisions of this title. The
 Secretary shall establish a procedure for determining whether such a State
 has failed to comply substantially within the provisions of this title
 and the sanctions to be imposed for any such noncompliance.
SEC. 103. RENEWAL OF GRANTS.
 A grant under this title may be renewed for up to 2 additional years after
 the 1st fiscal year during which a State receives its initial grant under
 this title, subject to the availability of funds, if--
 (1) the State submits to the Secretary an application pursuant to subsection
 (b) for each fiscal year for which the State desires to receive, and is
 eligible to receive, a grant under this title;
 (2) the Secretary determines that the funds made available to the State
 during the previous year were used in a manner required under the approved
 application; and
 (3) the Secretary determines that an additional grant is necessary to
 implement in the State a program described in subsection (a).
SEC. 104. ANNUAL REPORT.
 The Secretary shall include in the annual report under section 1705 of the
 Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300u-4) a description of the activities
 carried out under this title. The description shall include information
 concerning the number of children who were immunized during the period
 covered by the report with a vaccine purchased with funds received under this
 title in each State whose application has been approved under section 101.
SEC. 105. REGULATIONS.
 The Secretary may issue any regulations necessary to carry out this title.
SEC. 106. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title $20,000,000
 for fiscal year 1993, $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and $30,000,000
 for fiscal year 1995.
TITLE II--AMENDMENT TO PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT CONCERNING FEDERALLY
NEGOTIATED BULK RATE
SEC. 201. STATE PURCHASES AT FEDERALLY NEGOTIATED BULK RATE.
 Subsection (e) of section 317 of the Public Health Service Act (42
 U.S.C. 247b) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as subparagraphs (A) and
 (B), respectively;
 (2) by inserting `(1)' after the subsection designation; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(2) The Secretary, in carrying out paragraph (1) with respect to grant
 the authorization of appropriations for which is established in subsection
 (j)(1), may not procure a vaccine that may be used to immunize an individual
 under the age of 13 against a vaccine-preventable disease from a person
 if the person does not agree as a condition to the procurement to sell the
 vaccine to a State at the same price as the person offers to the Secretary.'.
TITLE III--IMMUNIZATION REGISTRY GRANT PROGRAM
SEC. 301. AUTHORITY TO MAKE GRANTS TO STATES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of Health and Human Services may make grants
 under this title to States for the establishment and operation, by a
 State agency that has legal responsibility for disease control under State
 law, of State immunization registries. The Secretary also may make grants
 under this title to 2 or more cooperating States for the establishment and
 operation, by 1 or more State agencies that have legal responsibility for
 disease control under State law, of regional immunization registries. Such
 a State or regional immunization registry shall--
 (1) collect in a central data system, with respect to a vaccine administered
 to a child by a health care provider in the State or region, the immunization
 information described in subsection (c);
 (2) disseminate such information, upon the consent of a parent of the
 child who is the subject of the information, to a health care provider
 who or which provides health care services to the child;
 (3) provide notices to a parent in the State or region at appropriate
 intervals regarding the immunization status of a child of the parent in the
 State or region and regarding a vaccine that the child should receive; and
 (4) monitor birth and vaccination rates of children in the State or region
 and determine on an ongoing basis if the number of children in an age range
 who are immunized against a vaccine-preventable disease falls below the
 number of children born in the State or region who are in the age range
 to an extent that an outbreak of such a disease is probable.
 (b) APPLICATIONS-
 (1) SUBMISSION- To apply for a grant under this title for any fiscal year,
 a State shall submit an application to the Secretary in accordance with
 the procedures established by the Secretary.
 (2) CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL- The Secretary may not approve an application
 submitted under paragraph (1) unless the application includes assurances
 satisfactory to the Secretary that--
 (A) funds received under this title will be used either to create a new
 State or regional immunization registry or to operate such a registry
 during the 1st year of operation of the registry;
 (B) a health care provider licensed by the State will be required as a
 condition of that license to provide the immunization information described
 in subsection (c) to such registry; and
 (C) a health care provider licensed by the State will have access to such
 information upon the consent of a parent of the child who is the subject
 of the information.
 (3) APPROVAL-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall approve each application submitted
 under paragraph (1) that, in the discretion of the Secretary, satisfies
 the requirements of this subsection.
 (B) PETITIONS FOR RECONSIDERATION AND REAPPLICATIONS-
 (i) IN GENERAL- With respect to an application submitted by a State under
 paragraph (1) that is disapproved under subparagraph (A), the State may
 submit to the Secretary--
 (I) a petition for reconsideration of the application; and
 (II) an application that conforms to the requirements of this section.
 (ii) DEADLINES- The Secretary shall establish a deadline for the submission
 of petitions for reconsideration and reapplications under this subparagraph
 for each fiscal year. The Secretary shall approve or disapprove each such
 petition and reapplication before the termination of the 60-day period
 beginning on the date of such submission.
 (c) IMMUNIZATION INFORMATION- The immunization information referred to in
 subsections (a) and (b) is as follows:
 (1) NAME- The name of a child to whom a health care provider administers
 a vaccine.
 (2) ADDRESS- The address of a child to whom a health care provider
 administers a vaccine.
 (3) VACCINE- The vaccine administered to a child by a health care provider.
 (4) DATE OF ADMINISTRATION- The date of administration of a vaccine to a
 child by a health care provider.
 (5) HEALTH CARE PROVIDER- The name and address of a health care provider
 who or which administers a vaccine to a child.
 (d) RENEWAL OF GRANTS- A grant under this title may not be renewed.
SEC. 302. REVIEW AND SANCTIONS.
 The Secretary shall review, at the conclusion of a period or periods
 established by the Secretary, the compliance of a State receiving a grant
 under this title with the provisions of this title. The Secretary shall
 establish a procedure for determining whether such a State has failed to
 comply substantially within the provisions of this title and the sanctions
 to be imposed for any such noncompliance.
SEC. 303. ANNUAL REPORT.
 The Secretary shall include in the annual report under section 1705 of
 the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300u-4) a description of the
 activities carried out under this title.
SEC. 304. REGULATIONS.
 The Secretary may issue any regulations necessary to carry out this title.
SEC. 305. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title $5,000,000
 for fiscal year 1993, $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and $10,000,000
 for fiscal year 1995.