[Congressional Bills 111th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]
[H.R. 875 Introduced in House (IH)]

111th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 875

 To establish the Food Safety Administration within the Department of 
 Health and Human Services to protect the public health by preventing 
food-borne illness, ensuring the safety of food, improving research on 
 contaminants leading to food-borne illness, and improving security of 
 food from intentional contamination, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 February 4, 2009

 Ms. DeLauro (for herself, Ms. Eshoo, Ms. DeGette, Ms. Schakowsky, Mr. 
 Engel, Ms. Castor of Florida, Mr. Murphy of Connecticut, Ms. Sutton, 
 Mrs. Lowey, Ms. Slaughter, Mr. Hinchey, Mr. McGovern, Ms. Wasserman 
Schultz, Ms. Hirono, Mr. Grijalva, Mr. Schauer, Mr. Nadler of New York, 
 Mr. Bishop of New York, Ms. Linda T. Sanchez of California, Mr. 
McDermott, Mr. Ryan of Ohio, Ms. Giffords, Mr. Filner, Mr. Hall of New 
 York, Ms. Lee of California, Ms. Pingree of Maine, Ms. Kaptur, Mr. 
Bishop of Georgia, Ms. Moore of Wisconsin, and Mr. DeFazio) introduced 
 the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Energy and 
Commerce, and in addition to the Committee on Agriculture, for a period 
 to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for 
consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the 
 committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To establish the Food Safety Administration within the Department of 
 Health and Human Services to protect the public health by preventing 
food-borne illness, ensuring the safety of food, improving research on 
 contaminants leading to food-borne illness, and improving security of 
 food from intentional contamination, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Food Safety 
Modernization Act of 2009''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings; purposes.
Sec. 3. Definitions.
 TITLE I--ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FOOD SAFETY ADMINISTRATION

Sec. 101. Establishment of the food safety administration.
Sec. 102. Consolidation of food safety functions.
Sec. 103. Additional duties of the administration.
 TITLE II--ADMINISTRATION OF FOOD SAFETY PROGRAM

Sec. 201. Administration of national program.
Sec. 202. Registration of food establishments and foreign food 
 establishments.
Sec. 203. Preventive process controls to reduce adulteration of food.
Sec. 204. Performance standards for contaminants in food.
Sec. 205. Inspections of food establishments.
Sec. 206. Food production facilities.
Sec. 207. Federal and State cooperation.
Sec. 208. Imports.
Sec. 209. Resource plan.
Sec. 210. Traceback requirements.
Sec. 211. Accredited laboratories.
 TITLE III--RESEARCH AND EDUCATION

Sec. 301. Public health assessment system.
Sec. 302. Public education and advisory system.
Sec. 303. Research.
Sec. 304. Working group on improving foodborne illness surveillance.
Sec. 305. Career-spanning training for food inspectors.
Sec. 306. Food-Borne Illness Health Registry.
Sec. 307. Study on Federal resources.
 TITLE IV--ENFORCEMENT

Sec. 401. Prohibited acts.
Sec. 402. Food detention, seizure, and condemnation.
Sec. 403. Notification and recall.
Sec. 404. Injunction proceedings.
Sec. 405. Civil and criminal penalties.
Sec. 406. Presumption.
Sec. 407. Whistleblower protection.
Sec. 408. Administration and enforcement.
Sec. 409. Citizen civil actions.
 TITLE V--IMPLEMENTATION

Sec. 501. Reorganization plan.
Sec. 502. Transitional authorities.
Sec. 503. Savings provisions.
Sec. 504. Conforming amendments.
Sec. 505. Additional technical and conforming amendments.
Sec. 506. Regulations.
Sec. 507. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 508. Limitation on authorization of appropriations.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS; PURPOSES.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds that--
 (1) the safety of the food supply of the United States is 
 vital to the public health, to public confidence in the food 
 supply, and to the success of the food sector of the Nation's 
 economy;
 (2) lapses in the protection of the food supply and loss of 
 public confidence in food safety are damaging to consumers and 
 the food industry, and place a burden on interstate commerce 
 and international trade;
 (3) recent ongoing events demonstrate that the food safety 
 program at the Food and Drug Administration is not effective in 
 controlling hazards in food coming from farms and factories in 
 the United States and food and food ingredients coming from 
 foreign countries, and these events have adversely affected 
 consumer confidence;
 (4) the safety and security of the food supply require a 
 systemwide approach to prevent food-borne illness involving the 
 integrated efforts of Federal, State and local agencies; a 
 thorough, broad-based, and coordinated approach to basic and 
 applied science; and intensive, effective, and efficient 
 management of the Nation's food safety program;
 (5) the task of preserving the safety of the food supply of 
 the United States faces tremendous pressures with regard to--
 (A) emerging pathogens and other contaminants and 
 the ability to detect all forms of contamination;
 (B) the threat of intentional contamination of the 
 food supply;
 (C) a growing number of people at high risk for 
 food-borne illnesses, including an increasing 
 population of aging and immune-compromised consumers, 
 together with infants and children;
 (D) an increasing volume of imported food, without 
 adequate monitoring, inspection, and systems for 
 prevention of food safety problems; and
 (E) maintenance of rigorous inspection of the 
 domestic food processing and food service industries;
 (6) Federal food safety standard setting, inspection, 
 enforcement, and research efforts should be based on the best 
 available science and public health considerations, and food 
 safety resources should be systematically deployed in ways that 
 most effectively prevent food-borne illness;
 (7) the Food and Drug Administration, an agency within the 
 Department of Health and Human Services, has regulatory 
 jurisdiction over the safety and labeling of 80 percent of the 
 American food supply, encompassing all foods except meat, 
 poultry, and egg products, as well as drugs, medical devices, 
 and biologics;
 (8) rapid technological advance and the expansion and 
 globalization of industries in all areas of Food and Drug 
 Administration jurisdiction present challenges and require 
 leadership beyond the capacity of any one agency or agency head 
 to provide;
 (9) in the food safety area, the Food and Drug 
 Administration implements provisions of the Federal Food, Drug, 
 and Cosmetic Act that are 70 years old and that antiquated law 
 limits the Food and Drug Administration's role largely to 
 reacting to and correcting food safety problems after they 
 occur, rather than working with the food industry to 
 systematically prevent problems;
 (10) the Food and Drug Administration's effectiveness is 
 further impaired by fragmentation of leadership and management 
 within the Administration, as major food safety 
 responsibilities are dispersed across the Administration's 
 Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, Center for 
 Veterinary Medicine, and Office of Regulatory Affairs;
 (11) there is no official with the full-time responsibility 
 and budget authority for food safety at the Food and Drug 
 Administration and food safety competes unsuccessfully with the 
 drug and medical device programs for senior agency management 
 attention and resources; and
 (12) improving Federal oversight of food safety requires a 
 modern food safety mandate, clear authorities, and a dedicated 
 official within the Department of Health and Human Services 
 with budget authority to manage an integrated organizational 
 structure and report directly to the Secretary.
 (b) Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are--
 (1) to establish an agency within the Department of Health 
 and Human Services to be known as the ``Food Safety 
 Administration'' to--
 (A) regulate food safety and labeling to strengthen 
 the protection of the public health;
 (B) ensure that food establishments fulfill their 
 responsibility to process, store, hold, and transport 
 food in a manner that protects the public health of all 
 people in the United States;
 (C) lead an integrated, systemwide approach to food 
 safety and to make more effective and efficient use of 
 resources to prevent food-borne illness;
 (D) provide a single focal point within the 
 Department of Health and Human Services for food safety 
 leadership, both nationally and internationally; and
 (E) provide an integrated food safety research 
 capability, including internally generated, 
 scientifically and statistically valid studies, in 
 cooperation with academic institutions and other 
 scientific entities of the Federal and State 
 governments;
 (2) to transfer to the Food Safety Administration the food 
 safety, labeling, inspection, and enforcement functions that, 
 as of the day before the date of the enactment of this Act, are 
 performed by various components of the Food and Drug 
 Administration and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
 Administration;
 (3) to modernize and strengthen the Federal food safety law 
 to ensure more effective application and efficient management 
 of the laws for the protection and improvement of public 
 health; and
 (4) to establish that food establishments have 
 responsibility to ensure that all stages of production, 
 processing, and distribution of their products or products 
 under their control satisfy the requirements of this law.

SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act:
 (1) Administration.--The term ``Administration'' means the 
 Food Safety Administration established under section 101(a)(1).
 (2) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the 
 Administrator of Food Safety appointed under section 101(a)(2).
 (3) Adulterated.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``adulterated'' has the 
 meaning given that term in section 402 of the Federal 
 Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 342).
 (B) Inclusion.--The term ``adulterated'' includes 
 bearing or containing a contaminant that causes illness 
 or death among sensitive populations.
 (4) Agency.--The term ``agency'' has the meaning given that 
 term in section 551 of title 5, United States Code.
 (5) Category 1 food establishment.--The term ``category 1 
 food establishment'' means a food establishment (other than a 
 seafood processing establishment) that slaughters, for the 
 purpose of producing food, animals that are not subject to 
 inspection under the Federal Meat Inspection Act or poultry 
 that are not subject to inspection under the Poultry Products 
 Inspection Act.
 (6) Category 2 food establishment.--The term ``category 2 
 food establishment'' means a seafood processing establishment 
 or other food establishment (other than a category 1 
 establishment) not subject to inspection under the Federal Meat 
 Inspection Act, the Poultry Products Inspection Act, or the Egg 
 Products Inspection Act, that processes raw seafood or other 
 raw animal products, whether fresh or frozen, or other products 
 that the Administrator determines by regulation to pose a 
 significant risk of hazardous contamination.
 (7) Category 3 food establishment.--The term ``category 3 
 food establishment'' means a food establishment (other than a 
 category 1 or category 2 establishment) that processes cooked, 
 pasteurized, or otherwise ready-to-eat seafood or other animal 
 products, fresh produce in ready-to-eat raw form, or other 
 products that pose a risk of hazardous contamination.
 (8) Category 4 food establishment.--The term ``category 4 
 food establishment'' means a food establishment that processes 
 all other categories of food products not described in 
 paragraphs (5) through (7).
 (9) Category 5 food establishment.--The term ``category 5 
 food establishment'' means a food establishment that stores, 
 holds, or transports food products prior to delivery for retail 
 sale.
 (10) Contaminant.--The term ``contaminant'' includes a 
 bacterium, chemical, natural toxin or manufactured toxicant, 
 virus, parasite, prion, physical hazard, or other human 
 pathogen that when found on or in food can cause human illness, 
 injury, or death.
 (11) Hazardous contamination.--The term ``hazardous 
 contamination'' refers to the presence of a contaminant in food 
 at levels that pose a risk of human illness, injury, or death 
 or are capable of reaching levels that pose such risk during 
 the shelf life of the product.
 (12) Food.--The term ``food'' means a product intended to 
 be used for food or drink for a human or an animal and 
 components thereof.
 (13) Food establishment.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``food establishment'' 
 means a slaughterhouse (except those regulated under 
 the Federal Meat Inspection Act or the Poultry Products 
 Inspection Act), factory, warehouse, or facility owned 
 or operated by a person located in any State that 
 processes food or a facility that holds, stores, or 
 transports food or food ingredients.
 (B) Exclusions.--For the purposes of registration, 
 the term ``food establishment'' does not include a food 
 production facility as defined in paragraph (14), 
 restaurant, other retail food establishment, nonprofit 
 food establishment in which food is prepared for or 
 served directly to the consumer, or fishing vessel 
 (other than a fishing vessel engaged in processing, as 
 that term is defined in section 123.3 of title 21, Code 
 of Federal Regulations).
 (14) Food production facility.--The term ``food production 
 facility'' means any farm, ranch, orchard, vineyard, 
 aquaculture facility, or confined animal-feeding operation.
 (15) Food safety law.--The term ``food safety law'' means--
 (A) the provisions of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
 Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.) related to and 
 requiring the safety, quality, nutritional composition, 
 labeling, and inspection of food, infant formulas, food 
 additives, pesticide residues, and other substances 
 present in food;
 (B) the provisions of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
 Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et 11 seq.) and of any 
 other Acts that are administered by the Center for 
 Veterinary Medicine of the Food and Drug 
 Administration;
 (C) the provisions of the Public Health Service Act 
 that relate in any way to studying, surveying, 
 containing, or preventing food-borne illness; and
 (D) the provisions of this Act.
 (16) Foreign food establishment.--The term ``foreign food 
 establishment'' means any category 1 through 5 food 
 establishment or food production facility located outside the 
 United States that processes or produces food or food 
 ingredients for consumption in the United States.
 (17) Interstate commerce.--The term ``interstate commerce'' 
 has the meaning given that term in section 201(b) of the 
 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321(b)).
 (18) Misbranded.--The term ``misbranded'' has the meaning 
 given that term in section 403 of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
 Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 343).
 (19) Process.--The term ``process'' or ``processing'' means 
 the commercial slaughter, packing, preparation, or manufacture 
 of food.
 (20) State.--The term ``State'' means--
 (A) a State;
 (B) the District of Columbia;
 (C) the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico; and
 (D) any other territory or possession of the United 
 States.

 TITLE I--ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FOOD SAFETY ADMINISTRATION

SEC. 101. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FOOD SAFETY ADMINISTRATION.

 (a) Establishment.--
 (1) In general.--There is established in the Department of 
 Health and Human Services an agency to be known as the ``Food 
 Safety Administration''.
 (2) Head of the administration.--The Administration shall 
 be headed by the Administrator of Food Safety, who shall be 
 appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent 
 of the Senate, for a term of 5 years, and who may be 
 reappointed.
 (3) Delegation.--All the authorities and responsibilities 
 assigned to the Secretary of Health and Human Services in the 
 food safety law are hereby assigned to the Administrator.
 (b) Duties of Administrator.--The Administrator shall--
 (1) administer and enforce the food safety law;
 (2) serve as the food safety leader within the Department 
 of Health and Human Services and coordinator of all Department 
 activities related to ensuring the safety, quality, and proper 
 labeling of the food supply;
 (3) represent the United States in relevant international 
 food safety bodies and discussions;
 (4) promulgate regulations to ensure the safety and 
 security of the food supply from all forms of contamination, 
 including intentional contamination; and
 (5) oversee within the Department of Health and Human 
 Services--
 (A) in consultation with the Director of the 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, all 
 activities related to foodborne illness surveillance 
 and investigation of foodborne illness outbreaks;
 (B) implementation of food safety inspection, 
 enforcement, and research efforts to protect the public 
 health;
 (C) development of consistent and science-based 
 standards for safe food;
 (D) coordination and prioritization of food safety 
 research and education programs with other Federal 
 agencies;
 (E) prioritization of food safety efforts and 
 deployment of food safety resources to achieve the 
 greatest possible benefit in reducing food-borne 
 illness;
 (F) coordination of the response to food-borne 
 illness outbreaks with other Federal and State 
 agencies; and
 (G) integration of food safety activities with 
 State and local agencies.

SEC. 102. CONSOLIDATION OF FOOD SAFETY FUNCTIONS.

 (a) Transfer of Functions and Resources.--For each component of the 
Department of Health and Human Services or the Department of Commerce 
specified in subsection (b), there are transferred to the 
Administration all functions, personnel, and assets (including 
facilities and financial resources) of those components as of the day 
before the date of the enactment of this Act (including all related 
functions of any officer or employee of the component) that relate to 
administration or enforcement of the food safety law, as determined by 
the President.
 (b) Transferred Functions and Resources.--The components referred 
to in subsection (a) are--
 (1) the Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition of the 
 Food and Drug Administration;
 (2) the Center for Veterinary Medicine of the Food and Drug 
 Administration;
 (3) the National Center for Toxicological Research of the 
 Food and Drug Administration;
 (4) the personnel and assets of the Office of Regulatory 
 Affairs of the Food and Drug Administration used to administer 
 and conduct inspections of food establishments and imports and 
 conduct laboratory analyses and other investigations relating 
 to food safety and enforcement of the food safety law;
 (5) the personnel and assets of the Office of the 
 Commissioner of Food and Drugs used to support--
 (A) the Center for Food Safety and Applied 
 Nutrition;
 (B) the Center for Veterinary Medicine;
 (C) the National Center for Toxicological Research; 
 and
 (D) the personnel and assets of the Office of 
 Regulatory Affairs described in paragraph (4); and
 (6) the personnel and assets of the National Marine 
 Fisheries Service of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
 Administration of the Department of Commerce used to administer 
 the seafood inspection program.
 (c) Renaming and Reservation of Agency Identity.--The Food and Drug 
Administration in the Department of Health and Human Services is hereby 
renamed the Federal Drug and Device Administration and may be referred 
to as ``FDA''.
 (d) Sharing of Facilities and Resources.--The Food Safety 
Administration and the Federal Drug and Device Administration shall 
enter into such agreements concerning the sharing of facilities and 
other resources as may be appropriate to make efficient use of such 
facilities and resources and achieve their respective missions.

SEC. 103. ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF THE ADMINISTRATION.

 (a) Officers and Employees.--The Administrator may--
 (1) appoint officers and employees for the Administration 
 in accordance with the provisions of title 5, United States 
 Code, relating to appointment in the competitive service; and
 (2) fix the compensation of those officers and employees in 
 accordance with chapter 51 and with subchapter III of chapter 
 53 of that title, relating to classification and General 
 Schedule pay rates.
 (b) Experts and Consultants.--The Administrator may--
 (1) procure the services of temporary or intermittent 
 experts and consultants as authorized by section 3109 of title 
 5, United States Code; and
 (2) pay in connection with those services the travel 
 expenses of the experts and consultants, including 
 transportation and per diem in lieu of subsistence while away 
 from the homes or regular places of business of the 
 individuals, as authorized by section 5703 of that title.
 (c) Bureaus, Offices, and Divisions.--The Administrator may 
establish within the Administration such bureaus, offices, and 
divisions as the Administrator determines are necessary to perform the 
duties of the Administrator.
 (d) Advisory Committees.--
 (1) In general.--The Administrator shall establish advisory 
 committees that consist of representatives of scientific expert 
 bodies, academics, industry specialists, and consumers.
 (2) Duties.--The duties of an advisory committee 
 established under paragraph (1) may include developing 
 recommendations with respect to the development of new 
 processes, research, communications, performance standards, and 
 inspection.

 TITLE II--ADMINISTRATION OF FOOD SAFETY PROGRAM

SEC. 201. ADMINISTRATION OF NATIONAL PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--The Administrator shall--
 (1) develop, administer, and annually update a national 
 food safety program (referred to in this section as the 
 ``program'') to protect public health; and
 (2) ensure that persons who produce, process, or distribute 
 food meet their responsibility to prevent or minimize food 
 safety hazards related to their products.
 (b) Comprehensive Analysis.--The program shall be based on a 
comprehensive analysis of the hazards associated with different food 
and with the processing of different food, including the identification 
and evaluation of--
 (1) the severity of the potential health risks;
 (2) the sources of potentially hazardous contamination or 
 practices extending from the farm or ranch to the consumer that 
 may increase the risk of food-borne illness;
 (3) the potential for persistence, multiplication, or 
 concentration of naturally occurring or added contaminants in 
 food;
 (4) the potential for hazardous contamination to have 
 cumulative toxic effects, multigenerational effects, or effects 
 on specific categories of consumers;
 (5) opportunities across the food production, processing, 
 distribution, and retail system to reduce potential health 
 risks; and
 (6) opportunities for intentional contamination of food or 
 food ingredients.
 (c) Program Elements.--In carrying out the program, the 
Administrator shall--
 (1) adopt and implement a national system for the 
 registration of food establishments and foreign food 
 establishments, as provided in section 202 of this Act;
 (2) adopt and implement a national system for regular 
 unannounced inspection of food establishments;
 (3) require and enforce the adoption of preventive process 
 controls in food establishments, based on the best available 
 scientific and public health considerations and best available 
 technologies;
 (4) establish and enforce science-based standards for--
 (A) potentially hazardous substances that may 
 contaminate food; and
 (B) safety and sanitation in the processing and 
 handling of food;
 (5) implement a statistically valid sampling program with 
 the stringency and frequency to independently monitor that 
 industry programs and procedures that prevent food 
 contamination are effective on an ongoing basis and that food 
 meets the standards established under this Act;
 (6) implement appropriate surveillance procedures and 
 requirements to ensure the safety and security of imported 
 food;
 (7) coordinate and collaborate with other agencies and 
 State or local governments in carrying out inspection, 
 enforcement, research, and monitoring;
 (8) implement a national system to identify the food 
 products posing the greatest public health risk and to analyze 
 the effectiveness of existing food safety programs, in 
 conjunction with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
 and other Federal agencies;
 (9) develop public education, risk communication, and 
 advisory programs;
 (10) implement an applied research program to further the 
 purposes of this Act;
 (11) coordinate and prioritize food safety research and 
 educational programs with other Federal agencies and with State 
 and local governments; and
 (12) provide technical assistance to farmers and food 
 establishments that are small business concerns (meeting the 
 requirements of section 3(a) of the Small Business Act and the 
 regulations promulgated thereunder) to assist with compliance 
 with the requirements of this Act.

SEC. 202. REGISTRATION OF FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND FOREIGN FOOD 
 ESTABLISHMENTS.

 (a) In General.--Any food establishment or foreign food 
establishment engaged in manufacturing, processing, packing, or holding 
food for consumption in the United States shall register annually with 
the Administrator.
 (b) Registration Requirements.--
 (1) In general.--To be registered under subsection (a), a 
 food establishment shall submit a registration or 
 reregistration to the Administrator.
 (2) Registration.--Registration under this section shall 
 begin within 90 days of the enactment of this Act. Each such 
 registration shall be submitted to the Secretary through an 
 electronic portal and shall contain such information as the 
 Secretary, by guidance, determines to be appropriate. Such 
 registration shall contain the following information:
 (A) The name, address, and emergency contact 
 information of each domestic food establishment or 
 foreign food establishment that the registrant owns or 
 operates under this Act and all trade names under which 
 the registrant conducts business in the United States 
 relating to food.
 (B) The primary purpose and business activity of 
 each domestic food establishment or foreign food 
 establishment, including the dates of operation if the 
 domestic food establishment or foreign food 
 establishment is seasonal.
 (C) The types of food processed or sold at each 
 domestic food establishment or, for foreign food 
 establishments selling food for consumption in the 
 United States, the specific food categories of that 
 food as listed under section 170.3(n) of title 21, Code 
 of Federal Regulations, or such other categories as the 
 Administrator may designate in guidance, action level, 
 or regulations for evaluating potential threats to food 
 protection.
 (D) The name, address, and 24-hour emergency 
 contact information of the United States distribution 
 agent for each domestic food establishment or foreign 
 food establishment, who shall maintain information on 
 the distribution of food, including lot information, 
 and wholesaler and retailer distribution.
 (E) An assurance that the registrant will notify 
 the Administrator of any change in the products, 
 function, or legal status of the domestic food 
 establishment or foreign food establishment (including 
 cessation of business activities) not later than 30 
 days after such change.
 (3) Procedure.--Upon receipt of a completed registration 
 described in paragraph (1), the Administrator shall notify the 
 registrant of the receipt of the registration, designate each 
 establishment as a category 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 food 
 establishment, and assign a registration number to each 
 domestic food establishment and foreign food establishment.
 (4) List.--The Administrator shall annually compile a list 
 of domestic food establishments and a list of foreign food 
 establishments that are registered under this section. The 
 Administrator may establish the manner of and any fees required 
 for reregistration and any circumstances by which either such 
 list may be shared with other governmental authorities. The 
 Administrator may remove from either list the name of any 
 establishment that fails to reregister, and such delisting 
 shall be treated as a suspension.
 (5) Disclosure exemption.--The disclosure requirements 
 under section 552 of title 5, United States Code, shall not 
 apply to--
 (A) the list compiled under paragraph (4); and
 (B) information derived from the list under 
 paragraph (4), to the extent that it discloses the 
 identity or location of a specific person.
 (6) Suspension of registration.--
 (A) In general.--The Administrator may suspend the 
 registration of a domestic food establishment or 
 foreign food establishment, including the facility of 
 an importer, for violation of a food safety law that is 
 either repeated or could result in serious adverse 
 health consequences or death to humans or animals.
 (B) Notice and opportunity for hearing.--The 
 Administrator shall provide notice of an intent to 
 suspend the registration of an establishment under this 
 paragraph to a registrant and provide the registrant 
 with an opportunity for an administrative hearing 
 within 3 days. The Administrator may issue a written 
 order of suspension following the hearing, if the 
 Administrator finds that a violation described in 
 subparagraph (A) has occurred.
 (C) Judicial review.--The issuance of an order of 
 suspension under subparagraph (B) shall be considered 
 to be a final agency action subject to judicial review 
 in accordance with the provisions of chapter 7 of title 
 5, United States Code.
 (7) Reinstatement.--A registration that is suspended under 
 this section may be reinstated based on a showing that adequate 
 process controls have been instituted that would prevent future 
 violations and there are assurances from the registrant that 
 the violations will not be repeated.
 (c) Transitional Provision.--During the 6-month period following 
the date of the enactment of this Act, a food establishment is deemed 
to be registered in accordance with this section if the establishment 
is registered under section 415 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
Act (21 U.S.C. 350d).
 (d) Repeal.--Effective at the end of the 6-month period following 
the date of the enactment of this Act, section 415 of the Federal Food, 
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 350d) is repealed.

SEC. 203. PREVENTIVE PROCESS CONTROLS TO REDUCE ADULTERATION OF FOOD.

 (a) In General.--The Administrator shall, upon the basis of best 
available public health, scientific, and technological data, promulgate 
regulations to ensure that food establishments carry out their 
responsibilities under the food safety law.
 (b) Regulations.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall promulgate regulations 
that require all food establishments, within time frames determined by 
the Administrator--
 (1) to adopt preventive process controls that--
 (A) reflect the standards and procedures recognized 
 by relevant authoritative bodies;
 (B) are adequate to protect the public health;
 (C) meet relevant regulatory and food safety 
 standards;
 (D) limit the presence and growth of contaminants 
 in food prepared in a food establishment using the best 
 reasonably available techniques and technologies; and
 (E) are tailored to the hazards and processes in 
 particular establishments or environments;
 (2) to establish a sanitation plan and program that meets 
 standards set by the Administrator;
 (3) to meet performance standards for hazardous 
 contamination established under section 204;
 (4) to implement recordkeeping to monitor compliance with 
 regulatory requirements;
 (5) to implement recordkeeping and labeling of all food and 
 food ingredients to facilitate their identification and 
 traceability in the event of a recall or market removal;
 (6) to implement product and environmental sampling at a 
 frequency and in a manner sufficient to ensure that process 
 controls are effective on an ongoing basis and that regulatory 
 standards are being met;
 (7) to label food intended for final processing outside 
 commercial food establishments with instructions for handling 
 and preparation for consumption that will destroy microbial 
 contaminants; and
 (8) to provide for agency access to records kept by the 
 food establishments and submission of copies of records to the 
 Administrator, as the Administrator determines appropriate.
 (c) Specific Hazard Controls.--The Administrator may require any 
person with responsibility for or control over food or food ingredients 
to adopt specific hazard controls, if such controls are needed to 
ensure the protection of the public health.

SEC. 204. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR CONTAMINANTS IN FOOD.

 (a) In General.--To protect the public health, the Administrator 
shall establish by guidance document, action level, or regulation and 
enforce performance standards that define, with respect to specific 
foods and contaminants in food, the level of food safety performance 
that a person responsible for producing, processing, or selling food 
shall meet.
 (b) Identification of Contaminants; Performance Standards.--
 (1) List of contaminants.--Not later than 6 months after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall 
 publish in the Federal Register a list of the contaminants in 
 foods that have the greatest adverse impact on public health in 
 terms of the number and severity of illnesses and number of 
 deaths associated with foods regulated under this Act. Where 
 appropriate, the Administrator shall indicate whether the risk 
 posed by a contaminant is generalized or specific to particular 
 foods or ingredients.
 (2) Performance standards.--
 (A) Establishment.--The Administrator shall 
 establish by guidance document, action level, or 
 regulation a performance standard for each contaminant 
 in the list under paragraph (1) at levels appropriate 
 to protect against the potential adverse health effects 
 of the contaminant.
 (B) Timing.--The Administrator shall establish a 
 performance standard under subparagraph (A) for each 
 contaminant in the list under paragraph (1)--
 (i) as soon as practicable; or
 (ii) in the case of a contaminant described 
 in subparagraph (C), by the date described in 
 such subparagraph.
 (C) Significant contaminants.--The list under 
 paragraph (1) (and any revision thereto) shall identify 
 the 5 most significant contaminants in the list (in 
 terms of the number and severity of illnesses and 
 number of deaths associated with foods regulated under 
 this Act). Not later than 3 years after a contaminant 
 is so identified, the Administrator shall promulgate a 
 performance standard under subparagraph (A) for the 
 contaminant.
 (3) Review; revision.--Not less than every 3 years, the 
 Administrator shall review and, if necessary, revise--
 (A) the list of contaminants under paragraph (1); 
 and
 (B) each performance standard established under 
 paragraph (2).
 (c) Performance Standards.--
 (1) In general.--The performance standards established 
 under this section may include--
 (A) health-based standards that set the level of a 
 contaminant that can safely and lawfully be present in 
 food;
 (B) zero tolerances, including any zero tolerance 
 performance standards in effect on the day before the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, when necessary to 
 protect against significant adverse health outcomes;
 (C) process standards, such as log reduction 
 criteria for cooked products, when sufficient to ensure 
 the safety of processed food; and
 (D) in the absence of data to support a performance 
 standard described in subparagraph (A), (B), or (C), 
 standards that define required performance on the basis 
 of reliable information on the best reasonably 
 achievable performance, using best available 
 technologies, interventions, and practices.
 (2) Best reasonably achievable performance standards.--In 
 developing best reasonably achievable performance standards 
 under paragraph (1)(D), the Administrator shall collect, or 
 contract for the collection of, data on current best practices 
 and food safety outcomes related to the contaminants and foods 
 in question, as the Administrator determines necessary.
 (3) Revocation by administrator.--All performance 
 standards, tolerances, action levels, or other similar 
 standards in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act 
 shall remain in effect until revised or revoked by the 
 Administrator.
 (d) Enforcement.--
 (1) In general.--In conjunction with the establishment of a 
 performance standard under this section, the Administrator 
 shall develop a statistically valid sampling program with the 
 stringency and frequency sufficient to independently monitor 
 whether food establishments are complying with the performance 
 standard and implement the program within 1 year of the 
 promulgation of the standard.
 (2) Inspections.--If the Administrator determines that a 
 food establishment fails to meet a standard promulgated under 
 this section, the Administrator shall, as appropriate--
 (A) detain, seize, or condemn food from the food 
 establishment under section 402;
 (B) order a recall of food from the food 
 establishment under section 403;
 (C) increase the inspection frequency for the food 
 establishment;
 (D) withdraw the mark of inspection from the food 
 establishment, if in use; or
 (E) take other appropriate enforcement action 
 concerning the food establishment, including withdrawal 
 of registration.
 (e) Newly Identified Contaminants.--Notwithstanding any other 
provision of this section, the Administrator shall establish interim 
performance standards for newly identified contaminants as necessary to 
protect the public health.

SEC. 205. INSPECTIONS OF FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS.

 (a) In General.--The Administrator shall establish an inspection 
program, which shall include statistically valid sampling of food and 
facilities to enforce performance standards. The inspection program 
shall be designed to determine if each food establishment--
 (1) is operated in a sanitary manner;
 (2) has continuous preventive control systems, 
 interventions, and processes in place to minimize or eliminate 
 contaminants in food;
 (3) is in compliance with applicable performance standards 
 established under section 204, and other regulatory 
 requirements;
 (4) is processing food that is not adulterated or 
 misbranded;
 (5) maintains records of process control plans under 
 section 203, and other records related to the processing, 
 sampling, and handling of food; and
 (6) is otherwise in compliance with the requirements of the 
 food safety law.
 (b) Establishment Categories and Inspection Frequencies.--The 
resource plan required under section 209, including the description of 
resources required to carry out inspections of food establishments, 
shall be based on the following categories and inspection frequencies, 
subject to subsections (c), (d), and (e):
 (1) Category 1 food establishments.--A category 1 food 
 establishment shall be subject to antemortem, postmortem, and 
 continuous inspection of each slaughter line during all 
 operating hours, and other inspection on a daily basis, 
 sufficient to verify that--
 (A) diseased animals are not offered for slaughter;
 (B) the food establishment has successfully 
 identified and removed from the slaughter line visibly 
 defective or contaminated carcasses, has avoided cross-
 contamination, and has destroyed or reprocessed such 
 carcasses in a manner acceptable to the Administrator; 
 and
 (C) applicable performance standards and other 
 provisions of the food safety law, including those 
 intended to eliminate or reduce pathogens, have been 
 satisfied.
 (2) Category 2 food establishments.--A category 2 food 
 establishment shall--
 (A) have ongoing verification that its processes 
 are controlled; and
 (B) be randomly inspected at least weekly.
 (3) Category 3 food establishments.--A category 3 food 
 establishment shall--
 (A) have ongoing verification that its processes 
 are controlled; and
 (B) be randomly inspected at least monthly.
 (4) Category 4 food establishments.--A category 4 food 
 establishment shall--
 (A) have ongoing verification that its processes 
 are controlled; and
 (B) be randomly inspected at least quarterly.
 (5) Category 5 food establishments.--A category 5 food 
 establishment shall--
 (A) have ongoing verification that its processes 
 are controlled; and
 (B) be randomly inspected at least annually.
 (c) Establishment of Inspection Procedures.--The Administrator 
shall establish procedures under which inspectors shall take random 
samples, photographs, and copies of records in food establishments.
 (d) Alternative Inspection Frequencies.--With respect to a 
subcategory of food establishment under category 2, 3, 4, or 5, the 
Administrator may establish alternative increasing or decreasing 
inspection frequencies for subcategories of food establishments or 
individual establishments, to foster risk-based allocation of 
resources. Before establishing an alternative inspection frequency for 
a subcategory of food establishments or individual establishments, the 
Administrator shall take into consideration the evidence described in 
paragraph (2)(D) and the overall record of compliance described in 
paragraph (2)(E) for such subcategory. In establishing alternative 
inspection frequencies under this subsection, the Administrator shall 
comply with the following criteria and procedures:
 (1) Subcategories of food establishments and their 
 alternative inspection frequencies shall be defined by 
 regulation, subject to paragraphs (2) and (3).
 (2) In defining subcategories of food establishments and 
 their alternative inspection frequencies under paragraphs (1) 
 and (2), the Administrator shall consider--
 (A) the nature of the food products being 
 processed, stored, or transported;
 (B) the manner in which food products are 
 processed, stored, or transported;
 (C) the inherent likelihood that the products will 
 contribute to the risk of food-borne illness;
 (D) the best available evidence concerning reported 
 illnesses associated with the foods processed, stored, 
 held, or transported in the proposed subcategory of 
 establishments; and
 (E) the overall record of compliance with food 
 safety law among establishments in the proposed 
 subcategory, including compliance with applicable 
 performance standards and the frequency of recalls.
 (3) The Administrator may adopt alternative inspection 
 frequencies for increased or decreased inspection for a 
 specific establishment and shall annually publish a list of 
 establishments subject to alternative inspections.
 (4) In adopting alternative inspection frequencies for a 
 specific establishment, the Administrator shall consider--
 (A) the criteria in paragraph (2), together with 
 any evidence submitted from the individual food 
 establishment supporting a request for an alternative 
 inspection frequency, including the establishment's 
 record for implementing effective preventive process 
 control systems;
 (B) whether products from the specific 
 establishment have been associated with a case or an 
 outbreak of food-borne illness; and
 (C) the establishment's record of compliance with 
 food safety law, including compliance with applicable 
 performance standards and the frequency of recalls.
 (e) Effective Date.--The inspection mandates shall go into effect 2 
years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (f) Maintenance and Inspection of Records.--
 (1) In general.--
 (A) Records.--A food establishment shall--
 (i) maintain such records as the 
 Administrator shall require by regulation, 
 including all records relating to the 
 processing, distributing, receipt, or 
 importation of any food; and
 (ii) permit the Administrator, in addition 
 to any authority transferred to the 
 Administrator pursuant to section 102, upon 
 presentation of appropriate credentials and at 
 reasonable times and in a reasonable manner, to 
 have access to and copy all records maintained 
 by or on behalf of such food establishment 
 representative in any format (including paper 
 or electronic) and at any location, that are 
 necessary to assist the Administrator--
 (I) to determine whether the food 
 is contaminated or not in compliance 
 with the food safety law; or
 (II) to track the food in commerce.
 (B) Required disclosure.--A food establishment 
 shall have an affirmative obligation to disclose to the 
 Administrator the results of testing or sampling of 
 food, equipment, or material in contact with food, that 
 is positive for any contaminant.
 (2) Maintenance of records.--The records in paragraph (1) 
 shall be maintained for a reasonable period of time, as 
 determined by the Administrator.
 (3) Requirements.--The records in paragraph (1) shall 
 include records describing--
 (A) the origin, receipt, delivery, sale, movement, 
 holding, and disposition of food or ingredients;
 (B) the identity and quantity of ingredients used 
 in the food;
 (C) the processing of the food;
 (D) the results of laboratory, sanitation, or other 
 tests performed on the food or in the food 
 establishment;
 (E) consumer complaints concerning the food or 
 packaging of the food;
 (F) the production codes, open date codes, and 
 locations of food production; and
 (G) other matters reasonably related to whether 
 food is adulterated or misbranded, or otherwise fails 
 to meet the requirements of this Act.
 (g) Protection of Sensitive Information.--
 (1) In general.--The Administrator shall develop and 
 maintain procedures to prevent the unauthorized disclosure of 
 any trade secret or commercially valuable confidential 
 information obtained by the Administrator.
 (2) Limitation.--The requirements under this subsection and 
 subsection (f) do not--
 (A) limit the authority of the Administrator to 
 inspect or copy records or to require the establishment 
 or maintenance of records under this Act;
 (B) have any legal effect on section 1905 of title 
 18, United States Code;
 (C) extend to any food recipe, financial data, 
 pricing data, or personnel data;
 (D) limit the public disclosure of distribution 
 records or other records related to food subject to a 
 voluntary or mandatory recall under section 403; or
 (E) limit the authority of the Administrator to 
 promulgate regulations to permit the sharing of data 
 with other governmental authorities.
 (h) Bribery of or Gifts to Inspector or Other Officers and 
Acceptance of Gifts.--Any person or agent or employee thereof that 
gives, pays, or offers, directly or indirectly, to the Administrator or 
any employee or other designee thereof authorized to perform any duty 
under the food safety law any money or other thing of value, with 
intent to influence the discharge of any duty under such law, shall be 
imprisoned for not more than 5 years, fined in accordance with title 
18, United States Code, or both. Any Administrator, employee, or other 
designee that solicits or accepts any money or other thing of value 
from any person, with intent to influence the discharge of any duty 
under the food safety law, shall be summarily discharged from office 
and imprisoned for not more than 5 years, fined in accordance with 
title 18, United States Code, or both.

SEC. 206. FOOD PRODUCTION FACILITIES.

 (a) Authorities.--In carrying out the duties of the Administrator 
and the purposes of this Act, the Administrator shall have the 
authority, with respect to food production facilities, to--
 (1) visit and inspect food production facilities in the 
 United States and in foreign countries to determine if they are 
 operating in compliance with the requirements of the food 
 safety law;
 (2) review food safety records as required to be kept by 
 the Administrator under section 210 and for other food safety 
 purposes;
 (3) set good practice standards to protect the public and 
 animal health and promote food safety;
 (4) conduct monitoring and surveillance of animals, plants, 
 products, or the environment, as appropriate; and
 (5) collect and maintain information relevant to public 
 health and farm practices.
 (b) Inspection of Records.--A food production facility shall permit 
the Administrator upon presentation of appropriate credentials and at 
reasonable times and in a reasonable manner, to have access to and 
ability to copy all records maintained by or on behalf of such food 
production establishment in any format (including paper or electronic) 
and at any location, that are necessary to assist the Administrator--
 (1) to determine whether the food is contaminated, 
 adulterated, or otherwise not in compliance with the food 
 safety law; or
 (2) to track the food in commerce.
 (c) Regulations.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Administrator, in consultation with the 
Secretary of Agriculture and representatives of State departments of 
agriculture, shall promulgate regulations to establish science-based 
minimum standards for the safe production of food by food production 
facilities. Such regulations shall--
 (1) consider all relevant hazards, including those 
 occurring naturally, and those that may be unintentionally or 
 intentionally introduced;
 (2) require each food production facility to have a written 
 food safety plan that describes the likely hazards and 
 preventive controls implemented to address those hazards;
 (3) include, with respect to growing, harvesting, sorting, 
 and storage operations, minimum standards related to fertilizer 
 use, nutrients, hygiene, packaging, temperature controls, 
 animal encroachment, and water;
 (4) include, with respect to animals raised for food, 
 minimum standards related to the animal's health, feed, and 
 environment which bear on the safety of food for human 
 consumption;
 (5) provide a reasonable period of time for compliance, 
 taking into account the needs of small businesses for 
 additional time to comply;
 (6) provide for coordination of education and enforcement 
 activities by State and local officials, as designated by the 
 Governors of the respective States; and
 (7) include a description of the variance process under 
 subsection (d) and the types of permissible variances which the 
 Administrator may grant under such process.
 (d) Variances.--States and foreign countries that export produce 
intended for consumption in the United States may request from the 
Administrator variances from the requirements of the regulations under 
subsection (c). A request shall--
 (1) be in writing;
 (2) describe the reasons the variance is necessary;
 (3) describe the procedures, processes, and practices that 
 will be followed under the variance to ensure produce is not 
 adulterated; and
 (4) contain any other information required by the 
 Administrator.
 (e) Approval or Disapproval of Variances.--If the Administrator 
determines after review of a request under subsection (d) that the 
requested variance provides equivalent protections to those promulgated 
under subsection (c), the Administrator may approve the request. The 
Administrator shall deny a request if it is--
 (1) not sufficiently detailed to permit a determination;
 (2) fails to cite sufficient grounds for allowing a 
 variance; or
 (3) does not provide reasonable assurances that the produce 
 will not be adulterated.
 (f) Enforcement.--The Administrator may coordinate with the agency 
or department designated by the Governor of each State to perform 
activities to ensure compliance with this section.
 (g) Imported Produce.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall promulgate regulations 
to ensure that raw agricultural commodities and minimally processed 
produce imported into the United States can meet standards for food 
safety, inspection, labeling, and consumer protection that are at least 
equal to standards applicable to such commodities and produce produced 
in the United States.

SEC. 207. FEDERAL AND STATE COOPERATION.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Authority.--The Administrator shall strengthen and 
 expand food-borne illness surveillance systems to--
 (A) inform and evaluate efforts to prevent food-
 borne illness; and
 (B) enhance the identification and investigation 
 of, and response to, food-borne illness outbreaks.
 (2) Food-borne illness outbreak.--For purposes of this 
 section, the term ``foodborne illness outbreak'' means the 
 occurrence of 2 or more cases of a similar illness resulting 
 from the ingestion of a common food.
 (b) Food-Borne Illness Surveillance Systems.--The Administrator, in 
collaboration with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
shall enhance food-borne illness surveillance systems to improve the 
collection, analysis, reporting, and usefulness of data on food-borne 
illnesses by--
 (1) coordinating food-borne illness surveillance systems, 
 including complaint systems, in order to--
 (A) produce better information on illnesses 
 associated with foods, including sources and risk 
 factors for infections by emerging pathogens; and
 (B) facilitate sharing of data acquisition and 
 findings on a more timely basis among governmental 
 agencies, including the Food Safety Administration, the 
 Food Safety and Inspection Service, and State and local 
 agencies, and with the public;
 (2) augmenting such systems to improve attribution of a 
 food-borne illness outbreak to a specific food;
 (3) developing improved epidemiological tools for obtaining 
 quality exposure data, microbiological methods for classifying 
 cases and detecting clusters, and improved tracebacks to 
 rapidly and specifically identify contaminated food products;
 (4) expanding capacity of such systems for implementation 
 of fingerprinting strategies for food-borne infectious agents, 
 including parasites and hepatitis A, in order to increase 
 pathogen discovery efforts to identify new or rarely documented 
 causes of food-borne illness;
 (5) allowing timely public access to de-identified, 
 aggregate surveillance data;
 (6) at least annually, publishing current reports on 
 findings from such systems;
 (7) exploring establishment of registries for long-term 
 case follow-up to better characterize late complications of 
 food-borne illness;
 (8) increasing participation in national networks of public 
 health and food regulatory agencies and laboratories to--
 (A) allow public health officials at the Federal, 
 State, and local levels to share and accept laboratory 
 analytic findings; and
 (B) identify food-borne illness outbreaks and 
 attribute such outbreaks to specific foods through 
 submission of standardized molecular subtypes (also 
 known as ``fingerprints'') of food-borne illness 
 pathogens to a centralized database; and
 (9) establishing a flexible mechanism for rapidly 
 supporting scientific research by academic centers of 
 excellence, which may include staff representing academic 
 clinical researchers, food microbiologists, animal and plant 
 disease specialists, ecologists, and other allied disciplines.
 (c) Improving State Surveillance Capacity.--The Administrator, in 
collaboration with the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, shall improve capacity for surveillance in the States by--
 (1) supporting outbreak investigations with needed 
 specialty expertise, including epidemiological, 
 microbiological, and environmental expertise, to assist 
 identification of underlying common sources and contributing 
 factors;
 (2) identifying, disseminating, and supporting 
 implementation of model practices at the State and local level 
 for--
 (A) facilitating rapid shipment of clinical 
 isolates from clinical laboratories to State public 
 health laboratories to avoid delays in testing;
 (B) conducting rapid and more standardized 
 interviewing of cases associated with major enteric 
 pathogens, including prior to designation of clusters 
 as food-borne illness outbreaks;
 (C) conducting and evaluating rapid and 
 standardized interviews of healthy control persons;
 (D) sharing information on a timely basis--
 (i) within public health and food 
 regulatory agencies;
 (ii) among such agencies;
 (iii) with the food industry;
 (iv) with healthcare providers; and
 (v) with the public;
 (3) developing, regularly updating, and disseminating 
 training curricula on food-borne illness surveillance 
 investigations, including standard sampling methods and 
 laboratory procedures;
 (4) integrating new molecular diagnostic tools for 
 parasites into web-based consultation services for parasitic 
 infections to accelerate the identification of these food-borne 
 infectious agents;
 (5) supporting research to develop and deploy new subtyping 
 methods for salmonella, E. coli, campylobacter, and other 
 pathogens, to increase the speed and accuracy of diagnoses;
 (6) determining minimum core competencies for public health 
 laboratories, and developing self-evaluation and proficiency-
 testing tools for such laboratories;
 (7) facilitating regional public health laboratory 
 partnerships to leverage resources, including equipment and 
 physical space, and increase surge capacity;
 (8) providing technical assistance, which may include the 
 detailing of officers and employees of the Administrator, to 
 State and local public health and food regulatory agencies;
 (9) partnering with the Food Safety Administration to 
 increase communication, coordination, and integration of food-
 borne illness surveillance and outbreak investigation 
 activities; and
 (10) developing and periodically updating response and 
 interview procedures so that such procedures are standardized 
 and tested.
 (d) Program Activities.--The Administrator shall carry out 
activities to support core food safety functions of State and local 
public health laboratories, including--
 (1) establishing fellowships, stipends, and scholarships to 
 address critical workforce shortages;
 (2) training and coordination of State and local personnel;
 (3) establishing partnerships between private and public 
 laboratories to facilitate sharing of positive enteric 
 specimens and improve surge capacity;
 (4) strengthening capacity to participate in existing or 
 new food-borne illness surveillance systems; and
 (5) purchasing and maintaining data systems hardware and 
 software and laboratory equipment.
 (e) Plan To Improve Food Safety Capacity at the State and Local 
Level.--
 (1) Goals.--The Administrator shall leverage and enhance 
 the food safety capacity and roles of State and local agencies 
 and integrate State and local agencies as fully as possible 
 into national food safety efforts, in order to achieve the 
 following goals:
 (A) Improve food-borne illness outbreak response 
 and containment.
 (B) Improve the contribution of food-borne illness 
 surveillance and investigation to the prevention of 
 food-borne illness.
 (C) Strengthen oversight of food safety at the 
 retail level.
 (D) Strengthen the capacity of State and local 
 agencies to carry out inspections and enforce safety 
 standards in food processing establishments, as part of 
 a national strategy and plan to provide an adequate 
 level of inspection and achieve compliance with safety 
 standards in such establishments.
 (E) Make more effective use of the Nation's 
 combined food safety resources to reduce the burden of 
 food-borne illness.
 (2) Survey.--In preparation for development of the plan 
 required by paragraph (3), the Administrator shall, not later 
 than 1 year after the date of enactment of this part, complete 
 a survey of State and local capacities, and needs for 
 enhancement, with respect to--
 (A) staffing levels and expertise available to 
 perform food safety functions;
 (B) laboratory capacity to support surveillance, 
 outbreak response, inspection, and enforcement 
 activities;
 (C) information systems to support data management 
 and sharing of food safety information among State and 
 local agencies and with counterparts at the Federal 
 level;
 (D) legal authorities of State and local agencies 
 to support the roles of such agencies in a national 
 food safety system; and
 (E) organizational arrangements for managing and 
 coordinating food safety activities.
 (3) Plan.--Taking into account the goals established in 
 paragraph (1), results from the survey required in paragraph 
 (2), and consultations with State and local agencies and other 
 food safety stakeholders, the Administrator shall, not later 
 than 2 years after the date of enactment of this part, develop, 
 publish, and begin implementation of a plan that includes the 
 following elements:
 (A) Criteria for assessing the adequacy of State 
 and local capacity to perform food safety functions as 
 part of a national food safety system.
 (B) Priorities for enhancing the capacity of State 
 and local agencies.
 (C) Action plans for meeting the highest priority 
 capacity needs, including budget requirements and 
 financing plans that take into account Federal, State, 
 and local resources.
 (D) Improved coordination and information flow 
 among Federal, State, and local agencies to strengthen 
 food-borne illness surveillance, outbreak response, and 
 investigation and to ensure that agencies at all levels 
 have the information on origins and causes of food-
 borne illness that such agencies need to plan 
 preventive measures.
 (E) Integration of the inspection and compliance 
 programs in food processing establishments of the Food 
 Safety Administration and State and local agencies, 
 including--
 (i) joint planning and priority setting to 
 ensure that the collective effort has the 
 greatest possible impact on achieving 
 compliance with food safety standards and 
 reducing food-borne illness;
 (ii) elimination of barriers to the free 
 flow of information among the Food Safety 
 Administration and State and local agencies 
 with respect to inspection and compliance 
 programs and integration of State and Federal 
 inspection and laboratory data systems;
 (iii) steps to expand, and ensure the vigor 
 and consistency of, State inspection of 
 processing establishments under contract to the 
 Food Safety Administration; and
 (iv) reliance by the Food Safety 
 Administration on State inspection and food 
 sample analyses in Federal enforcement 
 activities.
 (4) Food safety capacity building grants.--The 
 Administrator shall make grants to State and local agencies to 
 enhance State and local food safety capacity and programs and 
 support achievement of the goals established in paragraph (1). 
 In awarding such grants, the Administrator shall take into 
 account the criteria and priorities established by the 
 Administrator under paragraph (3).
 (5) Report to congress.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 date of enactment of this part, and on an annual basis 
 thereafter, the Administrator shall submit to Congress a report 
 that describes--
 (A) progress made in implementing this section, 
 including any obstacles to such implementation; and
 (B) any legislative recommendations or additional 
 resources needed for full implementation.
 (f) Service Agreements.--
 (1) In general.--The Administrator may, under agreements 
 entered into with Federal, State, or local agencies, use on a 
 reimbursable basis or otherwise the qualified personnel and 
 services of those agencies in carrying out this Act.
 (2) Training.--Agreements with a State under this 
 subsection shall provide for training of State employees.
 (3) Maintenance of agreements.--The Administrator shall 
 maintain any agreement described in paragraph (1) that is in 
 effect on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act 
 until the Administrator evaluates such agreement and determines 
 whether to maintain or substitute such agreement.
 (4) Commissioning.--Where necessary and appropriate to 
 fulfill the provisions of this Act or other food safety law, 
 the Administrator shall, as part of any service agreement, 
 commission qualified State and local regulatory officials and 
 inspectors to assist the Administrator in carrying out the food 
 safety law and accord such commissioned officials and 
 inspectors access to information in possession of the 
 Administrator as if they were Federal employees.

SEC. 208. IMPORTS.

 (a) In General.--All imported food under this Act shall meet 
requirements for food safety, inspection, labeling, and consumer 
protection that are at least equal to those applicable to food grown, 
manufactured, processed, packed, or held for consumption in the United 
States.
 (b) Certification System.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall establish a system 
under which food products offered for importation into the United 
States shall be certified by the accredited foreign government in the 
country of export or by an accredited certifying agent meeting all 
applicable standards under this section.
 (1) Category 1, 2, and 3 food establishments shall secure 
 certification of products from the accredited foreign 
 government in the country where the products are produced and 
 must enter the United States through ports designated by the 
 Administrator.
 (2) Category 4 and 5 food establishments shall be certified 
 either by--
 (A) the accredited foreign government in the 
 country where the products are produced; or
 (B) a certifying agent that has been accredited 
 under subsection (c).
 (3) Beginning not later than 5 years after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, food from category 4 and 5 food 
 establishments that is not certified by an accredited entity 
 described in subsection (c) shall not enter the United States 
 except through ports of entry that are located in a 
 metropolitan area with an accredited food testing laboratory.
 (c) Certification Standard.--
 (1) In general.--A foreign government or third party agent 
 requesting accreditation to certify food for entry into the 
 United States shall demonstrate, in a manner determined 
 appropriate by the Administrator, that food produced under the 
 supervision of the foreign government or third party agent, 
 respectively, can meet standards for food safety, inspection, 
 labeling, and consumer protection that are at least equal to 
 standards applicable to food produced in the United States.
 (2) Request by foreign government.--Prior to accrediting a 
 foreign government, the Administrator shall--
 (A) review and audit the food safety program of the 
 requesting foreign government (including all statutes, 
 regulations, and inspection authority); and
 (B) determine that the exporting country--
 (i) administers a food control program that 
 requires food exporters to implement hazard 
 control measures for physical, chemical, and 
 biological contaminants;
 (ii) ensures sanitary operations of 
 facilities;
 (iii) utilizes testing and verification 
 programs; and
 (iv) administers an effective enforcement 
 program.
 (3) Request by a certifying agent.--Prior to accrediting a 
 certifying agent, the Administrator shall--
 (A) review the training and qualifications of 
 auditors and other employees used by the agent;
 (B) ensure that any such auditors have completed 
 such training as may be required by the Administrator 
 for the conduct of food safety inspections; and
 (C) conduct reviews of internal systems and such 
 other investigation as the Administrator deems 
 necessary to determine that the certifying agent is 
 capable of auditing food establishments--
 (i) to assess the adequacy of systems and 
 standards in use; and
 (ii) to ensure that food approved by the 
 agent for import to the United States meets the 
 requirements of this Act.
 (4) Certification to accompany each shipment.--As a 
 condition of accrediting any foreign government or certifying 
 agent, such government or agent shall agree to issue a written 
 and electronic certification to accompany each shipment 
 intended for import to the United States from any food 
 establishment which the government or agent certifies, subject 
 to requirements set forth by the Administrator.
 (d) Audits; Inspections.--Following any accreditation under 
subsection (c), the Administrator may at any time--
 (1) conduct an on-site audit of any food establishment 
 registered under section 202, with or without the certifying 
 agent; or
 (2) require a certifying agent to submit an onsite audit 
 report and any other reports or documents which the agent 
 requires as part of the audit process, including documentation 
 that the food establishment is in compliance with registration 
 requirements and prior notice requirements for food imported to 
 the United States.
 (e) Limitation.--A foreign government or other certifying agent 
accredited by the Administrator to certify food for import to the 
United States under this section may certify only the food products or 
food categories for importation to the United States that are specified 
in the grant of accreditation.
 (f) Withdrawal of Accreditation.--The Administrator may withdraw 
accreditation from a foreign government or certifying agent--
 (1) if food approved by the foreign government or 
 certifying agent is linked to an outbreak of human illness;
 (2) following an investigation and finding by the 
 Administrator that the programs of the foreign government, or a 
 foreign food establishment certified by the certifying agent, 
 are no longer equal to those applied to food grown, 
 manufactured, processed, packed, or held in the United States; 
 or
 (3) following a refusal to allow United States officials to 
 conduct such audits and investigations as may be necessary to 
 ensure continued compliance with the requirements of this 
 section.
 (g) Renewal of Accreditation.--The Administrator shall audit 
foreign governments and certifying agents whenever needed, but no less 
than once every 3 years, to ensure the continued compliance with the 
requirements set forth in this section. Renewal of accreditation shall 
occur following each satisfactory audit.
 (h) Required Routine Inspection.--The Administrator shall routinely 
inspect food before or at entry into the United States to ensure 
ongoing compliance with food safety law and where appropriate, as part 
of the audit of any certifying entity.
 (i) Enforcement.--The Administrator may--
 (1) deny importation of food from any foreign country if 
 the government of such country does not permit United States 
 officials to enter the foreign country to conduct such audits 
 and inspections as may be necessary to fulfill requirements 
 under this section;
 (2) deny importation of food from any foreign country or 
 foreign food establishment that does not consent to a timely 
 investigation by the Administration when food from that foreign 
 country or foreign food establishment is linked to a food-borne 
 illness outbreak or is otherwise found to be adulterated or 
 misbranded;
 (3) promulgate regulations to carry out the purposes of 
 this section, including setting terms and conditions for the 
 destruction of products that fail to meet the requirements of 
 this Act; and
 (4) establish such fees as are necessary to carry out the 
 implementation of the accreditation and inspection programs 
 required under this section.
 (j) Detention and Seizure.--Any food imported for consumption in 
the United States may be detained, seized, or condemned pursuant to 
section 402 or recalled pursuant to section 403.
 (k) Certifying Agents.--Entities eligible for accreditation as a 
certifying agent under subsection (c) may include--
 (1) a State or regional food authority; or
 (2) a foreign or domestic cooperative that aggregates the 
 products of growers or processors for importation.
 (l) Avoiding Conflicts of Interest With Certifying Agents.--
 (1) In general.--To be eligible for accreditation under 
 subsection (c), a certifying agent shall--
 (A) not be owned, managed, or controlled by any 
 person that owns or operates an establishment whose 
 products are to be certified by such agent;
 (B) have procedures to ensure against the use, in 
 carrying out audits of food establishments under this 
 section, of any officer or employee of such agent that 
 has a financial conflict of interest regarding an 
 establishment whose products are to be certified by 
 such agent; and
 (C) annually make available to the Secretary, 
 disclosures of the extent to which such agent, and the 
 officers and employees of such agent, have maintained 
 compliance with subparagraphs (A) and (B) relating to 
 financial conflicts of interest.
 (2) Regulations.--The Secretary shall promulgate 
 regulations not later than 18 months after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act to ensure that there are protections 
 against conflicts of interest between a certifying agent and 
 the establishments whose products are to be certified by such 
 agent. Such regulations shall include--
 (A) requiring that domestic audits performed under 
 this section be unannounced;
 (B) a structure, including timing and public 
 disclosure, for fees paid by food establishments to 
 certifying agents to decrease the potential for 
 conflicts of interest; and
 (C) appropriate limits on financial affiliations 
 between a certifying agent and any person that owns or 
 operates an establishment whose products are to be 
 certified by such agent.

SEC. 209. RESOURCE PLAN.

 (a) In General.--The Administrator shall prepare and update 
annually a resource plan describing the resources required, in the best 
professional judgment of the Administrator, to develop and fully 
implement the national food safety program established under this Act.
 (b) Contents of Plan.--The resource plan shall--
 (1) describe quantitatively the personnel, financial, and 
 other resources required to carry out the inspection of food 
 establishments under section 205 and other requirements of this 
 Act;
 (2) allocate inspection resources in a manner reflecting 
 the distribution of risk and opportunities to reduce risk 
 across the food supply to the extent feasible based on the best 
 available information, and subject to section 205; and
 (3) describe the personnel, facilities, equipment, and 
 other resources needed to carry out inspection and other 
 oversight activities, at a total resource level equal to at 
 least 50 percent of the resources required to carry out 
 inspections in food establishments under section 205 and food 
 production facilities under section 206--
 (A) in foreign establishments and production 
 facilities; and
 (B) at the point of importation.
 (c) Grants.--The resource plan shall include recommendations for 
funding to provide grants to States and local governments to carry out 
food safety activities and inspections of food establishments and food 
production facilities and include resources to audit such programs.
 (d) Submission of Plan.--The Administrator shall submit annually to 
the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate, the Committee on 
Appropriations of the House of Representatives, and other relevant 
committees of Congress, the resource plan required under this section.

SEC. 210. TRACEBACK REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) In General.--The Administrator, in order to protect the public 
health, shall establish a national traceability system that enables the 
Administrator to retrieve the history, use, and location of an article 
of food through all stages of its production, processing, and 
distribution.
 (b) Applicability.--Traceability requirements under this section 
shall apply to food from food production facilities, food 
establishments, and foreign food establishments.
 (c) Requirements.--
 (1) Standards.--The Administrator shall establish standards 
 for the type of information, format, and timeframe for food 
 production facilities and food establishments to submit records 
 to aid the Administrator in effectively retrieving the history, 
 use, and location of an item of food.
 (2) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
 construed as requiring the Administrator to prescribe a 
 specific technology for the maintenance of records or labeling 
 of food to carry out the requirements of this section.
 (3) Availability of records for inspection.--Any records 
 that are required by the Administrator under this section shall 
 be available for inspection by the Administrator upon oral or 
 written request.
 (4) Demonstration of ability.--The Administrator, during 
 any inspection, may require a food establishment to demonstrate 
 its ability to trace an item of food and submit the information 
 in the format and timeframe required under paragraph (1).
 (d) Relationship to Other Requirements.--
 (1) Consistency with existing statutes and regulations.--To 
 the extent possible, the Administrator should establish the 
 national traceability system under this section to be 
 consistent with existing statutes and regulations that require 
 recordkeeping or labeling for identifying the origin or history 
 of food or food animals.
 (2) Existing laws.--For purposes of this subsection, the 
 Administrator should review the following:
 (A) Country of origin labeling requirements of 
 subtitle D of the Agricultural Marketing Act of 1946 (7 
 U.S.C. 1638 et seq.).
 (B) The Perishable Agricultural Commodities Act of 
 1930 (7 U.S.C. 499a-t).
 (C) Country of origin labeling requirements of 
 section 304 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 U.S.C. Sec. 
 1340).
 (D) The National Animal Identification System as 
 authorized by the Animal Health Protection Act of 2002 
 (7 U.S.C. 8301 et seq.).
 (3) Certain requirements.--Nothing contained in this 
 section prevents or interferes with implementation of the 
 country of origin labeling requirements of subtitle D of the 
 Agricultural Marketing Act of 1946 (7 U.S.C. 1638 et seq.).

SEC. 211. ACCREDITED LABORATORIES.

 (a) Establishment of Program.--The Administrator shall establish a 
program for accrediting laboratories to perform sampling and testing 
for purposes of this Act. Such program shall include--
 (1) standards for appropriate sampling and analytical 
 procedures;
 (2) training and experience qualification levels for 
 individuals who conduct sampling and analysis;
 (3) annual onsite visits to audit the performance of an 
 accredited laboratory; and
 (4) such additional requirements as the Administrator 
 determines to be appropriate.
 (b) Requirements.--To be accredited under this section, a 
laboratory shall--
 (1) prepare and submit an application for accreditation to 
 the Administrator;
 (2) meet required tests and standards established by the 
 Administrator; and
 (3) comply with such terms and conditions as are determined 
 necessary by the Administrator.
 (c) Accrediting Bodies.--The Administrator may approve State 
agencies or private, nonprofit entities as accrediting bodies to act on 
behalf of the Administrator in accrediting laboratories under this 
section. The Administrator shall--
 (1) in making such approvals--
 (A) oversee and review the performance of any 
 accrediting body acting on behalf of the Administrator 
 to ensure that such accrediting body is in compliance 
 with the requirements of this section; and
 (B) have the right to obtain from an accrediting 
 body acting on behalf of the Administrator and from any 
 laboratory that may be certified by such a body all 
 records and materials that may be necessary for the 
 oversight and review required by subparagraph (A);
 (2) reevaluate accreditation bodies approved under 
 paragraph (1) whenever--
 (A) the Administrator determines a laboratory 
 accredited by the accrediting body is no longer in 
 compliance with this section;
 (B) the Administrator determines the accrediting 
 body is no longer in compliance with the requirements 
 of this section; or
 (C) no less than once every 5 years; and
 (3) promptly revoke the approval of any accreditation body 
 found not to be in compliance with the requirements of this 
 section.
 (d) Revocation of Accreditation.--The Administrator shall revoke 
the accreditation of any laboratory that fails to meet the requirements 
this section.

 TITLE III--RESEARCH AND EDUCATION

SEC. 301. PUBLIC HEALTH ASSESSMENT SYSTEM.

 (a) In General.--The Administrator, acting in coordination with the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and with 
food safety and research programs of the Department of Agriculture, 
shall--
 (1) identify on an ongoing basis the priorities for 
 collection of epidemiological data and for other food safety 
 research and data collection that are most important to 
 implementing the food safety law and reducing the public health 
 burden of food-borne illness;
 (2) have full access for purposes of implementing the food 
 safety law to the applicable data and data systems of the 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, including data made 
 available to the Centers by a State;
 (3) provide appropriate support and input on the design and 
 implementation by the Centers for Disease Control and 
 Prevention and the States of an active surveillance system that 
 provides information on the incidence and causes of food-borne 
 illness which is timely, detailed, and representative of the 
 population of the United States;
 (4) based on data and information obtained from the Centers 
 for Disease Control and Prevention, the States, and other 
 sources, assess the incidence, distribution, public health 
 impact, and causes of human illness in the United States 
 associated with the consumption of food, and conduct research 
 and analysis to devise effective and feasible interventions to 
 reduce food-borne illness;
 (5) maintain a state-of-the-art DNA matching system and 
 epidemiological system dedicated to food-borne illness 
 identification, outbreaks, and containment; and
 (6) utilize surveillance data created by means of 
 monitoring and statistical studies conducted as part of its own 
 inspection.
 (b) Public Health Sampling.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the enactment 
 of this Act, the Administrator shall establish guidelines for a 
 sampling system under which the Administrator shall take and 
 analyze samples of food--
 (A) to assist the Administrator in carrying out 
 this Act; and
 (B) to assess the nature, frequency of occurrence, 
 and quantities of contaminants in food.
 (2) Requirements.--The sampling system described in 
 paragraph (1) shall provide--
 (A) statistically valid monitoring, including 
 market-based studies, on the nature, frequency of 
 occurrence, and quantities of contaminants in food 
 available to consumers; and
 (B) at the request of the Administrator, such other 
 information, including analysis of monitoring and 
 verification samples, as the Administrator determines 
 may be useful in assessing the occurrence of 
 contaminants in food.
 (c) Assessment of Health Hazards.--
 (1) In general.--Through the surveillance system and 
 analyses referred to in subsection (a) and the sampling system 
 described in subsection (b), the Administrator shall--
 (A) rank food categories based on the hazard to 
 human health presented by the food category and 
 specific chemical and microbiological hazards 
 associated with foods in those categories;
 (B) identify appropriate industry and regulatory 
 approaches to minimize hazards in the food supply; and
 (C) assess the conditions affecting the likelihood 
 that emerging pathogens and diseases, including 
 zoonosis, will affect the safety of the food supply and 
 possible strategies for minimizing the potential risk 
 to public health associated with emerging pathogens and 
 diseases.
 (2) Components of analysis.--The analysis under subsection 
 (b)(1) may include--
 (A) a comparison of the safety of commercial 
 processing with the health hazards associated with food 
 that is harvested for recreational or subsistence 
 purposes and prepared noncommercially;
 (B) a comparison of the safety of food that is 
 domestically processed with the health hazards 
 associated with food that is processed outside the 
 United States;
 (C) a description of contamination originating from 
 handling practices that occur prior to or after the 
 sale of food to consumers; and
 (D) use of comparative risk assessments.

SEC. 302. PUBLIC EDUCATION AND ADVISORY SYSTEM.

 (a) Public Education.--
 (1) In general.--The Administrator, in cooperation with 
 private and public organizations, including the cooperative 
 extension services and building on the efforts of appropriate 
 State and local entities, shall establish a national public 
 education program on food safety.
 (2) Requirements.--The program shall provide--
 (A) information to the public regarding Federal 
 standards and best practices, and promotion of public 
 awareness and understanding of those standards and 
 practices;
 (B) information for health professionals--
 (i) to improve diagnosis and treatment of 
 food-related illness; and
 (ii) to advise individuals at special risk 
 for food-related illnesses; and
 (C) such other information or advice, including on 
 safe food handling practices, to consumers and other 
 persons as the Administrator determines will promote 
 the purposes of this Act.
 (b) Health Advisories.--The Administrator, in consultation with 
other Federal departments and agencies as the Administrator determines 
necessary, shall work with the States and other appropriate entities--
 (1) to develop and distribute regional and national 
 advisories concerning food safety;
 (2) to develop standardized formats for written and 
 broadcast advisories;
 (3) to incorporate State and local advisories into the 
 national public education program established under subsection 
 (a); and
 (4) to present prompt, specific information regarding food 
 found to pose a threat to the public health, including by 
 identifying the retailers and food establishments where such 
 food has been sold.

SEC. 303. RESEARCH.

 (a) In General.--The Administrator shall conduct research to carry 
out this Act, including studies to--
 (1) improve sanitation and food safety practices in the 
 processing of food;
 (2) develop improved techniques to monitor and inspect 
 food;
 (3) develop efficient, rapid, and sensitive methods to 
 detect contaminants in food;
 (4) determine the sources of contamination of contaminated 
 food;
 (5) develop food consumption data;
 (6) identify ways that animal production techniques could 
 improve the safety of the food supply;
 (7) draw upon research and educational programs that exist 
 at the State and local level;
 (8) utilize the DNA matching system and other processes to 
 identify and control pathogens;
 (9) address common and emerging zoonotic diseases;
 (10) develop methods to reduce or destroy harmful pathogens 
 before, during, and after processing;
 (11) analyze the incidence of antibiotic resistence as it 
 pertains to the food supply and develop new methods to reduce 
 the transfer of antibiotic resistance to humans; and
 (12) conduct other research that supports the purposes of 
 this Act.
 (b) Contract Authority.--The Administrator may enter into contracts 
and agreements with any State, university, Federal Government agency, 
or person to carry out this section.

SEC. 304. WORKING GROUP ON IMPROVING FOODBORNE ILLNESS SURVEILLANCE.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, 
the Administrator shall establish a diverse working group of experts 
and stakeholders from Federal, State, and local food safety and health 
agencies, the food industry, consumer organizations, and academia. Such 
working group shall provide the Administrator, through at least annual 
meetings of the working group and an annual public report, advice and 
recommendations on an ongoing and regular basis regarding the 
improvement of food-borne illness surveillance, including advice and 
recommendations on--
 (1) the priority needs of regulatory agencies, the food 
 industry, and consumers for information and analysis on food-
 borne illness and its causes that can be used to prevent food-
 borne illness;
 (2) opportunities to improve the effectiveness of 
 initiatives at the Federal, State, and local levels, including 
 coordination and integration of activities among Federal 
 agencies, and between the Federal, State, and local levels of 
 government;
 (3) improvement in the timeliness and depth of access by 
 regulatory and health agencies, the food industry, academic 
 researchers, and consumers to food-borne illness surveillance 
 data collected by government agencies at all levels, including 
 data compiled by the Centers for Disease Control and 
 Prevention;
 (4) key barriers to improvement in food-borne illness 
 surveillance and its utility for preventing food-borne illness 
 at Federal, State, and local levels; and
 (5) specific actions to reduce barriers to such 
 improvement, implement the working group's recommendations, 
 with measurable objectives and timelines, and identification of 
 resource and staffing needs.

SEC. 305. CAREER-SPANNING TRAINING FOR FOOD INSPECTORS.

 (a) In General.--The Administrator shall make a grant to an entity 
described in subsection (c) to provide training to Federal, State, and 
local food inspectors.
 (b) Use of Funds.--The Administrator may make a grant under this 
section to an applicant only if the applicant agrees to use the grant 
to provide regular, standardized, graduated, career-spanning training, 
based on a curriculum developed by the Association of Food and Drug 
Officials, to Federal, State, and local food inspectors.
 (c) Eligible Entity.--An entity described in this subsection is an 
entity that--
 (1) is described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3));
 (2) has the capability to train not less than 1,000 food 
 inspectors per year; and
 (3) offers both on-site and off-site training for food 
 inspectors.

SEC. 306. FOOD-BORNE ILLNESS HEALTH REGISTRY.

 (a) Purpose.--The purpose of the registry under subsection (b) is 
to stimulate research on the trends, sources, health outcomes, and 
preventive strategies related to food-borne disease.
 (b) Registry.--For the purpose described in subsection (a), the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the Director of 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall develop and 
maintain a registry, to be known as the Food-Borne Illness Health 
Registry, consisting of data on the trends, sources, health outcomes, 
and preventive strategies related to food-borne disease.

SEC. 307. STUDY ON FEDERAL RESOURCES.

 Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Comptroller General of the United States shall complete a 
study on the Federal resources being dedicated to food-borne illness 
and food safety research and submit a report on the results of such 
study to the Congress.

 TITLE IV--ENFORCEMENT

SEC. 401. PROHIBITED ACTS.

 It is prohibited--
 (1) to manufacture, introduce, deliver for introduction, or 
 receive in interstate commerce any food that is adulterated, 
 misbranded, or otherwise unsafe;
 (2) to adulterate or misbrand any food in interstate 
 commerce;
 (3) for a food establishment or foreign food establishment 
 to fail to register under section 202, or to operate without a 
 valid registration;
 (4) to refuse to permit access to a food establishment or 
 food production facility for the inspection and copying of a 
 record as required under sections 205(f) and 206(a);
 (5) to fail to establish or maintain any record or to make 
 any report as required under sections 205(f) and 206(b);
 (6) to refuse to permit entry to or inspection of a food 
 establishment as required under section 205;
 (7) to fail to provide to the Administrator the results of 
 testing or sampling of food, equipment, or material in contact 
 with food, that is positive for any contaminant under section 
 205(f)(1)(B);
 (8) to fail to comply with a provision, regulation, or 
 order of the Administrator under section 202, 203, 204, 206, or 
 208;
 (9) to slaughter an animal that is capable for use in whole 
 or in part as human food at a food establishment processing any 
 food for commerce, except in compliance with the food safety 
 law;
 (10) to transfer food in violation of an administrative 
 detention order under section 402 or to remove or alter a 
 required mark or label identifying the food as detained;
 (11) to fail to comply with a recall or other order under 
 section 403; or
 (12) to otherwise violate the food safety law.

SEC. 402. FOOD DETENTION, SEIZURE, AND CONDEMNATION.

 (a) Administrative Detention of Food.--
 (1) Expanded authority.--The Administrator shall have 
 authority under section 304 of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
 Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 334) to administratively detain and 
 seize any food regulated under this Act that the Administrator 
 has reason to believe is unsafe, is adulterated or misbranded, 
 or otherwise fails to meet the requirements of the food safety 
 law.
 (2) Detention authority.--If, during an inspection 
 conducted in accordance with section 205 or 208, an officer, 
 employee, or agent of the Administration making the inspection 
 has reason to believe that a domestic food, imported food, or 
 food offered for import is unsafe, is adulterated or 
 misbranded, or otherwise fails to meet the requirements of this 
 the food safety law, the officer, employee, or agent may order 
 the food detained.
 (3) Period of detention.--
 (A) In general.--A food may be detained under 
 paragraph (1) or (2) for a reasonable period, not to 
 exceed 20 days, unless a longer period, not to exceed 
 30 days, is necessary for the Administrator to 
 institute a seizure action.
 (B) Perishable food.--The Administrator shall 
 provide by regulation for procedures to institute a 
 seizure action on an expedited basis with respect to 
 perishable food.
 (4) Security of detained food.--
 (A) In general.--A detention order under this 
 subsection--
 (i) may require that the food be labeled or 
 marked as detained; and
 (ii) shall require that the food be removed 
 to a secure facility, if appropriate.
 (B) Food subject to an order.--A food subject to a 
 detention order under this subsection shall not be 
 transferred by any person from the place at which the 
 food is removed, until released by the Administrator or 
 until the expiration of the detention period applicable 
 under the order, whichever occurs first.
 (C) Delivery of food.--This subsection does not 
 authorize the delivery of a food in accordance with 
 execution of a bond while the article is subject to the 
 order.
 (b) Appeal of Detention Order.--
 (1) In general.--A person who would be entitled to be a 
 claimant for a food subject to a detention order under 
 subsection (a) if the food were seized under section 304 of the 
 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 334), may 
 appeal the order to the Administrator.
 (2) Action by the administrator.--Not later than 5 days 
 after an appeal is filed under paragraph (1), the 
 Administrator, after providing an opportunity for an informal 
 hearing, shall confirm, modify, or terminate the order 
 involved.
 (3) Final agency action.--Confirmation, modification, or 
 termination by the Administrator under paragraph (2) shall be 
 considered a final agency action for purposes of section 702 of 
 title 5, United States Code.
 (4) Termination.--A detention order under subsection (a) 
 shall be considered to be terminated if, after 5 days, the 
 Administrator has failed--
 (A) to provide an opportunity for an informal 
 hearing; or
 (B) to confirm, modify, or terminate the order.
 (5) Effect of instituting court action.--If the 
 Administrator initiates an action under section 302 of the 
 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 332) or section 
 304(a) of that Act (21 U.S.C. 334(a)) for a food subject to a 
 detention order under subsection (a), the process for the 
 appeal of the detention order with respect to such food shall 
 terminate.
 (c) Condemnation of Food.--
 (1) In general.--After confirming a detention order, the 
 Administrator may order the food condemned.
 (2) Destruction of food.--Any food condemned shall be 
 destroyed under the supervision of the Administrator.
 (3) Release of food.--If the Administrator determines that, 
 through reprocessing, relabeling, or other action, a detained 
 food can be brought into compliance with this Act, the food may 
 be released following a determination by the Administrator that 
 the relabeling or other action as specified by the 
 Administrator has been performed.
 (d) Temporary Holds at Ports of Entry.--
 (1) In general.--If an officer or qualified employee of the 
 Administration has reason to believe that a food is unsafe, is 
 adulterated or misbranded, or otherwise fails to meet the 
 requirements of this Act, and the officer or qualified employee 
 is unable to inspect, examine, or investigate the food when the 
 food is offered for import at a port of entry into the United 
 States, the officer or qualified employee shall request the 
 Secretary of Homeland Security to hold the food at the port of 
 entry for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 24 hours, 
 to enable the Administrator to inspect or investigate the food 
 as appropriate.
 (2) Removal to secure facility.--The Administrator shall 
 work in coordination with the Secretary of Homeland Security to 
 remove a food held in accordance with paragraph (1) to a secure 
 facility as appropriate.
 (3) Prohibition on transfer.--During the period in which 
 food is held, the food shall not be transferred by any person 
 from the port of entry into the United States, or from the 
 secure facility to which the food has been removed.
 (4) Delivery in accordance with a bond.--The delivery of 
 the food in accordance with the execution of a bond while the 
 food is held is not authorized.
 (5) Prohibition on reexport.--A food found unfit for human 
 or animal consumption shall be prohibited from reexport without 
 further processing to remove the contamination and reinspection 
 by the Administration.

SEC. 403. NOTIFICATION AND RECALL.

 (a) Notice to Administrator of Violation.--
 (1) In general.--A person that has reason to believe that 
 any food introduced into or in interstate commerce, or held for 
 sale (whether or not the first sale) after shipment in 
 interstate commerce, may be in violation of the food safety law 
 shall immediately notify the Administrator of the identity and 
 location of the food.
 (2) Manner of notification.--Notification under paragraph 
 (1) shall be made in such manner and by such means as the 
 Administrator may require by regulation.
 (b) Recall and Consumer Notification.--
 (1) Voluntary actions.--If the Administrator determines 
 that food is in violation of the food safety law when 
 introduced into or while in interstate commerce or while held 
 for sale (whether or not the first sale) after shipment in 
 interstate commerce and that there is a reasonable probability 
 that the food, if consumed, would present a threat to public 
 health, as determined by the Administrator, the Administrator 
 shall give the appropriate persons (including the 
 manufacturers, importers, distributors, or retailers of the 
 food) an opportunity to--
 (A) cease distribution of the food;
 (B) notify all persons--
 (i) processing, distributing, or otherwise 
 handling the food to immediately cease such 
 activities with respect to the food; or
 (ii) to which the food has been 
 distributed, transported, or sold, to 
 immediately cease distribution of the food;
 (C) recall the food;
 (D) in conjunction with the Administrator, provide 
 notice of the finding of the Administrator--
 (i) to consumers to whom the food was, or 
 may have been, distributed; and
 (ii) to State and local public health 
 officials; or
 (E) take any combination of the measures described 
 in this paragraph, as determined by the Administrator 
 to be appropriate in the circumstances.
 (2) Mandatory actions.--If a person referred to in 
 paragraph (1) refuses to or does not adequately carry out the 
 actions described in that paragraph within the time period and 
 in the manner prescribed by the Administrator, the 
 Administrator shall--
 (A) have authority to control and possess the food, 
 including ordering the shipment of the food from the 
 food establishment to the Administrator--
 (i) at the expense of the food 
 establishment; or
 (ii) in an emergency (as determined by the 
 Administrator), at the expense of the 
 Administration; and
 (B) by order, require, as the Administrator 
 determines to be necessary, the person to immediately--
 (i) cease distribution of the food; and
 (ii) notify all persons--
 (I) processing, distributing, or 
 otherwise handling the food to 
 immediately cease such activities with 
 respect to the food; or
 (II) if the food has been 
 distributed, transported, or sold, to 
 immediately cease distribution of the 
 food.
 (3) Notification to consumers by administrator.--The 
 Administrator shall, as the Administrator determines to be 
 necessary--
 (A) provide notice of the finding of the 
 Administrator under paragraph (1)--
 (i) to consumers to whom the food was, or 
 may have been, distributed; and
 (ii) to State and local public health 
 officials; and
 (B) provide notice to the public of the names and 
 addresses of retail locations at which recalled food 
 products were available for sale.
 (4) Nondistribution by notified persons.--A person that 
 processes, distributes, or otherwise handles the food, or to 
 which the food has been distributed, transported, or sold, and 
 that is notified under paragraph (1)(B) or (2)(B) shall 
 immediately cease distribution of the food.
 (5) Availability of records to administrator.--Each person 
 referred to in paragraph (1) that processed, distributed, or 
 otherwise handled food shall make available to the 
 Administrator information necessary to carry out this 
 subsection, as determined by the Administrator, regarding--
 (A) persons that processed, distributed, or 
 otherwise handled the food; and
 (B) persons to which the food has been transported, 
 sold, distributed, or otherwise handled.
 (c) Informal Hearings on Orders.--
 (1) In general.--The Administrator shall provide any person 
 subject to an order under subsection (b) with an opportunity 
 for an informal hearing, to be held as soon as practicable but 
 not later than 2 business days after the issuance of the order.
 (2) Scope of the hearing.--In a hearing under paragraph 
 (1), the Administrator shall consider the actions required by 
 the order and any reasons why the food that is the subject of 
 the order should not be recalled.
 (d) Post-Hearing Recall Orders.--
 (1) Amendment of order.--If, after providing an opportunity 
 for an informal hearing under subsection (c), the Administrator 
 determines that there is a reasonable probability that the food 
 that is the subject of an order under subsection (b), if 
 consumed, would present a threat to the public health, the 
 Administrator, as the Administrator determines to be necessary, 
 may--
 (A) amend the order to require recall of the food 
 or other appropriate action;
 (B) specify a timetable in which the recall shall 
 occur;
 (C) require periodic reports to the Administrator 
 describing the progress of the recall; and
 (D) provide notice of the recall to consumers to 
 whom the food was, or may have been, distributed.
 (2) Vacation of orders.--If, after providing an opportunity 
 for an informal hearing under subsection (c), the Administrator 
 determines that adequate grounds do not exist to continue the 
 actions required by the order, the Administrator shall vacate 
 the order.
 (e) Remedies Not Exclusive.--The remedies provided in this section 
shall be in addition to, and not exclusive of, other remedies that may 
be available.

SEC. 404. INJUNCTION PROCEEDINGS.

 (a) Jurisdiction.--The district courts of the United States, and 
the United States courts of the territories and possessions of the 
United States, shall have jurisdiction, for cause shown, to restrain a 
violation of section 202, 203, 204, 208, or 401 (or a regulation 
promulgated thereunder).
 (b) Trial.--In a case in which violation of an injunction or 
restraining order issued under this section also constitutes a 
violation of the food safety law, trial shall be by the court or, upon 
demand of the accused, by a jury.

SEC. 405. CIVIL AND CRIMINAL PENALTIES.

 (a) Civil Sanctions.--
 (1) Civil penalty.--
 (A) In general.--Any person that commits an act 
 that violates the food safety law (including a 
 regulation promulgated or order issued under the food 
 safety law) may be assessed a civil penalty by the 
 Administrator of not more than $1,000,000 for each such 
 act.
 (B) Separate offense.--Each act described in 
 subparagraph (A) and each day during which that act 
 continues shall be considered a separate offense.
 (2) Other requirements.--
 (A) Written order.--The civil penalty described in 
 paragraph (1) shall be assessed by the Administrator by 
 a written order, which shall specify the amount of the 
 penalty and the basis for the penalty under 
 subparagraph (B) considered by the Administrator.
 (B) Amount of penalty.--Subject to paragraph 
 (1)(A), the amount of the civil penalty shall be 
 determined by the Administrator, after considering--
 (i) the gravity of the violation;
 (ii) the degree of culpability of the 
 person;
 (iii) the size and type of the business of 
 the person; and
 (iv) any history of prior offenses by the 
 person under the food safety law.
 (C) Review of order.--The order may be reviewed 
 only in accordance with subsection (c).
 (b) Criminal Sanctions.--
 (1) Offense resulting in serious illness.--Notwithstanding 
 section 303(a) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
 U.S.C. 333(a)), if a violation of any provision of section 301 
 of such Act (21 U.S.C. 301) with respect to an adulterated or 
 misbranded food results in serious illness, the person 
 committing the violation shall be imprisoned for not more than 
 5 years, fined in accordance with title 18, United States Code, 
 or both.
 (2) Offense resulting in death.--Notwithstanding section 
 303(a) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 
 333(a)), if a violation of any provision of section 301 of such 
 Act (21 U.S.C. 331) with respect to an adulterated or 
 misbranded food results in death, the person committing the 
 violation shall be imprisoned for not more than 10 years, fined 
 in accordance with title 18, United States Code, or both.
 (c) Judicial Review.--
 (1) In general.--An order assessing a civil penalty against 
 a person under subsection (a) shall be a final order unless the 
 person--
 (A) not later than 30 days after the effective date 
 of the order, files a petition for judicial review of 
 the order in the United States court of appeals for the 
 circuit in which that person resides or has its 
 principal place of business or the United States Court 
 of Appeals for the District of Columbia; and
 (B) simultaneously serves a copy of the petition by 
 certified mail to the Administrator.
 (2) Filing of record.--Not later than 45 days after the 
 service of a copy of the petition under paragraph (1)(B), the 
 Administrator shall file in the court a certified copy of the 
 administrative record upon which the order was issued.
 (3) Standard of review.--The findings of the Administrator 
 relating to the order shall be set aside only if found to be 
 unsupported by substantial evidence on the record as a whole.
 (d) Collection Actions for Failure To Pay.--
 (1) In general.--If any person fails to pay a civil penalty 
 assessed under subsection (a) after the order assessing the 
 penalty has become a final order, or after the court of appeals 
 described in subsection (b) has entered final judgment in favor 
 of the Administrator, the Administrator shall refer the matter 
 to the Attorney General, who shall institute in a United States 
 district court of competent jurisdiction a civil action to 
 recover the amount assessed.
 (2) Limitation on review.--In a civil action under 
 paragraph (1), the validity and appropriateness of the order of 
 the Administrator assessing the civil penalty shall not be 
 subject to judicial review.
 (e) Penalties Paid Into Account.--The Administrator--
 (1) shall deposit penalties collected under this section in 
 an account in the Treasury; and
 (2) may use the funds in the account, without further 
 appropriation or fiscal year limitation--
 (A) to carry out enforcement activities under the 
 food safety law; or
 (B) to provide assistance to States to inspect 
 retail commercial food establishments or other food or 
 firms under the jurisdiction of State food safety 
 programs.
 (f) Discretion of the Administrator To Prosecute.--Nothing in this 
Act requires the Administrator to report for prosecution, or for the 
commencement of an action, the violation of the food safety law in a 
case in which the Administrator finds that the public interest will be 
adequately served by the assessment of a civil penalty under this 
section.
 (g) Remedies Not Exclusive.--The remedies provided in this section 
are in addition to, and not exclusive of, other remedies that may be 
available.

SEC. 406. PRESUMPTION.

 In any action to enforce the requirements of the food safety law, 
the connection with interstate commerce required for jurisdiction shall 
be presumed to exist.

SEC. 407. WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Prohibition.--No Federal employee, employee of a 
 Federal contractor or subcontractor, or covered individual may 
 be discharged, demoted, suspended, threatened, harassed, or in 
 any other manner discriminated against, because of any lawful 
 act done by the employee or covered individual to--
 (A) provide information, cause information to be 
 provided, or otherwise assist in an investigation 
 regarding any conduct that the covered individual 
 reasonably believes constitutes a violation of any law, 
 rule, or regulation, or that the covered individual 
 reasonably believes constitutes a threat to the public 
 health, when the information or assistance is provided 
 to, or the investigation is conducted by--
 (i) a Federal regulatory or law enforcement 
 agency;
 (ii) a Member or committee of Congress; or
 (iii) a person with supervisory authority 
 over the covered individual (or such other 
 individual who has the authority to 
 investigate, discover, or terminate 
 misconduct);
 (B) file, cause to be filed, testify, participate 
 in, or otherwise assist in a proceeding or action filed 
 or about to be filed relating to a violation of any 
 law, rule, or regulation; or
 (C) refused to violate or assist in the violation 
 of any law, rule, or regulation.
 (2) Definition.--For the purposes of this section, the term 
 ``covered individual'' means an individual who is an employee 
 of--
 (A) a food establishment;
 (B) a food production facility;
 (C) a restaurant;
 (D) a retail food establishment other than a 
 restaurant;
 (E) a nonprofit food establishment in which food is 
 prepared for or served directly to the consumer;
 (F) a fishing vessel; or
 (G) an agent of any of the above.
 (b) Enforcement Action.--
 (1) In general.--A covered individual who alleges discharge 
 or other discrimination by any person in violation of 
 subsection (a) may seek relief under subsection (c) by filing a 
 complaint with the Secretary of Labor. If the Secretary of 
 Labor has not issued a final decision within 180 days after the 
 date on which the complaint is filed and there is no showing 
 that such delay is due to the bad faith of the claimant, the 
 claimant may bring an action at law or equity for de novo 
 review in the appropriate district court of the United States, 
 which shall have jurisdiction over such an action without 
 regard to the amount in controversy.
 (2) Procedure.--
 (A) In general.--An action under paragraph (1) 
 shall be governed under the rules and procedures set 
 forth in section 42121(b) of title 49, United States 
 Code.
 (B) Exception.--Notification under section 
 42121(b)(1) of title 49, United States Code, shall be 
 made to the person named in the complaint and to the 
 person's employer.
 (C) Burdens of proof.--An action brought under 
 paragraph (1) shall be governed by the legal burdens of 
 proof set forth in section 42121(b) of title 49, United 
 States Code.
 (D) Statute of limitations.--An action under 
 paragraph (1) shall be commenced not later than 90 days 
 after the date on which the violation occurs.
 (c) Remedies.--
 (1) In general.--A covered individual prevailing in any 
 action under subsection (b)(1) shall be entitled to all relief 
 necessary to make the covered individual whole.
 (2) Compensatory damages.--Relief for any action described 
 in paragraph (1) shall include--
 (A) reinstatement with the same seniority status 
 that the covered individual would have had, but for the 
 discrimination;
 (B) the amount of any back pay, with interest; and
 (C) compensation for any special damages sustained 
 as a result of the discrimination, including litigation 
 costs, expert witness fees, and reasonable attorney's 
 fees.
 (d) Rights Retained by the Covered Individual.--Nothing in this 
section shall be construed to diminish the rights, privileges, or 
remedies of any covered individual under any Federal or State law, or 
under any collective bargaining agreement.

SEC. 408. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.

 (a) In General.--For the efficient administration and enforcement 
of the food safety law, the provisions (including provisions relating 
to penalties) of sections 6, 8, 9, and 10 of the Federal Trade 
Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 46, 48, 49, and 50) (except subsections (c) 
through (h) of section 6 of that Act), relating to the jurisdiction, 
powers, and duties of the Federal Trade Commission and the Attorney 
General to administer and enforce that Act, and to the rights and 
duties of persons with respect to whom the powers are exercised, shall 
apply to the jurisdiction, powers, and duties of the Administrator and 
the Attorney General in administering and enforcing the provisions of 
the food safety law and to the rights and duties of persons with 
respect to whom the powers are exercised, respectively.
 (b) Inquiries and Actions.--
 (1) In general.--The Administrator, in person or by such 
 agents as the Administrator may designate, may prosecute any 
 inquiry necessary to carry out the duties of the Administrator 
 under the food safety law in any part of the United States.
 (2) Powers.--The powers conferred by sections 9 and 10 of 
 the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 49 and 50) on the 
 United States district courts may be exercised for the purposes 
 of this chapter by any United States district court of 
 competent jurisdiction.

SEC. 409. CITIZEN CIVIL ACTIONS.

 (a) Civil Actions.--A person may commence a civil action against--
 (1) a person that violates a regulation (including a 
 regulation establishing a performance standard), order, or 
 other action of the Administrator to ensure the safety of food; 
 or
 (2) the Administrator (in his or her capacity as the 
 Administrator), if the Administrator fails to perform an act or 
 duty to ensure the safety of food that is not discretionary 
 under the food safety law.
 (b) Court.--In an action commenced under this section:
 (1) In general.--The action shall be commenced--
 (A) in the case of a civil action against a person, 
 the United States district court for the district in 
 which the defendant resides, is found, or has an agent; 
 and
 (B) in the case of a civil action against the 
 Administrator, any United States district court.
 (2) Jurisdiction.--The court shall have jurisdiction, 
 without regard to the amount in controversy, or the citizenship 
 of the parties, to enforce a regulation (including a regulation 
 establishing a performance standard), order, or other action of 
 the Administrator, or to order the Administrator to perform the 
 act or duty.
 (3) Damages.--The court may--
 (A) award damages, in the amount of damages 
 actually sustained; and
 (B) if the court determines it to be in the 
 interest of justice, award the plaintiff the costs of 
 suit, including reasonable attorney's fees, reasonable 
 expert witness fees, and penalties.
 (c) Remedies Not Exclusive.--The remedies provided for in this 
section shall be in addition to, and not exclusive of, other remedies 
that may be available.

 TITLE V--IMPLEMENTATION

SEC. 501. REORGANIZATION PLAN.

 (a) Submission of Plan.--Not later than 180 days after the 
enactment of this Act, the President shall transmit to the appropriate 
congressional committees a reorganization plan regarding the following:
 (1) The transfer of agencies, personnel, assets, and 
 obligations to the Administration pursuant to this Act.
 (2) Any consolidation, reorganization, or streamlining of 
 agencies transferred to the Administration pursuant to this 
 Act.
 (b) Plan Elements.--The plan transmitted under subsection (a) shall 
contain, consistent with this Act, such elements as the President 
determines appropriate, including the following:
 (1) The timetable for transfer and identification of any 
 functions of agencies designated to be transferred to the 
 Administration pursuant to this Act that will not be 
 transferred promptly to the Administration under the plan.
 (2) Specification of the steps to be taken by the 
 Administrator to organize the Administration, including the 
 delegation or assignment of functions transferred to the 
 Administration among the officers of the Administration in 
 order to permit the Administration to carry out the functions 
 transferred under the plan.
 (3) Specification of the funds available to each agency 
 that will be transferred to the Administration as a result of 
 transfers under the plan.
 (4) Specification of the proposed allocations within the 
 Administration of unexpended funds transferred in connection 
 with transfers under the plan.
 (5) Specification of any proposed disposition of property, 
 facilities, contracts, records, and other assets and 
 obligations of agencies transferred under the plan.
 (6) Specification of the proposed allocations within the 
 Administration of the functions of the agencies and 
 subdivisions that are not related directly to ensuring the 
 safety of food.
 (c) Modification of Plan.--The President may, on the basis of 
consultations with the appropriate congressional committees, modify or 
revise any part of the plan until that part of the plan becomes 
effective in accordance with subsection (d).
 (d) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--The reorganization plan described in this 
 section, including any modifications or revisions of the plan 
 under subsection (c), shall become effective for an agency on 
 the earlier of--
 (A) the date specified in the plan (or the plan as 
 modified pursuant to subsection (c)), except that such 
 date may not be earlier than 90 days after the date the 
 President has transmitted the reorganization plan to 
 the appropriate congressional committees pursuant to 
 subsection (a); or
 (B) the end of the 12-month period beginning on the 
 date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) Statutory construction.--Nothing in this subsection may 
 be construed to require the transfer of functions, personnel, 
 records, balances of appropriations, or other assets of an 
 agency on a single date.
 (3) Supersedes existing law.--Paragraph (1) shall apply 
 notwithstanding section 905(b) of title 5, United States Code.

SEC. 502. TRANSITIONAL AUTHORITIES.

 (a) Provision of Assistance by Officials.--Until the transfer of an 
agency to the Administration, any official having authority over or 
function relating to the agency immediately before the date of the 
enactment of this Act shall provide the Administrator such assistance, 
including the use of personnel and assets, as the Administrator may 
request in preparing for the transfer and integration of the agency to 
the Administration.
 (b) Services and Personnel.--During the transition period, upon the 
request of the Administrator, the head of any executive agency may 
provide services or detail personnel to assist with the transition.
 (c) Acting Officials.--
 (1) In general.--During the transition period, pending the 
 advice and consent of the Senate to the appointment of an 
 officer required by this Act to be appointed by and with such 
 advice and consent, the President may designate any officer 
 whose appointment was required to be made by and with such 
 advice and consent and who was such an officer immediately 
 before the date of the enactment of this Act (and who continues 
 to be in office) or immediately before such designation, to act 
 in such office until the same is filled as provided in this 
 Act.
 (2) Compensation.--While acting pursuant to paragraph (1), 
 such officers shall receive compensation at the higher of--
 (A) the rates provided by this Act for the 
 respective offices in which they act; or
 (B) the rates provided for the offices held at the 
 time of designation.
 (3) Limitation.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to 
 require the advice and consent of the Senate to the appointment 
 by the President to a position in the Administration of any 
 officer whose agency is transferred to the Administration 
 pursuant to this Act and whose duties following such transfer 
 are germane to those performed before such transfer.
 (d) Transfer of Personnel, Assets, Obligations, and Function.--
 (1) In general.--Consistent with section 1531 of title 31, 
 United States Code, the personnel, assets, liabilities, 
 contracts, property, records, and unexpended balances of 
 appropriations, authorizations, allocations, and other funds 
 that relate to the functions transferred under subsection (a) 
 from a Federal agency shall be transferred to the 
 Administration.
 (2) Unexpended funds.--Unexpended funds transferred under 
 this subsection shall be used by the Administration only for 
 the purposes for which the funds were originally authorized and 
 appropriated.

SEC. 503. SAVINGS PROVISIONS.

 (a) Completed Administrative Actions.--The enactment of this Act or 
the transfer of functions under this Act shall not affect any order, 
determination, rule, regulation, tolerance, guidance, permit, personnel 
action, agreement, grant, contract, certificate, license, registration, 
user fees, privilege, or other administrative action issued, made, 
granted, or otherwise in effect or final with respect to that agency on 
the day before the transfer date with respect to the transferred 
functions.
 (b) Pending Proceedings.--Subject to the authority of the 
Administrator under this Act--
 (1) pending proceedings in an agency, including notices of 
 proposed rulemaking, and applications for licenses, permits, 
 certificates, grants, and financial assistance, shall continue 
 notwithstanding the enactment of this Act or the transfer of 
 the agency to the Administration, unless discontinued or 
 modified under the same terms and conditions and to the same 
 extent that such discontinuance or modification could have 
 occurred if such enactment or transfer had not occurred; and
 (2) orders issued in such proceedings, and appeals 
 therefrom, and payments made pursuant to such orders, shall 
 issue in the same manner on the same terms as if this Act had 
 not been enacted or the agency had not been transferred, and 
 any such order shall continue in effect until amended, 
 modified, superseded, terminated, set aside, or revoked by an 
 officer of the United States or a court of competent 
 jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
 (c) Pending Civil Actions.--Subject to the authority of the 
Administrator under this Act, any civil action commenced with regard to 
that agency pending before that agency on the day before the transfer 
date with respect to the transferred functions shall continue 
notwithstanding the enactment of this Act or the transfer of an agency 
to the Administration.
 (d) References.--
 (1) In general.--After the transfer of functions from a 
 Federal agency under this Act, any reference in any other 
 Federal law, Executive order, rule, regulation, directive, 
 document, or other material to that Federal agency or the head 
 of that agency in connection with the administration or 
 enforcement of the food safety law shall be deemed to be a 
 reference to the Administration or the Administrator, 
 respectively.
 (2) Statutory reporting requirements.--Statutory reporting 
 requirements that applied in relation to such an agency 
 immediately before the date of the enactment of this Act shall 
 continue to apply following such transfer if they refer to the 
 agency by name.

SEC. 504. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.

 (a) Executive Schedule.--Section 5313 of title 5, United States 
Code, is amended by inserting at the end the following new item: 
``Administrator of Food Safety.''.

SEC. 505. ADDITIONAL TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.

 Not later than 60 days after the submission of the reorganization 
plan under section 501, the President shall prepare and submit proposed 
legislation to Congress containing necessary and appropriate technical 
and conforming amendments to the Acts listed in section 3(15) of this 
Act to reflect the changes made by this Act.

SEC. 506. REGULATIONS.

 The Administrator may promulgate such regulations as the 
Administrator determines are necessary or appropriate to perform the 
duties of the Administrator.

SEC. 507. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary 
to carry out this Act.

SEC. 508. LIMITATION ON AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 For the fiscal year that includes the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the amount authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act 
shall not exceed--
 (1) the amount appropriated for that fiscal year for the 
 Federal agencies identified in section 102(b) for the purpose 
 of administering or enforcing the food safety law; or
 (2) the amount appropriated for those agencies for that 
 purpose for the preceding fiscal year, if, as of the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, appropriations for those agencies 
 for the fiscal year that includes such date have not yet been 
 made.
 <all>