HR 3838 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3838
To amend the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 to provide for independent health
and safety regulation of Department of Energy defense nuclear facilities.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
November 21, 1989
Mr. SKAGGS (for himself, Mrs. ROUKEMA, Mrs. SCHROEDER, Mr. STARK, Mr. OWENS
of Utah, Mr. CAMPBELL of Colorado, Mr. RICHARDSON, Mr. STALLINGS, Mr. HUGHES,
Mr. DWYER of New Jersey, Mr. JONTZ, and Mr. FAUNTROY) introduced the following
bill; which was referred jointly to the Committees on Armed Services and
Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 to provide for independent health
and safety regulation of Department of Energy defense nuclear facilities.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Nuclear Weapons Health and Safety Enforcement
 Act'.
SEC. 2. PROTECTION OF MEMBERS OF DEFENSE NUCLEAR FACILITIES SAFETY BOARD.
 Section 311(b) of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2286(b)) is
 amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(5) A member of the Board may be removed by the President only for
 inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office.'.
SEC. 3. FUNCTIONS OF BOARD.
 Section 312 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2286a) is amended
 as follows:
 (1) Paragraph (1) is amended to read as follows:
 `(1) STANDARDS- The Board shall by rule establish standards to provide for
 the protection of the health and safety of the public and facility employees,
 and for the protection of the environment, from risks caused by Department
 of Energy defense nuclear facilities. The standards shall not apply to,
 or include standards that apply to, activities subject to regulation under
 the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401 et seq.), the Federal Water Pollution
 Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42
 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.), the Safe Drinking Water Act (42 U.S.C. 300f et seq.),
 the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act
 of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601 et seq.), the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982
 (42 U.S.C. 10101 et seq.), and the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act
 (49 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.). The standards shall include occupational health
 and safety standards and standards for location, design, construction,
 operation, and decommissioning of Department of Energy defense nuclear
 facilities, as follows:
 `(A) OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH STANDARDS- The standards established
 by the Board shall include occupational safety and health standards for
 protection of facility employees, including standards established under
 the Occupational Safety and Health Act (29 U.S.C. 651 et seq.) unless
 the Board determines that such standards are not appropriate to apply to
 Department of Energy defense nuclear facilities.
 `(B) ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS- The standards established by the Board shall
 include standards for the degree of cleanup of releases into the environment
 of byproduct, source, and special nuclear materials (as defined in section
 11 of this Act) not subject to the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
 Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601 et seq.). In the
 case of any materials to remain on the site on which the Department of
 Energy defense nuclear facility is located, such standards shall assure,
 at a minimum, compliance with any applicable Federal or State environmental
 law, regulation, or other requirement.
 `(C) ENFORCEMENT- The rules established by the Board shall include the manner
 and process for enforcement of the standards, including all of the following:
 `(i) Mechanisms and processes for enforcement, including the right of
 entry for unannounced inspections without probable cause.
 `(ii) Receipt of complaints from individuals and protection of the
 individuals from retribution for making the complaints.
 `(iii) Such other regulations as are necessary to carry out this chapter.
 `(D) DIFFERENTIATION BETWEEN FACILITIES- Except for the standards
 established under subparagraph (B), in establishing the standards the
 Board may distinguish between existing and new facilities.
 `(E) APPLICABILITY OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES- Notwithstanding section
 553(a)(1) of title 5, United States Code, the rules under this paragraph
 shall be issued in accordance with section 553 of such title.
 `(F) CONSULTATIONS- Before establishing standards under this paragraph,
 the Board shall consult, as appropriate depending on the subject matter
 of the standards, with the Secretary of Energy, the Secretary of Labor,
 the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency, and the Governors of States in which the Department of
 Energy defense nuclear facilities are located.'.
 (2) Paragraph (2) is amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking out `public health and safety'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `the health and safety of the public and
 facility employees and the environment';
 (B) in subparagraph (B)(i), by striking out `of the Department of Energy'
 and all that follows through `facility';
 (C) in subparagraph (B)(iv), by striking out `such standards or';
 (D) in subparagraph (B)(iv), by striking out `(including' and all that
 follows through `research needs'; and
 (E) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 `(C) Following each investigation under subparagraph (A), the Board shall
 submit a report to the Secretary and Congress recommending improvements to
 enhance the protection of the health and safety of the public and facility
 employees and the protection of the environment.'.
 (3) Paragraph (4) is amended to read as follows:
 `(4) LICENSES FOR NEW FACILITIES-
 `(A) STANDARDS- The Board shall by rule establish standards for the
 issuance of a license under subparagraph (B), which shall provide for the
 protection of the health and safety of the public and facilities employees
 and the environment.
 `(B) REQUIREMENT- No new Department of Energy defense nuclear facility or
 substantially modified Department of Energy defense nuclear facility (other
 than the Waste Isolation Pilot Project) may commence operations unless it
 has received a license from the Board. The Board shall issue a license for
 such a facility if it complies with standards established by the Board under
 subparagraph (A), standards established by the Board under paragraph (1),
 and other applicable Federal and State laws, regulations, and requirements.
 `(C) PUBLIC PARTICIPATION- The Board may not issue a license under
 subparagraph (B) until it has published notice of the application for a
 license in the Federal Register and in such trade or news publications
 as the Board considers appropriate to give reasonable notice to persons
 who might have a potential interest in the facility. The Board also shall
 hold a public hearing and provide an opportunity for other forms of public
 participation in the process of licensing a facility under subparagraph
 (B).'.
 (4) Paragraph (5) is amended--
 (A) by striking out `(5)' and inserting in lieu thereof `(6)'; and
 (B) by striking out `public health and safety' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `the health and safety of the public and facility employees and
 of the environment'.
 (5) Such section is further amended by adding the following new paragraph
 (5) after paragraph (4):
 `(5) OVERSIGHT- The Board shall maintain ongoing oversight of the operation
 and construction of Department of Energy defense nuclear facilities.'.
 (6) Such section is further amended by adding at the end the following
 new paragraphs:
 `(7) TRANSPORTATION- Investigations under paragraph (3)(A) and oversight
 functions under paragraph (4) may include investigations and oversight of
 those aspects of transportation of nuclear materials to and from facilities
 which the Board determines to be significant because of possible adverse
 effects on health, safety, or the environment.
 `(8) CITIZEN PARTICIPATION- The Board shall establish procedures for
 petitions by citizens for action by the Board with respect to standards,
 investigations, and enforcement, and for public hearings for consideration
 of such petitions.
 `(9) NATIONAL SECURITY- The Board shall ensure that in all of its actions
 it safeguards classified national security information.'.
SEC. 4. POWERS OF BOARD.
 Section 313 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2286b) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)(1), by striking out `, but not more than the equivalent
 of 100 full-time employees';
 (2) in subsection (f), by adding at the end the following: `With the
 consent of and under appropriate support arrangements with the Environmental
 Protection Agency, the Board may obtain the advice and recommendations of the
 staff of the Agency on matters relating to the Board's responsibilities.';
 (3) by redesignating subsections (i) and (j) as subsections (j) and (k),
 respectively; and
 (4) by striking out subsection (h) and inserting in lieu thereof the
 following:
 `(h) INVESTIGATORY AND REVIEW STAFF- The Board shall maintain an onsite
 staff for investigation, review, and compliance at each Department of
 Energy defense nuclear facility.'.
SEC. 5. NOTIFICATION BY SECRETARY.
 Section 314 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2286c) is amended
 by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(c) NOTIFICATION OF ABNORMAL OCCURRANCES- The Secretary of Energy shall
 immediately notify the Board and Congress in the case of any abnormal
 occurrence at a Department of Energy defense nuclear facility that resulted,
 or could result, in an unplanned release of a quantity of radioactive
 products or hazardous materials in excess of the allowable limits for
 normal operation.'.
SEC. 6. ENFORCEMENT.
 (a) ENFORCEMENT REQUIREMENTS- Section 315 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954
 (42 U.S.C. 2286d) is amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 315. ENFORCEMENT.
 `(a) COMPLIANCE WITH BOARD STANDARDS- The Board may issue administrative
 orders to compel compliance with the standards established under section
 312(1), and may bring suit in the appropriate United States district court
 to compel compliance with such administrative orders.
 `(b) COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER FEDERAL OR STATE REQUIREMENTS- The Board may
 issue administrative orders to compel compliance with any Federal standards
 or requirements established by any executive branch agency, or any State
 standards or requirements, that apply to facilities and that protect the
 health and safety of the public and facility employees and the environment,
 and may bring suit in the appropriate United States district court to compel
 compliance with such administrative orders. Not later than 10 days after
 issuing an order or bringing a suit under this subsection, the Board shall
 provide notice of such action to the executive branch agency or State with
 whose standards or requirements the Board is seeking to compel compliance.
 `(c) IMMINENT AND SUBSTANTIAL ENDANGERMENT-
 `(1) NOTICE TO SECRETARY AND CIVIL ACTION- Upon receipt of evidence
 that an activity at a Department of Energy defense nuclear facility is
 presenting an imminent and substantial endangerment to the health and
 safety of persons or to the environment, the Board (or, in the absence of a
 quorum, the Chairman on behalf of the Board) shall submit a written notice
 to the Secretary to abate such activity so it does not present such an
 endangerment. If in response to that notice, the Secretary does not abate
 the activity, the Board may bring suit in the appropriate United States
 district court to immediately restrain any person causing or contributing
 to such an endangerment. The court shall so restrain any person found to
 be causing or contributing to such endangerment unless the court finds,
 based on clear and compelling evidence, that doing so would impair the
 national security interests of the United States.
 `(2) ORDERS BY BOARD- If it is not practicable to assure prompt protection of
 the health and safety of persons or the environment solely by commencement
 of a civil action under paragraph (1), the Board (or, in the absence of a
 quorum, the Chairman acting on behalf of the Board) may issue such order
 as may be necessary--
 `(A) to protect the health and safety of persons who are, or may be,
 affected by an activity at a Department of Energy defense nuclear facility
 that is presenting an imminent and substantial endangerment to the health
 and safety of persons; or
 `(B) to protect the environment if the environment is, or may be, affected
 by an activity at a Department of Energy defense nuclear facility that is
 presenting an imminent and substantial endangerment to the environment.
Before taking such action, the Board (or the Chairman) shall consult with
the Secretary. Any such order shall cease to be in effect 24 hours after
its issuance unless the Board (or the Chairman) has by that time brought
suit in United States district court as provided in paragraph (1).
 `(d) PRESIDENTIAL ORDERS FOR NATIONAL SECURITY- The President may
 issue such orders regarding administrative orders issued by the Board,
 complaints filed by the Board, or decisions of courts with respect to any
 specified Department of Energy defense nuclear facility as may be necessary
 to protect the national security interests of the United States at that
 facility. Such orders may include, where necessary to protect such interests,
 an exemption from the administrative order, judicial action sought by the
 Board, or decision of the court with respect to the facility concerned. The
 President shall notify the Congress within 30 days after the issuance of
 an order under this subsection providing for an exemption. An exemption
 under this subsection shall be for a specified period which may not exceed
 one year. Additional exemptions with respect to the same subject matter
 may be granted, but each such additional exemption may be granted only by
 the President's issuance of a new order under this subsection. An order
 of the President under this subsection shall not be subject to judicial
 review except with respect to the requirement that an exemption shall
 be for a specified period which may not exceed one year and with respect
 to the requirement that additional exemptions may be granted only by the
 President's issuance of a new order under this subsection.
 `(e) CIVIL PENALTIES-
 `(1) BOARD STANDARDS AND ORDERS- Failure to comply with an administrative
 order issued under subsection (a) or (c)(2) shall be subject to a civil
 fine of not to exceed $50,000 per day of violation. Failure to comply with
 a court order issued under subsection (a) or (c)(1) shall be subject to
 a civil fine of not more than $100,000 per day of violation.
 `(2) FEDERAL AND STATE REQUIREMENTS- Failure to comply with an administrative
 order or a court order issued under subsection (b) shall be subject to the
 penalty provided for failure to comply with the standard or requirement
 with respect to which the administrative order or court order is issued.
 `(f) CRIMINAL PENALTIES- (1) Any person who--
 `(A) knowingly violates a standard established under section 312;
 `(B) knowingly commences operation of a new Department of Energy defense
 nuclear facility or of a substantially modified Department of Energy
 defense nuclear facility without a license issued under section 312; or
 `(C) knowingly makes any false material statement or representation in
 any application, report, or other document filed, maintained, or used for
 purposes of compliance with this chapter;
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $50,000 for
each day of violation, or to imprisonment for not more than two years, or both.
 `(2) Any person who knowingly gives advance notice of any inspection to
 be conducted by the Board under this chapter without authority from the
 Board to do so shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more
 than $1,000 or to imprisonment for not more than six months, or both.'.
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of contents of the Atomic Energy Act of
 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2011 prec.) is amended by striking out the item relating
 to section 315 and inserting in lieu thereof the following new item:
`Sec. 315. Enforcement.'.
SEC. 7. REPORT.
 Section 316(a)(1) of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2286e(a)(1))
 is amended by inserting after `including all recommendations made by the
 Board' the following: `and all enforcement activities of the Board under
 section 315'.
SEC. 8. DEFINITIONS.
 (a) DEFINITIONS- Section 318 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42
 U.S.C. 2286g) is amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 318. DEFINITIONS.
 `As used in this chapter:
 `(1) The term `Department of Energy defense nuclear facility' means any
 of the following:
 `(A) A production facility or utilization facility (as defined in section
 11 of this Act) that is under the control or jurisdiction of the Secretary
 of Energy and that is operated for national security purposes (including
 the tritium loading facility at Savannah River, South Carolina; the 236
 H facility at Savannah River, South Carolina; and the Mound Laboratory,
 Ohio), but the term does not include--
 `(i) any facility or activity covered by Executive Order No. 12344, dated
 February 1, 1982, pertaining to the Naval nuclear propulsion program; or
 `(ii) any facility that does not conduct atomic energy defense activities.
 `(B) A nuclear waste storage facility under the control or jurisdiction of
 the Secretary of Energy, but the term does not include a facility developed
 pursuant to the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982 (42 U.S.C. 10101 et
 seq.) and licensed by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
 `(C) A testing and assembly facility that is under the control or
 jurisdiction of the Secretary of Energy and that is operated for national
 security purposes (including the test site facility in Nevada; the Pinnellas
 Plant, Florida; and the Pantex facility, Texas).
 `(2) The term `facility employees' means any of the following:
 `(A) An officer or employee of the United States who is working at a
 Department of Energy defense nuclear facility.
 `(B) An officer or employee of a contractor under contract with the United
 States who is working at such facility.
 `(3) The term `new Department of Energy defense nuclear facility' means--
 `(A) a Department of Energy defense nuclear facility; or
 `(B) a building, structure, or installation at such a facility in which
 byproduct, source, or special nuclear materials (as defined in section 11
 of this Act) are stored, handled, processed, or disposed of,
which commences operation after the one-year period beginning on the date
of the enactment of the National Defense Authorization Act, Fiscal Year 1990.
 `(4) The term `substantially modified Department of Energy defense nuclear
 facility' means--
 `(A) a Department of Energy defense nuclear facility; or
 `(B) a building, structure, or installation at such a facility in which
 byproduct, source, or special nuclear materials (as defined in section 11
 of this Act) are stored, handled, processed, or disposed of,
at which new or different activities that create a significant new or
different possibility of risk to the health and safety of the public or
facility employees or to the environment (as determined by the Board) are
commenced after the one-year period beginning on the date of the enactment
of the National Defense Authorization Act, Fiscal Year 1990.'.
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The item relating to section 318 in the table
 of contents of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2011 prec.) is
 amended to read as follows:
`Sec. 318. Definitions.'.
SEC. 9. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS.
 (a) RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS- The Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2011
 et seq.) is amended by adding after section 318 the following new section:
`SEC. 319. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS.
 `Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to reduce the authority of
 any Federal agency (other than the Department of Energy) or of any State
 or local agency over Department of Energy defense nuclear facilities.'.
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of contents at the beginning of such Act
 is amended by adding after the item relating to section 318 the following
 new item:
`Sec. 319. Relationship to other laws.'.