HR 5305 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5305
To amend title 18, United States Code, with respect to environmental crimes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
JUNE 2, 1992
Mr. SCHUMER introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on the Judiciary
A BILL
To amend title 18, United States Code, with respect to environmental crimes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Environmental Crimes Act of 1992'.
SEC. 2. ENVIRONMENTAL CRIMES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Part I of title 18, United States Code, is amended by
 inserting after chapter 33 the following:
`CHAPTER 34--ENVIRONMENTAL CRIMES
`Sec.
`731. Knowing endangerment.
`732. Contractor Listing.
`733. Rewards.
`Sec. 731. Knowing endangerment.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Whoever commits an environmental offense and thereby
 knowingly places another person in imminent danger of death or serious
 bodily injury shall if an individual, be fined under this title or imprisoned
 not more than 15 years or both.
 `(b) MAXIMUM FINE FOR FIRST OFFENSE BY ORGANIZATION- If the defendant is
 an organization, the maximum fine for a first offense under this section
 is $1,000,000.
 `(c) MAXIMUM PUNISHMENT FOR SECOND AND SUBSEQUENT OFFENSES- In the case
 of a second or subsequent offense under this section, the maximum fine and
 term of imprisonment are double those for a first offense under this section.
 `(d) ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS- For the purpose of this section--
 `(1) in determining whether a defendant who is an individual knew that
 his conduct placed another person in imminent danger of death or serious
 bodily injury--
 `(A) the person is responsible only for actual awareness or actual belief
 that he possessed; and
 `(B) knowledge possessed by a person other than the defendant but not by
 the defendant himself may not be attributed to the defendant;
except that in proving the defendant's possession of actual knowledge,
circumstantial evidence may be used, including evidence that the defendant
took affirmative steps to shield himself from relevant information;
 `(2) it is an affirmative defense to prosecution that the conduct charged
 was consented to by the person endangered and that the danger and conduct
 charged were reasonably foreseeable hazards of--
 `(A) an occupation, a business, or a profession; or
 `(B) medical treatment or medical or scientific experimentation conducted
 by professionally approved methods and such other person had been made
 aware of the risks involved prior to giving consent;
and such defense may be established under this subparagraph by a preponderance
of the evidence; and
 `(3) the term `serious bodily injury' means bodily injury which involves
 a substantial risk of death, unconsciousness, extreme physical pain,
 protracted and obvious disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of
 the function of a bodily member, organ, or mental faculty.
 `(e) DEFINITION- As used in this section, the term environmental offense
 means a criminal violation of--
 `(1) subsection (b) or (c) of section 103 of the Comprehensive Environmental
 Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980;
 `(2) section 14(b)(1) of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide
 Act;
 `(3) section 105(b) of the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act
 (Ocean Dumping Act);
 `(4) section 1423(b)(2) or subsection (a) or (b) of section 1432 of the
 Safe Drinking Water Act;
 `(5) section 16(b) of the Toxic Substances Control Act; or
 `(6) section 325(b)(4) of the Environmental Protection and Community
 Right-to-Know Act.
`Sec. 732. Contractor Listing
 `(a) CERTAIN ACTIVITIES WITH VIOLATORS PROHIBITED- The court shall order as
 an additional penalty for an offense under section 731 of this title that no
 Federal agency may enter into any contract with, or make any loan or grant
 to, any person who has been convicted of that offense, for the procurement
 of goods, materials, or services, if such contract is to be performed at,
 or such grant or loan pertains to, any facility at which the violation
 giving rise to such conviction occurred, and such facility is owned, leased,
 or supervised by such person. The prohibition of such order shall continue
 until the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency certifies
 that the condition giving rise to such conviction has been corrected.
 `(b) NOTIFICATION OF AGENCIES- The Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency shall establish procedures to provide all Federal agencies
 with the notification necessary to carry out this section.
 `(c) EXEMPTION- The President may exempt any contract, loan, or grant
 from the application of all or any part of this section if the President
 determines such exemption is necessary in the paramount interest of the
 United States. The President shall notify Congress of each such exemption.
 `(d) COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS- The Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency may enter into a cooperative agreement with a State or
 Indian tribe to delegate to that State or tribe any authority such Agency
 has under this section.
`Sec. 733. Rewards
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Subject to the availability of appropriations for this
 purpose, the Attorney General may pay a reward of not more than $10,000 to
 any person who furnishes information or services that lead to a conviction
 under--
 `(1) section 731 of this title;
 `(2) a provision of law listed in section 731(e) of this title;
 `(3) section 3008(e) of the Solid Waste disposal Act; or
 `(4) section 309(c)(3) of the Clean Water Act.
 `(b) LIMITATION- An officer or employee of the United States or of a
 State or local government who furnishes information or renders services
 in the performance of official duty is ineligible for a payment under this
 section with respect to such information or services.
 `(c) ADDITIONAL CRITERIA- The Attorney General may, by regulation, prescribe
 additional criteria for eligibility for awards under this section. In making
 such regulations, the Attorney General shall consult with the Administrator
 of the Environmental Protection Agency. Such regulations shall avoid the
 duplication of rewards under this section with awards the Administrator
 of the Environmental Protection Agency may make.'.
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of chapters at the beginning of part
 I of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding after the item
 relating to chapter 33 the following new item:
731'.
SEC. 3. PROBATION FOR ORGANIZATIONS CONVICTED OF ENVIRONMENTAL CRIMES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subchapter B of chapter 227 of title 18, United States Code,
 is amended by adding at the end the following:
`Sec. 3567. Probation for organizations convicted of environmental crimes
 `(a) IN GENERAL-
 `(1) SENTENCE OF PROBATION- The court shall sentence an organization
 that is convicted of a qualifying environmental crime to probation. It
 shall be a condition of that probation that the organization pay for an
 environmental compliance audit.
 `(2) DEFINITION- As used in this subsection, the term qualifying
 environmental crime means any offense under--
 `(A) section 731 of this title;
 `(B) section 3008(e) of the Solid Waste Disposal Act;
 `(C) section 309(c)(3) of the Clean Water Act; or
 `(D) section 113(c)(5)(A) of the Clean Air Act.
 `(b) WAIVER- Upon motion by the Attorney for the Government, the court may
 waive the requirement of subsection (a) of this section if the organization
 can prove that, before the offense took place, the organization had
 implemented an effective program to prevent and detect violations of
 environmental law that has the relevant characteristics of an effective
 program to prevent and detect violations of law as described in the
 Federal Sentencing Guidelines Manual, and the offense occurred despite such
 program. This subsection shall be construed narrowly and the presumption
 shall be in favor of requiring an audit under subsection (a) of this section.
 `(c) INDEPENDENT EXPERT-
 `(1) GENERALLY- The court shall appoint an independent expert who--
 `(A) has no prior involvement in the management of the organization; and
 `(B) has demonstrated abilities to conduct such an audit.
 `(2) SUGGESTION OF PARTIES- The Attorney for the Government and the defendant
 may submit a reasonable number of names of suggested experts. The court shall
 consider any such submissions in making an appointment under this subsection.
 `(d) SCOPE OF AUDIT- The independent expert appointed under subsection (c)
 shall conduct an environmental audit of the organization. The audit shall
 be limited to the investigation of all possible causes of the offense for
 which the organization was convicted and any possible measures that could
 be undertaken to prevent any recurrence. The audit shall be limited to the
 facility of the organization where the offense took place and all other
 facilities under the control of the organization where, in the opinion of
 the independent expert--
 `(1) processes, practices, or policies are employed that are similar to
 those employed at the facility where the offense took place; and
 `(2) similar violations could reasonably be expected to occur.
 `(e) AUDIT REPORT- The independent expert shall, not later than the date the
 court shall set, file an audit report with the court after completing the
 audit. Such report shall identify the causes of the violation constituting
 the offense and recommend specific measures that should be taken to prevent
 any recurrence. The report shall not recommend any measure that would
 require the violation of any environmental law, regulation, or existing
 applicable permit.
 `(f) REVIEW OF AUDIT REPORT- The independent expert shall provide a copy
 of the audit report to the defendant, the Department of Justice, and the
 Environmental Protection Agency not later than 5 days after filing the
 report with the court. Each recipient of these copies shall, not later than
 30 days after receipt, file with the court an assessment of the adequacy
 and feasibility of the recommendations.
 `(g) COURT-ORDERED IMPLEMENTATION- The court may order the defendant to
 implement the recommendations contained in the audit report, and order
 that any other appropriate action be taken. In determining whether to
 order implementation of a recommendation of the audit report, the court
 shall consider--
 `(1) whether--
 `(A) the recommendation is likely to achieve the results intended;
 `(B) the technology exists to implement the recommendation;
 `(C) remedial or mitigating action previously taken has accomplished the
 intent of the recommendation; and
 `(D) the cost of implementation outweighs the benefits; and
 `(2) any other matter the court determines should be taken into account
 in order to carry out the purposes of this section.
 `(h) REVIEW OF COMPLIANCE- The Environmental Protection Agency shall,
 on such schedule as the court may direct, inspect the facilities which
 are subject to the order under subsection (g) of this section, to monitor
 compliance with the order.
 `(i) LENGTH OF TERM OF PROBATION- The court may extend the term of probation
 under this section to a period not more than 2 years longer than the maximum
 otherwise provided by law if the court determines that the longer term is
 necessary to implement the order under subsection (g) of this section.
 `(j) ENFORCEMENT OF COMPLIANCE- The Attorney for the Government, the
 independent expert, or the Environmental Protection Agency may seek
 appropriate court enforcement of the court's order under this section.
 `(k) CRIMINAL LIABILITY AND THE AUDIT- Neither the defendant, or any of its
 subsidiaries, directors, officers, agents, or employees shall be subject
 to criminal penalties for a violation of environmental law discovered
 during an audit under this section, unless the person charged with such
 violation has failed to cooperate fully with the audit or implement the
 order of the court under this section. For the purposes of this subsection,
 an organization that is a defendant is not deemed to have cooperated fully
 if any of its subsidiaries, directors, officers, agents, or employees
 fails to cooperate fully.
 `(l) COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS- The Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency may enter into a cooperative agreement with a State or
 Indian tribe to delegate to that State or tribe any authority such Agency
 has under this section.'.
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections at the beginning of subchapter
 B of chapter 227 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at
 the end the following:
`3567. Probation for organizations convicted of environmental crimes.'.