[Congressional Bills 118th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 6775 Introduced in House (IH)]

<DOC>

118th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 6775

 To provide for the Federal charter of certain public banks, and for 
 other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 December 13, 2023

 Ms. Tlaib (for herself, Ms. Ocasio-Cortez, Ms. Pressley, Ms. Lee of 
 California, Ms. Schakowsky, and Ms. Omar) introduced the following 
bill; which was referred to the Committee on Financial Services, and in 
 addition to the Committees on Oversight and Accountability, Ways and 
 Means, and Energy and Commerce, for a period to be subsequently 
 determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such 
 provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To provide for the Federal charter of certain public banks, and for 
 other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Public Banking Act 
of 2023''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Definitions.
 TITLE I--FEDERAL RECOGNITION OF PUBLIC BANKS

Sec. 101. Federal charter of public lending banks and public payment 
 banks.
Sec. 102. Federal recognition of non-federally chartered banks.
Sec. 103. Federal Reserve System membership.
Sec. 104. Public member bank services.
Sec. 105. Specific requirements relating to covered banks.
Sec. 106. Regulations.
Sec. 107. Technical assistance.
 TITLE II--FEDERAL RECOGNITION OF PUBLIC SECURITIES

Sec. 201. Regulation of public lending banks and non-federally 
 chartered banks.
 TITLE III--PUBLIC DEPOSIT INSURANCE

Sec. 301. In general.
 TITLE IV--POSTAL BANKING

Sec. 401. Partnerships with covered banks for postal banking services.
 TITLE V--PUBLIC BANK DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS

Sec. 501. Public bank grant program.
Sec. 502. Public bank incubator program.
Sec. 503. Community development grant program.
Sec. 504. Treatment of funding.
 TITLE VI--COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

Sec. 601. State and local instrumentalities eligible to be community 
 development financial institutions.

SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act:
 (1) Board of governors.--The term ``Board of Governors'' 
 means the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
 (2) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the 
 Securities and Exchange Commission.
 (3) Copyleft license.--The term ``copyleft license'' means 
 any copyright license with respect to technology that grants 
 the licensee the authority to--
 (A) use the technology for any purpose;
 (B) study how the technology works, and change the 
 technology as desired;
 (C) access any source code related to the 
 technology; and
 (D) redistribute copies of the technology, 
 including modified or extended copies, to others, for 
 any purpose, if the authorities described under this 
 paragraph are also granted to all modified, extended, 
 or redistributed copies.
 (4) Corporation.--The term ``Corporation'' means the 
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
 (5) Covered bank.--The term ``covered bank'' means--
 (A) a public lending bank (as defined in section 
 101(b));
 (B) a public payment bank (as defined in section 
 101(c)); and
 (C) a non-federally chartered bank (as defined in 
 section 102(b)) that obtains a certificate of Federal 
 recognition under section 102.
 (6) Environmental justice community.--With respect to a 
 public lending bank, the term ``environmental justice 
 community'' means--
 (A) a community with significant representation of 
 communities of color, low-income communities, or Tribal 
 and Indigenous communities, that experience, or are at 
 risk of experiencing, higher or more adverse human 
 health or environmental effects; or
 (B) notwithstanding subparagraph (A), a definition 
 established by the State in which the public lending 
 bank is located, if--
 (i) the definition was established by using 
 a process established, by rule, jointly by the 
 Environmental Protection Agency and the Council 
 on Environmental Quality; and
 (ii) the State establishes a corresponding 
 screening tool to identify which communities 
 are an environmental justice community under 
 such definition.
 (7) Public member bank.--The term ``public member bank'' 
 means a covered bank that is a member of the Federal Reserve 
 System.
 (8) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of the Treasury.
 (9) State.--The term ``State'' means each of the several 
 States, the District of Columbia, and any commonwealth, 
 territory, or possession of the United States.
 (10) Tribal and indigenous community.--The term ``Tribal 
 and indigenous community'' means a population of people who are 
 members of--
 (A) a federally recognized Indian Tribe;
 (B) a State-recognized Indian Tribe;
 (C) an Alaska Native community or organization;
 (D) a Native Hawaiian community or organization; or
 (E) any other Indigenous community located in a 
 State.
 (11) Tribal covered bank.--The term ``Tribal covered bank'' 
 means a covered bank that is wholly owned and controlled by--
 (A) a Tribal government, including a unit of local 
 Tribal government, or Tribal government agency;
 (B) a Tribally chartered corporation;
 (C) a nonprofit instrumentality designated by a 
 Tribal government as acting in the public interest of a 
 community within such Tribe, including an 
 unincorporated community; or
 (D) an association of 1 or more entities described 
 in subparagraphs (A) through (C).

 TITLE I--FEDERAL RECOGNITION OF PUBLIC BANKS

SEC. 101. FEDERAL CHARTER OF PUBLIC LENDING BANKS AND PUBLIC PAYMENT 
 BANKS.

 (a) In General.--The Board of Governors shall charter public 
lending banks and public payment banks.
 (b) Public Lending Bank Defined.--In this Act, the term ``public 
lending bank'' means a person that--
 (1) is wholly owned and controlled by--
 (A) a State or Tribal government, including a unit 
 of local government, or government agency;
 (B) a State or Tribally chartered corporation;
 (C) a nonprofit instrumentality designated by a 
 State or Tribal government as acting in the public 
 interest of a community within such State or Tribe, 
 including an unincorporated community; or
 (D) an association of 1 or more entities described 
 in subparagraphs (A) through (C);
 (2) that--
 (A) is not owned or governed by, operated as a 
 subsidiary of, or otherwise affiliated with any for-
 profit entity;
 (B) does not own, govern, or operate a subsidiary 
 that is any for-profit entity; and
 (C) does not compensate any employee, executive, or 
 board member at a rate to exceed the salary of the 
 President of the United States for that equivalent 
 period; and
 (3) provides--
 (A) fiscal agent services;
 (B) money transmitter services;
 (C) digital dollar services as a pass-through 
 intermediary for the Federal Government;
 (D) depository services;
 (E) banking services in partnership with the United 
 States Postal Service;
 (F) municipal deposit services;
 (G) securities-related services; or
 (H) any lending product approved by the Board of 
 Governors, including participation loans and letters of 
 credit.
 (c) Public Payment Bank Defined.--In this Act, the term ``public 
payment bank'' means a person that--
 (1) is wholly owned and controlled by an entity described 
 in subsection (b)(1);
 (2) provides at least one of the services specified in 
 subparagraphs (A) through (F) of subsection (b)(3); and
 (3) does not provide the services specified in subparagraph 
 (G) or (H) of subsection (b)(3).
 (d) Exception of Certain Public Lending Banks From Consideration as 
Bank Holding Company.--A person or entity described in subsection 
(b)(1) shall not be considered a bank holding company under the Bank 
Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1841 et seq.) or any other law, 
solely due to the person or entity's ownership or control of a public 
lending bank, public payment bank, or non-federally chartered bank.

SEC. 102. FEDERAL RECOGNITION OF NON-FEDERALLY CHARTERED BANKS.

 (a) Certificates of Recognition.--The Board of Governors shall 
issue certificates of Federal recognition to non-federally chartered 
banks.
 (b) Non-Federally Chartered Bank Defined.--In this Act, the term 
``non-federally chartered bank'' means a person that is--
 (1) wholly owned and controlled by an entity described in 
 section 101(b)(1); and
 (2) either--
 (A) chartered as a non-depository institution by an 
 approved non-Federal financial regulator described in 
 subsection (c); or
 (B) insured as a depository institution by the 
 Corporation, by an approved non-Federal financial 
 regulator described in subsection (c), or under an 
 alternate public deposit insurance scheme approved by 
 the Corporation.
 (c) List of Approved Non-Federal Financial Regulators.--The Board 
of Governors shall establish and maintain on a public website of the 
Board of Governors a list of approved non-Federal financial regulators 
for the purpose of determining eligibility for a certificate of Federal 
recognition under this section.
 (d) Conversion.--At the request of a non-federally chartered bank, 
the Board of Governors may convert such bank into a public payment bank 
or a public lending bank.
 (e) Services.--A non-federally chartered bank--
 (1) may not offer depository services before--
 (A) obtaining--
 (i) deposit insurance or conditional 
 deposit insurance from the Corporation; or
 (ii) deposit insurance from alternate 
 public deposit insurance scheme approved by the 
 Corporation; and
 (B) becoming a public member bank or a conditional 
 public member in accordance with section 103(b); and
 (2) may--
 (A) invest any funds held on behalf of an entity 
 described in section 101(b)(1) in a fiscal agent 
 account;
 (B) provide fiscal agent services, including 
 sending and receiving money and effectuating payments 
 to and from any entity whose funds are invested in a 
 fiscal agent account;
 (C) invest any funds held on behalf of an entity 
 not described in section 101(b)(1) in a payments 
 account or as digital dollar products; and
 (D) provide money transmitter and digital dollar 
 services.

SEC. 103. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM MEMBERSHIP.

 (a) Eligibility.--A covered bank shall be eligible for membership 
in the Federal reserve system as a public member bank and, except as 
provided in subsection (c), shall be treated in the same manner as a 
member bank under section 4 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 308).
 (b) Conditional Public Member Bank.--The Board of Governors shall 
establish a special category of public member bank, called a 
``conditional public member bank'', for persons that are in the process 
of applying for becoming a covered bank. Such conditional public member 
banks shall be subject to such conditions and restrictions as the Board 
of Governors determines to be necessary and appropriate to promote 
public welfare, provided that such conditions and restrictions are not 
arbitrary, punitive, or unduly burdensome.
 (c) Purchasing Stock.--The Board of Governors may not require a 
covered bank to purchase stock in a Federal reserve bank or otherwise 
maintain paid-in capital in the Federal reserve system.

SEC. 104. PUBLIC MEMBER BANK SERVICES.

 (a) Purposes of Services.--The Board of Governors shall offer the 
services described in subsection (b) to public member banks in order 
to--
 (1) promote the safety, soundness, viability, and 
 resiliency of publicly owned and operated financial 
 institutions;
 (2) facilitate the provision of payments, credit, and other 
 financial services as a public good; and
 (3) support the financial and budgetary health of State and 
 Tribal governments, local government units, government 
 agencies, State or tribally chartered corporations, nonprofit 
 entities designated by a State or Tribal government to be 
 acting in the public interest of a community within such State 
 or Tribe, or an association of one or more of such entities.
 (b) Services.--The Board of Governors shall offer the following 
services to public member banks:
 (1) Fiscal agent accounts--
 (A) in which public member banks may invest funds 
 held on behalf of any entity described in section 
 101(b)(1); and
 (B) under which--
 (i) the Board of Governors shall pay 
 interest on all balances held overnight in such 
 fiscal agent accounts at a rate that is greater 
 than or equal to the greater of--
 (I) the sum of the overnight policy 
 target rate plus two percent; or
 (II) the daily rate on 30-year 
 marketable Treasury bonds; and
 (ii) the interest described in clause (i) 
 (minus a reasonable administrative fee imposed 
 by the public member bank) shall be paid to the 
 entity for which the public member bank 
 invested such funds.
 (2) Payment accounts--
 (A) in which public member banks may invest funds 
 held on behalf of any entity other than an entity 
 described in section 101(b)(1) for purposes of 
 providing money transmitter services; and
 (B) under which the Board of Governors shall pay 
 interest (minus a reasonable administrative fee) on all 
 balances held overnight in such fiscal agent accounts 
 at a rate that is greater than or equal to the greater 
 of--
 (i) the overnight rate paid on required 
 reserves; or
 (ii) the overnight rate paid on excess 
 reserves.
 (3)(A) Digital dollar services in which public member banks 
 may operate as pass-through intermediaries for any digital 
 dollar or other financial services offered by the Federal 
 Government, including--
 (i) digital dollar account wallets administered by 
 the Board of Governors (commonly known as 
 ``FedAccounts'');
 (ii) digital dollar cash wallets administered by 
 the Secretary (commonly known as ``eCash''); and
 (iii) postal banking services provided by the 
 United States Postal Service.
 (B) The Board of Governors may issue regulations as 
 necessary to ensure effective harmonization and coordination 
 between covered banks and any entities responsible for 
 administering digital dollar services on behalf of the Federal 
 Government.
 (4)(A) A facility (to be known as the ``Public Bank Primary 
 Liquidity Facility'') to provide liquidity to public member 
 banks by buying or lending (at a reasonable rate of interest 
 that is not greater than the overnight policy target rate) 
 against federally recognized public loans (as described in 
 section 105) and federally-recognized public securities (as 
 described in section 201(b)), under terms and conditions that 
 the Board of Governors determines to be necessary and 
 appropriate to promote public welfare.
 (B) The facility under subparagraph (A) shall purchase or 
 accept loans or securities under such subparagraph at face 
 value.
 (5)(A) A facility (to be known as the ``Public Bank 
 Supplementary Liquidity Facility'') to provide liquidity to 
 public member banks by buying or lending (at a reasonable rate 
 of interest that is not greater than the overnight policy 
 target rate) against assets not otherwise eligible to be 
 purchased or accepted as collateral under paragraph (4).
 (B) The facility under subparagraph (A) may purchase or 
 accept assets as collateral under such subparagraph at a 
 reasonable discount.
 (6) A facility (to be known as the ``Public Bank Credit 
 Facility'') to provide credit to public member banks on an 
 unsecured basis, in such amounts and such rates of interests as 
 the Board of Governors determines to be necessary and 
 appropriate to promote public welfare.
 (7) A facility (to be known as the ``Federally Recognized 
 Public Loan Facility'') to, in consultation with the 
 Corporation--
 (A) develop rules, standards, and criteria for 
 Federal recognition of loans, mortgages, credit cards, 
 account overdrafts, and other direct lending products 
 issued by public member banks; and
 (B) provide prepurchase agreements under which the 
 facility will purchase loans and agree that such loans 
 will be repurchased by the public member bank at such 
 time as is agreed upon by such facility and member 
 bank.
 (c) Administrative, Operating, and Maintenance Costs.--The Board of 
Governors shall pay all administrative, operating, and maintenance 
costs associated with the accounts, services, and facilities described 
in subsection (b).
 (d) Reimbursement.--The Board of Governors shall reimburse a public 
member bank for any expenses reasonably incurred in the process of 
operating as a pass-through intermediary described in subsection 
(b)(3).
 (e) Expenses.--
 (1) Member services.--Any expenses incurred by the Board of 
 Governors under paragraphs (1) through (3) of subsection (b) 
 and under subsections (c) and (d) shall be recorded--
 (A) in an account to be known as the ``Special 
 Public Member Bank Services Account'' established at 
 the Federal Reserve Bank of New York; and
 (B) as a deferred asset (as described in section 
 11.96 of the Financial Accounting Manual for Federal 
 Reserve Banks, as in effect on the date of the 
 enactment of this Act) and maintained separately from 
 the balance sheet of the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
 York and the Federal Reserve System, so as to not 
 reduce or impact the calculation of total income or 
 revenue generated by the Federal Reserve System, or 
 otherwise reduce the total amount of net operating 
 profits to be made available for remittance to the 
 Treasury on an ongoing basis.
 (2) Facilities.--Any expenses incurred by the Board of 
 Governors under paragraphs (4) through (7) of subsection (b) 
 shall be recorded--
 (A) in an account to be known as the ``Special 
 Public Member Bank Liquidity and Credit Account'' 
 established at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York; 
 and
 (B) as a deferred asset (as described in section 
 11.96 of the Financial Accounting Manual for Federal 
 Reserve Banks, as in effect on the date of the 
 enactment of this Act) and maintained separately from 
 the balance sheet of the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
 York and the Federal Reserve System, so as to not 
 reduce or impact the calculation of total income or 
 revenue generated by the Federal Reserve System, or 
 otherwise reduce the total amount of net operating 
 profits to be made available for remittance to the 
 Treasury on an ongoing basis.

SEC. 105. SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO COVERED BANKS.

 (a) Public Purpose Bank Requirement.--
 (1) In general.--A covered bank shall serve the public good 
 and promote the general welfare.
 (2) Definition in governing documents.--A covered bank 
 shall define the terms ``public good'' and ``promote the 
 general welfare'' in the governing documents of the covered 
 bank, after such definitions are approved by either--
 (A) the Governing Assembly of the covered bank; or
 (B) if the covered bank does not have a Governing 
 Assembly, the Board of Directors.
 (b) Democratic Governance.--
 (1) Governance policy.--Before the end of the 2-year period 
 beginning on the formation of a covered bank, the Board of 
 Directors of the covered bank or the Governing Assembly of the 
 covered bank shall establish a formal governance policy for the 
 covered bank.
 (2) Institutionalization of a democratic governance 
 structure.--A covered bank shall institutionalize a democratic 
 governance structure through the following:
 (A) Board of directors.--The establishment of a 
 Board of Directors--
 (i) charged with ensuring that fiduciary 
 duties of the covered bank are met;
 (ii) charged with ensuring the covered bank 
 complies with policies and procedures required 
 by statute, regulation, and principles of 
 safety and soundness;
 (iii) with no less than 5 members, of 
 which--
 (I) at least one-third of the 
 members shall represent community-
 based, nonprofit organizations based 
 primarily within the geographic area of 
 (or, with respect to a corporation or 
 nonprofit instrumentality, the 
 geographic area served by) the relevant 
 entity described in section 101(b)(1);
 (II) at least one member shall have 
 demonstrated experience with, and 
 endorsement from, organizations 
 representing historically excluded and 
 marginalized groups based primarily 
 within the geographic area of (or, with 
 respect to a corporation or nonprofit 
 instrumentality, the geographic area 
 served by) the relevant entity 
 described in section 101(b)(1);
 (III) at least one member shall 
 have demonstrated experience with, and 
 endorsement from, environmental justice 
 or environmental organizations based 
 primarily within the geographic area of 
 (or, with respect to a corporation or 
 nonprofit instrumentality, the 
 geographic area served by) the relevant 
 entity described in section 101(b)(1);
 (IV) at least one member shall have 
 demonstrated experience with, and 
 endorsement from, community development 
 organizations based primarily within 
 the geographic area of (or, with 
 respect to a corporation or nonprofit 
 instrumentality, the geographic area 
 served by) the relevant entity 
 described in section 101(b)(1);
 (V) at least one member shall have 
 demonstrated experience with, and 
 endorsement from, labor organizations 
 based primarily within the geographic 
 area of (or, with respect to a 
 corporation or nonprofit 
 instrumentality, the geographic area 
 served by) the relevant entity 
 described in section 101(b)(1); and
 (VI) with respect to a Tribal 
 covered bank, include a number of 
 representatives of Indigenous 
 communities on the board roughly 
 proportionate to the percentage of the 
 population of the geographic area of 
 the relevant entity described in 
 section 101(b)(1) who are Indigenous;
 (iv) with respect to a covered bank with a 
 Governing Assembly and a People's Review Board, 
 that is--
 (I) responsible for the basic 
 operations of the covered bank, 
 including--
 (aa) hiring and firing 
 senior management;
 (bb) monitoring and 
 assessing the covered bank's 
 performance, operations, and 
 investment decisions;
 (cc) producing internal 
 annual reports; and
 (dd) interfacing with the 
 People's Review Board in the 
 issuance of public-facing 
 reports; and
 (II) responsible for ensuring that 
 the mandates set by the Governing 
 Assembly are successfully implemented; 
 and
 (v) with respect to a covered bank without 
 a Governing Assembly and People's Review Board, 
 responsible for the basic operations of the 
 covered bank, including--
 (I) those responsibilities 
 described under item (aa) through (cc) 
 of clause (iv)(I);
 (II) setting the core mandates and 
 policies which guide the covered bank's 
 activities; and
 (III) issuing public-facing 
 reports.
 (B) Requirement for larger public lending banks.--
 With respect to a public lending bank with more than 
 $500,000,000 in total assets--
 (i) the establishment of a Governing 
 Assembly, which--
 (I) shall--
 (aa) be responsible for 
 setting the broad priorities of 
 the public lending bank's 
 financing and loan programs 
 over a multi-year investment 
 cycle;
 (bb) generate the public 
 lending bank's core mandates;
 (cc) make binding decisions 
 on the policy of the public 
 lending bank without exercising 
 control over day-to-day 
 decision making;
 (dd) be composed of members 
 in a manner that ensures 
 adequate representation of, or 
 democratic accountability to, 
 residents within the geographic 
 area of (or, with respect to a 
 corporation or nonprofit 
 instrumentality, the geographic 
 area served by) the relevant 
 entity described in section 
 101(b)(1); and
 (ee) with respect to a 
 Tribal covered bank, include a 
 number of representatives of 
 Indigenous communities on the 
 Governing Assembly roughly 
 proportionate to the percentage 
 of the population of the 
 geographic area of the relevant 
 entity described in section 
 101(b)(1) who are Indigenous; 
 and
 (II) may only have members selected 
 by sortition if--
 (aa) a super-majority of 
 the members are selected by a 
 stratified sampling of 
 residents based primarily 
 within the geographic area of 
 (or, with respect to a 
 corporation or nonprofit 
 instrumentality, the geographic 
 area served by) the relevant 
 entity described in section 
 101(b)(1);
 (bb) the Governing Assembly 
 is professionally facilitated, 
 deliberative in nature, and 
 draw upon outside experts 
 representing a range of 
 divergent interests and 
 viewpoints;
 (cc) the members selected 
 through sortition are required 
 to receive a comprehensive 
 orientation and intensive 
 training on banking regulation 
 and finance prior to 
 participating in decision 
 making, and required to receive 
 continuing educational 
 programming throughout their 
 term; and
 (dd) no member serves for 
 longer than 6 months, absent 
 extenuating circumstances; and
 (ii) the establishment of a People's Review 
 Board--
 (I) which shall act in an advisory 
 and oversight capacity for the public 
 lending bank, including--
 (aa) monitoring and 
 assessing the public lending 
 bank's performance, operations, 
 and investment decisions to 
 ensure they are consistent with 
 the core mandates and policies 
 established by the Governing 
 Assembly;
 (bb) assessing the 
 priorities and mandates of the 
 public lending bank;
 (cc) ensuring the 
 viewpoints of affected groups 
 are represented in the policy 
 of the public lending bank; and
 (dd) providing information 
 and recommendations to the 
 Governing Assembly and Board of 
 Directors of the public lending 
 bank;
 (II) which shall have access to all 
 public lending bank information 
 pertinent to the operations and 
 performance of the People's Review 
 Board;
 (III) the meetings of which shall 
 be open to public observation;
 (IV) which shall issue an annual 
 report of the findings and 
 recommendations of the People's Review 
 Board, and make such report publicly 
 available online;
 (V) the structure of which shall 
 ensure adequate representation of, or 
 democratic accountability to, residents 
 within the geographic area of (or, with 
 respect to a corporation or nonprofit 
 instrumentality, the geographic area 
 served by) the relevant entity 
 described in section 101(b)(1);
 (VI) the membership of which shall 
 prioritize community members 
 representing historically redlined and 
 marginalized communities; and
 (VII) which may only have members 
 selected by sortition if--
 (aa) a super-majority of 
 the members are selected by a 
 stratified sampling of 
 residents based primarily 
 within the geographic area of 
 (or, with respect to a 
 corporation or nonprofit 
 instrumentality, the geographic 
 area served by) the relevant 
 entity described in section 
 101(b)(1);
 (bb) the People's Review 
 Board is professionally 
 facilitated, deliberative in 
 nature, and draw upon outside 
 experts representing a range of 
 divergent interests and 
 viewpoints; and
 (cc) the members selected 
 through sortition are required 
 to receive a comprehensive 
 orientation and intensive 
 training on banking regulation 
 and finance prior to 
 participating in decision 
 making, and required to receive 
 continuing educational 
 programming throughout their 
 term.
 (c) Tribal Covered Bank Lending Priorities.--A Tribal covered bank 
shall prioritize loans to Indigenous communities.
 (d) Environmental Policy.--Before the end of the 2-year period 
beginning on the formation of a covered bank, the Board of Directors of 
the covered bank or the Governing Assembly of the covered bank shall 
establish a formal environmental or environmental justice policy for 
the covered bank.
 (e) Use and Disclosure of Financial Information and Technology.--
 (1) Gramm-Leach-Bliley act.--Title V of the Gramm-Leach-
 Bliley Act (15 U.S.C. 6801 et seq.) shall apply to a covered 
 bank to the same extent such title applies to a financial 
 institution.
 (2) Use of technology.--A covered bank shall--
 (A) wherever feasible, prefer, use, and promote 
 open source technologies;
 (B) wherever possible, license under a copyleft 
 license any software, hardware, or other digital 
 technologies that are developed, financed, or otherwise 
 owned by the covered bank;
 (C) wherever possible, make any software acquired 
 or developed by the covered bank available to other 
 covered banks to study, copy, and use, at zero cost, 
 upon request; and
 (D) generally take all reasonable efforts to 
 encourage and promote technology sharing and the 
 development of technological best practices and common 
 standards.
 (3) Expectation of privacy.--A covered bank shall--
 (A) maintain an individual or entity's legitimate 
 expectation of privacy if that individual or entity is 
 a customer of the covered bank; and
 (B) not be presumed to have given up such a 
 legitimate expectation of privacy on the basis of the 
 third-party doctrine articulated by the Supreme Court 
 in United States v. Miller (1976).
 (4) Data privacy.--Data obtained by a covered bank--
 (A) may not be sold to third parties, except 
 consumer reporting agencies;
 (B) that is shared with a third party by the 
 covered bank, shall maintain an assumed right of 
 privacy;
 (C) with respect to lending data, may only be 
 shared with--
 (i) Federal, State, or Tribal agencies; or
 (ii) a third party that is a consumer 
 reporting agency under the Fair Credit 
 Reporting Act and is in compliance with such 
 Act; and
 (D) with respect to account data, may only be 
 accessed by appropriate warrant or administrative 
 search subpoena.
 (5) Metadata.--A covered bank--
 (A) may not share metadata with private or for-
 profit third parties; and
 (B) shall hold metadata unused in a manner 
 consistent with rights of privacy and duty of care.
 (f) Terms of Lending.--
 (1) Establishment of policy on lending practices.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than the end of the 1-
 year period beginning on the date of the formation of a 
 public lending bank, the public lending bank shall 
 establish a policy on lending practices. With respect 
 to a public lending bank in existence on the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the policy on lending practices 
 shall be established before the end of the 1-year 
 period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act.
 (B) Update of policy.--A public lending bank shall 
 update the policy on lending practices required under 
 subparagraph (A) at least every 5 years.
 (C) Public comment process.--A public lending bank 
 shall provide for a public comment period of at least 
 90 days before the establishment of, and any update of, 
 the policy on lending practices required under this 
 paragraph.
 (2) Lending preferences.--For purposes of determining the 
 projects with respect to which a public lending bank extends 
 loans, the public lending bank shall give preference to 
 projects that--
 (A) maximize the creation of high-quality 
 employment and apprenticeship opportunities for local 
 workers, consistent with the public interest, 
 especially workers from environmental justice 
 communities and labor organizations;
 (B) certify, for all contractors and 
 subcontractors, that the rights of workers to organize 
 and unionize are recognized;
 (C) agree to implement a project labor agreement;
 (D) ensure that no less than 40 percent of the 
 monetary value of such loans provide direct benefits, 
 including economic and health benefits, to 
 environmental justice communities; and
 (E) meet unmet needs in the local banking market.
 (3) Requirements on who may receive loans.--The public 
 lending bank shall require, for any project for which the 
 public lending bank extends a loan, that--
 (A) the recipient does not oppose or resist 
 unionization efforts involving projects utilizing 
 public funds;
 (B) if the loan is $500,000 or more, as a condition 
 of receiving the loan, the recipient shall ensure that 
 all laborers employed by a nongovernmental entity that 
 enters into a contract for the performance of 
 construction, alteration, or repair work that is 
 facilitated, in whole or in part, by such loan, or a 
 subcontract thereof, are paid wages at rates not less 
 than those prevailing on similar construction, 
 alteration, or repair work in the locality as 
 determined by the Secretary of Labor in accordance with 
 subchapter IV of chapter 31 of title 40, United States 
 Code (commonly referred to as the ``Davis-Bacon Act'') 
 and with respect to such labor standards, the Secretary 
 of Labor shall have the authority and functions set 
 forth in Reorganization Plan Numbered 14 of 1950 (64 
 Stat. 1267; 5 U.S.C. App.) and section 3145 of title 
 40, United States Code;
 (C) if the project with respect to which the loan 
 is being extended has a budget of $35,000,000 or more, 
 all contractors and subcontractors shall implement a 
 project labor agreement that includes--
 (i) goals for hiring local community 
 members, economically disadvantaged workers, or 
 workers from other underrepresented 
 communities;
 (ii) an equity plan, including--
 (I) the impacts of the proposed 
 project on underserved communities, 
 including social and environmental 
 impacts;
 (II) the overall benefits of the 
 proposed project, if funded, to 
 underserved communities; and
 (III) how diversity, equity, and 
 inclusion objectives will be 
 incorporated into the project; and
 (iii) strategic recruitment and retention 
 policies for workers from underserved 
 communities and people facing systemic barriers 
 to employment; and
 (D) if the project is for the acquisition, 
 construction, or renovation of, or addition to, a 
 residential building which includes rental units, the 
 recipient--
 (i) may not discriminate when renting the 
 units based on an applicant's source of income, 
 sexual orientation, gender expression or 
 identity, immigration status, conviction or 
 arrest history, bankruptcy history, eviction 
 history, or credit score;
 (ii) shall ensure the right of tenants to 
 organize tenant unions, associations, or 
 resident councils;
 (iii) shall utilize minimum time-bound 
 affordability requirements of at least 99 years 
 for affordable housing;
 (iv) except with respect to a building 
 assisted under section 9 of the United States 
 Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437g) or a 
 building that has been issued a certificate of 
 occupancy within the previous 5 years, may not 
 increase rent on an annual basis in excess of 
 the annual percent change in the Consumer Price 
 Index for All Urban Consumers published by the 
 Bureau of Labor Statistics of the Department of 
 Labor for the closest metropolitan core based 
 statistical area, rounded to one decimal place, 
 as established the August preceding the 
 calendar year in question or 3 percent, 
 whatever is less; and
 (v) shall practice avoidance and mitigation 
 of displacement, including by establishing a 
 right of return and temporary relocation for 
 tenants displaced by renovations.
 (4) Application of certain laws.--The following Acts shall 
 apply to a public lending bank to the same extent as such Acts 
 apply to applicable persons subject to such Acts:
 (A) The Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1601 et 
 seq.).
 (B) The Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681 
 et seq.).
 (C) The Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 
 1691 et seq.).
 (D) The Fair Debt Collection Practices Act (15 
 U.S.C. 1692 et seq.).
 (g) Terms of Retail Account Services.--Any covered bank that holds, 
administers, or manages funds on behalf of any unincorporated person in 
a payments account, or otherwise accepts funds on deposit or for the 
purpose of providing public depository accounts services--
 (1) may not--
 (A) impose any fees, minimum balances, or maximum 
 balances on such payments accounts or public depository 
 accounts; or
 (B) include on such payments accounts or public 
 depository accounts overdraft fees or penalties;
 (2) shall--
 (A) prominently brand any such payments account or 
 public depository account as a ``public bank account'' 
 in all account statements, marketing materials, and 
 other communications of the public bank; and
 (B) provide such account holders with reasonable 
 protection against losses caused by fraud or security 
 breaches, as determined by the Corporation or the 
 Director of the Bureau of Consumer Financial 
 Protection, or both; and
 (3) may only close or restrict access to such payments 
 accounts or public depository accounts on the basis of the 
 mandate of the covered bank.
 (h) Terms of Retail Credit.--
 (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any provision of law, the 
 annual percentage rate applicable to any extension of credit by 
 a covered bank may not exceed the lesser of--
 (A) 15 percent on unpaid balances, inclusive of all 
 finance charges; or
 (B) the maximum rate permitted by the laws of the 
 State in which the consumer resides.
 (2) Other fees.--Any fees that are not considered finance 
 charges under paragraph (1), including fees for ancillary 
 products and services, may not--
 (A) exceed the total amount of finance charges 
 assessed; and
 (B) be imposed in such a way as to evade or 
 frustrate the purpose of limiting the total interest 
 and related costs that may be charged in relation to 
 any lending product issued by covered banks under this 
 Act.
 (3) Penalties for charging higher rates on retail credit.--
 (A) Violation.--The taking, receiving, reserving, 
 or charging of an annual percentage rate or fee greater 
 than that permitted by paragraph (1), when knowingly 
 done, shall be a violation of this subsection, and a 
 forfeiture of the entire interest which the note, bill, 
 or other evidence of the obligation carries with it, or 
 which has been agreed to be paid thereon.
 (B) Refund of interest amounts.--
 (i) In general.--With respect to a person 
 charging interest, a finance charge, or a fee 
 greater than that permitted by paragraph (1), 
 the person paying such interest, finance 
 charge, or fee may notify the Bureau of 
 Consumer Financial Protection, and the Bureau 
 of Consumer Financial Protection shall take 
 such enforcement actions as the Director of the 
 Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection 
 determines appropriate.
 (ii) Lack of bureau action.--If a person 
 notifies the Bureau of Consumer Financial 
 Protection under clause (i), and the Bureau of 
 Consumer Financial Protection takes no action 
 with respect to such notice during the 60-day 
 period following such notice, such person may 
 bring an action in a Federal district court to 
 recover the entire amount of interest, finance 
 charges, or fees paid.
 (C) Civil liability.--Any creditor who violates 
 this subsection shall be subject to the provisions of 
 section 130(a) of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 
 1640(a)).
 (D) Bank secrecy act.--In establishing and 
 maintaining personal accounts, each covered bank shall 
 comply with--
 (i) section 21 of the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1829b);
 (ii) section 123 of Public Law 91-508; and
 (iii) subchapter II of chapter 53 of title 
 31, United States Code.
 (i) Annual Reporting Requirements.--Each covered bank shall make 
publicly available an annual report on the activities of such covered 
bank, including recipients of financial services, sources of funding, 
financial reporting, and evaluation of the effectiveness of the covered 
bank's services in achieving the public purposes for which it was 
chartered, as well as any other purposes, goals, and targets under this 
Act or other law or regulation, including the percentage of the 
monetary value of a public lending bank's loans which provide direct 
benefits to environmental justice communities.
 (j) Other Excluded Activities.--A covered bank may not provide 
loans to, make investments in, or otherwise engage in any activity that 
is financial in nature, or incidental to such financial activity, 
with--
 (1) a company supporting--
 (A) weapon or gun manufacturing;
 (B) private prisons;
 (C) immigration detention facilities; or
 (D) the tobacco industry; or
 (2) a company that has--
 (A) a C.E.O. to median worker pay ratio in excess 
 of 100:1, as determined by the National Labor Relations 
 Board;
 (B) a history of unfair labor practices, as 
 determined by the Secretary of Labor;
 (C) a history of violations of the Fair Labor 
 Standards Act of 1938 and the Occupational Safety and 
 Health Act of 1970, as determined by the Secretary of 
 Labor; or
 (D) a history of offshore tax avoidance, as 
 determined by the Commissioner of the Internal Revenue 
 Service.
 (k) Clarifying the Eligibility of Public Lending Banks and Public 
Payment Banks for Certain Federal Programs.--
 (1) Elective payment of applicable credits.--Section 
 6417(d)(1)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended--
 (A) in clause (v), by striking ``or'' at the end;
 (B) in clause (vi), by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting ``, or''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(vii) a public lending bank or a public 
 payment bank (as such terms are defined, 
 respectively, under section 101 of the Public 
 Banking Act of 2023).''.
 (2) Incentives for innovative technologies.--Section 
 1701(7)(B) of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (42 U.S.C. 
 16511(7)(B)) is amended by inserting ``and an entity that is a 
 public lending bank or a public payment bank (as such terms are 
 defined, respectively, under section 101 of the Public Banking 
 Act of 2023)'' before the period at the end.
 (l) Exception for Existing Public Banks.--
 (1) In general.--Subsections (b), (e), (f), (g), and (h) 
 shall not apply to a covered bank in existence on the date of 
 enactment of this Act.
 (2) Public bank grant program participants.--Paragraph (1) 
 shall cease to apply to a covered bank described under that 
 paragraph after the end of the 24-month period beginning on the 
 date the covered bank receives a public bank grant under 
 section 501.

SEC. 106. REGULATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Board of Governors, the Director of the 
Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, and the Corporation shall 
jointly--
 (1) establish a separate regulatory scheme with respect to 
 public lending banks, public payment banks, and non-federally 
 chartered banks that receive or are in the process of receiving 
 a certificate of Federal recognition under section 102; and
 (2) after a notice and comment period during which consumer 
 advocacy organizations shall be invited to submit feedback and 
 suggestions, issue such regulations as are necessary and 
 appropriate to promote public welfare with respect to public 
 lending banks, public payment banks, and non-federally 
 chartered banks that receive or are in the process of receiving 
 a certificate of Federal recognition under section 102.
 (b) Regulations With Respect to Excluded and Marginalized Groups.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Board of Governors shall issue 
 regulations for public lending banks, public payment banks, and 
 non-federally chartered banks to ensure that the services 
 provided by such banks are universal and comprehensively 
 include historically excluded and marginalized groups.
 (2) Limitations.--A regulation issued under this subsection 
 may not--
 (A) supersede or supplant any other stronger 
 regulations or standards promulgated by other Federal 
 or applicable State regulatory entities, including any 
 such regulation issued by the Corporation or the 
 Director of the Bureau of Consumer Financial 
 Protection; and
 (B) result in less robust or less stringent 
 protections to consumers than protections that exist on 
 the date of the enactment of this Act for consumers 
 served by other existing categories of depository 
 institutions, including protection under the Community 
 Reinvestment Act of 1977 (12 U.S.C. 2901 et seq.).
 (3) Data reporting.--The Board of Governors and the 
 Corporation shall jointly, in a manner that respects the 
 privacy of covered bank customers to the greatest extent 
 possible, develop an annual assessment for determining if 
 covered banks have appropriately provided services to all 
 customers within the jurisdiction of service, based on 
 demographic information chosen by regulators, including race, 
 gender, and area median income of such customers.
 (c) Ecological Sustainability Considerations and Prohibitions on 
Fossil Fuel Investment.--
 (1) In general.--The Board of Governors, the Corporation, 
 and the Commission shall jointly develop and promulgate rules 
 and regulations to--
 (A) ensure that any and all activities undertaken 
 and services offered by a covered bank, or any person 
 seeking or in the process of becoming a covered bank, 
 are consistent with Federal and scientifically 
 established standards, goals, and targets with respect 
 to ecological sustainability, climate crisis-
 mitigation, and decarbonization; and
 (B) require that any covered bank or person seeking 
 or in the process of becoming a covered bank, may not 
 facilitate fossil fuel production, processing, or 
 infrastructure, including by--
 (i) providing loans to, making investments 
 in, or otherwise engaging in any activity that 
 is financial in nature, or incidental to such 
 financial activity, with a fossil fuel company;
 (ii) providing loans to, making investments 
 in, or otherwise engaging in any activity that 
 is financial in nature, or incidental to such 
 financial activity, for a fossil fuel project;
 (iii) taking compensation to arrange or 
 facilitate a transaction that provides funds 
 for fossil fuel production or processing from 
 existing or new sources;
 (iv) securitizing assets that provide funds 
 for fossil fuel production or processing from 
 existing or new sources;
 (v) entering into a derivatives transaction 
 designed to provide funding for, facilitate, or 
 hedge risks from fossil fuel production or 
 processing from existing or new sources; and
 (vi) engaging in any activity that is 
 complementary to a financial activity involving 
 fossil fuel production or processing from 
 existing or new sources, including financing 
 the international trade thereof; or any other 
 form of activity defined by regulators or 
 supervisors of the covered bank.
 (2) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) Existing sources.--The term ``existing 
 sources'' means--
 (i) reserves of fossil fuels proven, 
 developed, and producing as of the date of 
 enactment of this section; or
 (ii) fossil infrastructure that would 
 facilitate the production described in clause 
 (i).
 (B) Fossil fuel.--The term ``fossil fuel'' means 
 coal, petroleum, natural gas, or any derivative of 
 coal, petroleum, or natural gas that is used for fuel.
 (C) Fossil infrastructure.--The term ``fossil 
 infrastructure'' means fossil fuel-related projects, 
 including wells, rail infrastructure, pipelines, 
 terminals, refineries, and power plants.
 (D) New sources.--The term ``new sources'' means--
 (i) any production in excess of proven 
 developed producing reserves of fossil fuels as 
 of the date of enactment of this section; or
 (ii) new or expanded fossil infrastructure 
 that would facilitate the production described 
 in clause (i).
 (E) Processing.--The term ``processing'' means the 
 preparation of a chemical substance or mixture 
 (including any chemical transformations of, or physical 
 separations involving, such substance or mixture) after 
 its production or extraction, for distribution in 
 commerce--
 (i) in the same form or physical state as, 
 or in a different form or physical state from, 
 that in which it was received by the person so 
 preparing such substance or mixture; or
 (ii) as part of an article of commerce 
 containing the chemical substance or mixture.
 (F) Production.--The term ``production'' means 
 extractive or production activities that result in 
 fossil fuels being made available for refining or use.
 (d) State Law.--Nothing in this section may be construed to preempt 
any provision of State law that provides greater protection to 
consumers, or establishes more stringent environmental or ecological 
regulations, than is provided in this section.

SEC. 107. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.

 The Board of Governors shall provide technical assistance to public 
member banks to develop, use, and share financial and infrastructure 
technologies, practices, and operational and business practice data 
that promote the public welfare, however such data may not include any 
customer data, including transactional and identifying information.

 TITLE II--FEDERAL RECOGNITION OF PUBLIC SECURITIES

SEC. 201. REGULATION OF PUBLIC LENDING BANKS AND NON-FEDERALLY 
 CHARTERED BANKS.

 (a) In General.--The Commission shall establish a separate 
registration and regulatory scheme for licensing and regulating as 
public investment entities all public lending banks and non-federally 
chartered banks that engage or seek to engage in securities-related 
activities, including origination, investment brokering, dealing, and 
trading of federally-recognized public securities.
 (b) Federally-Recognized Public Securities.--The Board of Governors 
shall, in consultation with the Commission, develop rules, standards, 
and criteria for Federal recognition of securities issued by public 
member banks (to be known as ``federally-recognized public 
securities'') as the Commission determines to be necessary and 
appropriate to promote public welfare.
 (c) Conditional License.--The Commission shall establish a special 
category of public investment entity license for entities that are in 
the process of applying for, but have not yet received, any license to 
issue federally-recognized public securities, which shall be subject to 
such conditions and restrictions as the Commission determines to be 
necessary and appropriate to promote public welfare.

 TITLE III--PUBLIC DEPOSIT INSURANCE

SEC. 301. IN GENERAL.

 (a) Public Deposit Insurance.--Within 6 months of the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Corporation shall establish a separate 
registration and regulatory scheme for providing deposit insurance (to 
be known as ``public deposit insurance'') to covered banks and make 
such deposit insurance available to covered banks without regard to the 
total deposit amount.
 (b) Alternative Public Deposit Insurance.--Within 6 months of the 
date of enactment of this Act, the Corporation shall establish publicly 
available criteria for alternative public deposit insurance schemes 
established and provided by an approved non-Federal financial 
regulator, and subsequently approve, within 6 months of such 
submission, schemes that meet said criteria.
 (c) Conditional Insurance.--Within 6 months of the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Corporation shall establish a separate 
registration and regulatory scheme for providing deposit insurance (to 
be known as ``conditional public deposit insurance'') for entities that 
are in the process of applying for, but have not yet received, public 
deposit insurance, which shall be subject to such conditions and 
restrictions as the Corporation determines to be necessary and 
appropriate to promote public welfare.
 (d) Alternative Risk Profile.--The Corporation shall--
 (1) establish and utilize an alternative risk profile 
 methodology for covered banks at an advantage, in comparison to 
 other depository institutions provided deposit insurance, which 
 accounts for the benefits to the general welfare created by 
 publicly owned and operated financial institutions; and
 (2) within 6 months following the establishment of the 
 alternative risk profile methodology, the Corporation shall 
 publish a publicly available report on the alternative risk 
 profile methodology.

 TITLE IV--POSTAL BANKING

SEC. 401. PARTNERSHIPS WITH COVERED BANKS FOR POSTAL BANKING SERVICES.

 (a) Partnership With USPS.--Notwithstanding section 404(e)(2) of 
title 36, United States Code, the Postmaster General shall, to the 
maximum extent practicable, partner with covered banks to make 
available retail account and payment services provided by covered banks 
at post offices, and via any postal banking platforms established by 
the United States Postal Service.
 (b) Funding.--The Board of Governors shall provide such funding to 
the United States Postal Service as the Postmaster General determines 
to be necessary to achieve carry out subsection (a).
 (c) Treatment of Expenses.--Any expenses incurred by the Board of 
Governors under this section shall be recorded--
 (1) in an account to be known as the ``Special Public 
 Member Bank Services Account'' established at the Federal 
 Reserve Bank of New York; and
 (2) as a deferred asset (as described in section 11.96 of 
 the Financial Accounting Manual for Federal Reserve Banks, as 
 in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act) and 
 maintained separately from the balance sheet of the Federal 
 Reserve Bank of New York and the Federal Reserve System, so as 
 to not reduce or impact the calculation of total income or 
 revenue generated by the Federal Reserve System, or otherwise 
 reduce the total amount of net operating profits to be made 
 available for remittance to the Treasury on an ongoing basis.

 TITLE V--PUBLIC BANK DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS

SEC. 501. PUBLIC BANK GRANT PROGRAM.

 (a) Program Established.--
 (1) In general.--The Board of Governors shall, jointly with 
 the Secretary, carry out a grant program to make grants to 
 covered banks, or persons seeking to become or in the process 
 of becoming covered banks, to carry out the activities 
 described in subsection (b).
 (2) Considerations for eligibility.--
 (A) Required considerations.--When determining 
 eligibility for grants under this section, the Board of 
 Governors and the Secretary shall consider, among other 
 factors, the extent to which a grant applicant has 
 established an appropriate degree of community 
 involvement and oversight, including dedicated 
 community representation on the governing board, and 
 evidence of support or commitment from community 
 representative organizations.
 (B) Prohibited consideration.--When determining 
 eligibility for grants under this section, the Board of 
 Governors and the Secretary may not consider the 
 budgetary or financial health of the entity that wholly 
 owns or controls a covered bank.
 (b) Use of Funds.--An entity that receives a grant under this 
section may use the grant funds--
 (1) to carry out activities related to bank formation, 
 chartering, and regulatory compliance;
 (2) for capitalization;
 (3) to make payments and develop financial market 
 infrastructure;
 (4) to carry out activities related to information and 
 communications technology;
 (5) to support operations;
 (6) to cover unexpected losses;
 (7) to run sortition processes; and
 (8) to carry out such other activities as the Board of 
 Governors and the Secretary determine appropriate.
 (c) Matching Funds.--The Board of Governors and the Secretary may 
not require that an entity that receives a grant under this section 
provide matching funds with respect to such grant.

SEC. 502. PUBLIC BANK INCUBATOR PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--The Board of Governors shall establish an 
incubator program to provide technical and technological assistance to 
persons seeking to be chartered by the Board of Governors under section 
101 or to obtain a certificate of Federal recognition under section 
102.
 (b) Application.--The Board of Governors, in coordination with the 
Secretary, the Corporation, and the Commission, shall establish a 
single application and review process for persons seeking to--
 (1) be federally chartered under section 101;
 (2) obtain a certificate of Federal recognition under 
 section 102;
 (3) become a public member bank;
 (4) obtain a license to issue federally-recognized public 
 securities under section 201;
 (5) obtain public deposit insurance pursuant to section 301 
 or from a Corporation-approved alternative provider; and
 (6) apply for a grant under section 401.

SEC. 503. COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT GRANT PROGRAM.

 (a) Reasonable Efforts To Coordinate.--Covered banks shall, where 
and as appropriate, make reasonable efforts to coordinate activities 
with community development financial institutions, minority deposit 
institutions, and credit unions to promote community development and 
ensure community-oriented financial services are universal and 
comprehensively include historically excluded and marginalized groups.
 (b) Grants for Coordination.--The Board of Governors shall, jointly 
with the Secretary, award grants to covered banks, community 
development financial institutions, minority deposit institutions, and 
credit unions to facilitate coordination of activities under subsection 
(a).
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Community development financial institution.--The term 
 ``community development financial institution'' has the meaning 
 given the term in section 103(5) of the Riegle Community 
 Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994 (12 U.S.C. 
 4702(5)).
 (2) Credit union.--The term ``credit union'' means a 
 Federal credit union or a State credit union (as such terms are 
 defined in section 101 of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 
 U.S.C. 1752)).
 (3) Minority deposit institution.--The term ``minority 
 deposit institution'' has the meaning given the term in section 
 308(b)(1) of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and 
 Enforcement Act of 1989 (12 U.S.C. 1463(b)(1)).

SEC. 504. TREATMENT OF FUNDING.

 Any expenses incurred by the Board of Governors under this title 
shall be recorded--
 (1) in an account to be known as the ``Special Public Bank 
 Development Programs'' established at the Federal Reserve Bank 
 of New York; and
 (2) as a deferred asset (as described in section 11.96 of 
 the Financial Accounting Manual for Federal Reserve Banks, as 
 in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act) and 
 maintained separately from the balance sheet of the Federal 
 Reserve Bank of New York and the Federal Reserve System, so as 
 to not reduce or impact the calculation of total income or 
 revenue generated by the Federal Reserve System, or otherwise 
 reduce the total amount of net operating profits to be made 
 available for remittance to the Treasury on an ongoing basis.

 TITLE VI--COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

SEC. 601. STATE AND LOCAL INSTRUMENTALITIES ELIGIBLE TO BE COMMUNITY 
 DEVELOPMENT FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS.

 Section 103(5)(A)(v) of the Riegle Community Development and 
Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994 (12 U.S.C. 4702(5)(A)(v)) is amended 
by striking ``, or of any State or political subdivision of a State''.
 <all>