HR 2829 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2829
To strengthen the authority of the Federal Trade Commission regarding fraud
and consumer abuse committed in connection with sales made with a telephone
and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
July 9, 1991
Mr. SWIFT introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To strengthen the authority of the Federal Trade Commission regarding fraud
and consumer abuse committed in connection with sales made with a telephone
and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE, FINDINGS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Telephone Disclosure and
 Dispute Resolution Act'.
 (b) FINDINGS- The Congress finds the following:
 (1) The use of pay-per-call services, most commonly through the use of
 900 numbers, has grown exponentially in the past few years. This payment
 mechanism is convenient to consumers, cost-effective to vendors, and
 profitable to communications common carriers.
 (2) The interstate nature of the pay-per-call industry means that its
 activities are beyond the reach of individual States and therefore requires
 Federal regulatory treatment to protect the public interest.
 (3) The lack of nationally uniform regulatory guidelines has led to
 confusion for consumers, industry, and regulatory agencies as to the rights
 of callers and the oversight responsibilities of regulatory authorities,
 and has allowed some pay-per-call businesses to engage in practices which
 abuse the rights of callers.
 (4) Because the consumer most often incurs a financial obligation as soon as
 a pay-per-call transaction is initiated, the accuracy and descriptiveness
 of vendor advertisements become crucial in avoiding consumer abuse. The
 obligation for accuracy should include price-per-call and duration-of-call
 information, odds disclosure for lotteries, games, and sweepstakes, and
 obligations for obtaining parental consent from callers under 18.
 (5) The continued growth of the legitimate pay-per-call industry is
 dependent upon consumer confidence that unfair and deceptive behavior
 will be effectively curtailed and that consumers will have adequate rights
 of redress.
 (6) Vendors of telephone-billed goods and services must also feel confident
 in their rights and obligations for resolving billing disputes if they are to
 use this new marketplace for the sale of products of more than nominal value.
 (7) Consequently, Congress should enact legislation that will offer
 consumers and vendors necessary protections and help facilitate the growth
 of a robust and competitive pay-per-call marketplace.
TITLE I--TELEMARKETING WITH THE 900 TELEPHONE NUMBER
SEC. 101. REGULATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) The Federal Trade Commission shall prescribe rules, as described in
 this subsection, for any advertisement for services or products procured
 through the use of a telephone number with a 900 prefix or any other prefix
 under which liability for the service or product provided attaches to the
 telephone bill of the individual calling such number. Such rules shall
 require that the person offering such services or products--
 (A) clearly disclose the cost of the use of such telephone number, including
 the rate per minute and, if applicable, for the duration of the call,
 (B) in the case of an advertisement which offers a prize or award or a
 service or product at no cost or for a reduced cost, clearly disclose the
 odds of being able to receive such prize, award, service, or product at
 such cost,
 (C) in the case of individuals under the age of 18 using such telephone
 number, clearly state that such individual must have the consent of such
 individual's parent or legal guardian for the use of such telephone number.
 (2) The Federal Trade Commission shall by rule require a common carrier
 that provides telephone services to a vendor who uses the telephone number
 described in paragraph (1) to make available to the Commission any records
 and financial information maintained by such carrier relating to the
 arrangements between such carrier and vendor.
 (3) A rule issued under paragraph (1) or (2) shall be treated as a rule
 issued under section 18(a)(1)(B) of the Federal Trade Commission Act
 (15 U.S.C. 57a(a)(1)(B)).
 (b) RULEMAKING- The Commission shall prescribe the rules under subsection
 (a) within 270 days after the date of enactment of this Act. Such rules shall
 be prescribed in accordance with section 553 of title 5, United States Code.
 (c) ENFORCEMENT- Any violation of any rule prescribed under subsection (a)
 shall be treated as a violation of a rule under section 5 of the Federal
 Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45) regarding unfair or deceptive acts or
 practices. Notwithstanding section 5(a)(2) of such Act (15 U.S.C. 45(a)(2)),
 communications common carriers shall be subject to the jurisdiction of
 the Federal Trade Commission for purposes of this Act.
SEC. 102. ACTIONS BY STATES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Whenever an attorney general of any State has reason to
 believe that the interests of the residents of that State have been or are
 being threatened or adversely affected because any person has engaged or
 is engaging in a pattern or practice of telemarketing which violates any
 rule of the Commission under section 101(a)(1), the State may bring a civil
 action on behalf of its residents in an appropriate district court of the
 United States to enjoin such telemarketing, to enforce compliance with such
 rule of the Commission, to obtain damages on behalf of their residents,
 or to obtain such further and other relief as the court may deem appropriate.
 (b) NOTICE- The State shall serve prior written notice of any civil action
 under subsection (a) upon the Commission and provide the Commission with a
 copy of its complaint, except that if it is not feasible for the State to
 provide such prior notice, the State shall serve such notice immediately
 upon instituting such action. Upon receiving a notice respecting a civil
 action, the Commission shall have the right (1) to intervene in such action,
 (2) upon so intervening, to be heard on all matters arising therein, and
 (3) to file petitions for appeal.
 (c) CONSTRUCTION- For purposes of bringing any civil action under subsection
 (a), nothing in this Act shall prevent an attorney general from exercising
 the powers conferred on the attorney general by the laws of such State
 to conduct investigations or to administer oaths or affirmations or to
 compel the attendance of witnesses or the production of documentary and
 other evidence.
 (d) ACTIONS BY THE COMMISSION- Whenever the Commission has instituted a
 civil action for violation of any rule prescribed under section 101, no
 State may, during the pendency of such action instituted by the Commission,
 institute a civil action under subsection (a) against any defendant named
 in the Commission's complaint for acts or omissions alleged in the complaint
 for violation of any rule as alleged in the Commission's complaint.
 (e) Actions by Other State Officials-
 (1) Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit an authorized State
 official from proceeding in State court on the basis of an alleged violation
 of any general civil or criminal statute of such State.
 (2) In addition to actions brought by an attorney general of a State
 under subsection (a), such an action may be brought by officers of such
 State who are authorized by the State to bring actions in such State for
 protection of consumers and who are designated by the Commission to bring
 an action under subsection (a) against persons that the Commission has
 determined have or are engaged in a pattern or practice of telemarketing
 which violates a rule of the Commission under section 101.
SEC. 103. ADMINISTRATION AND APPLICABILITY OF TITLE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in section 102, this title
 shall be enforced by the Commission under the Federal Trade Commission
 Act (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.). Consequently, no activity which is outside
 the jurisdiction of that Act shall be affected by this Act, except for
 purposes of this title.
 (b) ACTIONS BY THE COMMISSION- The Commission shall prevent any person
 from violating a rule of the Commission under section 101 in the same
 manner, by the same means, and with the same jurisdiction, powers, and
 duties as though all applicable terms and provisions of the Federal Trade
 Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.) were incorporated into and made a
 part of this title. Any person who violates such rule shall be subject to
 the penalties and entitled to the privileges and immunities provided in
 the Federal Trade Commission Act in the same manner, by the same means,
 and with the same jurisdiction, power, and duties as though all applicable
 terms and provisions of the Federal Trade Commission Act were incorporated
 into and made a part of this title.
SEC. 104. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this title:
 (1) The term `attorney general' means the chief legal officer of a State.
 (2) The term `State' means any State of the United States, the District
 of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Northern Mariana Islands, and any territory
 or possession of the United States.
TITLE II--TELEPHONE SERVICES BILLING AND COLLECTION
SEC. 201. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this title--
 (1) The term `providing carrier' means a local exchange or interexchange
 common carrier providing telephone services to a vendor for a
 telephone-billed purchase that is the subject of a billing error complaint.
 (2) The term `billing carrier' means a local exchange or interexchange
 common carrier that transmits to a customer a statement of charges for a
 telephone-billed purchase.
 (3) The term `vendor' means any person who, through the use of the telephone,
 offers goods or services for a telephone-billed purchase.
 (4) The term `customer' means any person who acquires or attempts to
 acquire goods or services in a telephone-billed purchase.
 (5) The term `telephone-billed purchase' means any goods or services
 (including information services) acquired through the use of the telephone,
 any part of the charges for which are compiled and transmitted through
 the use of billing services provided by a local exchange or interexchange
 common carrier, except that such term does not include local exchange
 telephone services or interexchange telephone services or any service that
 the Federal Communications Commission determines, by rule--
 (A) is closely related to the provision of local exchange telephone services
 or interexchange telephone services; and
 (B) is subject to billing dispute resolution procedures required by Federal
 or State statute or regulation.
 (6) A `billing error' consists of any of the following:
 (A) A reflection on a billing statement from a billing carrier of a
 telephone-billed purchase which was not made by the customer or, if made,
 was not in the amount reflected on such statement.
 (B) A reflection on a statement of a telephone-billed purchase for which
 the customer requests additional clarification, including documentary
 evidence thereof.
 (C) A reflection on a statement of a telephone-billed purchase not accepted
 by the customer or not provided to the customer in accordance with the
 stated terms of the transaction.
 (D) The billing carrier's failure to reflect properly on a statement
 a payment made by the customer or a credit issued to the customer with
 respect to a telephone-billed purchase.
 (E) A computation error or similar error of an accounting nature of the
 billing carrier on a statement.
 (F) Failure to transmit the billing statement to the last address of the
 customer which has been disclosed to the creditor, unless that address
 was furnished less than twenty days before the end of the billing cycle
 for which the statement is required.
 (G) Any other error described in regulations prescribed by the Commission
 pursuant to section 553 of title 5, United States Code.
 (7) The term `Commission' means the Federal Trade Commission.
SEC. 202. CORRECTION OF BILLING ERRORS.
 (a) INITIATION OF BILLING REVIEW- A customer may initiate a billing review
 under this section with respect to a telephone-billed purchase by sending,
 within 60 days after receipt of a billing statement from a billing carrier
 that contains a charge for such telephone-billed purchase, a written notice
 to that billing carrier in which the customer--
 (1) sets forth or otherwise enables the billing carrier to identify the
 name of the customer and the phone number to which the charge was billed;
 (2) indicates the customer's belief that the statement contains a billing
 error that relates to a telephone-billed purchase and the amount of such
 billing error; and
 (3) sets forth the reasons for the customer's belief (to the extent
 applicable) that the statement contains a billing error.
 (b) RESPONSE TO CUSTOMER NOTICE-
 (1) RESPONSE BY BILLING CARRIER- A billing carrier that receives a notice
 from any customer under subsection (a) shall--
 (A) if the billing error is described in section 201(6) (D), (E), or (F)
 or otherwise relates to the calculation of amounts due, be deemed to be
 a providing carrier for purposes of paragraph (2) of this subsection; or
 (B) transmit such notice within 10 days to the providing carrier for the
 telephone-billed purchase to which the alleged billing error relates.
 (2) RESPONSE BY PROVIDING CARRIER- A providing carrier that receives from
 any customer a notice that meets the requirements of subsection (a) shall,
 unless the customer has, after giving such written notice and before the
 expiration of the time limits herein specified, agreed that the statement
 was correct--
 (A) not later than 30 days after the receipt of the notice, unless the
 action required in subparagraph (B) is taken within such 30-day period, send
 a written acknowledgement thereof to the customer, which acknowledgement
 shall include the name, mailing address, and business telephone number of
 the vendor that is the subject of the notice, and
 (B) not later than two complete billing cycles of the billing carrier
 (in no event later than 90 days) after the receipt of the notice and
 prior to taking any action to collect the amount, or any part thereof,
 indicated by the customer under subsection (a)(2) either--
 (i) make appropriate corrections in the account of the customer, including
 the crediting of any related charges on amounts erroneously billed,
 and transmit to billing carrier and the customer a notification of such
 corrections and the providing carrier's explanation of any change in the
 amount indicated by the customer under subsection (a)(2) and, if any such
 change is made and the customer so requests, copies of documentary evidence
 of the customer's indebtedness; or
 (ii) send a written explanation or clarification to the customer, after
 having conducted an investigation, setting forth to the extent applicable
 the reasons why the providing carrier believes the account of the customer
 was correctly shown in the statement and, upon request of the customer,
 provide copies of documentary evidence of the customer's indebtedness.
 (3) DETERMINATIONS CONCERNING DELIVERY OF TELEPHONE-BILLED PURCHASES- In
 the case of a billing error where the customer alleges that the billing
 statement reflects goods or services not delivered to the customer in
 accordance with the stated terms of the transaction, a providing carrier
 may not construe such amount to be correctly shown unless the providing
 carrier determines that such goods or services were actually delivered or
 otherwise sent to the customer and provides the customer with a statement
 of such determination.
 (4) TERMINATION OF PROVIDING CARRIER RESPONSIBILITY- After complying with
 the provisions of this subsection with respect to an alleged billing error,
 a providing carrier has no further responsibility under this section if
 the customer continues to make substantially the same allegation with
 respect to such error.
 (c) COLLECTION ACTIONS-
 (1) DEFINITION- For the purposes of subsection (b)(2)(B) of this section,
 `action to collect the amount, or any part thereof, indicated by the customer
 under subsection (a)(2)' does not include the sending of statements of
 account, which may include late charges on amounts in dispute, to the
 customer following written notice from the customer as specified under
 subsection (a), if--
 (A) the customer's account is not restricted or closed because of the failure
 of the customer to pay the amount indicated under subsection (a)(2), and
 (B) the billing carrier indicates to the customer that the payment of
 such amount is not required pending the providing carrier's compliance
 with this section.
 (2) NO EFFECT ON AMOUNTS NOT SUBJECT TO REVIEW- Nothing in this section
 shall be construed to prohibit any action by a vendor, providing carrier,
 or billing carrier to collect any amount which has not been indicated by
 the customer under subsection (a)(2) to contain a billing error.
 (d) FORFEITURE OF RIGHTS- Any billing carrier or providing carrier who fails
 to comply with the requirements of this section or section 203 forfeits
 any right to collect from the customer the amount indicated by the customer
 under subsection (a)(2) of this section, and any late charges thereon.
SEC. 203. REGULATION OF REPORTS.
 (a) ADVERSE REPORTS PROHIBITED- After receiving a notice from a customer as
 provided in section 202, a vendor, billing carrier, providing carrier, or
 its agent may not directly or indirectly threaten to report to any person
 adversely on the customer's credit rating or credit standing because of
 the customer's failure to pay the amount indicated by the customer under
 section 202(a)(2), and such amount may not be reported as delinquent to
 any third party until the billing carrier or providing carrier has met the
 requirements of section 202 and has allowed the customer 20 days thereafter
 to make payment.
 (b) REPORTS DURING CONTINUATION OF DISPUTE- If a billing carrier or providing
 carrier receives a further written notice from a customer that an amount
 is still in dispute within the time allowed for payment under subsection
 (a) of this section, a vendor, billing carrier, or providing carrier or its
 agent may not report to any third party that the account of the customer is
 in arrears because the customer has failed to pay an amount indicated under
 section 202(a)(2), unless the vendor, billing carrier, providing carrier,
 or its agent also reports that the amount is in dispute and, at the same
 time, notifies the customer of the name and address of each party to whom
 the vendor, billing carrier, providing carrier, or its agent is reporting
 information concerning the arrearage.
 (c) REPORTS OF RESOLUTIONS- A vendor, billing carrier, providing carrier,
 or its agent shall report any subsequent resolution of any matter reported
 pursuant to subsection (b) to the parties to whom such matter was initially
 reported.
SEC. 204. PROMPT NOTIFICATION OF CREDIT.
 With respect to any telephone-billed purchase where the vendor is a person
 other than the billing carrier, and where the vendor accepts or allows a
 forgiveness of a debit for the telephone-billed purchase, the vendor shall
 promptly transmit to the billing carrier a credit statement with respect
 thereto and the billing carrier shall credit the account of the customer
 for the amount of the purchase.
SEC. 205. RIGHTS OF CUSTOMERS.
 A billing carrier or providing carrier who seeks to collect charges for a
 telephone-billed purchase from a customer for a vendor shall be subject
 to all claims (other than tort claims) and defenses arising out of any
 telephone-billed purchase in which the customer's telephone billing account
 is used as a method for collection if the customer has made a good faith
 attempt to obtain satisfactory resolution of a disagreement or problem
 relative to the purchase from the vendor or providing carrier.
SEC. 206. RELATION TO STATE LAWS.
 (a) STATE LAW APPLICABLE UNLESS INCONSISTENT- This title does not annul,
 alter, or affect, or exempt any person subject to the provisions of this
 title from complying with, the laws of any State with respect to telephone
 billing practices, except to the extent that those laws are inconsistent
 with any provision of this title, and then only to the extent of the
 inconsistency. The Commission is authorized to determine whether such
 inconsistencies exist. The Commission may not determine that any State
 law is inconsistent with any provision of this chapter if the Commission
 determines that such law gives greater protection to the consumer.
 (b) REGULATORY EXEMPTIONS- The Commission shall by regulation exempt
 from the requirements of this title any class of telephone-billed
 purchase transactions within any State if it determines that under the
 law of that State that class of transactions is subject to requirements
 substantially similar to those imposed under this chapter or that such
 law gives greater protection to the consumer, and that there is adequate
 provision for enforcement.
SEC. 207. ENFORCEMENT.
 The Commission shall enforce the requirements of this title. For the
 purpose of the exercise by the Commission of its functions and powers
 under the Federal Trade Commission Act, a violation of any requirement
 imposed under this title shall be deemed a violation of a requirement
 imposed under that Act. All the functions and powers of the Federal Trade
 Commission under that Act are available to the Commission to enforce
 compliance by any person with the requirements imposed under this title,
 irrespective of whether that person is engaged in commerce or meets any
 other jurisdictional tests in that Act.