HR 1375 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1375
To amend the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to strengthen protections against
discrimination in employment, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
March 12, 1991
Mr. MICHEL (for himself, Mr. HYDE, Mr. GINGRICH, Mr. LEWIS of California,
Mr. EDWARDS of Oklahoma, Mr. HUNTER, Mr. MCCOLLUM, Mr. WEBER, Mr. VANDER
JAGT, Mr. ARCHER, Mr. GRADISON, Mr. SOLOMON, Mr. MCDADE, Mr. GOODLING,
Mr. GUNDERSON, Mr. FAWELL, Ms. MOLINARI, Mr. COBLE, Mr. GRANDY, Mr. FRANKS of
Connecticut, Mr. WALKER, Mr. IRELAND, Mr. GALLO, Mr. CLINGER, Mr. HASTERT,
Mr. LENT, Mr. ZELIFF, Mr. RHODES, Mr. HAMMERSCHMIDT, Mr. GALLEGLY, Mr. KYL,
Mr. GEKAS, Mr. SENSENBRENNER, Mr. RAMSTAD, Mr. STEARNS, Mr. GILLMOR, Mr. RIDGE,
Mr. INHOFE, Mr. BARRETT, Mr. PORTER, Mr. BOEHNER, Mr. SUNDQUIST, Mr. RAVENEL,
Mr. LAGOMARSINO, Mr. THOMAS of Wyoming, Mrs. BENTLEY, Mr. CAMP, Mr. SANTORUM,
Mrs. VUCANOVICH, Mr. WELDON, Mr. COUGHLIN, Mr. MCGRATH, Mr. FIELDS, Mr. ROGERS,
Mr. MILLER of Washington, Mr. EMERSON, Mr. JAMES, Mr. SHAW, Mr. HANCOCK,
Mr. BROOMFIELD, Mr. MCEWEN, Mr. BAKER, Mr. BUNNING, Mr. KOLBE, Mr. MCMILLAN
of North Carolina, Mrs. ROUKEMA, Mr. SCHIFF, Mr. MOORHEAD, Mr. SCHAEFER,
Mr. UPTON, Mr. BALLENGER, and Mr. LEWIS of Florida) introduced the following
bill; which was referred to the Committee on the Judiciary and Education
and Labor
A BILL
To amend the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to strengthen protections against
discrimination in employment, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Civil Rights Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
 (a) FINDINGS- Congress finds that additional protections and remedies
 under Federal law are needed to deter unlawful discrimination.
 (b) PURPOSE- The purpose of this Act is to strengthen existing protections
 and remedies available under Federal civil rights laws.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 Section 701 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e) is amended
 by adding at the end the following new subsections:
 `(l) The term `complaining party' means the Commission, the Attorney General,
 or a person who may bring an action or proceeding under this title.
 `(m) The term `demonstrates' means meets the burdens of production and
 persuasion.
 `(n) The term `justified by business necessity' means that the challenged
 practice has a manifest relationship to the employment in question or that
 the respondent's legitimate employment goals are significantly served by,
 even if they do not require, the challenged practice.
 `(o) The term `respondent' means an employer, employment agency, labor
 organization, joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship
 or other training or retraining programs, including on-the-job training
 programs, or those Federal entities subject to the provisions of section
 717 (or the heads thereof).
 `(p)(1) The term `harass' means, in cases involving discrimination because
 of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin, the subjection of an
 individual to conduct that creates a working environment that would be
 found intimidating, hostile or offensive by a reasonable person.
 `(2) The term `harass' also means, in cases involving discrimination
 because of sex, (i) making the submission to unwelcome sexual advances
 by an employer a term or condition of employment of the individual;
 or (ii) using the rejection of such advances as a basis for employment
 decisions adversely affecting the individual; or (iii) making unwelcome
 sexual advances that create a working environment that would be found
 intimidating, hostile or offensive by a reasonable person.'.
SEC. 4. DISPARATE IMPACT CLAIMS.
 Section 703 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-2) is amended
 by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(k) PROOF OF UNLAWFUL EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES IN DISPARATE IMPACT CASES-
 Under this title, an unlawful employment practice based on disparate impact
 is established only when a complaining party demonstrates that a particular
 employment practice causes a disparate impact on the basis of race, color,
 religion, sex, or national origin, and the respondent fails to demonstrate
 that such practice is justified by business necessity: Provided, however,
 That an unlawful employment practice shall nonetheless be established
 if the complaining party demonstrates the availability of an alternative
 employment practice, comparable in cost and equally effective in predicting
 job performance or achieving the respondent's legitimate employment goals,
 that will reduce the disparate impact, and the respondent refuses to adopt
 such alternative.'.
SEC. 5. FINALITY OF JUDGMENTS OR ORDERS.
 For purposes of determining whether a litigated or consent judgment or
 order resolving a claim of employment discrimination because of race,
 color, religion, sex, national origin, or disability shall bind only those
 individuals who were parties to the judgment or order, the Federal Rules of
 Civil Procedure shall apply in the same manner as they apply with respect
 to other civil causes of action.
SEC. 6. PROHIBITION AGAINST RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN THE MAKING AND PERFORMANCE
OF CONTRACTS.
 Section 1977 of the Revised Statutes of the United States (42 U.S.C. 1981)
 is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(a)' before `All persons within'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsections:
 `(b) For purposes of this section, the right to `make and enforce contracts'
 shall include the making, performance, modification and termination
 of contracts, and the enjoyment of all benefits, privileges, terms and
 conditions of the contract.
 `(c) The rights protected by this section are protected against impairment
 by nongovernmental discrimination as well as against impairment under
 color of State law.'.
SEC. 7. EXPANSION OF RIGHT TO CHALLENGE DISCRIMINATORY SENIORITY SYSTEMS.
 Subsection 706(e) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5(e))
 is amended by adding at the end the following sentence: `For purposes
 of this section, an alleged unlawful employment practice occurs when
 a seniority system is adopted, when an individual becomes subject to a
 seniority system, or when a person aggrieved is injured by the application
 of a seniority system, or provision thereof, that is alleged to have been
 adopted for an intentionally discriminatory purpose, in violation of this
 title, whether or not that discriminatory purpose is apparent on the face
 of the seniority provision.'.
SEC. 8. PROVIDING FOR ADDITIONAL REMEDIES FOR HARASSMENT IN THE WORKPLACE
BECAUSE OF RACE, COLOR, RELIGION, SEX, OR NATIONAL ORIGIN.
 (a) Subsection 703(a) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-2(a))
 is amended by deleting the period at the end and inserting in lieu thereof
 `; or' and by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(3) to harass any employee or applicant for employment because of that
 individual's race, color, religion, sex, or national origin: Provided,
 however, That no such unlawful employment practice shall be found to have
 occurred if the complaining party failed to avail himself or herself of a
 procedure, of which the complaining party was or should have been aware,
 established by the employer for resolving complaints of harassment in an
 effective fashion within a period not exceeding ninety days.'.
 (b) Section 706 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5) is
 amended by adding at the end the following new subsections:
 `(l) EMERGENCY RELIEF IN HARASSMENT CASES- An employee or other complaining
 party alleging a violation of section 703(a)(3) of this title may petition
 the court for temporary or preliminary relief. If the complaining party
 establishes a substantial probability of success on the merits of such
 harassment claim, the continued submission to the harassment shall be
 deemed injury sufficiently irreparable to warrant the entry of temporary
 or preliminary relief. A court having jurisdiction over a request for
 temporary or preliminary relief pursuant to this paragraph shall assign
 the case for hearing at the earliest practicable date and cause such case
 to be expedited in every way practicable.
 `(m) EQUITABLE MONETARY AWARDS IN HARASSMENT CASES-
 `(1) In ordering relief for a violation of section 703(a)(3) of this title,
 the court may, in addition to ordering appropriate equitable relief under
 subsection (g) of this section, exercise its equitable discretion to require
 the employer to pay the complaining party an amount up to but not exceeding a
 total of $150,000.00, if the court finds that an additional equitable remedy
 beyond those available under subsection (g) of this section is justified
 by the equities, is consistent with the purposes of this title, and is
 in the public interest. In weighing the equities and fixing the amount of
 any award under this paragraph, the court shall give due consideration,
 along with any other relevant equitable factors, to (i) the nature of
 compliance programs, if any, established by the employer to ensure that
 unlawful harassment does not occur in the workplace; (ii) the nature of
 procedures, if any, established by the employer for resolving complaints
 of harassment in an effective fashion; (iii) whether the employer took
 prompt and reasonable corrective action upon becoming aware of the conduct
 complained of; (iv) the employer's size and the effect of the award on its
 economic viability; (v) whether the harassment was willful or egregious;
 and (vi) the need, if any, to provide restitution for the complaining party.
 `(2) All issues in cases arising under this title, including cases arising
 under section 703(a)(3) of this title shall be heard and determined by
 a judge, as provided in subsection (f) of this section. If, however,
 the court holds that a monetary award pursuant to paragraph (1) of this
 subsection is sought by the complaining party and that such an award cannot
 constitutionally be granted unless a jury determines liability on one or more
 issues with respect to which such award is sought, a jury may be empaneled to
 hear and determine such liability issues and no others. In no case arising
 under this title shall a jury consider, recommend, or determine the amount
 of any monetary award sought pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection.'.
 (c) Subsection 706(e) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5(e))
 (as amended by section 7 of this Act) is further amended by adding at the
 end the following sentence: `For purposes of actions involving harassment
 under section 703(a)(3) of this title, the period of limitations established
 under this subsection shall be tolled during the time (not exceeding ninety
 days) that an employee avails himself or herself of a procedure established
 by the employer for resolving complaints of harassment.'.
SEC. 9. ALLOWING THE AWARD OF EXPERT FEES.
 Section 706(k) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5(k))
 is amended by inserting `(including reasonable expert fees up to but not
 exceeding $300 per day)' after `attorney's fee'.
SEC. 10. PROVIDING FOR INTEREST, AND EXTENDING THE STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS,
IN ACTIONS AGAINST THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
 Section 717 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-16) is amended--
 (1) in subsection 717(c), by striking out `thirty days' and inserting in
 lieu thereof `ninety days'; and
 (2) in subsection 717(d), by inserting before the period `, and the same
 interest to compensate for delay in payment shall be available as in
 cases involving non-public parties'.
SEC. 11. PROVIDING CIVIL RIGHTS PROTECTIONS TO CONGRESSIONAL EMPLOYEES.
 Section 717 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-16) (as
 amended by section 10 of this Act) is further amended--
 (1) in subsection 717(a), by striking `legislative and judicial branches'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `judicial branch'.
 (2) in subsection 717(a), by striking `in the Library of Congress' and
 inserting in lieu thereof: `in the Congress of the United States, or its
 Houses, committees, offices or instrumentalities, or the offices of any
 of its Members'.
 (3) in subsection 717(b), by striking the last sentence and inserting
 in lieu thereof: `With respect to the Congress of the United States,
 its Houses, committees, offices, and instrumentalities, and the offices
 of its Members, authorities granted in this subsection to the Commission
 shall be exercised in each House of Congress as determined by that House
 of Congress, and in offices and instrumentalities not within a House of
 Congress as determined by the Congress.'.
 (4) in subsection 717(c), by inserting, after `Equal Employment Opportunity
 Commission' each time it appears, `, or a congressional entity exercising the
 authorities of the Commission pursuant to subsection (b) of this section,'.
SEC. 12. ALTERNATIVE MEANS OF DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
 Where knowingly and voluntarily agreed to by the parties, reasonable
 alternative means of dispute resolution, including binding arbitration,
 shall be encouraged in place of the judicial resolution of disputes arising
 under this Act and the Acts amended by this Act.
SEC. 13. SEVERABILITY.
 If any provision of this Act, or an amendment made by this Act, or the
 application of such provision or amendment to any person or circumstances
 is held to be invalid, the remainder of this Act and the amendments made
 by this Act, and the application of such provisions of this Act to other
 persons and circumstances, shall not be affected thereby.
SEC. 14. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect upon
 enactment. The amendments made by this Act shall not apply to any claim
 arising before the effective date of this Act.