S 933 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 933
To provide fair refunds to consumers of natural gas who are found to have
been overcharged.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
April 25, 1991
Mr. METZENBAUM introduced the following bill; which was read twice and
referred to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
A BILL
To provide fair refunds to consumers of natural gas who are found to have
been overcharged.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Natural Gas Ratepayers Relief Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. REFUNDS FOR OVERCHARGES.
 (a) AMENDMENT OF SECTION 4(e) OF THE NATURAL GAS ACT- The third and fourth
 sentences of section 4(e) of the Natural Gas Act (15 U.S.C. 717c(e)) are
 amended to read as follows: `Where rates or charges are thus made effective,
 the Commission may, by order, require the natural-gas company to furnish a
 bond, to be approved by the Commission, to refund any amounts ordered by the
 Commission, to keep accurate accounts in detail of all amounts received,
 specifying by whom and in whose behalf such amounts were paid, and, upon
 completion of the hearing and decision, to order such natural-gas company
 to refund, with interest, the portion of such rates or charges by its
 decision found not justified. At any hearing involving a rate or charge
 sought to be changed, the burden of proof to show that the changed rate
 or charge is just and reasonable shall be upon the natural-gas company,
 and the Commission shall give to the hearing and decision of such questions
 preference over other questions pending before it and decide the same as
 speedily as possible.'.
 (b) AMENDMENT OF SECTION 4 OF THE NATURAL GAS ACT- Section 4 of the
 Natural Gas Act (15 U.S.C. 717d) is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following new subsection:
 `(f) Any natural-gas company subject to the jurisdiction of the Commission
 shall file tariff sheets restating its rates to establish new base tariff
 rates at least 30 days before the expiration of 36 months after the
 effective date of any previously approved base tariff rates.'.
 (c) AMENDMENT OF SECTION 5 OF THE NATURAL GAS ACT- Section 5 of the Natural
 Gas Act (15 U.S.C. 717d) is amended by--
 (1) redesignating subsection (b) as subsection (c); and
 (2) inserting the following new subsection after subsection (a):
 `(b) At the conclusion of a proceeding under this section, the Commission
 shall order the natural-gas company to make refunds of such amounts as
 have been paid, for the period subsequent to the refund effective date,
 in excess of those that would have been paid under the just and reasonable
 rate, charge, classification, rule, regulation, practice, or contract that
 the Commission orders to be thereafter observed and in force. The refunds
 shall be made, with interest, to persons who have paid the rates or charges
 that were the subject of the proceeding. The Commission shall establish the
 refund effective date. In the case of a hearing instituted on complaint,
 the refund effective date shall not be earlier than the date that is 60
 days after the date of filing of the complaint or later than 150 days
 after the expiration of such 60-day period.'.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- (1) The amendments made by this section shall not
 apply to a proceeding under the Natural Gas Act commenced before the date
 of enactment of this Act.
 (2) A proceeding to which the amendments made by this section does not apply
 by reason of paragraph (1) may be withdrawn and refiled without prejudice.
 (e) STUDY- (1) Not earlier than 3 years and not later than 4 years after
 the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall perform a study
 of the effect of the amendments to the Natural Gas Act made by this Act.
 (2) The study required by paragraph (1) shall analyze--
 (A) the impact, if any, of such amendments on the cost of capital paid by
 natural gas companies;
 (B) any change in the average time taken to resolve proceedings under
 sections 4 and 5 of the Natural Gas Act; and
 (C) such other matters as the Commission may deem appropriate in the
 public interest.
 (3) Upon completion the study required by paragraph (1) shall be submitted
 to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the
 Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives.