S 871 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 871
To institute a manufacturers' excise tax on certain ozone-depleting chemicals;
to partially direct revenues from such excise tax toward an Ozone Layer
Conservation Trust Fund for developing chemical and technological alternatives
to ozone-depleting chemicals; and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
May 1 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. GORE introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Finance
A BILL
To institute a manufacturers' excise tax on certain ozone-depleting chemicals;
to partially direct revenues from such excise tax toward an Ozone Layer
Conservation Trust Fund for developing chemical and technological alternatives
to ozone-depleting chemicals; and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Ozone Layer Conservation Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. OBJECTIVES AND NATIONAL GOAL.
 The objectives of this Act are to protect human health and natural ecosystems
 from all known and potential dangers due to depletion of the stratospheric
 ozone layer, which is or would be caused by manmade chemicals such as the
 chlorofluorocarbons, halons, or other chemicals covered by this Act by--
 (1) instituting a manufacturers' excise tax on certain ozone-depleting
 chemicals;
 (2) directing a portion of the revenues from such excise tax toward research,
 development, and market incentives for technological alternatives to such
 chemicals; and
 (3) promoting the development of such alternative technologies for
 applications in developing countries.
SEC. 3. MANUFACTURERS' EXCISE TAX ON CHEMICALS THAT DEPLETE THE STRATOSPHERIC
OZONE LAYER.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Chapter 38 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to
 environmental taxes) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new subchapter:
`Subchapter D--Ozone-Depleting Chemicals, Etc.
`Sec. 4681. Imposition of tax.
`Sec. 4682. Definitions and special rules.
`SEC. 4681. IMPOSITION OF TAX.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- There is hereby imposed a tax on--
 `(1) any ozone-depleting chemical sold or used by the manufacturer,
 producer, or importer thereof, and
 `(2) any imported taxable product sold or used by the importer thereof.
 `(b) Amount of Tax-
 `(1) Ozone-depleting chemicals-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The amount of the tax imposed by subsection (a) on each
 pound of ozone-depleting chemical shall be an amount equal to--
 `(i) the base tax amount, multiplied by
 `(ii) the ozone-depletion factor for such chemical.
 `(B) BASE TAX AMOUNT- Except as provided in subsection (c), the base tax
 amount for purposes of subparagraph (A) with respect to any sale or use
 during a calendar year is the amount determined under the following table
 for such calendar year:
--`Base tax
 `Calendar year:
--Amount:
 1990
--$1
 1991
--2
 1992
--3
 1993
--4
 1994 or thereafter
--5.
 `(2) Imported taxable product-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The amount of the tax imposed by subsection (a) on any
 imported taxable product shall be the amount of tax that would have been
 imposed by subsection (a) on the ozone-depleting chemicals used as materials
 in the manufacture or production of such product if such ozone-depleting
 chemicals had been sold in the United States for use in the manufacture
 or production of such imported taxable product.
 `(B) CERTAIN RULES TO APPLY- Rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (2)
 and (3) of section 4671(b) shall apply.
 `(c) Inflation Adjustment of Base Tax Amount-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In the case of any article sold or used in a calendar year
 after 1990, the base tax amount applicable to such year under subsection
 (b) shall be the amount (determined by the Secretary) equal to--
 `(A) the dollar amount specified in subsection (b)(1)(B) for such calendar
 year increased by
 `(B) the product of--
 `(i) the dollar amount so specified, and
 `(ii) the inflation adjustment for such calendar year.
 `(2) Inflation adjustment-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- For purposes of paragraph (1), the inflation adjustment
 for a calendar year is the percentage (if any) by which--
 `(i) the applicable price index for the preceding calendar year, exceeds
 `(ii) the applicable index for 1989.
 `(B) APPLICABLE PRICE INDEX- For purposes of subparagraph (A), the applicable
 price index for any calendar year is the average of the producer price
 index for basic inorganic chemicals (as published by the Secretary of
 Labor) for the months in the 12-month period ending on September 30 of
 such calendar year.
 `(3) ROUNDING- If any increase determined under paragraph (1) is not
 a multiple of 10 cents, such increase shall be rounded to the nearest
 multiple of 10 cents (or if such increase is a multiple of 5 cents, such
 increase shall be increased to the nearest multiple of 10 cents).
`SEC. 4682. DEFINITIONS AND SPECIAL RULES.
 `(a) OZONE-DEPLETING CHEMICAL- For purposes of this subchapter--
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The term `ozone-deleting chemical' means any substance--
 `(A) that, at the time of the sale or use by the manufacturer, producer,
 or importer, is listed as an ozone-depleting chemical by the Secretary
 for purposes of this subchapter, and
 `(B) that is manufactured or produced in the United States or entered into
 the United States for consumption, use, or warehousing.
 `(2) DETERMINATION OF SUBSTANCES ON LIST- A substance shall be listed
 under paragraph (1) if--
 `(A) the substance is specified in the list under paragraph (3), or
 `(B) the Secretary determines that the substance is known, or may
 reasonably be anticipated, to cause or contribute to atmospheric or climatic
 modification, including stratospheric ozone depletion.
If, after enactment of this section, a substance not listed under paragraph (1)
becomes subject to regulation under a treaty that regulates ozone-depleting
substances and to which the United States is a party, the Secretary shall
list such substance under paragraph (1) not later than 60 days after the
substance became so subject
 `(3) Initial list of ozone-depleting chemicals-
 `Common name
`Chemical nomenclature
 CFC-11
trichlorofluoromethane
 CFC-12
dichlorodifluoromethane
 CFC-22
chlorodifluoromethane
 CFC-113
trichlorotrifluoromethane
 CFC-114
1,2-dichloro-1,1,2,2,-tetrafluoroethane
 CFC-115
chloropentafluoroethane
 Carbon tetrachloride
tetrachloromethane
 Methyl chloroform.
1,1,1,-trichloroethane
 Methylene chloride
dichloromethane
 Halon-1211
bromochlorodifluoromethane
 Halon-1301
bromotrifluoromethane
 `(4) MODIFICATIONS TO LIST- The Secretary may add substances to or remove
 substances from the list under paragraph (3) (including items listed by
 reason of paragraph (2)(B)) as necessary to carry out the purposes of
 this subchapter.
 `(b) Ozone-Depleting Factors-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this subchapter, the term `ozone-depleting
 factor' means, with respect to an ozone-depleting chemical, the numerical
 value assigned by the Secretary that represents the ozone depletion
 potential of such chemical on a mass (per kilogram) basis, as compared
 with the ozone depletion potential of CFC-11.
 `(2) Initial ozone-depleting factors-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), in the case
 of an ozone-depleting chemical specified in the following table, the
 ozone-depleting factor shall be as follows:
--
 `Ozone-depleting chemical
--`Ozone-depleting factor:
 CFC-11
--1.0
 CFC-12
--1.0
 CFC-22
--0.05
 CFC-113
--0.78
 CFC-114
--0.7
 CFC-115
--0.6
 Carbon tetrachloride
--1.06
 Methyl chloroform
--0.1
 Methylene chloride
--0.1
 Halon-1211
--2.69
 Halon-1301
--11.43.
 `(B) MODIFICATIONS TO OZONE-DEPLETING FACTORS- The Secretary may,
 as necessary to carry out the purposes of this subchapter, prescribe
 ozone-depleting factors that will apply in lieu of the ozone-depleting
 factors specified in subparagraph (A).
 `(c) IMPORTED TAXABLE PRODUCT- For purposes of this subchapter--
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The term `imported taxable product' means any substance
 (other than an ozonedepleting chemical) if any ozone-depleting chemical
 was used as material in the manufacture or production of such substance.
 `(2) DE MINIMUS EXCEPTION- The term `imported taxable product' shall not
 include any substances specified in regulations prescribed by the Secretary
 as containing a de minimis amount of ozonedepleting chemicals. The preceding
 sentence shall not apply with respect to any substance if any ozonedepleting
 chemical is used for purposes of refrigeration or air-conditioning,
 creating an aerosol or foam, or in the production of electronic components.
 `(d) EXCEPTION FOR RECYCLING- No tax shall be imposed by section 4681 on
 any ozone-depleting chemical that is diverted or recovered in the United
 States as part of a recycling process (and not as part of the original
 manufacturing or production process).
 `(e) OTHER DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this subchapter--
 `(1) IMPORTER- The term `importer' means the person entering the article
 for consumption, use, or warehousing.
 `(2) UNITED STATES- The term `United States' has the meaning given such
 term by section 4612(a)(4).
 `(f) Special Rules-
 `(1) FRACTIONAL PARTS OF A POUND- In the case of a fraction of a pound,
 the tax imposed by section 4681 shall be the same fraction of the amount
 of such tax imposed on a whole pound.
 `(2) DISPOSITION OF REVENUES FROM PUERTO RICO AND THE VIRGIN ISLANDS-
 The provisions of subsection (a)(3) of section 7652 shall not apply to
 any tax imposed by section 4681.'.
 `(b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of subchapters for chapter 38 of such
 Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`Subchapter D. Ozone-depleting chemicals, etc.'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall take effect
 on January 1, 1990.
SEC. 3. FLOOR STOCKS TAX.
 (a) IMPOSITION OF TAX- On any ozone-depleting chemical specified in section
 4682(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 that on January 1, 1990,
 is held by a dealer for sale, there is hereby imposed a floor stocks tax
 in an amount equal to the tax that would be imposed under section 4681 of
 such Code on such chemical if such chemical were sold during 1990 by the
 manufacturer thereof.
 (b) APPLICATION OF OTHER LAWS- All other provisions of law, including
 penalties, applicable with respect to the taxes imposed by section 4681
 of such Code shall apply to the floor stocks tax imposed by this section.
 (c) DUE DATE OF TAX- The taxes imposed by this section shall be paid before
 February 14, 1990.
 (d) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section--
 (1) DEALER- The term `dealer' includes a wholesaler, jobber, distributer,
 or retailer.
 (2) HELD BY A DEALER- An article shall be considered as `held by a dealer'
 if title thereto has passed to such dealer (whether or not delivery to
 the dealer has been made) and if for purposes of consumption title to such
 article or possession thereof has not at any time been transferred to any
 person other than a dealer.
SEC. 4. OZONE LAYER CONSERVATION TRUST FUND.
 (a) Creation of Trust Fund-
 (1) IN GENERAL- There shall be established in the Treasury of the United
 States a trust fund to be known as the `Ozone Layer Conservation Trust
 Fund', consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited to
 the Ozone Layer Conservation Trust Fund.
 (2) TRUSTEES- The trustees of the Ozone Layer Conservation Trust Fund
 shall be the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of Energy, and the
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
 (b) TRANSFER OF CERTAIN TAXES- There shall be appropriated to the Ozone
 Layer Conservation Trust Fund amounts equivalent to one-half of the taxes
 received in the Treasury under the manufacturers' excise tax instituted
 in section 3 of this Act.
 (c) Expenditures From Trust Fund-
 (1) DEVELOPMENT OF STRATEGIC PLAN- The Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency, in consultation with the Secretary of Energy, shall
 develop a strategic plan for the disbursement of funds from the Ozone
 Layer Conservation Trust Fund. Such plan shall be delivered to the Congress
 within six months of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) Considerations for strategic plan-
 (A) GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS- The strategic plan shall provide for Federal
 Government-private sector cooperation in research, development, and
 deployment of non-ozone-depleting chemical and technological alternatives to
 the ozone-depleting substances listed in section 2. Such plan shall seek to
 hasten the development and deployment of such alternative technologies with
 maximal environmental benefit in terms of both the stratospheric ozone layer,
 and energy-efficiency. Such plan shall also seek to develop such alternative
 technologies that are suitable for export to the developing world.
 (B) Specific considerations-
 (i) Research, development, and deployment of air-conditioning and
 refrigeration equipment that does not rely on the ozone-depleting substances
 listed in section 3, is energy-efficient, is suitable for applications
 in the developing world, and is capable of being powered by thermal,
 direct-current electric, and alternating-current electric power sources.
 (ii) Block purchases of such air-conditioning and refrigeration equipment
 by the Federal Government, for the purpose of providing an initial market
 for such technologies; such block purchases should be carried out every
 eighteen to twenty-four months, with increasing performance standards
 required for each subsequent block purchase.
 (iii) The feasibility of granting preferential status to such
 air-conditioning and refrigeration equipment in Federal procurement.
 (iv) The means by which the Federal Government might assist United States
 manufacturers of such air-conditioning and refrigeration equipment, in
 exporting such equipment.