HR 1307 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1307
To amend the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 relating to general aviation
accidents.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
March 8, 1989
Mr. GLICKMAN (for himself, Mr. ANDERSON, Mr. MINETA, Mr. FISH, Mr. GINGRICH,
Mr. LEHMAN of Florida, Mr. CARR, Mr. FRANK, Mr. BARTON of Texas, Mr. BEREUTER,
Mr. BILIRAKIS, Mr. BOEHLERT, Mr. BOUCHER, Mr. BROWN of California, Mrs. BYRON,
Mr. CLINGER, Mr. COBLE, Mr. CRAIG, Mr. DANNEMEYER, Mr. DAVIS, Mr. DE LUGO,
Mr. DERRICK, Mr. DICKINSON, Mr. DYMALLY, Mr. FASCELL, Mr. FRENZEL, Mr. GEKAS,
Mr. HAYES of Illinois, Mr. DORGAN of North Dakota, Mr. HEFLEY, Mr. HEFNER,
Mr. HENRY, Mr. HOUGHTON, Mr. INHOFE, Mrs. JOHNSON of Connecticut, Mr. KOLTER,
Mr. LEWIS of Florida, Mr. LIGHTFOOT, Mr. LIPINSKI, Mr. MARTIN of New York,
Mrs. MARTIN of Illinois, Mr. MCCANDLESS, Mr. MCCURDY, Mrs. MEYERS of Kansas,
Mrs. MORELLA, Mr. PARRIS, Mr. PEASE, Mr. PENNY, Mr. PETRI, Mr. RHODES,
Mr. RITTER, Mr. ROBERTS, Mr. ROBINSON, Mr. ROE, Ms. SCHNEIDER, Mr. SKEEN,
Mr. SLATTERY, Mr. DENNY SMITH, Mr. SMITH of Texas, Mr. SMITH of New Hampshire,
Mr. SPRATT, Mr. STANGELAND, Mr. STUMP, Mr. SWIFT, Mr. TAUKE, Mr. VANDER JAGT,
Mr. VOLKMER, Mr. WHITTAKER, Mr. CHANDLER, Mr. NIELSON of Utah, Mr. STENHOLM,
Mr. GALLEGLY, and Mr. HAYES of Louisiana) introduced the following bill; which
was referred jointly to the Committees on Public Works and Transportation,
the Judiciary, and Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 relating to general aviation
accidents.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `General Aviation Standards Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) transportation by air of passengers continues to comprise an increasingly
 important component of the Nation's overall transportation system;
 (2) the Federal Government has an interest in the general aviation
 accident liability system because the Federal Government has established
 a comprehensive system for regulating general aviation, including--
 (A) establishing standards for design, construction, and certification of
 general aviation aircraft,
 (B) establishing standards for maintenance of aircraft, licensing of repair
 facilities, and licensing of persons who may perform or approve maintenance,
 repairs, and inspections,
 (C) establishing standards for training and licensing of pilots,
 (D) establishing a comprehensive air control system,
 (E) conducting investigations to determine the probable cause of aviation
 accidents and prevent future accidents, and
 (F) conducting other activities necessary to assure a safe air transportation
 system,
and this Federal system is the exclusive legal authority for regulating
aviation operations and safety;
 (3) competent general aviation manufacturers and component part manufacturers
 are ceasing or limiting production of general aviation aircraft or some
 models of such aircraft because of the increasing costs and unavailability
 of product liability insurance;
 (4) although the incidence of injuries to passengers in general aviation
 accidents has decreased, the amount of damages sought in general aviation
 accident liability claims against general aviation aircraft manufacturers
 is increasing at disproportionate rates, beyond any relationship to the
 quality of the aircraft manufactured and in use;
 (5) it is in the national interest to reduce unnecessary expenditures
 related to general aviation accident liability claims while providing more
 rapid and more efficient compensation for individuals harmed in general
 aviation accidents; and
 (6) Federal action to reform the general aviation accident liability system
 will result in--
 (A) the maintenance of airworthy general aviation aircraft; and
 (B) a more rational general aviation accident liability system.
 (b) PURPOSE- It is the purpose of this Act to establish rules of Federal
 law for determining personal injury and property damage arising out of
 general aviation accidents.
SEC. 3. AMENDMENT OF FEDERAL AVIATION ACT OF 1958.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title VII of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (relating
 to aviation accident investigations) is amended by adding at the end the
 following new subtitle:
`Subtitle B--General Aviation Accidents
`SEC. 721. APPLICABILITY.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b), the provisions of
 this subtitle shall apply to any action for damages for harm arising out of
 a general aviation accident brought against a general aviation manufacturer,
 the owner or operator of a general aviation aircraft, a person who repairs,
 maintains, or provides any other support for a general aviation aircraft,
 or any other person or governmental entity.
 `(b) EXCEPTION- The provisions of this subtitle shall not apply with
 respect to an action brought by a person against a manufacturer, owner,
 or operator of an aircraft that is not a general aviation aircraft or
 any person who repairs, maintains, or provides any other support for an
 aircraft that is not a general aviation aircraft.
`SEC. 722. LIABILITY FOR GENERAL AVIATION ACCIDENTS.
 `(a) LIABILITY FOR NEGLIGENCE- Any person claiming damages for harm arising
 out of a general aviation accident may bring an action for damages against
 a party and may recover damages from that party if that party was negligent
 and such negligence is a proximate cause of the claimant's harm.
 `(b) PRODUCT LIABILITY OF GENERAL AVIATION MANUFACTURERS-
 `(1) ACTIONS FOR DEFECTIVE PRODUCTS- Any person claiming damages for harm
 arising out of a general aviation accident may bring an action for damages
 against a general aviation manufacturer of a product and may recover
 damages from that general aviation manufacturer if--
 `(A) the product, when it left the control of the manufacturer, was in
 a defective condition unreasonably dangerous for its intended purpose,
 according to engineering and manufacturing practices which were reasonably
 feasible;
 `(B) the defective condition is a proximate cause of the claimant's harm; and
 `(C) the general aviation aircraft was being used at the time of the accident
 for a purpose and in a manner for which it was designed and manufactured.
 `(2) ACTIONS FOR FAILURE TO PROVIDE ADEQUATE WARNINGS OR INSTRUCTIONS- Any
 person claiming damages for harm arising out of a general aviation accident
 may bring an action for damages against a general aviation manufacturer of a
 product and may recover damages from that general aviation manufacturer if--
 `(A) at the time the product left the control of the manufacturer, the
 manufacturer--
 `(i) knew, or in the exercise of reasonable care should have known, about
 a danger connected with the product that caused the claimant's harm; and
 `(ii) failed to provide the warnings or instructions that a person exercising
 reasonable care would have provided with respect to the danger which caused
 the harm alleged by the claimant, unless those warnings or instructions,
 if provided, would not have materially affected the conduct of the product
 user; or
 `(B) after the product left the control of the general aviation manufacturer,
 the manufacturer--
 `(i) knew, or in the exercise of reasonable care should have known, about
 the danger which caused the claimant's harm; and
 `(ii) failed to take reasonable steps to provide warnings or instructions,
 after the manufacture of the product, which would have been provided by a
 person exercising reasonable care, unless those warnings or instructions, if
 provided, would not have materially affected the conduct of the product user;
and the failure to provide warnings or instructions described in subparagraph
(A) or (B) is a proximate cause of the claimant's harm.
 `(3) ACTIONS FOR FAILURE TO CONFORM TO EXPRESS WARRANTY- Any person claiming
 damages for harm arising out of a general aviation accident may bring an
 action for damages against a general aviation manufacturer of a product
 and may recover damages from that general aviation manufacturer if--
 `(A) the manufacturer made an express warranty with respect to the product;
 `(B) the warranty relates to that aspect of the product which caused
 the harm;
 `(C) the product failed to conform to the warranty; and
 `(D) the failure of the product to conform to the warranty is a proximate
 cause of the claimant's harm.
 `(c) BURDEN OF PROOF- In an action governed by subsection (b) of this
 section, a general aviation manufacturer shall not be liable if such
 manufacturer proves, by a preponderance of the evidence, that--
 `(1) the defective condition could have been corrected by compliance with
 action described in an airworthiness directive issued by the Administrator;
 and
 `(2) such directive was issued at a reasonable time before the date of the
 accident and after the product left the control of the general aviation
 manufacturer.
 `(d) ADMISSIBILITY OF COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS- In any action governed
 by subsection (b) of this section, evidence of compliance with standards,
 conditions, or specifications established, adopted, or approved by the
 Federal Aviation Administration shall be admissible with regard to whether
 the product was defective and unreasonably dangerous for its intended
 purpose.
`SEC. 723. COMPARATIVE RESPONSIBILITY.
 `(a) ACTIONS GOVERNED BY COMPARATIVE RESPONSIBILITY- All actions governed
 by this subtitle shall be governed by the principles of comparative
 responsibility. Comparative responsibility attributed to the claimant's
 conduct shall not bar recovery in such an action, but shall reduce
 any damages awarded to the claimant in an amount proportionate to
 the responsibility of the claimant. The trier of fact shall determine
 comparative responsibility by making findings indicating the percentage of
 total responsibility for the claimant's harm attributable to the claimant,
 each defendant, each third-party defendant, and any other person not a
 party to the action.
 `(b) DEFENDANTS SEVERALLY LIABLE- Except as provided in subsection (c),
 a defendant is severally but not jointly liable in an action governed
 by this subtitle, and the liability of any defendant in any such action
 shall be determined on the basis of that defendant's proportionate share
 of responsibility for the claimant's damages.
 `(c) LIABILITY OF CERTAIN MANUFACTURERS- In an action governed by this
 subtitle--
 `(1) a general aviation manufacturer who is the builder or manufacturer
 of the airframe of the general aviation aircraft involved is jointly
 and severally liable for damages for harm caused by a defective system,
 component, subassembly, or other part of that aircraft that the manufacturer
 installed or certified as part of the original type design for that
 aircraft; and
 `(2) a general aviation manufacturer who is the manufacturer of a system
 or component of the general aviation aircraft involved is jointly and
 severally liable for damages for harm caused by a defective subassembly
 or other part of that system or component.
 `(d) RIGHT OF INDEMNITY AND CONTRIBUTION- A general aviation manufacturer
 and any other person jointly liable under subsection (c) shall have the
 right to bring an action for indemnity or contribution against any person
 with whom they are jointly liable under subsection (c).
`SEC. 724. TIME LIMITATION ON LIABILITY.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- No civil action for damages for harm arising out of a
 general aviation accident which is brought against a general aviation
 manufacturer may be brought for harm which is alleged to have been caused
 by an aircraft or a system, component, subassembly, or other part of an
 aircraft and which occurs more than--
 `(1) 12 years from--
 `(A) the date of delivery of the aircraft to its first purchaser or lessee,
 if delivered directly from the manufacturer, or
 `(B) the date of first delivery of the aircraft to a person engaged in
 the business of selling or leasing such an aircraft; or
 `(2) with respect to any system, component, subassembly, or other part
 which replaced another product in, or which was added to, the aircraft,
 and which is alleged to have caused the claimant's harm, 12 years from
 the date of the replacement or addition.
 `(b) EXCEPTION IN CASE OF EXPRESS WARRANTY- Subsection (a) does not apply
 in the case of harm to a claimant which occurs after the period set forth
 in subsection (a) if the general aviation manufacturer or the seller of
 the product that caused the claimant's harm gave an express warranty that
 the product would be suitable, for the purpose for which it was intended,
 for a longer period of time.
 `(c) DUTY TO PROVIDE ADDITIONAL WARNINGS NOT AFFECTED- Nothing in this
 section shall be construed to affect a person's duty to provide, after the
 sale or lease of an aircraft, to aircraft owners, and to repair facilities
 to which a license or certificate to perform repairs has been issued by the
 Administrator, additional or modified warnings or instructions regarding the
 use or maintenance of that aircraft or any system, component, subassembly,
 or other part of that aircraft.
`SEC. 725. SUBSEQUENT REMEDIAL MEASURES.
 `In an action governed by this subtitle, evidence of any measure taken after
 an event which, if taken previously, would have made the event less likely
 to occur is not admissible to prove liability. Such evidence is admissible
 to the extent permitted under Rule 407 of the Federal Rules of Evidence.
`SEC. 726. ADMISSIBILITY OF CERTAIN EVIDENCE.
 `In an action governed by this subtitle, evidence of Federal, State, or
 local income tax liability or any social security or other payroll tax
 liability attributable to past or future earnings, support, or profits and
 the present value of future earnings, support, or profits alleged to have
 been lost or diminished because of harm arising out of a general aviation
 accident, is admissible regarding proof of the claimant's damages.
`SEC. 727. PUNITIVE DAMAGES.
 `(a) BASIS FOR RECOVERY- Punitive damages may be awarded in an action
 governed by this subtitle only if the claimant establishes by clear and
 convincing evidence that the harm suffered was the direct result of conduct
 manifesting a conscious and flagrant indifference to the safety of those
 persons who might be harmed by use of the general aviation aircraft involved.
 `(b) ADMISSIBILITY OF EVIDENCE ON CLAIM FOR PUNITIVE DAMAGES- Evidence
 regarding the financial worth of a defendant or the defendant's profits or
 any other financial evidence relating solely to a claim for punitive damages
 under this subtitle is not admissible unless the claimant establishes,
 before any such evidence is offered, that the claimant can present evidence
 that will establish prima facie proof of conduct manifesting a conscious
 and flagrant indifference to the safety of those persons who might be
 harmed by use of the general aviation aircraft involved.
`SEC. 728. TIME LIMITATION ON BRINGING CERTAIN ACTIONS.
 `An action governed by this subtitle shall be barred, notwithstanding any
 State law, unless--
 `(1) the complaint is filed within 2 years after the date on which the
 accident occurred which caused the claimant's harm; and
 `(2) the summons and complaint are properly served upon the defendant
 within 120 days after the filing of the complaint, unless the party on
 whose behalf such service is required can show good cause why such service
 was not made within that 120-day period.
Paragraph (2) shall not apply to service of process in a foreign country
pursuant to Rule 4(i) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure or any similar
State law.
`SEC. 729. JURISDICTION AND VENUE.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The district courts of the United States, concurrently
 with the State courts, shall have original jurisdiction, without regard
 to the amount in controversy, in all actions governed by section 722 and
 in all actions for indemnity or contribution described in section 723(d)
 of this subtitle.
 `(b) REMOVAL OF STATE ACTIONS- A civil action which is brought in a State
 court may be removed to the district court of the United States for the
 district embracing the place where the action is pending, without the
 consent of any other party and without regard to the amount in controversy,
 by any defendant against whom a claim in the action is asserted for damages
 for harm arising out of a general aviation accident.
 `(c) DETERMINATION OF PENDENT CLAIMS UNDER STATE LAW- In any case commenced
 in or removed to a district court under subsection (a) or (b), the court
 shall have jurisdiction to determine all claims under State law that arise
 out of the same general aviation accident if a substantial question of
 fact is common to the claims under State law and to the Federal claim,
 defense, or counterclaim.
 `(d) VENUE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A civil action in which the district courts have
 jurisdiction under subsection (a) may be brought only in a district
 in which--
 `(A) the accident giving rise to the claim occurred; or
 `(B) any plaintiff or defendant resides.
 `(2) TRANSFER OF ACTIONS- In an action pending in a district court under
 paragraph (1), a district court may, on motion of any party or its own
 motion, transfer the action to any other district for the convenience of
 parties and witnesses in the interest of justice.
 `(3) RESIDENCE DEFINED- For purposes of this subsection, a corporation shall
 be considered to be a resident of any State in which it is incorporated
 or licensed to do business or is doing business.
`SEC. 730. PREEMPTION.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- This subtitle supersedes any State law regarding recovery,
 under any legal theory, of damages for harm arising out of a general
 aviation accident, to the extent that this subtitle establishes a rule of
 law or procedure applicable to the claim.
 `(b) NO EFFECT ON SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY- Nothing in this subtitle shall be
 construed to supersede or to waive or affect any defense of sovereign
 immunity asserted by the United States or any State.
 `(c) WORKERS' COMPENSATION LAWS- No right of action for damages for harm
 exists under this subtitle if that right would be inconsistent with any
 applicable workers' compensation law.
`SEC. 731. SANCTIONS.
 `It is the intent of Congress that, with respect to civil actions governed
 by this subtitle, the sanctions for violation of Rule 11 of the Federal
 Rules of Civil Procedure, including orders to pay to the other party or
 parties the amount of their reasonable expenses, including a reasonable
 attorney's fee, be strictly enforced.
`SEC. 732. DEFINITIONS.
 `As used in this subtitle--
 `(1) the term `claimant' means any person who brings an action subject to
 this subtitle, and any person on whose behalf such an action is brought,
 including--
 `(A) the claimant's decedent, and
 `(B) the claimant's parent or guardian, if the action is brought through
 or on behalf of a minor or incompetent;
 `(2) the term `general aviation accident' means any accident which arises out
 of the operation of any general aviation aircraft and which results in harm;
 `(3) the term `general aviation aircraft' means any aircraft for which a
 type certificate or an airworthiness certificate has been issued by the
 Administrator, which, at the time such certificate was originally issued,
 had a maximum seating capacity of fewer than 20 passengers, and which is
 not, at the time of the accident, engaged in scheduled passenger carrying
 operations as defined in regulations issued under this Act;
 `(4) the term `general aviation manufacturer' means--
 `(A) the builder or manufacturer of the airframe of a general aviation
 aircraft;
 `(B) the manufacturer of the engine of a general aviation aircraft; and
 `(C) the manufacturer of any system, component, subassembly, or other part
 of a general aviation aircraft;
 `(5) the term `harm' means--
 `(A) property damage or bodily injury sustained by a person,
 `(B) death resulting from such bodily injury,
 `(C) pain and suffering which is caused by such bodily injury, and
 `(D) emotional harm (including bereavement and loss of affection, care,
 or society) which is caused by such bodily injury;
 `(6) the term `product' means a general aviation aircraft and any system,
 component, subassembly, or other part of a general aviation aircraft; and
 `(7) the term `property damage' means physical injury to tangible property,
 including loss of use of tangible property.'.
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS- (1) Title VII of the Federal Aviation Act of
 1958 is amended by striking the title designation and inserting in lieu
 thereof the following:
`TITLE VIII--AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS
`Subtitle A--Investigations'.
 (2) The table of contents in the first section of the Federal Aviation
 Act of 1958 is amended by striking--
`Title VII--Aircraft Accident Investigation'
and inserting in lieu thereof
`Title VII--Aircraft Accidents
`Subtitle A--Investigations'.
 (3) Such table of contents is amended by adding at the end of the portion
 relating to title VII the following:
`Subtitle B--General Aviation Accidents
`Sec. 721. Applicability.
`Sec. 722. Liability for general aviation accidents.
`(a) Liability of certain parties for negligence.
`(b) Product liability of general aviation manufacturers.
`(c) Burden of proof.
`(d) Admissibility of compliance with standards.
`Sec. 723. Comparative responsibility.
`(a) Actions governed by comparative responsibility.
`(b) Defendants severally liable.
`(c) Liability of certain manufacturers.
`(d) Right of indemnity and contribution.
`Sec. 724. Time limitation on liability.
`(a) In general.
`(b) Exception in case of express warranty.
`(c) Duty to provide additional warnings not affected.
`Sec. 725. Subsequent remedial measures.
`Sec. 726. Admissibility of certain evidence.
`Sec. 727. Punitive damages.
`(a) Basis for recovery.
`(b) Admissibility of evidence on claim for punitive damages.
`Sec. 728. Time limitation on bringing certain actions.
`Sec. 729. Jurisdiction and venue.
`(a) In general.
`(b) Removal of State actions.
`(c) Determination of pendent claims under State law.
`(d) Venue.
`Sec. 730. Preemption.
`(a) In general.
`(b) No effect on sovereign immunity.
`(c) Workers' compensation laws.
`Sec. 731. Sanctions.
`Sec. 732. Definitions.'.
SEC. 4. SEVERABILITY.
 If any provision of this Act or the amendments made by this Act or the
 application of the provision to any person or circumstance is held invalid,
 the remainder of this Act and such amendments and the application of the
 provision to any other person or circumstance shall not be affected by
 that invalidation.
SEC. 5. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall apply to
 any civil action governed by subtitle B of title VII of the Federal Aviation
 Act of 1958 which is filed on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) LEAVE TO AMEND- If an action governed by subtitle B of title VII of
 the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 is filed within 180 days after the date
 of the enactment of this Act, liberal leave shall be given to a party to
 amend any pleading, motion, statement of jurisdiction or venue, or other
 matter to conform to the amendments made by this Act.
SEC. 6. FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR GENERAL AVIATION ACCIDENTS.
 (a) STUDY- The Secretary of Transportation shall conduct a study for the
 purpose of determining (1) whether or not persons awarded damages from
 owners and operators of, and mechanics for, general aviation aircraft as
 a result of general aviation accidents involving such aircraft are unable
 to collect all or any portion of such damages, and (2) the relative amount
 of such uncollectible damages.
 (b) REPORT- Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this
 Act, the Secretary shall report to Congress on the results of the study
 conducted under subsection (a) together with recommendations.
 (c) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section, the terms `general aviation
 accident' and `general aviation aircraft' have the meanings such terms
 have under section 732 of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958.