S 2298 IS
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 S. 2298
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to regulate the sale and
distribution of tobacco products containing tar, nicotine, additives, carbon
monoxide, and other potentially harmful constituents, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
February 27 (legislative day, JANUARY 30), 1992
Mr. BINGAMAN introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
A BILL
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to regulate the sale and
distribution of tobacco products containing tar, nicotine, additives, carbon
monoxide, and other potentially harmful constituents, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; REFERENCE.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Tobacco Health and Safety
 Act of 1992'.
 (b) REFERENCE- Whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in
 terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the
 reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision
 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) cigarette smoking and the use of smokeless tobacco products continue
 to represent a major health hazard to the American public,
 (2) cigarette smoking continues to be the single most preventable cause
 of death and disability in the United States,
 (3) tobacco products contain hazardous tobacco additives, gases, and other
 chemical constituents dangerous to health,
 (4) the use of tobacco products cost the United States in excess of
 $60,000,000,000 in lost productivity and health care costs,
 (5) tobacco products contain nicotine, a poisonous addictive drug,
 (6) the tobacco industry has maintained that smoking is an adult practice
 and that smoking and the use of smokeless tobacco is not a practice to be
 carried out by young people,
 (7) 60 percent of all new smokers are under the age of 14 years of age,
 (8) despite the known adverse health effects associated with tobacco,
 it remains one of the least regulated consumer products,
 (9) the tobacco industry spends over $2,000,000,000 annually to promote
 and sell its products,
 (10) the Congress of the United States has a major policy-setting role in
 ensuring that the use of tobacco products is discouraged to the maximum
 extent possible, and
 (11) creation of a separate chapter for tobacco under the Federal Food,
 Drug, and Cosmetic Act assures the most effective means of regulating the
 product without the product being banned.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 Section 201 (21 U.S.C. 321) is amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new paragraphs:
 `(bb) The term `tobacco product' means cigarettes, cigars, little cigars,
 pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, snuff, and chewing tobacco.
 `(cc) The term `tobacco additive' means any substance the intended
 use of which results or may reasonably be expected to result, directly
 or indirectly, in its becoming a component or otherwise affecting the
 characteristics of any tobacco product.
 `(dd) The term `constituent' means any element of cigarette mainstream or
 sidestream smoke which is present in quantities which represent a potential
 health hazard or where health effect is unknown.
 `(ee) The term `tar' means mainstream total articulate matter minus nicotine
 and water.'.
SEC. 4. ENFORCEMENT.
 Section 301 (21 U.S.C. 331) is amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new subsection:
 `(t) The sale or distribution of tobacco products in violation of section
 701 and the manufacture, importation, or packaging of tobacco products in
 violation of section 705.'.
SEC. 5. REGULATION.
 (a) REGULATION- The Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act is amended by
 redesignating chapters VII, VIII, and IX as chapters VIII, IX, and X,
 respectively, and by adding after chapter VI the following:
`CHAPTER VII--TOBACCO PRODUCTS
`PROHIBITED ACTS
 `SEC. 701. (a) It shall be unlawful for a tobacco product intended for
 use by man which contains nicotine or tobacco additives or, because of
 its pharmacological and toxicological effects or other potentiality for
 harmful effects, presents risks to health--
 `(1) to be sold to any person under the age of 18 years or under such
 other age, greater than 18, as the State in which the sale occurs may by
 law establish,
 `(2) to be distributed if the product is misbranded as prescribed by
 section 702,
 `(3) to be distributed if the product is adulterated as prescribed by
 section 703, or
 `(4) to be distributed as a free sample or to be made available as the
 result of coupons or other materials which allow for the obtaining of free
 or discounted tobacco products.
 `(b)(1) In carrying out the requirements of subsection (a)(1), States
 shall enact such laws and promulgate such regulations as may be necessary
 to ensure compliance.
 `(2) If the Secretary finds that--
 `(A) the implementation and enforcement of State laws and regulations
 is insufficient to require compliance with the requirement of subsection
 (a)(1), and
 `(B) Federal regulation will provide the only reasonable assurance of the
 inaccessibility of tobacco products to those who are lawfully prohibited
 from purchasing such products, the Secretary may, to assist in enforcing
 such requirement, by regulation impose requirements on the form, manner,
 or location of the sale of tobacco products in such State or on any
 combination of such aspects of the sale of tobacco products. A tobacco
 product which is sold or distributed in violation of subsection (a)(1) or
 (a)(4) shall be considered a misbranded tobacco product.
`MISBRANDED TOBACCO PRODUCTS
 `SEC. 702. (a) A tobacco product shall be deemed to be misbranded--
 `(1) if its labeling is false or misleading in any particular,
 `(2) if the labeling fails to contain the statements required by section
 4 of the Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act (15 U.S.C. 1333) and
 the Comprehensive Smokeless Tobacco Health Education Act (15 U.S.C. 4401
 et. seq.),
 `(3) if the labeling fails to contain the statement `Federal Law Prohibits
 Sale to Minors' in a prominent and conspicuous place as prescribed by
 regulation by the Secretary,
 `(4) if in package form, unless it bears a label containing--
 `(A) the name and place of business of the manufacturer, packer, or
 distributor, and
 `(B) an accurate statement of the quantity of the contents in terms of
 weight, measure, or numerical count,
except that under regulations of the Secretary reasonable variations from
the requirements of this paragraph shall be permitted and exemptions from
such requirements for small packages shall be established,
 `(5) if the manufacturer, importer, or packager of the product does not
 provide the list of tobacco additives contained in the product in accordance
 with section 704(a),
 `(6) if it does not disclose the tobacco additives contained in the product
 as required under section 704(b), or
 `(7) if it does not disclose tar, nicotine, carbon monoxide, and other
 constituents as required under section 705.
 `(b) The Secretary may by regulation require that the manufacturer of tobacco
 products provide consumers of tobacco products with additional information,
 by way of additional labeling of packages, requiring inserts or other
 means, about the adverse effects of tobacco products, adequate warnings
 and directions for use, contraindications, adequate warnings against use
 in pathological conditions, and any information deemed necessary by the
 Secretary.
 `(c)(1) Nothing in this chapter or the Federal Cigarette Labeling and
 Advertising Act (15 U.S.C. 1333 et seq.) shall prohibit a manufacturer
 of tobacco products from providing consumers with information about the
 adverse effects of tobacco products in addition to the information they
 are required to provide pursuant to this chapter and the Federal Cigarette
 Labeling and Advertising Act (15 U.S.C. 1333 et seq.).
 `(2) The Secretary shall have the authority to modify existing warning
 labels as required by the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act
 and the Comprehensive Smokeless Tobacco Health Education Act so long as such
 modifications do not weaken the health message contained in such warnings.
`ADULTERATED TOBACCO PRODUCTS
 `SEC. 703. A tobacco product shall be deemed to be adulterated--
 `(1) if the level of any tobacco additive contained in the product is in
 violation of a requirement under section 704(b),
 `(2) if the nicotine, tar, carbon monoxide, or other harmful constituent
 level has not been established under section 705,
 `(3) if it bears or contains any added poisonous or deleterious substance
 which may render it injurious to health,
 `(4) if it contains in whole or in part any filthy, putrid, or decomposed
 substance,
 `(5) if it has been prepared, packed, or held under unsanitary conditions
 whereby it may have become contaminated with filth or whereby it may have
 been rendered injurious to health, or
 `(6) if its container or packaging is composed in whole or in part of any
 poisonous or deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious
 to health.
`TOBACCO ADDITIVES
 `SEC. 704. (a) It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, import,
 or package for sale or distribution within the United States any tobacco
 product unless such person has provided to the Secretary a complete list
 of each tobacco additive used in the manufacture of such tobacco product
 and the relative quantity of such additive.
 `(b)(1) The Secretary shall by regulation prescribe any disclosure
 requirements on packages of tobacco products or by any other means in
 order to adequately inform the public of the tobacco additives contained
 in tobacco products.
 `(2) If the Secretary determines that any tobacco additive in a tobacco
 product, either by itself or in conjunction with any other additive, is
 unsafe and presents unnecessary increased risks to health, the Secretary
 may require that such levels of the tobacco additive in the tobacco product
 be reduced or that it be prohibited from use. The Secretary may make such
 a determination only with the advice of experts qualified by scientific
 training and experience to evaluate the safety of tobacco additives.
`NICOTINE, TAR, CARBON MONOXIDE, AND OTHER CONSTITUENTS
 `SEC. 705. (a) It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, import,
 or package for sale or distribution within the United States any tobacco
 product unless such person has provided the Secretary with a complete list
 of all brands of such tobacco products and until such products have been
 tested by the Secretary to establish the tar, nicotine, carbon monoxide,
 and other constituent (as determined by the Secretary) levels for each brand.
 `(b) The Secretary may by regulation prescribe any disclosure requirements
 on packages of tobacco products or by any other means to adequately inform
 the public of the quantities and levels of nicotine, tar, carbon monoxide,
 or other constituents and initiate and carry out any educational activities
 to adequately inform the public that any reduced levels of nicotine, tar,
 carbon monoxide, or other constituents do not necessarily constitute a
 reduced health risk.
`REPORTS
 `SEC. 706. The Secretary shall report annually to the Committee on Energy
 and Commerce of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Labor
 and Human Resources of the Senate on--
 `(1) the use of tobacco additives in tobacco products, including a list
 of tobacco additives which have been prohibited from use in tobacco products,
 `(2) the levels of nicotine, tar, carbon monoxide, and other potentially
 harmful constituents in tobacco products or tobacco smoke and any actions
 the Secretary has taken to reduce the levels of these constituents, and
 `(3) any legislative recommendations that would further reduce the risk
 to health associated with the use of tobacco products, tobacco additives,
 nicotine, tar, or other potentially harmful constituents.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Sections 701 through 709 are redesignated
 as sections 801 through 809, respectively, sections 801 and 802 are
 redesignated as sections 901 and 902, respectively, and sections 901 and
 902 are redesignated as sections 1001 and 1002, respectively.
SEC. 6. WARNING LABELS.
 Section 4(a) of the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act (15
 U.S.C. 1333(a)) is amended by striking out in paragraphs (1), (2), and
 (3) the phrase `SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Cigarette Smoke Contains Carbon
 Monoxide,' and inserting in lieu thereof the following: `SURGEON GENERAL'S
 WARNING: Smoking is Addictive. Once you start you may not be able to stop.'
SEC. 7. NONTOBACCO NICOTINE CONTAINING PRODUCTS.
 Any product which contains nicotine but does not meet the definition of
 tobacco products as contained in section 201(bb) of the Federal Food, Drug,
 and Cosmetic Act shall be deemed to be a drug under section 201(g)(1)(C)
 of such Act.
SEC. 8. MISCELLANEOUS.
 (a) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in the amendment made by section 5 shall supersede,
 repeal, or modify any requirement of the Federal Cigarette Labeling and
 Advertising Act (15 U.S.C. 1333), and the Comprehensive Smokeless Tobacco
 Health Education Act (15 U.S.C. 4401 et. seq.).
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this Act shall be effective
 one year after date of enactment.