HR 4486 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 4486
To amend the Federal Water Pollution Control Act to require the Secretary of
the Army and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency to issue
rules establishing a program ensuring that there is no net loss in the total
number of acres of wetlands that were in the United States on June 8, 1989.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
March 18, 1992
Mrs. BOXER introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Public Works and Transportation
A BILL
To amend the Federal Water Pollution Control Act to require the Secretary of
the Army and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency to issue
rules establishing a program ensuring that there is no net loss in the total
number of acres of wetlands that were in the United States on June 8, 1989.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That section 404 of the Federal
 Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1344) is amended by adding at the
 end the following:
 `(u)(1) Not later than 180 days after the effective date of this subsection,
 the Secretary and the Administrator shall jointly issue rules that establish
 a program that ensures that there is no net loss in the total number of
 acres of wetlands that were in the United States on June 8, 1989.
 `(2) A program established under this subsection--
 `(A) shall require that activities conducted under permits issued under
 this section do not result in any reduction in--
 `(i) the total number of acres of wetlands in the United States; or
 `(ii) the functions and value of those wetlands; and
 `(B) shall include a system of wetlands acreage accounting that is adequate
 to accurately determine--
 `(i) the total number of acres of wetlands in the United States; and
 `(ii) changes in that number that result from activities under permits
 under this section.
 `(3) Not later than 180 days after the effective date of this subsection,
 the Secretary and the Administrator shall jointly prepare and submit to
 the Congress a report describing--
 `(A) any reduction in the total number of acres of wetlands in the United
 States that has occurred since June 8, 1989; and
 `(B) any action that is necessary (in addition to activities required
 under paragraph (2)) to comply with paragraph (1).
 `(4) For purposes of this subsection, the term `wetlands' means any area
 that would be identified as wetlands under the Federal Manual for Identifying
 and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands, as published on January 10, 1989.'.
SEC. 2. SHORT TITLE.
 This act may be cited as `The Wetlands Preservation Act.'