HR 4004 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 4004
To amend section 201(e) of the Agricultural Act of 1949 to prohibit the sale,
during a three-year period, of milk produced by cows injected with bovine
growth hormone, and to require that the Secretary of Agriculture issue rules
requiring records to be kept by producers regarding the manufacture and sale
of bovine growth hormone during such period, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
February 7, 1990
Mr. SMITH of Vermont introduced the following bill; which was referred
jointly to the Committees on Agriculture and Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend section 201(e) of the Agricultural Act of 1949 to prohibit the sale,
during a three-year period, of milk produced by cows injected with bovine
growth hormone, and to require that the Secretary of Agriculture issue rules
requiring records to be kept by producers regarding the manufacture and sale
of bovine growth hormone during such period, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act may be cited as the
 `Bovine Growth Hormone Moratorium Act of 1990'.
 SEC. 2. Effective for the period thirty days after the date of enactment
 of this section until three years after such date of enactment, section
 201(e) of the Agricultural Act of 1949 (7 U.S.C. 1446(e)) is amended to
 read as follows:
 `(e)(1) Effective six months after the date of enactment of this subsection
 during which the Secretary shall issue rules as provided in paragraph (2),
 it shall be unlawful for a person to market milk produced in the United
 States by a cow after such cow was injected with bovine growth hormone if
 such person knew, or should have known, that such milk could be marketed
 for commercial use that was produced by a cow injected with such hormone.
 `(2)(A) Any person who sells bovine growth hormone or injects such hormone
 into cows shall prepare and maintain records that comply with the rules
 issued under subparagraph (B) by the Secretary of Agriculture.
 `(B)(i) The Secretary shall issue rules that require--
 `(I) persons who sell bovine growth hormone, and
 `(II) persons who inject bovine growth hormone into cows,
to create and maintain records that contain the applicable information
specified in clause (ii).
 `(ii) Rules issued under this paragraph shall require such records to
 contain the following information:
 `(I) the quantity and source of the bovine growth hormone obtained (by
 manufacture, purchase, or any other means);
 `(II) the date on which such hormone was obtained, and,
 `(III) the identity of each person to whom such hormone was sold or otherwise
 distributed, the cows into which any portion of such hormone was injected,
 and each person who has an operator or ownership interest in such cows.
 `(3)(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), a person who violates
 paragraph (1) or (2) is liable for a civil penalty of $1,000.
 `(B) A person who commits more than one violation of paragraph (1), or
 more than one violation of paragraph (2), is liable for a civil penalty
 of $10,000 for each such violation after the first such violation.
 `(C) For purposes of this subparagraph--
 `(i) each day on which a person sells milk in violation of paragraph
 (1) shall be treated as a separate violation of such paragraph by such
 person, and
 `(ii) each day on which a person sells or injects bovine growth hormone
 in violation of paragraph 2 shall be treated as a separate violation of
 such paragraph by such person.
 `(4) Not later than January 1, 1993, the Secretary shall--
 `(A) carry out a study to determine the direct effects that the use of
 bovine growth hormone may have on--
 `(i) cows injected with such hormone,
 `(ii) humans who consume milk produced by such cows, and
 `(iii) the profitability of producers who sell such milk; and
 `(B) submit to the Committee on Agriculture of the House of Representatives
 and the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry of the Senate a
 report summarizing in detail the results of such study.
 `(5) For purposes of this subsection--
 `(A) the term `bovine growth hormone' means the substance known as bovine
 somatotropin, and
 `(B) the term `cow' means bovine.'.