HR 2500 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2500
To amend title XVIII of the Social Security Act to provide for coverage of
certain prescription drugs under part B of the medicare program.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
May 30, 1991
Mr. STARK introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the
Committees on Ways and Means and Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend title XVIII of the Social Security Act to provide for coverage of
certain prescription drugs under part B of the medicare program.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit Act
 of 1991'.
SEC. 2. COVERAGE OF EXPENSES FOR PRESCRIPTION DRUGS AND INSULIN.
 (a) DESCRIPTION OF COVERED OUTPATIENT DRUGS- Section 1861 of the Social
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (s)(2), by amending subparagraph (J) to read as follows:
 `(J) covered outpatient drugs (as defined in subsection (t)); and'; and
 (2) in subsection (t)--
 (A) by inserting `and paragraph (2)' after `subsection (m)(5)',
 (B) by striking `(t)' and inserting `(t)(1)', and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
 `(2) Subject to paragraph (3), the term `covered outpatient drug' means--
 `(A) a drug which may be dispensed only upon prescription and--
 `(i) which is approved for safety and effectiveness as a prescription drug
 under section 505 or 507 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act or
 which is approved under section 505(j) of such Act;
 `(ii)(I) which was commercially used or sold in the United States before the
 date of the enactment of the Drug Amendments of 1962 or which is identical,
 similar, or related (within the meaning of section 310.6(b)(1) of title
 21 of the Code of Federal Regulations) to such a drug, and (II) which has
 not been the subject of a final determination by the Secretary that it is a
 `new drug' (within the meaning of section 201(p) of the Federal Food, Drug,
 and Cosmetic Act) or an action brought by the Secretary under section 301,
 302(a), or 304(a) of such Act to enforce section 502(f) or 505(a) of such
 Act; or
 `(iii)(I) which is described in section 107(c)(3) of the Drug Amendments
 of 1962 and for which the Secretary has determined there is a compelling
 justification for its medical need, or is identical, similar, or related
 (within the meaning of section 310.6(b)(1) of title 21 of the Code of
 Federal Regulations) to such a drug, and (II) for which the Secretary has
 not issued a notice of an opportunity for a hearing under section 505(e)
 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act on a proposed order of the
 Secretary to withdraw approval of an application for such drug under such
 section because the Secretary has determined that the drug is less than
 effective for all conditions of use prescribed, recommended, or suggested
 in its labeling;
 `(B) a biological product which--
 `(i) may only be dispensed upon prescription,
 `(ii) is licensed under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act, and
 `(iii) is produced at an establishment licensed under such section to
 produce such product; and
 `(C) insulin certified under section 506 of the Federal Food, Drug, and
 Cosmetic Act.
 `(3)(A) The term `covered outpatient drug' does not include any drug,
 biological product, or insulin provided as, as part of, or as incident
 to, any of the following (and for which payment may be included under
 this title):
 `(i) Inpatient hospital services (described in subsection (b)(2)).
 `(ii) Extended care services (described in subsection (h)(5)).
 `(iii) Physicians' services under subparagraph (A) or (B) of subsection
 (s)(2).
 `(iv) Dialysis supplies under subsection (s)(2)(F).
 `(v) Antigens under subsection (s)(2)(G).
 `(vi) Blood clotting factors for hemophiliacs under subsection (s)(2)(I).
 `(vii) Services of a physician assistant, nurse practitioner, or clinical
 nurse specialist under subsection (s)(2)(K).
 `(viii) Pneumococcal, hepatitis B, or influenza vaccines under subsection
 (s)(10).
 `(ix) Rural health clinic services (under subsection (aa)(1)).
 `(x) Comprehensive outpatient rehabilitation facility services (under
 subsection (cc)(1)).
 `(xi) Hospice care (as defined in subsection (dd)(1)).
 `(xii) Certified nurse-midwife service (as defined in subsection (gg)(1)).
 `(xiii) Inpatient or outpatient rural primary care hospital services
 (as defined in subsection (mm)).
 `(xiv) A covered surgical procedure in an ambulatory surgical center
 (under section 1832(a)(2)(F)(i)).
 `(B) The term `covered outpatient drug' does not include any drug that is
 intravenously administered in a home setting.'.
 (b) DEDUCTIBLE AND PAYMENT AMOUNTS- (1) Section 1833(a)(1) of the Social
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(a)(1)), as amended by sections 4153(a)(2)(B)
 and 4155(b)(2)(B) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990
 (hereafter referred to as `OBRA-1990'), is amended--
 (A) by striking `1834(h)(1), (M)' and inserting `1834(h)(1), (N)';
 (B) by striking `subsection (r)(2)) and (N)' and inserting `subsection
 (r)(2)), (O)'; and
 (C) by striking `1848(a)(1);' and inserting the following `1848(a)(1),
 and (P) with respect to expenses incurred for covered outpatient drugs,
 the amounts paid shall be the amounts determined under section 1834(d)(2);'.
 (2) Section 1833(a)(2) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(a)(2)) is amended by
 inserting `(other than covered outpatient drugs)' after `(2) in the case
 of services'.
 (3) Section 1833(b) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(b)) is amended--
 (A) in clause (1), by inserting `or for covered outpatient drugs' after
 `1861(s)(10)(A)', and
 (B) in clause (2), by inserting `or with respect to covered outpatient
 drugs' after `home health services'.
 (4) Section 1834 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m), as amended by section
 4163(b)(2) of OBRA-1990, is amended by adding at the end the following
 new subsection:
 `(d) PAYMENT FOR COVERED OUTPATIENT DRUGS-
 `(1) DEDUCTIBLE-
 `(A) APPLICATION-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in clauses (ii) and (iii), payment shall
 be made under paragraph (2) only with respect to expenses incurred by an
 individual for covered outpatient drugs during a calendar year on or after
 such date in the year as the Secretary determines that the individual has
 incurred expenses in the year for covered outpatient drugs (during a period
 in which the individual is entitled to benefits under this part) equal to
 the amount of the prescription drug deductible specified in subparagraph
 (C) for that year.
 `(ii) DEDUCTIBLE NOT APPLIED TO 1ST YEAR IMMUNOSUPPRESSIVES- The prescription
 drug deductible established under this paragraph shall not apply to drugs
 described in section 1861(t)(2)(A) used in immunosuppressive therapy and
 furnished, to an individual who receives an organ transplant for which
 payment is made under this title, within 1 year after the date of the
 transplant.
 `(B) RESPONSE TO APPLICATION- If the system described in section 1842(o)(4)
 has not been established and an individual applies to the Secretary to
 establish that the individual has met the requirement of subparagraph (A),
 the Secretary shall promptly notify the individual (and, if the application
 was submitted by or through a participating pharmacy, the pharmacy) as to
 the date (if any) as of which the individual has met such requirement.
 `(C) PRESCRIPTION DRUG DEDUCTIBLE AMOUNT- The prescription drug deductible
 specified in this subparagraph for--
 `(i) 1993 is $650, and
 `(ii) any succeeding year, is the amount specified in this subparagraph
 for the preceding year increased by $50.
 `(2) PAYMENT AMOUNT-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to the prescription drug deductible established
 under paragraph (1)(A) and except as provided in subparagraph (B), the
 amounts payable under this part with respect to a covered outpatient drug
 is equal to 80 percent of the lesser of--
 `(i) the actual charge for the drug, or
 `(ii) the applicable payment limit established under paragraph (3).
 `(B) TREATMENT OF CERTAIN COST-BASED PREPAID ORGANIZATIONS- In applying
 subparagraph (A) in the case of an organization under a reasonable cost
 reimbursement contract under section 1876 and in the case of an organization
 receiving payment under section 1833(a)(1)(A) and providing coverage of
 covered outpatient drugs, the Secretary shall provide for an appropriate
 adjustment in the payment amounts otherwise made to reflect the aggregate
 increase in payments that would otherwise be made with respect to enrollees
 in such an organization if payments were made other than under such clause
 or such a contract on an individual-by-individual basis.
 `(3) PAYMENT LIMITS-
 `(A) PAYMENT LIMIT FOR NON-MULTIPLE SOURCE DRUGS AND MULTIPLE-SOURCE DRUGS
 WITH RESTRICTIVE PRESCRIPTIONS- In the case of a drug that either is not
 a multiple source drug (as defined in paragraph (9)(A)) or is a multiple
 source drug and has a restrictive prescription (as defined in paragraph
 (9)(B)), the payment limit for the drug under this paragraph for a payment
 calculation period is equal to the lesser of--
 `(i) the 90th percentile of the actual charges (computed on a statewide
 basis, carrier-wide basis, or other appropriate geographic area basis, as
 specified by the Secretary) for the drug for the second previous payment
 calculation period, adjusted (as the Secretary determines to be appropriate)
 to reflect the number of tablets (or other dosage units) dispensed; or
 `(ii) the amount of the administrative allowance (established under paragraph
 (4)) plus the product of--
 `(I) the number of tablets (or other dosage units) dispensed, and
 `(II) the per tablet or unit average wholesale price for such drug (as
 determined under subparagraph (C) for the period for purposes of this
 subparagraph).
 `(B) PAYMENT LIMIT FOR MULTIPLE SOURCE DRUGS WITHOUT RESTRICTIVE
 PRESCRIPTIONS- In the case of a drug that is a multiple source drug but
 does not have a restrictive prescription, the payment limit for the drug
 under this paragraph for a payment calculation period is equal to the
 amount of the administrative allowance (established under paragraph (4))
 plus the product of--
 `(i) the number of tablets (or other dosage units) dispensed, and
 `(ii) the unweighted median of the per tablet or unit average wholesale
 prices (determined under subparagraph (C) for purposes of this subparagraph)
 for such drug for the period.
 `(C) DETERMINATION OF UNIT PRICE-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this paragraph, the Secretary shall
 determine, with respect to the dispensing of a covered outpatient drug
 in a payment calculation period (beginning on or after January 1, 1993),
 the per tablet or unit average wholesale price for the drug.
 `(ii) BASIS FOR DETERMINATIONS-
 `(I) DETERMINATION FOR NON-MULTIPLE-SOURCE DRUGS- For purposes of
 subparagraph (A), such determination shall be based on a biannual survey
 conducted by the Secretary of a representative sample of direct sellers,
 wholesalers, or pharmacies (as appropriate) of wholesale (or comparable
 direct) prices (excluding discounts to pharmacies); except that if, because
 of low volume of sales for the drug or other appropriate reasons or in the
 case of covered outpatient drugs during 1993, the Secretary determines
 that such a survey is not appropriate with respect to a specific drug,
 such determination shall be based on published average wholesale (or
 comparable direct) prices for the drug.
 `(II) DETERMINATION FOR MULTIPLE-SOURCE DRUGS- For purposes of subparagraph
 (B), the Secretary may base the determination under this subparagraph on
 the published average wholesale (or comparable direct) prices for the drug
 or on a biannual survey conducted by the Secretary of a representative
 sample of direct sellers, wholesalers, or pharmacists (as appropriate) of
 wholesale (or comparable direct) prices (excluding discounts to pharmacies).
 `(III) COMPLIANCE WITH SURVEY REQUIRED- If a wholesaler or direct seller of
 a covered outpatient drug refuses, after being requested by the Secretary,
 to provide the information required in a survey under this clause, or
 deliberately provides information that is false, the Secretary may impose
 a civil money penalty of not to exceed $10,000 for each such refusal or
 provision of false information. The provisions of section 1128A (other than
 subsections (a) and (b)) shall apply to civil money penalties under the
 previous sentence in the same manner as such provisions apply to a penalty
 or proceeding under section 1128A(a). Information gathered pursuant to
 the survey shall not be disclosed except as the Secretary determines to
 be necessary to carry out the purposes of this part.
 `(iii) QUANTITY AND TIMING- Such determination shall be based on the price
 or prices for purchases in reasonable quantities and shall be made for a
 payment calculation period based on prices for the first day of the first
 month of the previous payment calculation period.
 `(iv) GEOGRAPHIC BASIS- The Secretary shall make such determination, and
 calculate the payment limits under this paragraph, on a national basis;
 except that the Secretary may make such determination, and calculate such
 payment limits, on a regional basis to take account of limitations on the
 availability of drug products and variations among regions in the average
 wholesale prices for a drug product.
 `(4) ADMINISTRATIVE ALLOWANCE FOR PURPOSES OF PAYMENT LIMITS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), for drugs
 dispensed in--
 `(i) 1993, the administrative allowance under this paragraph is--
 `(I) $5.00 for drugs dispensed by a participating pharmacy, or
 `(II) $3.00 for drugs dispensed by another pharmacy; or
 `(ii) a subsequent year, the administrative allowance under this paragraph
 is the administrative allowance under this paragraph for the preceding
 year increased by the percentage increase (if any) in the implicit price
 deflator for gross national product (as published by the Department of
 Commerce in its `Survey of Current Business') over the 12-month period
 ending with August of such preceding year.
Any allowance determined under the clause (ii) which is not a multiple of
1 cent shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of 1 cent.
 `(B) ADJUSTMENT IN ALLOWANCE FOR MAIL SERVICE PHARMACIES- The Secretary may,
 by regulation and after consultation with pharmacists, elderly groups,
 and private insurers, reduce the administrative allowances established
 under subparagraph (A) for any drug dispensed by a mail service pharmacy
 (as defined by the Secretary) based on differences between such pharmacies
 and other pharmacies with respect to operating costs and other economies.
 `(5) ASSURING APPROPRIATE PRESCRIBING AND DISPENSING PRACTICES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall establish a program to identify
 (and to educate physicians and pharmacists concerning)--
 `(i) instances or patterns of unnecessary or inappropriate prescribing or
 dispensing practices for covered outpatient drugs;
 `(ii) instances or patterns of substandard care with respect to such
 drugs; and
 `(iii) potential adverse reactions.
 `(B) STANDARDS- In carrying out the program under subparagraph (A), the
 Secretary shall establish for each covered outpatient drug standards for the
 prescribing of the drug which are based on accepted medical practice. In
 establishing such standards, the Secretary shall incorporate standards
 from such current authoritative compendia as the Secretary may select;
 except that the Secretary may modify such a standard by regulation on
 the basis of scientific and medical information that such standard is not
 consistent with the safe and effective use of the drug.
 `(C) PROHIBITION OF FORMULARY- Nothing in this title (other than section
 1862(c)) shall be construed as authorizing the Secretary to exclude from
 coverage or to deny payment--
 `(i) for any specific covered outpatient drug, or specific class of covered
 outpatient drug; or
 `(ii) for any specific use of such a drug for a specific indication unless
 such exclusion is pursuant to section 1862(a)(1) based on a finding by
 the Secretary that such use is not safe or is not effective.
 `(6) TREATMENT OF CERTAIN PREPAID ORGANIZATIONS-
 `(A) GENERAL RULE COUNTING PREPAID PLAN EXPENSES TOWARDS THE PRESCRIPTION
 DRUG DEDUCTIBLE- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), expenses incurred
 by (or on behalf of) a medicare beneficiary for covered outpatient drugs
 shall be counted (consistent with subparagraph (C)) toward the prescription
 drug deductible established under paragraph (1) whether or not, at the
 time the expenses were incurred, the beneficiary was enrolled in a plan
 under section 1833(a)(1)(A) or under section 1876.
 `(B) TREATMENT OF DRUG BUY-OUT PLAN EXPENSES- In the case of a medicare
 beneficiary enrolled in a month in a drug buy-out plan (as defined in
 subparagraph (D))--
 `(i) expenses incurred by the beneficiary for covered outpatient drugs
 reimbursed under the plan shall not be counted towards the prescription
 drug deductible, but
 `(ii) if the individual disenrolls from the plan during the year, the
 beneficiary is deemed to have incurred, for each month of such enrollment,
 expenses for covered outpatient drugs in an amount equal to the actuarial
 value (with respect to such month) of the deductible for covered outpatient
 drugs (as computed by the Secretary for purposes of section 1876(e)(1))
 applicable on the average to individuals in the United States.
 `(C) TREATMENT OF EXPENSES FOR COVERED OUTPATIENT DRUGS INCURRED WHILE
 ENROLLED IN A PREPAID PLAN OTHER THAN A DRUG BUY-OUT PLAN- The Secretary
 may not enter into a contract with an organization under section 1876,
 or provide for payment under section 1833(a)(1)(A) with respect to an
 organization which provides reimbursement for covered outpatient drugs, with
 respect to a plan that is not a drug buy-out plan, unless the organization
 provides assurances, satisfactory to the Secretary, that--
 `(i) the organization will maintain and make available, for its enrollees
 and in coordination with the appropriate carriers under this part, an
 accounting of expenses incurred by (or on behalf of) enrollees under the
 plan for covered outpatient drugs; and
 `(ii) the organization will take into account, in any deductibles established
 under the plan in a year with respect to covered outpatient drugs under
 this part, the amounts of expenses for covered outpatient drugs incurred
 in the year by (or on behalf of) the beneficiary and otherwise counted
 towards the prescription drug deductible in the year.
 `(D) DRUG BUY-OUT PLAN DEFINED- In this paragraph, the term `drug buy-out
 plan' means a plan under section 1833(a)(1)(A) or offered by an organization
 under section 1876 and with respect to which--
 `(i) the amount of any deductible under the plan with respect to covered
 outpatient drugs under this title,
is less than 50 percent of--
 `(ii) the prescription drug deductible specified in paragraph (1)(C).
 `(E) MEDICARE BENEFICIARY DEFINED- In this subsection, the term `medicare
 beneficiary' means, with respect to a month, an individual covered for
 benefits under this part for the month.
 `(F) TREATMENT OF PLAN CHARGES- In the case of covered outpatient
 drugs furnished by an eligible organization under section 1876(b) or an
 organization described in section 1833(a)(1)(A) which does not impose
 charges on covered outpatient drugs dispensed to its members, for purposes
 of this subsection the actual charges of the organization shall be the
 organization's standard charges to members, and other individuals, not
 entitled to benefits with respect to such drugs.
 `(7) PHYSICIAN GUIDE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall develop, and update annually,
 an information guide for physicians concerning the comparative average
 wholesale prices of at least 500 of the most commonly prescribed covered
 outpatient drugs. Such guide shall, to the extent practicable, group covered
 outpatient drugs (including multiple source drugs) in a manner useful to
 physicians by therapeutic category or with respect to the conditions for
 which they are prescribed. Such guide shall specify the average wholesale
 prices on the basis of the amount of the drug required for a typical daily
 therapeutic regimen.
 `(B) MAILING GUIDE- The Secretary shall provide for mailing, in January of
 each year (beginning with 1993), a copy of the guide developed and updated
 under subparagraph (A)--
 `(i) to each hospital with an agreement in effect under section 1866;
 `(ii) to each physician (as defined in section 1861(r)(1)) who routinely
 provides services under this part; and
 `(iii) to Social Security offices, senior citizen centers, and other
 appropriate places.
 `(8) REPORTS ON UTILIZATION AND EFFECTS ON PRICES-
 `(A) COMPILATION OF INFORMATION- The Secretary shall compile information on--
 `(i) manufacturers' prices for covered outpatient drugs, and on charges
 of pharmacists for covered outpatient drugs, and
 `(ii) the use of covered outpatient drugs by individuals entitled to
 benefits under this part.
The information compiled under clause (i) shall include a comparison of the
increases in prices and charges for covered outpatient drugs during each
6 month period (beginning with January 1991) with the semiannual average
increase in such prices and charges during the 5 years beginning with 1986.
 `(B) REPORTS- The Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Ways and
 Means and Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives and the
 Committee on Finance of the Senate a report, in May and November of 1992
 and 1993 and in May of each succeeding year, providing the information
 compiled under subparagraph (A). For each such report submitted after
 1994, the report shall include an explanation of the extent to which the
 increases in outlays for covered outpatient drugs under this part are due
 to the factors described in subparagraphs (A)(i) and (A)(ii).
 `(9) DEFINITIONS- In this subsection:
 `(A) MULTIPLE SOURCE DRUG-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- The term `multiple source drug' means, with respect to
 a payment calculation period, a covered outpatient drug for which there
 are 2 or more drug products which--
 `(I) are rated as therapeutically equivalent (under the Food and Drug
 Administration's most recent publication of `Approved Drug Products with
 Therapeutic Equivalence Evaluations');
 `(II) except as provided in clause (ii), are pharmaceutically equivalent
 and bioequivalent, as defined in clause (iii) and as determined by the
 Food and Drug Administration; and
 `(III) are sold or marketed during the period.
 `(ii) EXCEPTION- Subclause (II) of clause (i) shall not apply if the Food
 and Drug Administration changes by regulation (after an opportunity for
 public comment of 90 days) the requirement that, for purposes of the
 publication described in clause (i)(I), in order for drug products to
 be rated as therapeutically equivalent, they must be pharmaceutically
 equivalent and bioequivalent, as defined in clause (iii).
 `(iii) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this subparagraph:
 `(I) PHARMACEUTICALLY EQUIVALENT- Drug products are pharmaceutically
 equivalent if the products contain identical amounts of the same active
 drug ingredient in the same dosage form and meet compendial or other
 applicable standards of strength, quality, purity, and identity.
 `(II) BIOEQUIVALENT- Drugs are bioequivalent if they do not present a known
 or potential bioequivalence problem or, if they do present such a problem,
 are shown to meet an appropriate standard of bioequivalence.
 `(III) SOLD OR MARKETED- A drug is considered to be sold or marketed during
 a period if it is listed in the publications referred to in clause (i)(I),
 unless the Secretary determines that such sale or marketing is not actually
 taking place.
 `(B) RESTRICTIVE PRESCRIPTION- A drug has a `restrictive prescription'
 only if--
 `(i) in the case of a written prescription, the prescription for the drug
 indicates, in the handwriting of the physician or other person prescribing
 the drug and with an appropriate phrase (such as `brand medically necessary')
 recognized by the Secretary, that the particular drug must be dispensed; or
 `(ii) in the case of a prescription issued by telephone--
 `(I) the physician or other person prescribing the drug (through use of such
 an appropriate phrase) states that the particular drug must be dispensed, and
 `(II) the physician or other person submits to the pharmacy involved,
 within 30 days after the date of the telephone prescription, a written
 confirmation which is in the handwriting of the physician or other person
 prescribing the drug and which indicates with such appropriate phrase that
 the particular drug was required to have been dispensed.
 `(C) PAYMENT CALCULATION PERIOD- The term `payment calculation period'
 means the 6-month period beginning with January of each year and the
 6-month period beginning with July of each year.'.
 (c) PARTICIPATING PHARMACIES; CIVIL MONEY PENALTIES-
 (1) PARTICIPATING PHARMACIES- Section 1842 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395t)
 is amended--
 (A) in subsection (h)(1), by inserting before the period at the end of
 the second sentence the following: `, except that, with respect to a
 supplier of covered outpatient drugs, the term `participating supplier'
 means a participating pharmacy (as defined in subsection (o)(1))';
 (B) in subsection (h)(4), is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `In publishing directories under this paragraph, the Secretary shall
 provide for separate directories (wherever appropriate) for participating
 pharmacies.'; and
 (C) by inserting after subsection (n) the following new subsection:
 `(o)(1) For purposes of this section, the term `participating pharmacy'
 means, with respect to covered outpatient drugs dispensed on or after January
 1, 1993, an entity which is authorized under a State law to dispense covered
 outpatient drugs and which has entered into an agreement with the Secretary,
 providing at least the following:
 `(A) The entity agrees to accept payment under this part on an
 assignment-related basis for all covered outpatient drugs dispensed to
 an individual entitled to benefits under this part (in this subsection
 referred to as a `medicare beneficiary') during a year after--
 `(i) the Secretary has notified the entity, through the electronic system
 described in paragraph (4); or
 `(ii) in the absence of such a system, the entity is otherwise notified
 that the Secretary has determined,
that the individual has met the prescription drug deductible with respect
to such drugs under section 1834(d)(1) for the year.
 `(B) The entity agrees--
 `(i) not to refuse to dispense covered outpatient drugs stocked by the
 entity to any medicare beneficiary; and
 `(ii) not to charge medicare beneficiaries (regardless of whether or
 not the beneficiaries are enrolled under a prepaid health plan or with
 eligible organization under section 1876) more for such drugs than the
 amount it charges to the general public (as determined by the Secretary
 in regulations).
 `(C) The entity agrees to keep patient records (including records on
 expenses) for all covered outpatient drugs dispensed to all medicare
 beneficiaries.
 `(D) The entity agrees to submit information (in a manner specified by
 the Secretary to be necessary to administer this title) on all purchases
 of covered outpatient drugs dispensed to medicare beneficiaries.
 `(E) The entity agrees--
 `(i) to offer to counsel, or to offer to provide information (consistent
 with State law respecting the provision of such information) to, each
 medicare beneficiary on the appropriate use of a drug to be dispensed and
 whether there are potential interactions between the drug and other drugs
 dispensed to the beneficiary; and
 `(ii) to advise the beneficiary on the availability (consistent with
 State laws respecting substitution of drugs) of therapeutically equivalent
 covered outpatient drugs.
 `(F) The entity agrees to provide the information requested by the Secretary
 in surveys under section 1834(d)(3)(C)(ii).
Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as requiring a pharmacy operated
by an eligible organization (described in section 1876(b)) or an organization
described in section 1833(a)(1)(A) for the exclusive benefit of its members
to dispense covered outpatient drugs to individuals who are not members of
the organization.
 `(2) The Secretary shall provide to each participating pharmacy--
 `(A) a distinctive emblem (suitable for display to the public) indicating
 that the pharmacy is a participating pharmacy; and
 `(B) upon request, such electronic equipment and technical assistance
 (other than the costs of obtaining, maintaining, or expanding telephone
 service) as the Secretary determines may be necessary for the pharmacy to
 submit claims using the electronic system established under paragraph (4).
 `(3) The Secretary shall provide for periodic audits of participating
 pharmacies to assure--
 `(A) compliance with the requirements for participation under this title; and
 `(B) the accuracy of information submitted by the pharmacies under this
 title.
 `(4) The Secretary shall establish, by not later than January 1, 1993,
 a point-of-sale electronic system for use by carriers and participating
 pharmacies in the submission of information respecting covered outpatient
 drugs dispensed to medicare beneficiaries under this part.
 `(5) Notwithstanding subsection (b)(3)(B), payment for covered outpatient
 drugs may be made on the basis of an assignment described in clause (ii)
 of that subsection only to a participating pharmacy.'.
 (2) CIVIL MONEY PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF PARTICIPATION AGREEMENT, FOR
 EXCESSIVE CHARGES FOR NONPARTICIPATING PHARMACIES AND FOR FAILURE TO PROVIDE
 SURVEY INFORMATION- Section 1128A(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7a(a))
 is amended--
 (A) by striking `or' at the end of paragraph (1);
 (B) in paragraph (2)(C), by inserting `or to be a participating pharmacy
 under section 1842(o)' after `1842(h)(1)';
 (C) by striking `, or' at the end of paragraph (2) and inserting a semicolon;
 (D) by adding `or' at the end of paragraph (3); and
 (E) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph:
 `(4) in the case of a participating or nonparticipating pharmacy (as
 defined for purposes of part B of title XVIII)--
 `(A) presents or causes to be presented to any person a request for
 payment for covered outpatient drugs dispensed to an individual entitled
 to benefits under part B of title XVIII and for which the amount charged
 by the pharmacy is greater than the amount the pharmacy charges the general
 public (as determined by the Secretary in regulations), or
 `(B) fails to provide the information requested by the Secretary in a
 survey under section 1834(d)(3)(C)(ii);'.
 (d) LIMITATION ON LENGTH OF PRESCRIPTION- Section 1862(c) of such Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1395y(c)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) through (D) of paragraph (1) as
 clauses (i) through (iv);
 (2) in paragraph (2)(A), by striking `paragraph (1)' and inserting
 `subparagraph (A)';
 (3) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (2) as clauses
 (i) and (ii);
 (4) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as subparagraphs (A) and (B);
 (5) by inserting `(1)' after `(c)'; and
 (6) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(2) No payment may be made under part B for any expense incurred for a
 covered outpatient drug if the drug is dispensed in a quantity exceeding
 a supply of 30 days or such longer period of time (not to exceed 90 days,
 except in exceptional circumstances) as the Secretary may authorize.'.
 (e) USE OF CARRIERS, FISCAL INTERMEDIARIES, AND OTHER ENTITIES IN
 ADMINISTRATION-
 (1) AUTHORIZING USE OF OTHER ENTITIES IN ELECTRONIC CLAIMS SYSTEM- Section
 1842(f) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395u(f)) is amended--
 (A) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (1);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (2) and inserting `;
 and'; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(3) with respect to implementation and operation (and related functions)
 of the electronic system established under subsection (o)(4), a voluntary
 association, corporation, partnership, or other nongovernmental organization,
 which the Secretary determines to be qualified to conduct such activities.'.
 (2) ADDITIONAL FUNCTIONS OF CARRIERS- Section 1842(b)(3) of such Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1395u(b)(3)) is amended--
 (A) by striking `and' at the end of subparagraph (H);
 (B) by adding `and' at the end of subparagraph (L);
 (C) by redesignating subparagraph (L) as subparagraph (I); and
 (D) by inserting after subparagraph (I) (as so redesignated) the following
 new subparagraphs:
 `(J) if it makes determinations or payments with respect to covered
 outpatient drugs, will--
 `(i) receive information transmitted under the electronic system established
 under subsection (o)(4), and
 `(ii) respond to requests by participating pharmacies (and individuals
 entitled to benefits under this part) as to whether or not such an
 individual has met the prescription drug deductible established under
 section 1834(d)(1)(A) for a year; and
 `(K) will enter into such contracts with organizations described in
 subsection (f)(3) as the Secretary determines may be necessary to implement
 and operate (and for related functions with respect to) the electronic
 system established under subsection (o)(4) for covered outpatient drugs
 under this part;'.
 (3) SPECIAL CONTRACT PROVISIONS FOR ELECTRONIC CLAIMS SYSTEM-
 (A) PAYMENT ON OTHER THAN A COST BASIS- Section 1842(c)(1)(A) of such Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1395u(c)(1)(A)) is amended--
 (i) by inserting `(i)' after `(c)(1)(A)';
 (ii) in the first sentence, by inserting `, except as provided in clause
 (ii),' after `under this part, and'; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 `(ii) To the extent that a contract under this section provides for
 implementation and operation (and related functions) of the electronic
 system established under subsection (o)(4) for covered outpatient drugs,
 the Secretary may provide for payment for such activities based on any
 method of payment determined by the Secretary to be appropriate.'.
 (B) APPLICATION OF DIFFERENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS- The Secretary of Health
 and Human Services, before entering into contracts under section 1842 of
 the Social Security Act with respect to the implementation and operation
 (and related functions) of the electronic system for covered outpatient
 drugs, shall establish standards with respect to performance with respect
 to such activities. The provisions of section 1153(e)(2) and paragraphs (1)
 and (2) of section 1153(h) of such Act shall apply to such activities in
 the same manner as they apply to contracts with peer review organizations,
 instead of the requirements of the last 2 sentences of section 1842(b)(2)
 of such Act.
 (C) USE OF REGIONAL CARRIERS- Section 1842(b)(2)(A) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395u(b)(2)(A)) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new sentence: `With respect to activities relating to implementation and
 operation (and related functions) of the electronic system established
 under subsection (o)(4), the Secretary may enter into contracts with
 carriers under this section to perform such activities on a regional basis.'.
 (4) DELAY IN APPLICATION OF COORDINATED BENEFITS WITH MEDIGAP- The provisions
 of subparagraph (B) of section 1842(h)(3) of the Social Security Act
 shall not apply to covered outpatient drugs (other than drugs described
 in section 1861(s)(2)(J) of such Act as of the date of the enactment of
 this Act) dispensed before January 1, 1995.
 (5) BATCH PROMPT PROCESSING OF CLAIMS- Section 1842(c) (42 U.S.C. 1395u(c))
 is amended--
 (A) in paragraphs (2)(A) and (3)(A), by striking `Each' and inserting
 `Except as provided in paragraph (3), each';
 (B) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(4)(A) Each contract under this section which provides for the disbursement
 of funds, as described in subsection (a)(1)(B), with respect to claims for
 payment for covered outpatient drugs shall provide for a payment cycle
 under which each carrier will, on a monthly basis, make a payment with
 respect to all claims which were received and approved for payment in the
 period since the most recent date on which such a payment was made with
 respect to the participating pharmacy or individual submitting the claim.
 `(B) If payment is not issued, mailed, or otherwise transmitted within 5
 days of when such a payment is required to be made under subparagraph (A),
 interest shall be paid at the rate used for purposes of section 3902(a) of
 title 31, United States Code (relating to interest penalties for failure
 to make prompt payments) for the period beginning on the day after such
 5-day period and ending on the date on which payment is made.'.
 (f) MODIFICATION OF HMO/CMP CONTRACTS-
 (1) SEPARATE ACTUARIAL DETERMINATION FOR COVERED OUTPATIENT DRUG BENEFIT-
 Section 1876(e)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395mm(e)(1)) is amended by adding
 at the end thereof the following new sentence: `The preceding sentence
 shall be applied separately with respect to covered outpatient drugs.'.
 (2) ADDITIONAL OPTIONAL BENEFITS- Section 1876(g)(3)(A) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395mm(g)(3)(A)) is amended by striking `rate' and inserting `rates'.
 (g) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) The first sentence of section 1866(a)(2)(A) (42 U.S.C. 1395cc(a)(2)(A))
 is amended--
 (A) by inserting `1834(d),' after `1833(b),'; and
 (B) by inserting `and in the case of covered outpatient drugs, applicable
 coinsurance percent (specified in section 1834(d)(2)(C)) of the lesser of
 the actual charges for the drugs or the payment limit (established under
 section 1834(d)(3))' after `established by the Secretary'.
 (2) Section 1903(i)(5) (42 U.S.C. 1396b(i)(5)) is amended by striking
 `section 1862(c)' and inserting `section 1862(c)(1)'.
 (h) PRESCRIPTION DRUG PAYMENT REVIEW COMMISSION- Part B is amended by
 inserting after section 1846 the following new section:
`PRESCRIPTION DRUG PAYMENT REVIEW COMMISSION
 `SEC. 1847. (a)(1) The Director of the Congressional Office of Technology
 Assessment (in this section referred to as the `Director' and the `Office',
 respectively) shall provide for the appointment of a Prescription Drug
 Payment Review Commission (in this section referred to as the `Commission'),
 to be composed of individuals with expertise in the provision and financing
 of covered outpatient drugs appointed by the Director (without regard to
 the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in
 the competitive service).
 `(2) The Commission shall consist of 11 individuals. Members of the
 Commission shall first be appointed by no later than January 1, 1992,
 for a term of 3 years, except that the Director may provide initially for
 such shorter terms as will insure that (on a continuing basis) the terms
 of no more than 4 members expire in any one year.
 `(3) The membership of the Commission shall include recognized experts in
 the fields of health care economics, medicine, pharmacology, pharmacy,
 and prescription drug reimbursement, as well as at least one individual
 who is a medicare beneficiary.
 `(b)(1) The Commission shall submit to Congress an annual report no
 later than May 1 of each year, beginning with 1993, concerning methods of
 determining payment for covered outpatient drugs under this part.
 `(2) Such report, in 1994 and thereafter, shall include, with respect to
 the previous year, information on--
 `(A) increases in manufacturers' prices for covered outpatient drugs and
 in charges of pharmacists for covered outpatient drugs,
 `(B) the level of utilization of covered outpatient drugs by medicare
 beneficiaries, and
 `(C) administrative costs relating to covered outpatient drugs.
 `(c) Section 1845(c)(1) shall apply to the Commission in the same manner
 as it applies to the Physician Payment Review Commission.
 `(d) There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary
 to carry out the provisions of this section. Such sums shall be payable
 from the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund.'.
 (i) ADDITIONAL STUDIES-
 (1) HHS- The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this section
 referred to as the `Secretary') shall conduct the following studies, and
 report to Congress on the results of each such study by the following dates:
 (A) A study of the possibility of including drugs which have not yet been
 approved under section 505 or 507 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
 and biological products which have not been licensed under section 351 of
 the Public Health Service Act but which are commonly used in the treatment
 of cancer or in immunosuppressive therapy and other experimental drugs and
 biological products as covered outpatient drugs under the medicare program,
 for which a report shall be made by January 1, 1992. The study under this
 subparagraph shall be conducted in consultation with an advisory board of
 consumers, experts in the fields of cancer chemotherapy and immunosuppressive
 therapy, representatives of pharmaceutical manufacturers, and such other
 individuals as the Secretary may select.
 (B) A study to evaluate the potential to use mail service pharmacies to
 reduce costs to the medicare program and to medicare beneficiaries, for
 which a report shall be made by January 1, 1992.
 (C) A study of methods to improve utilization review of covered outpatient
 drugs, for which a report shall be made by January 1, 1995.
 (D) A longitudinal study on the use of outpatient prescription drugs by
 medicare beneficiaries with respect to medical necessity, potential for
 adverse drug interactions, cost (including whether lower cost drugs could
 have been used), and patient stockpiling or wastage, for which a report
 shall be made by January 1, 1995.
 (2) GAO- The Comptroller General shall conduct the following studies,
 and report to Congress on the results of each such study by not later than
 May 1, 1994:
 (A) A study comparing average wholesale prices with actual pharmacy
 acquisition costs by type of pharmacy.
 (B) A study to determine the overhead costs of retail pharmacies.
 (C) A study of the discounts given by pharmacies to other third-party
 insurers.
Pharmacies which fail to provide the Comptroller General with reasonable
access to necessary records to carry out the studies under this paragraph
are subject to exclusion from the medicare program under section 1128(a)
of the Social Security Act.
 (j) DEVELOPMENT OF STANDARD MEDICARE CLAIMS FORM-
 (1) The Secretary shall develop, in consultation with representatives
 of pharmacies and other interested individuals, a standard claims form
 (and a standard electronic claims format) to be used in requests for
 payment for covered outpatient drugs under the medicare program and other
 third-party payors.
 (2) Not later than October 1, 1992, the Secretary shall distribute official
 sample copies of the format developed under paragraph (1) to pharmacies
 and other interested parties and by not later than October 1, 1992, shall
 distribute official sample copies of the form developed under paragraph
 (1) to pharmacies and other interested parties.
 (k) EFFECTIVE DATES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the
 amendments made by this section shall apply to items dispensed on or after
 January 1, 1993.
 (2) CARRIERS- The amendments made by subsection (e) shall take effect on
 the date of the enactment of this Act; except that the amendments made by
 subsection (e)(5) shall take effect on January 1, 1994, but shall not be
 construed as requiring payment before February 1, 1994.
 (3) HMO/CMP ENROLLMENTS- The amendment made by subsection (f) shall apply
 to enrollments effected on or after January 1, 1993.
SEC. 3. FINANCING BENEFIT THROUGH INCREASE IN PART B PREMIUM.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1839(e)(1)(B) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395r(e)(1)(B)) is amended--
 (1) in clause (iii), by striking `$36.60' and inserting `$42.40';
 (2) in clause (iv), by striking `$41.10' and inserting `$47.70'; and
 (3) in clause (v), by striking `$46.10' and inserting `$53.60'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to
 months beginning on or after December 1992.