[Congressional Bills 110th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]
[S. 3101 Placed on Calendar Senate (PCS)]

 Calendar No. 772
110th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 S. 3101

 To amend titles XVIII and XIX of the Social Security Act to extend 
expiring provisions under the Medicare program, to improve beneficiary 
access to preventive and mental health services, to enhance low-income 
 benefit programs, and to maintain access to care in rural areas, 
 including pharmacy access, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 June 6, 2008

 Mr. Baucus (for himself, Ms. Snowe, Mr. Rockefeller, and Mr. Smith) 
 ordered introduced the following bill; which was read the first time

 June 9, 2008

 Read the second time and placed on the calendar

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To amend titles XVIII and XIX of the Social Security Act to extend 
expiring provisions under the Medicare program, to improve beneficiary 
access to preventive and mental health services, to enhance low-income 
 benefit programs, and to maintain access to care in rural areas, 
 including pharmacy access, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare 
Improvements for Patients and Providers Act of 2008''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
 TITLE I--MEDICARE

 Subtitle A--Beneficiary Improvements

 Part I--Prevention, Mental Health, and Marketing

Sec. 101. Improvements to coverage of preventive services.
Sec. 102. Elimination of discriminatory copayment rates for Medicare 
 outpatient psychiatric services.
Sec. 103. Prohibitions and limitations on certain sales and marketing 
 activities under Medicare Advantage plans 
 and prescription drug plans.
Sec. 104. Improvements to the Medigap program.
 Part II--Low-Income Programs

Sec. 111. Extension of qualifying individual (QI) program.
Sec. 112. Application of full LIS subsidy assets test under Medicare 
 Savings Program.
Sec. 113. Eliminating barriers to enrollment.
Sec. 114. Elimination of Medicare part D late enrollment penalties paid 
 by subsidy eligible individuals.
Sec. 115. Eliminating application of estate recovery.
Sec. 116. Exemptions from income and resources for determination of 
 eligibility for low-income subsidy.
Sec. 117. Judicial review of decisions of the Commissioner of Social 
 Security under the Medicare part D low-
 income subsidy program.
Sec. 118. Translation of model form.
Sec. 119. Medicare enrollment assistance.
 Subtitle B--Provisions Relating to Part A

Sec. 121. Expansion and extension of the Medicare Rural Hospital 
 Flexibility Program.
Sec. 122. Rebasing for sole community hospitals.
Sec. 123. Demonstration project on community health integration models 
 in certain rural counties.
Sec. 124. Extension of the reclassification of certain hospitals.
Sec. 125. Revocation of unique deeming authority of the Joint 
 Commission.
 Subtitle C--Provisions Relating to Part B

 Part I--Physicians' Services

Sec. 131. Physician payment, efficiency, and quality improvements.
Sec. 132. Incentives for electronic prescribing.
Sec. 133. Expanding access to primary care services.
Sec. 134. Extension of floor on Medicare work geographic adjustment 
 under the Medicare physician fee schedule.
Sec. 135. Imaging provisions.
Sec. 136. Extension of treatment of certain physician pathology 
 services under Medicare.
Sec. 137. Accommodation of physicians ordered to active duty in the 
 Armed Services.
Sec. 138. Adjustment for Medicare mental health services.
Sec. 139. Improvements for Medicare anesthesia teaching programs.
 Part II--Other Payment and Coverage Improvements

Sec. 141. Extension of exceptions process for Medicare therapy caps.
Sec. 142. Extension of payment rule for brachytherapy and therapeutic 
 radiopharmaceuticals.
Sec. 143. Speech-language pathology services.
Sec. 144. Payment and coverage improvements for patients with chronic 
 obstructive pulmonary disease and other 
 conditions.
Sec. 145. Revision of payment for power-driven wheelchairs.
Sec. 146. Clinical laboratory tests.
Sec. 147. Improved access to ambulance services.
Sec. 148. Extension and expansion of the Medicare hold harmless 
 provision under the prospective payment 
 system for hospital outpatient department 
 (HOPD) services for certain hospitals.
Sec. 149. Clarification of payment for clinical laboratory tests 
 furnished by critical access hospitals.
Sec. 150. Adding certain entities as originating sites for payment of 
 telehealth services.
Sec. 151. MedPAC study and report on improving chronic care 
 demonstration programs.
Sec. 152. Increase of FQHC payment limits.
Sec. 153. Kidney disease education and awareness provisions.
Sec. 154. Renal dialysis provisions.
 Subtitle D--Provisions Relating to Part C

Sec. 161. Phase-out of indirect medical education (IME).
Sec. 162. Revisions to requirements for Medicare Advantage private fee-
 for-service plans.
Sec. 163. Revisions to quality improvement programs.
Sec. 164. Revisions relating to specialized Medicare Advantage plans 
 for special needs individuals.
Sec. 165. Limitation on out-of-pocket costs for dual eligibles and 
 qualified medicare beneficiaries enrolled 
 in a specialized Medicare Advantage plan 
 for special needs individuals.
Sec. 166. Adjustment to the Medicare Advantage stabilization fund.
Sec. 167. Access to Medicare reasonable cost contract plans.
Sec. 168. MedPAC study and report on quality measures.
Sec. 169. MedPAC study and report on Medicare Advantage payments.
 Subtitle E--Provisions Relating to Part D

 Part I--Improving Pharmacy Access

Sec. 171. Prompt payment by prescription drug plans and MA-PD plans 
 under part D.
Sec. 172. Submission of claims by pharmacies located in or contracting 
 with long-term care facilities.
Sec. 173. Regular update of prescription drug pricing standard.
 Part II--Other Provisions

Sec. 175. Inclusion of barbiturates and benzodiazepines as covered part 
 D drugs.
Sec. 176. Formulary requirements with respect to certain categories or 
 classes of drugs.
 Subtitle F--Other Provisions

Sec. 181. Use of part D data.
Sec. 182. Revision of definition of medically accepted indication for 
 drugs.
Sec. 183. Contract with a consensus-based entity regarding performance 
 measurement.
Sec. 184. Cost-sharing for clinical trials.
Sec. 185. Addressing health care disparities.
Sec. 186. Demonstration to improve care to previously uninsured.
Sec. 187. Office of the Inspector General report on compliance with and 
 enforcement of national standards on 
 culturally and linguistically appropriate 
 services (CLAS) in Medicare.
Sec. 188. Medicare Improvement Funding.
 TITLE II--MEDICAID

Sec. 201. Extension of transitional medical assistance (TMA) and 
 abstinence education program.
Sec. 202. Medicaid DSH extension.
Sec. 203. Pharmacy reimbursement under Medicaid.
Sec. 204. Review of administrative claim determinations.
 TITLE III--MISCELLANEOUS

Sec. 301. Extension of TANF supplemental grants.
Sec. 302. 70 percent federal matching for foster care and adoption 
 assistance for the District of Columbia.
Sec. 303. Extension of Special Diabetes Grant Programs.
Sec. 304. IOM reports on best practices for conducting systematic 
 reviews of clinical effectiveness research 
 and for developing clinical protocols.

 TITLE I--MEDICARE

 Subtitle A--Beneficiary Improvements

 PART I--PREVENTION, MENTAL HEALTH, AND MARKETING

SEC. 101. IMPROVEMENTS TO COVERAGE OF PREVENTIVE SERVICES.

 (a) Coverage of Additional Preventive Services.--
 (1) Coverage.--Section 1861 of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395x), as amended by section 114 of the Medicare, 
 Medicaid, and SCHIP Extension Act of 2007 (Public Law 110-173), 
 is amended--
 (A) in subsection (s)(2)--
 (i) in subparagraph (Z), by striking 
 ``and'' after the semicolon at the end;
 (ii) in subparagraph (AA), by adding 
 ``and'' after the semicolon at the end; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following 
 new subparagraph:
 ``(BB) additional preventive services (described in 
 subsection (ddd)(1));''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 subsection:

 ``Additional Preventive Services

 ``(ddd)(1) The term `additional preventive services' means services 
not otherwise described in this title that identify medical conditions 
or risk factors and that the Secretary determines are--
 ``(A) reasonable and necessary for the prevention or early 
 detection of an illness or disability;
 ``(B) recommended with a grade of A or B by the United 
 States Preventive Services Task Force; and
 ``(C) appropriate for individuals entitled to benefits 
 under part A or enrolled under part B.
 ``(2) In making determinations under paragraph (1) regarding the 
coverage of a new service, the Secretary shall use the process for 
making national coverage determinations (as defined in section 
1869(f)(1)(B)) under this title. As part of the use of such process, 
the Secretary may conduct an assessment of the relation between 
predicted outcomes and the expenditures for such service and may take 
into account the results of such assessment in making such 
determination.''.
 (2) Payment and coinsurance for additional preventive 
 services.--Section 1833(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395l(a)(1)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``and'' before ``(V)''; and
 (B) by inserting before the semicolon at the end 
 the following: ``, and (W) with respect to additional 
 preventive services (as defined in section 
 1861(ddd)(1)), the amount paid shall be (i) in the case 
 of such services which are clinical diagnostic 
 laboratory tests, the amount determined under 
 subparagraph (D), and (ii) in the case of all other 
 such services, 80 percent of the lesser of the actual 
 charge for the service or the amount determined under a 
 fee schedule established by the Secretary for purposes 
 of this subparagraph''.
 (3) Conforming amendment regarding coverage.--Section 
 1862(a)(1)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395y(a)(1)(A)) is amended by inserting ``or additional 
 preventive services (as described in section 1861(ddd)(1))'' 
 after ``succeeding subparagraph''.
 (4) Rule of construction.--Nothing in the provisions of, or 
 amendments made by, this subsection shall be construed to 
 provide coverage under title XVIII of the Social Security Act 
 of items and services for the treatment of a medical condition 
 that is not otherwise covered under such title.
 (b) Revisions to Initial Preventive Physical Examination.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1861(ww) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(ww)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by inserting ``body mass index,'' after 
 ``weight'';
 (ii) by striking ``, and an 
 electrocardiogram''; and
 (iii) by inserting ``and end-of-life 
 planning (as defined in paragraph (3)) upon the 
 agreement with the individual'' after 
 ``paragraph (2)'';
 (B) in paragraph (2), by adding at the end the 
 following new subparagraphs:
 ``(M) An electrocardiogram.
 ``(N) Additional preventive services (as defined in 
 subsection (ddd)(1)).''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(3) For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `end-of-life 
planning' means verbal or written information regarding--
 ``(A) an individual's ability to prepare an advance 
 directive in the case that an injury or illness causes the 
 individual to be unable to make health care decisions; and
 ``(B) whether or not the physician is willing to follow the 
 individual's wishes as expressed in an advance directive.''.
 (2) Waiver of application of deductible.--The first 
 sentence of section 1833(b) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395l(b)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``and'' before ``(8)''; and
 (B) by inserting ``, and (9) such deductible shall 
 not apply with respect to an initial preventive 
 physical examination (as defined in section 1861(ww))'' 
 before the period at the end.
 (3) Extension of eligibility period from six months to one 
 year.--Section 1862(a)(1)(K) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395y(a)(1)(K)) is amended by striking ``6 months'' and 
 inserting ``1 year''.
 (4) Technical correction.--Section 1862(a)(1)(K) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y(a)(1)(K)) is amended by 
 striking ``not later'' and inserting ``more''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to services furnished on or after January 1, 2009.

SEC. 102. ELIMINATION OF DISCRIMINATORY COPAYMENT RATES FOR MEDICARE 
 OUTPATIENT PSYCHIATRIC SERVICES.

 Section 1833(c) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(c)) is 
amended to read as follows:
 ``(c)(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this part, with 
respect to expenses incurred in a calendar year in connection with the 
treatment of mental, psychoneurotic, and personality disorders of an 
individual who is not an inpatient of a hospital at the time such 
expenses are incurred, there shall be considered as incurred expenses 
for purposes of subsections (a) and (b)--
 ``(A) for expenses incurred in years prior to 2010, only 
 62\1/2\ percent of such expenses;
 ``(B) for expenses incurred in 2010 or 2011, only 68\3/4\ 
 percent of such expenses;
 ``(C) for expenses incurred in 2012, only 75 percent of 
 such expenses;
 ``(D) for expenses incurred in 2013, only 81\1/4\ percent 
 of such expenses; and
 ``(E) for expenses incurred in 2014 or any subsequent 
 calendar year, 100 percent of such expenses.
 ``(2) For purposes of subparagraphs (A) through (D) of paragraph 
(1), the term `treatment' does not include brief office visits (as 
defined by the Secretary) for the sole purpose of monitoring or 
changing drug prescriptions used in the treatment of such disorders or 
partial hospitalization services that are not directly provided by a 
physician.''.

SEC. 103. PROHIBITIONS AND LIMITATIONS ON CERTAIN SALES AND MARKETING 
 ACTIVITIES UNDER MEDICARE ADVANTAGE PLANS AND 
 PRESCRIPTION DRUG PLANS.

 (a) Prohibitions.--
 (1) Medicare advantage program.--
 (A) In general.--Section 1851 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-21) is amended--
 (i) in subsection (h)(4)--
 (I) in subparagraph (A)--
 (aa) by striking ``cash or 
 other monetary rebates'' and 
 inserting ``, subject to 
 subsection (j)(2)(C), cash, 
 gifts, prizes, or other 
 monetary rebates''; and
 (bb) by striking ``, and'' 
 at the end and inserting a 
 semicolon;
 (II) in subparagraph (B), by 
 striking the period at the end and 
 inserting a semicolon; and
 (III) by adding at the end the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(C) shall not permit a Medicare Advantage 
 organization (or the agents, brokers, and other third 
 parties representing such organization) to conduct the 
 prohibited activities described in subsection (j)(1); 
 and''; and
 (ii) by adding at the end the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(j) Prohibited Activities Described and Limitations on the 
Conduct of Certain Other Activities.--
 ``(1) Prohibited activities described.--The following 
 prohibited activities are described in this paragraph:
 ``(A) Unsolicited means of direct contact.--Any 
 unsolicited means of direct contact of prospective 
 enrollees, including soliciting door-to-door or any 
 outbound telemarketing without the prospective enrollee 
 initiating contact.
 ``(B) Cross-selling.--The sale of other non-health 
 related products (such as annuities and life insurance) 
 during any sales or marketing activity or presentation 
 conducted with respect to a Medicare Advantage plan.
 ``(C) Meals.--The provision of meals of any sort, 
 regardless of value, to prospective enrollees at 
 promotional and sales activities.
 ``(D) Sales and marketing in health care settings 
 and at educational events.--Sales and marketing 
 activities for the enrollment of individuals in 
 Medicare Advantage plans that are conducted--
 ``(i) in health care settings in areas 
 where health care is delivered to individuals 
 (such as physician offices and pharmacies), 
 except in the case where such activities are 
 conducted in common areas in health care 
 settings; and
 ``(ii) at educational events.''.
 (2) Medicare prescription drug program.--Section 1860D-4 of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-104) is amended by 
 adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(l) Requirements With Respect to Sales and Marketing 
Activities.--The following provisions shall apply to a PDP sponsor (and 
the agents, brokers, and other third parties representing such sponsor) 
in the same manner as such provisions apply to a Medicare Advantage 
organization (and the agents, brokers, and other third parties 
representing such organization):
 ``(1) The prohibition under section 1851(h)(4)(C) on 
 conducting activities described in section 1851(j)(1).''.
 (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply to plan years beginning on or after January 1, 
 2009.
 (b) Limitations.--
 (1) Medicare advantage program.--Section 1851 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-21), as amended by subsection 
 (a)(1), is amended--
 (A) in subsection (h)(4), by adding at the end the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(D) shall only permit a Medicare Advantage 
 organization (and the agents, brokers, and other third 
 parties representing such organization) to conduct the 
 activities described in subsection (j)(2) in accordance 
 with the limitations established under such 
 subsection.''; and
 (B) in subsection (j), by adding at the end the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(2) Limitations.--The Secretary shall establish 
 limitations with respect to at least the following:
 ``(A) Scope of marketing appointments.--The scope 
 of any appointment with respect to the marketing of a 
 Medicare Advantage plan. Such limitation shall require 
 advance agreement with a prospective enrollee on the 
 scope of the marketing appointment and documentation of 
 such agreement by the Medicare Advantage organization. 
 In the case where the marketing appointment is in 
 person, such documentation shall be in writing.
 ``(B) Co-branding.--The use of the name or logo of 
 a co-branded network provider on Medicare Advantage 
 plan membership and marketing materials.
 ``(C) Limitation of gifts to nominal dollar 
 value.--The offering of gifts and other promotional 
 items other than those that are of nominal value (as 
 determined by the Secretary) to prospective enrollees 
 at promotional activities.
 ``(D) Compensation.--The use of compensation other 
 than as provided under guidelines established by the 
 Secretary. Such guidelines shall ensure that the use of 
 compensation creates incentives for agents and brokers 
 to enroll individuals in the Medicare Advantage plan 
 that is intended to best meet their health care needs.
 ``(E) Required training, annual retraining, and 
 testing of agents, brokers, and other third parties.--
 The use by a Medicare Advantage organization of any 
 individual as an agent, broker, or other third party 
 representing the organization that has not completed an 
 initial training and testing program and does not 
 complete an annual retraining and testing program.''.
 (2) Medicare prescription drug program.--Section 1860D-4(l) 
 of the Social Security Act, as added by subsection (a)(2), is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(2) The requirement under section 1851(h)(4)(D) to 
 conduct activities described in section 1851(j)(2) in 
 accordance with the limitations established under such 
 subsection.''.
 (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall take effect on a date specified by the Secretary (but in 
 no case later than November 15, 2008).
 (c) Required Inclusion of Plan Type in Plan Name.--
 (1) Medicare advantage program.--Section 1851(h) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-21(h)) is amended by 
 adding at the end following new paragraph:
 ``(6) Required inclusion of plan type in plan name.--For 
 plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2010, a Medicare 
 Advantage organization must ensure that the name of each 
 Medicare Advantage plan offered by the Medicare Advantage 
 organization includes the plan type of the plan (using standard 
 terminology developed by the Secretary).''.
 (2) Prescription drug plans.--Section 1860D-4(l) of the 
 Social Security Act, as added by subsection (a)(2) and amended 
 by subsection (b)(2), is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(3) The inclusion of the plan type in the plan name under 
 section 1851(h)(6).''.
 (d) Strengthening the Ability of States To Act in Collaboration 
With the Secretary To Address Fraudulent or Inappropriate Marketing 
Practices.--
 (1) Medicare advantage program.--Section 1851(h) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-21(h), as amended by 
 subsection (c)(1), is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(7) Strengthening the ability of states to act in 
 collaboration with the secretary to address fraudulent or 
 inappropriate marketing practices.--
 ``(A) Appointment of agents and brokers.--Each 
 Medicare Advantage organization shall--
 ``(i) only use agents and brokers who have 
 been licensed under State law to sell Medicare 
 Advantage plans offered by the Medicare 
 Advantage organization;
 ``(ii) in the case where a State has a 
 State appointment law, abide by such law; and
 ``(iii) report to the applicable State the 
 termination of any such agent or broker, 
 including the reasons for such termination (as 
 required under applicable State law).
 ``(B) Compliance with state information requests.--
 Each Medicare Advantage organization shall comply in a 
 timely manner with any request by a State for 
 information regarding the performance of a licensed 
 agent, broker, or other third party representing the 
 Medicare Advantage organization as part of an 
 investigation by the State into the conduct of the 
 agent, broker, or other third party.''.
 (2) Prescription drug plans.--Section 1860D-4(l) of the 
 Social Security Act, as amended by subsection (c)(2), is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) The requirements regarding the appointment of agents 
 and brokers and compliance with State information requests 
 under subparagraphs (A) and (B), respectively, of section 
 1851(h)(7).''.
 (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply to plan years beginning on or after January 1, 
 2009.

SEC. 104. IMPROVEMENTS TO THE MEDIGAP PROGRAM.

 (a) Implementation of NAIC Recommendations.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall 
 provide for implementation of the changes in the NAIC model law 
 and regulations approved by the National Association of 
 Insurance Commissioners in its Model #651 (``Model Regulation 
 to Implement the NAIC Medicare Supplement Insurance Minimum 
 Standards Model Act'') on March 11, 2007, as modified to 
 reflect the changes made under this Act and the Genetic 
 Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 (Public Law 110-233).
 (2) Implementation dates.--
 (A) In general.--The modifications to Model #651 
 required under paragraph (1) shall be completed by the 
 National Association of Insurance Commissioners not 
 later than October 31, 2008. Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B), each State shall have 1 year from the 
 date the National Association of Insurance 
 Commissioners adopts the revised NAIC model law and 
 regulations (as changed by Model #651, as so modified) 
 to conform the regulatory program established by the 
 State to such revised NAIC model law and regulations.
 (B) Extension of effective date for state law 
 amendment.--In the case of a State which the Secretary 
 determines requires State legislation in order to 
 conform the regulatory program established by the State 
 to such revised NAIC model law and regulations, the 
 State shall not be regarded as failing to comply with 
 the requirements of this section solely on the basis of 
 its failure to meet such requirements before the first 
 day of the first calendar quarter beginning after the 
 close of the first regular session of the State 
 legislature that begins after the date of the enactment 
 of this Act. For purposes of the previous sentence, in 
 the case of a State that has a 2-year legislative 
 session, each year of the session is considered to be a 
 separate regular session of the State legislature.
 (C) Transition dates.--No carrier may issue a new 
 or revised medicare supplemental policy or certificate 
 under section 1882 of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395ss) that meets the requirements of such 
 revised NAIC model law and regulations for coverage 
 effective prior to June 1, 2010. A carrier may continue 
 to offer or issue a medicare supplemental policy under 
 such section that meets the requirements of the NAIC 
 model law and regulations and State law (as in effect 
 prior to the adoption of such revised NAIC model law 
 and regulations) prior to June 1, 2010. Nothing shall 
 preclude carriers from marketing new or revised 
 medicare supplemental policies or certificates that 
 meet the requirements of such revised NAIC model law 
 and regulations on or after the date on which the State 
 conforms the regulatory program established by the 
 State to such revised NAIC model law and regulations.
 (b) Required Offering of a Range of Policies.--Section 1882(o) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395s(o)) is amended by adding at 
the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) In addition to the requirement under paragraph (2), 
 the issuer of the policy must make available to the individual 
 at least Medicare supplemental policies with benefit packages 
 classified as `C' or `F'.''.

 PART II--LOW-INCOME PROGRAMS

SEC. 111. EXTENSION OF QUALIFYING INDIVIDUAL (QI) PROGRAM.

 (a) Extension.--Section 1902(a)(10)(E)(iv) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(E)(iv)) is amended by striking ``June 
2008'' and inserting ``December 2009''.
 (b) Extending Total Amount Available for Allocation.--Section 
1933(g) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396u-3(g)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph 
 (H);
 (B) in subparagraph (I)--
 (i) by striking ``June 30'' and inserting 
 ``September 30'';
 (ii) by striking ``$200,000,000'' and 
 inserting ``$300,000,000''; and
 (iii) by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting a semicolon; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraphs:
 ``(J) for the period that begins on October 1, 
 2008, and ends on December 31, 2008, the total 
 allocation amount is $100,000,000;
 ``(K) for the period that begins on January 1, 
 2009, and ends on September 30, 2009, the total 
 allocation amount is $350,000,000; and
 ``(L) for the period that begins on October 1, 
 2009, and ends on December 31, 2009, the total 
 allocation amount is $150,000,000.''; and
 (2) in paragraph (3), in the matter preceding subparagraph 
 (A), by striking ``or (H)'' and inserting ``(H), (J), or (L)''.

SEC. 112. APPLICATION OF FULL LIS SUBSIDY ASSETS TEST UNDER MEDICARE 
 SAVINGS PROGRAM.

 Section 1905(p)(1)(C) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(p)(1)(C)) is 
amended by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``or, 
effective beginning with January 1, 2010, whose resources (as so 
determined) do not exceed the maximum resource level applied for the 
year under subparagraph (D) of section 1860D-14(a)(3) (determined 
without regard to the life insurance policy exclusion provided under 
subparagraph (G) of such section) applicable to an individual or to the 
individual and the individual's spouse (as the case may be)''.

SEC. 113. ELIMINATING BARRIERS TO ENROLLMENT.

 (a) SSA Assistance With Medicare Savings Program and Low-Income 
Subsidy Program Applications.--Section 1144 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
1320b-14) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(c) Assistance With Medicare Savings Program and Low-Income 
Subsidy Program Applications.--
 ``(1) Distribution of applications and information to 
 individuals who are potentially eligible for low-income subsidy 
 program.--For each individual who submits an application for 
 low-income subsidies under section 1860D-14, requests an 
 application for such subsidies, or is otherwise identified as 
 an individual who is potentially eligible for such subsidies, 
 the Commissioner shall do the following:
 ``(A) Provide information describing the low-income 
 subsidy program under section 1860D-14 and the Medicare 
 Savings Program (as defined in paragraph (7)).
 ``(B) Provide an application for enrollment under 
 such low-income subsidy program (if not already 
 received by the Commissioner).
 ``(C) In accordance with paragraph (3), transmit 
 data from such an application for purposes of 
 initiating an application for benefits under the 
 Medicare Savings Program.
 ``(D) Provide information on how the individual may 
 obtain assistance in completing such application and an 
 application under the Medicare Savings Program, 
 including information on how the individual may contact 
 the State health insurance assistance program (SHIP).
 ``(E) Make the application described in 
 subparagraph (B) and the information described in 
 subparagraphs (A) and (D) available at local offices of 
 the Social Security Administration.
 ``(2) Training personnel in explaining benefit programs and 
 assisting in completing lis application.--The Commissioner 
 shall provide training to those employees of the Social 
 Security Administration who are involved in receiving 
 applications for benefits described in paragraph (1)(B) in 
 order that they may promote beneficiary understanding of the 
 low-income subsidy program and the Medicare Savings Program in 
 order to increase participation in these programs. Such 
 employees shall provide assistance in completing an application 
 described in paragraph (1)(B) upon request.
 ``(3) Transmittal of data to states.--Beginning on January 
 1, 2010, with the consent of an individual completing an 
 application for benefits described in paragraph (1)(B), the 
 Commissioner shall electronically transmit to the appropriate 
 State Medicaid agency data from such application, as determined 
 by the Commissioner, which transmittal shall initiate an 
 application of the individual for benefits under the Medicare 
 Savings Program. In order to ensure that such data transmittal 
 provides effective assistance for purposes of State 
 adjudication of applications for benefits under the Medicare 
 Savings Program, the Commissioner shall consult with the 
 Secretary, after the Secretary has consulted with the States, 
 regarding the content, form, frequency, and manner in which 
 data (on a uniform basis for all States) shall be transmitted 
 under this subparagraph.
 ``(4) Coordination with outreach.--The Commissioner shall 
 coordinate outreach activities under this subsection with 
 outreach activities conducted by States in connection with the 
 low-income subsidy program and the Medicare Savings Program.
 ``(5) Reimbursement of social security administration 
 administrative costs.--
 ``(A) Initial medicare savings program costs; 
 additional low-income subsidy costs.--
 ``(i) Initial medicare savings program 
 costs.--There are hereby appropriated to the 
 Commissioner to carry out this subsection, out 
 of any funds in the Treasury not otherwise 
 appropriated, $21,100,000. The amount 
 appropriated under ths clause shall be 
 available on October 1, 2008, and shall remain 
 available until expended.
 ``(ii) Additional amount for low-income 
 subsidy activities.--There are hereby 
 appropriated to the Commissioner, out of any 
 funds in the Treasury not otherwise 
 appropriated, $24,800,000 for fiscal year 2009 
 to carry out low-income subsidy activities 
 under this Act, to remain available until 
 expended. Such funds shall be in addition to 
 the Social Security Administration's Limitation 
 on Administrative Expenditure appropriations 
 for such fiscal year.
 ``(B) Subsequent funding under agreements.--
 ``(i) In general.--Effective for fiscal 
 years beginning on or after October 1, 2010, 
 the Commissioner and the Secretary shall enter 
 into an agreement which shall provide funding 
 to cover the administrative costs of the 
 Commissioner's activities under this 
 subsection. Such agreement shall--
 ``(I) provide funds to the 
 Commissioner for the full cost of the 
 Social Security Administration's work 
 related to the Medicare Savings Program 
 required under this section;
 ``(II) provide such funding 
 quarterly in advance of the applicable 
 quarter based on estimating methodology 
 agreed to by the Commissioner and the 
 Secretary; and
 ``(III) require an annual 
 accounting and reconciliation of the 
 actual costs incurred and funds 
 provided under this subsection.
 ``(ii) Appropriation.--There are hereby 
 appropriated to the Secretary solely for the 
 purpose of providing payments to the 
 Commissioner pursuant to an agreement specified 
 in clause (i) that is in effect, out of any 
 funds in the Treasury not otherwise 
 appropriated, not more than $3,000,000 for 
 fiscal year 2011 and each fiscal year 
 thereafter.
 ``(C) Limitation.--In no case shall funds from the 
 Social Security Administration's Limitation on 
 Administrative Expenses be used to carry out activities 
 under this subsection. For fiscal years beginning on or 
 after October 1, 2010, no such activities shall be 
 undertaken by the Social Security Administration unless 
 the agreement specified in subparagraph (B) is in 
 effect and full funding has been provided to the 
 Commissioner as specified in such subparagraph.
 ``(6) GAO analysis and report.--
 ``(A) Analysis.--The Comptroller General of the 
 United States shall prepare an analysis of the impact 
 of this subsection--
 ``(i) in increasing participation in the 
 Medicare Savings Program, and
 ``(ii) on States and the Social Security 
 Administration.
 ``(B) Report.--Not later than January 1, 2012, the 
 Comptroller General shall submit to Congress, the 
 Commissioner, and the Secretary a report on the 
 analysis conducted under subparagraph (A).
 ``(7) Medicare savings program defined.--For purposes of 
 this subsection, the term `Medicare Savings Program' means the 
 program of medical assistance for payment of the cost of 
 medicare cost-sharing under the Medicaid program pursuant to 
 sections 1902(a)(10)(E) and 1933.''.
 (b) Medicaid Agency Consideration of Data Transmittal.--Section 
1935(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396u-5(a)) is amended by adding at the 
end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Consideration of data transmitted by the social 
 security administration for purposes of medicare savings 
 program.--The State shall accept data transmitted under section 
 1144(c)(3) and act on such data in the same manner and in 
 accordance with the same deadlines as if the data constituted 
 an initiation of an application for benefits under the Medicare 
 Savings Program (as defined for purposes of such section) that 
 had been submitted directly by the applicant. The date of the 
 individual's application for the low income subsidy program 
 from which the data have been derived shall constitute the date 
 of filing of such application for benefits under the Medicare 
 Savings Program.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--Except as otherwise provided, the amendments 
made by this section shall take effect on January 1, 2010.

SEC. 114. ELIMINATION OF MEDICARE PART D LATE ENROLLMENT PENALTIES PAID 
 BY SUBSIDY ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS.

 (a) Waiver of Late Enrollment Penalty.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1860D-13(b) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-113(b)) is amended by adding at the end 
 the following new paragraph:
 ``(8) Waiver of penalty for subsidy-eligible individuals.--
 In no case shall a part D eligible individual who is determined 
 to be a subsidy eligible individual (as defined in section 
 1860D-14(a)(3)) be subject to an increase in the monthly 
 beneficiary premium established under subsection (a).''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Section 1860D-14(a)(1)(A) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-114(a)(1)(A)) is amended 
 by striking ``equal to'' and all that follows through the 
 period and inserting ``equal to 100 percent of the amount 
 described in subsection (b)(1), but not to exceed the premium 
 amount specified in subsection (b)(2)(B).''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to subsidies for months beginning with January 2009.

SEC. 115. ELIMINATING APPLICATION OF ESTATE RECOVERY.

 (a) In General.--Section 1917(b)(1)(B)(ii) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1396p(b)(1)(B)(ii)) is amended by inserting ``(but not 
including medical assistance for medicare cost-sharing or for benefits 
described in section 1902(a)(10)(E))'' before the period at the end.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
take effect as of January 1, 2010.

SEC. 116. EXEMPTIONS FROM INCOME AND RESOURCES FOR DETERMINATION OF 
 ELIGIBILITY FOR LOW-INCOME SUBSIDY.

 (a) In General.--Section 1860D-14(a)(3) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395w-114(a)(3)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (C)(i), by inserting ``and except that 
 support and maintenance furnished in kind shall not be counted 
 as income'' after ``section 1902(r)(2)'';
 (2) in subparagraph (D), in the matter before clause (i), 
 by inserting ``subject to the life insurance policy exclusion 
 provided under subparagraph (G)'' before ``)'';
 (3) in subparagraph (E)(i), in the matter before subclause 
 (I), by inserting ``subject to the life insurance policy 
 exclusion provided under subparagraph (G)'' before ``)''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(G) Life insurance policy exclusion.--In 
 determining the resources of an individual (and the 
 eligible spouse of the individual, if any) under 
 section 1613 for purposes of subparagraphs (D) and (E) 
 no part of the value of any life insurance policy shall 
 be taken into account.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on January 1, 2010, and shall apply to determinations of 
eligibility for months beginning with January 2010.

SEC. 117. JUDICIAL REVIEW OF DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSIONER OF SOCIAL 
 SECURITY UNDER THE MEDICARE PART D LOW-INCOME SUBSIDY 
 PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--Section 1860D-14(a)(3)(B)(iv) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-114(a)(3)(B)(iv)) is amended--
 (1) in subclause (I), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in subclause (II), by striking the period at the end 
 and inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subclause:
 ``(III) judicial review of the 
 final decision of the Commissioner made 
 after a hearing shall be available to 
 the same extent, and with the same 
 limitations, as provided in subsections 
 (g) and (h) of section 205.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
take effect as if included in the enactment of section 101 of the 
Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003.

SEC. 118. TRANSLATION OF MODEL FORM.

 (a) In General.--Section 1905(p)(5)(A) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1396d(p)(5)(A)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following: ``The Secretary shall provide for the translation of such 
application form into at least the 10 languages (other than English) 
that are most often used by individuals applying for hospital insurance 
benefits under section 226 or 226A and shall make the translated forms 
available to the States and to the Commissioner of Social Security.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
take effect on January 1, 2010.

SEC. 119. MEDICARE ENROLLMENT ASSISTANCE.

 (a) Additional Funding for State Health Insurance Assistance 
Programs.--
 (1) Grants.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services (in this section referred to as the 
 ``Secretary'') shall use amounts made available under 
 subparagraph (B) to make grants to States for State 
 health insurance assistance programs receiving 
 assistance under section 4360 of the Omnibus Budget 
 Reconciliation Act of 1990.
 (B) Funding.--For purposes of making grants under 
 this subsection, the Secretary shall provide for the 
 transfer, from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust 
 Fund under section 1817 of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395i) and the Federal Supplementary Medical 
 Insurance Trust Fund under section 1841 of such Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395t), in the same proportion as the Secretary 
 determines under section 1853(f) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395w-23(f)), of $7,500,000 to the Centers for Medicare 
 & Medicaid Services Program Management Account for 
 fiscal year 2009, to remain available until expended.
 (2) Amount of grants.--The amount of a grant to a State 
 under this subsection from the total amount made available 
 under paragraph (1) shall be equal to the sum of the amount 
 allocated to the State under paragraph (3)(A) and the amount 
 allocated to the State under subparagraph (3)(B).
 (3) Allocation to states.--
 (A) Allocation based on percentage of low-income 
 beneficiaries.--The amount allocated to a State under 
 this subparagraph from \2/3\ of the total amount made 
 available under paragraph (1) shall be based on the 
 number of individuals who meet the requirement under 
 subsection (a)(3)(A)(ii) of section 1860D-14 of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-114) but who have 
 not enrolled to receive a subsidy under such section 
 1860D-14 relative to the total number of individuals 
 who meet the requirement under such subsection 
 (a)(3)(A)(ii) in each State, as estimated by the 
 Secretary.
 (B) Allocation based on percentage of rural 
 beneficiaries.--The amount allocated to a State under 
 this subparagraph from \1/3\ of the total amount made 
 available under paragraph (1) shall be based on the 
 number of part D eligible individuals (as defined in 
 section 1860D-1(a)(3)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-
 101(a)(3)(A))) residing in a rural area relative to the 
 total number of such individuals in each State, as 
 estimated by the Secretary.
 (4) Portion of grant based on percentage of low-income 
 beneficiaries to be used to provide outreach to individuals who 
 may be subsidy eligible individuals or eligible for the 
 medicare savings program.--Each grant awarded under this 
 subsection with respect to amounts allocated under paragraph 
 (3)(A) shall be used to provide outreach to individuals who may 
 be subsidy eligible individuals (as defined in section 1860D-
 14(a)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-
 114(a)(3)(A)) or eligible for the Medicare Savings Program (as 
 defined in subsection (e)).
 (b) Additional Funding for Area Agencies on Aging.--
 (1) Grants.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Assistant Secretary for Aging, shall make grants to 
 States for area agencies on aging (as defined in 
 section 102 of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 
 U.S.C. 3002)).
 (B) Funding.--For purposes of making grants under 
 this subsection, the Secretary shall provide for the 
 transfer, from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust 
 Fund under section 1817 of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395i) and the Federal Supplementary Medical 
 Insurance Trust Fund under section 1841 of such Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395t), in the same proportion as the Secretary 
 determines under section 1853(f) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395w-23(f)), of $7,500,000 to the Administration on 
 Aging for fiscal year 2009, to remain available until 
 expended.
 (2) Amount of grant and allocation to states based on 
 percentage of low-income and rural beneficiaries.--The amount 
 of a grant to a State under this subsection from the total 
 amount made available under paragraph (1) shall be determined 
 in the same manner as the amount of a grant to a State under 
 subsection (a), from the total amount made available under 
 paragraph (1) of such subsection, is determined under paragraph 
 (2) and subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (3) of such 
 subsection.
 (3) Required use of funds.--
 (A) All funds.--Subject to subparagraph (B), each 
 grant awarded under this subsection shall be used to 
 provide outreach to eligible Medicare beneficiaries 
 regarding the benefits available under title XVIII of 
 the Social Security Act.
 (B) Outreach to individuals who may be subsidy 
 eligible individuals or eligible for the medicare 
 savings program.--Subsection (a)(4) shall apply to each 
 grant awarded under this subsection in the same manner 
 as it applies to a grant under subsection (a).
 (c) Additional Funding for Aging and Disability Resource Centers.--
 (1) Grants.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary shall make grants to 
 Aging and Disability Resource Centers under the Aging 
 and Disability Resource Center grant program that are 
 established centers under such program on the date of 
 the enactment of this Act.
 (B) Funding.--For purposes of making grants under 
 this subsection, the Secretary shall provide for the 
 transfer, from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust 
 Fund under section 1817 of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395i) and the Federal Supplementary Medical 
 Insurance Trust Fund under section 1841 of such Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395t), in the same proportion as the Secretary 
 determines under section 1853(f) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395w-23(f)), of $5,000,000 to the Administration on 
 Aging for fiscal year 2009, to remain available until 
 expended.
 (2) Required use of funds.--Each grant awarded under this 
 subsection shall be used to provide outreach to individuals 
 regarding the benefits available under the Medicare 
 prescription drug benefit under part D of title XVIII of the 
 Social Security Act and under the Medicare Savings Program.
 (d) Coordination of Efforts To Inform Older Americans About 
Benefits Available Under Federal and State Programs.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Assistant Secretary for Aging, in cooperation with related 
 Federal agency partners, shall make a grant to, or enter into a 
 contract with, a qualified, experienced entity under which the 
 entity shall--
 (A) maintain and update web-based decision support 
 tools, and integrated, person-centered systems, 
 designed to inform older individuals (as defined in 
 section 102 of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 
 U.S.C. 3002)) about the full range of benefits for 
 which the individuals may be eligible under Federal and 
 State programs;
 (B) utilize cost-effective strategies to find older 
 individuals with the greatest economic need (as defined 
 in such section 102) and inform the individuals of the 
 programs;
 (C) develop and maintain an information 
 clearinghouse on best practices and the most cost-
 effective methods for finding older individuals with 
 greatest economic need and informing the individuals of 
 the programs; and
 (D) provide, in collaboration with related Federal 
 agency partners administering the Federal programs, 
 training and technical assistance on the most effective 
 outreach, screening, and follow-up strategies for the 
 Federal and State programs.
 (2) Funding.--For purposes of making a grant or entering 
 into a contract under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall 
 provide for the transfer, from the Federal Hospital Insurance 
 Trust Fund under section 1817 of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395i) and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance 
 Trust Fund under section 1841 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395t), in 
 the same proportion as the Secretary determines under section 
 1853(f) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-23(f)), of $5,000,000 to 
 the Administration on Aging for fiscal year 2009, to remain 
 available until expended.
 (e) Medicare Savings Program Defined.--For purposes of this 
section, the term ``Medicare Savings Program'' means the program of 
medical assistance for payment of the cost of medicare cost-sharing 
under the Medicaid program pursuant to sections 1902(a)(10)(E) and 1933 
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(E), 1396u-3).

 Subtitle B--Provisions Relating to Part A

SEC. 121. EXPANSION AND EXTENSION OF THE MEDICARE RURAL HOSPITAL 
 FLEXIBILITY PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--Section 1820(g) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395i-4(g)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(6) Providing mental health services and other health 
 services to veterans and other residents of rural areas.--
 ``(A) Grants to states.--The Secretary may award 
 grants to States that have submitted applications in 
 accordance with subparagraph (B) for increasing the 
 delivery of mental health services or other health care 
 services deemed necessary to meet the needs of veterans 
 of Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring 
 Freedom living in rural areas (as defined for purposes 
 of section 1886(d) and including areas that are rural 
 census tracks, as defined by the Administrator of the 
 Health Resources and Services Administration), 
 including for the provision of crisis intervention 
 services and the detection of post-traumatic stress 
 disorder, traumatic brain injury, and other signature 
 injuries of veterans of Operation Iraqi Freedom and 
 Operation Enduring Freedom, and for referral of such 
 veterans to medical facilities operated by the 
 Department of Veterans Affairs, and for the delivery of 
 such services to other residents of such rural areas.
 ``(B) Application.--
 ``(i) In general.--An application is in 
 accordance with this subparagraph if the State 
 submits to the Secretary at such time and in 
 such form as the Secretary may require an 
 application containing the assurances described 
 in subparagraphs (A)(ii) and (A)(iii) of 
 subsection (b)(1).
 ``(ii) Consideration of regional 
 approaches, networks, or technology.--The 
 Secretary may, as appropriate in awarding 
 grants to States under subparagraph (A), 
 consider whether the application submitted by a 
 State under this subparagraph includes 1 or 
 more proposals that utilize regional 
 approaches, networks, health information 
 technology, telehealth, or telemedicine to 
 deliver services described in subparagraph (A) 
 to individuals described in that subparagraph. 
 For purposes of this clause, a network may, as 
 the Secretary determines appropriate, include 
 federally qualified health centers, rural 
 health clinics, home health agencies, community 
 mental health clinics and other providers of 
 mental health services, pharmacists, local 
 government, and other providers deemed 
 necessary to meet the needs of veterans.
 ``(iii) Coordination at local level.--The 
 Secretary shall require, as appropriate, a 
 State to demonstrate consultation with the 
 hospital association of such State, rural 
 hospitals located in such State, providers of 
 mental health services, or other appropriate 
 stakeholders for the provision of services 
 under a grant awarded under this paragraph.
 ``(iv) Special consideration of certain 
 applications.--In awarding grants to States 
 under subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall 
 give special consideration to applications 
 submitted by States in which veterans make up a 
 high percentage (as determined by the 
 Secretary) of the total population of the 
 State. Such consideration shall be given 
 without regard to the number of veterans of 
 Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring 
 Freedom living in the areas in which mental 
 health services and other health care services 
 would be delivered under the application.
 ``(C) Coordination with va.--The Secretary shall, 
 as appropriate, consult with the Director of the Office 
 of Rural Health of the Department of Veterans Affairs 
 in awarding and administering grants to States under 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(D) Use of funds.--A State awarded a grant under 
 this paragraph may, as appropriate, use the funds to 
 reimburse providers of services described in 
 subparagraph (A) to individuals described in that 
 subparagraph.
 ``(E) Limitation on use of grant funds for 
 administrative expenses.--A State awarded a grant under 
 this paragraph may not expend more than 15 percent of 
 the amount of the grant for administrative expenses.
 ``(F) Independent evaluation and final report.--The 
 Secretary shall provide for an independent evaluation 
 of the grants awarded under subparagraph (A). Not later 
 than 1 year after the date on which the last grant is 
 awarded to a State under such subparagraph, the 
 Secretary shall submit a report to Congress on such 
 evaluation. Such report shall include an assessment of 
 the impact of such grants on increasing the delivery of 
 mental health services and other health services to 
 veterans of the United States Armed Forces living in 
 rural areas (as so defined and including such areas 
 that are rural census tracks), with particular emphasis 
 on the impact of such grants on the delivery of such 
 services to veterans of Operation Enduring Freedom and 
 Operation Iraqi Freedom, and to other individuals 
 living in such rural areas.''.
 (b) Use of Funds for Federal Administrative Expenses.--Section 
1820(g)(5) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-4(g)(5)) is 
amended--
 (1) by striking ``beginning with fiscal year 2005'' and 
 inserting ``for each of fiscal years 2005 through 2008''; and
 (2) by inserting ``and, of the total amount appropriated 
 for grants under paragraphs (1), (2), and (6) for a fiscal year 
 (beginning with fiscal year 2009)'' after ``2005)''.
 (c) Extension of Authorization for FLEX Grants.--Section 1820(j) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-4(j)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``and for'' and inserting ``for''; and
 (2) by inserting ``, for making grants to all States under 
 paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (g), $55,000,000 in each 
 of fiscal years 2009 and 2010, and for making grants to all 
 States under paragraph (6) of subsection (g), $50,000,000 in 
 each of fiscal years 2009 and 2010, to remain available until 
 expended'' before the period at the end.
 (d) Medicare Rural Hospital Flexibility Program.--Section 
1820(g)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-4(g)(1)) is 
amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in subparagraph (C), by striking the period at the end 
 and inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(D) providing support for critical access 
 hospitals for quality improvement, quality reporting, 
 performance improvements, and benchmarking.''.
 (e) Assistance to Small Critical Access Hospitals Transitioning to 
Skilled Nursing Facilities and Assisted Living Facilities.--Section 
1820(g) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-4(g)), as amended 
by subsection (a), is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(7) Critical access hospitals transitioning to skilled 
 nursing facilities and assisted living facilities.--
 ``(A) Grants.--The Secretary may award grants to 
 eligible critical access hospitals that have submitted 
 applications in accordance with subparagraph (B) for 
 assisting such hospitals in the transition to skilled 
 nursing facilities and assisted living facilities.
 ``(B) Application.--An applicable critical access 
 hospital seeking a grant under this paragraph shall 
 submit an application to the Secretary on or before 
 such date and in such form and manner as the Secretary 
 specifies.
 ``(C) Additional requirements.--The Secretary may 
 not award a grant under this paragraph to an eligible 
 critical access hospital unless--
 ``(i) local organizations or the State in 
 which the hospital is located provides matching 
 funds; and
 ``(ii) the hospital provides assurances 
 that it will surrender critical access hospital 
 status under this title within 180 days of 
 receiving the grant.
 ``(D) Amount of grant.--A grant to an eligible 
 critical access hospital under this paragraph may not 
 exceed $1,000,000.
 ``(E) Funding.--There are appropriated from the 
 Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund under section 
 1817 for making grants under this paragraph, $5,000,000 
 for fiscal year 2008.
 ``(F) Eligible critical access hospital defined.--
 For purposes of this paragraph, the term `eligible 
 critical access hospital' means a critical access 
 hospital that has an average daily acute census of less 
 than 0.5 and an average daily swing bed census of 
 greater than 10.0.''.

SEC. 122. REBASING FOR SOLE COMMUNITY HOSPITALS.

 (a) Rebasing Permitted.--Section 1886(b)(3) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(b)(3)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new subparagraph:
 ``(L)(i) For cost reporting periods beginning on or after January 
1, 2009, in the case of a sole community hospital there shall be 
substituted for the amount otherwise determined under subsection 
(d)(5)(D)(i) of this section, if such substitution results in a greater 
amount of payment under this section for the hospital, the subparagraph 
(L) rebased target amount.
 ``(ii) For purposes of this subparagraph, the term `subparagraph 
(L) rebased target amount' has the meaning given the term `target 
amount' in subparagraph (C), except that--
 ``(I) there shall be substituted for the base cost 
 reporting period the 12-month cost reporting period beginning 
 during fiscal year 2006;
 ``(II) any reference in subparagraph (C)(i) to the `first 
 cost reporting period' described in such subparagraph is deemed 
 a reference to the first cost reporting period beginning on or 
 after January 1, 2009; and
 ``(III) the applicable percentage increase shall only be 
 applied under subparagraph (C)(iv) for discharges occurring on 
 or after January 1, 2009.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--Section 1886(b)(3) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(b)(3)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (C), in the matter preceding clause 
 (i), by striking ``subparagraph (I)'' and inserting 
 ``subparagraphs (I) and (L)''; and
 (2) in subparagraph (I)(i), in the matter preceding 
 subclause (I), by striking ``For'' and inserting ``Subject to 
 subparagraph (L), for''.

SEC. 123. DEMONSTRATION PROJECT ON COMMUNITY HEALTH INTEGRATION MODELS 
 IN CERTAIN RURAL COUNTIES.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall establish a demonstration 
project to allow eligible entities to develop and test new models for 
the delivery of health care services in eligible counties for the 
purpose of improving access to, and better integrating the delivery of, 
acute care, extended care, and other essential health care services to 
Medicare beneficiaries.
 (b) Purpose.--The purpose of the demonstration project under this 
section is to--
 (1) explore ways to increase access to, and improve the 
 adequacy of, payments for acute care, extended care, and other 
 essential health care services provided under the Medicare and 
 Medicaid programs in eligible counties; and
 (2) evaluate regulatory challenges facing such providers 
 and the communities they serve.
 (c) Requirements.--The following requirements shall apply under the 
demonstration project:
 (1) Health care providers in eligible counties selected to 
 participate in the demonstration project under subsection 
 (d)(3) shall (when determined appropriate by the Secretary), 
 instead of the payment rates otherwise applicable under the 
 Medicare program, be reimbursed at a rate that covers at least 
 the reasonable costs of the provider in furnishing acute care, 
 extended care, and other essential health care services to 
 Medicare beneficiaries.
 (2) Methods to coordinate the survey and certification 
 process under the Medicare program and the Medicaid program 
 across all health service categories included in the 
 demonstration project shall be tested with the goal of assuring 
 quality and safety while reducing administrative burdens, as 
 appropriate, related to completing such survey and 
 certification process.
 (3) Health care providers in eligible counties selected to 
 participate in the demonstration project under subsection 
 (d)(3) and the Secretary shall work with the State to explore 
 ways to revise reimbursement policies under the Medicaid 
 program to improve access to the range of health care services 
 available in such eligible counties.
 (4) The Secretary shall identify regulatory requirements 
 that may be revised appropriately to improve access to care in 
 eligible counties.
 (5) Other essential health care services necessary to 
 ensure access to the range of health care services in eligible 
 counties selected to participate in the demonstration project 
 under subsection (d)(3) shall be identified. Ways to ensure 
 adequate funding for such services shall also be explored.
 (d) Application Process.--
 (1) Eligibility.--
 (A) In general.--Eligibility to participate in the 
 demonstration project under this section shall be 
 limited to eligible entities.
 (B) Eligible entity defined.--In this section, the 
 term ``eligible entity'' means an entity that--
 (i) is a Rural Hospital Flexibility Program 
 grantee under section 1820(g) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-4(g)); and
 (ii) is located in a State in which at 
 least 65 percent of the counties in the State 
 are counties that have 6 or less residents per 
 square mile.
 (2) Application.--
 (A) In general.--An eligible entity seeking to 
 participate in the demonstration project under this 
 section shall submit an application to the Secretary at 
 such time, in such manner, and containing such 
 information as the Secretary may require.
 (B) Limitation.--The Secretary shall select 
 eligible entities located in not more than 4 States to 
 participate in the demonstration project under this 
 section.
 (3) Selection of eligible counties.--An eligible entity 
 selected by the Secretary to participate in the demonstration 
 project under this section shall select not more than 6 
 eligible counties in the State in which the entity is located 
 in which to conduct the demonstration project.
 (4) Eligible county defined.--In this section, the term 
 ``eligible county'' means a county that meets the following 
 requirements:
 (A) The county has 6 or less residents per square 
 mile.
 (B) As of the date of the enactment of this Act, a 
 facility designated as a critical access hospital which 
 meets the following requirements was located in the 
 county:
 (i) As of the date of the enactment of this 
 Act, the critical access hospital furnished 1 
 or more of the following:
 (I) Home health services.
 (II) Hospice care.
 (III) Rural health clinic services.
 (ii) As of the date of the enactment of 
 this Act, the critical access hospital has an 
 average daily inpatient census of 5 or less.
 (C) As of the date of the enactment of this Act, 
 skilled nursing facility services were available in the 
 county in--
 (i) a critical access hospital using swing 
 beds; or
 (ii) a local nursing home.
 (e) Administration.--
 (1) In general.--The demonstration project under this 
 section shall be administered jointly by the Administrator of 
 the Office of Rural Health Policy of the Health Resources and 
 Services Administration and the Administrator of the Centers 
 for Medicare & Medicaid Services, in accordance with paragraphs 
 (2) and (3).
 (2) HRSA duties.--In administering the demonstration 
 project under this section, the Administrator of the Office of 
 Rural Health Policy of the Health Resources and Services 
 Administration shall--
 (A) award grants to the eligible entities selected 
 to participate in the demonstration project; and
 (B) work with such entities to provide technical 
 assistance related to the requirements under the 
 project.
 (3) CMS duties.--In administering the demonstration project 
 under this section, the Administrator of the Centers for 
 Medicare & Medicaid Services shall determine which provisions 
 of titles XVIII and XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395 et seq.; 1396 et seq.) the Secretary should waive under 
 the waiver authority under subsection (i) that are relevant to 
 the development of alternative reimbursement methodologies, 
 which may include, as appropriate, covering at least the 
 reasonable costs of the provider in furnishing acute care, 
 extended care, and other essential health care services to 
 Medicare beneficiaries and coordinating the survey and 
 certification process under the Medicare and Medicaid programs, 
 as appropriate, across all service categories included in the 
 demonstration project.
 (f) Duration.--
 (1) In general.--The demonstration project under this 
 section shall be conducted for a 3-year period beginning on 
 October 1, 2009.
 (2) Beginning date of demonstration project.--The 
 demonstration project under this section shall be considered to 
 have begun in a State on the date on which the eligible 
 counties selected to participate in the demonstration project 
 under subsection (d)(3) begin operations in accordance with the 
 requirements under the demonstration project.
 (g) Funding.--
 (1) CMS.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary shall provide for 
 the transfer, in appropriate part from the Federal 
 Hospital Insurance Trust Fund established under section 
 1817 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i) and 
 the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund 
 established under section 1841 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395t), of such sums as are necessary for the costs to 
 the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services of 
 carrying out its duties under the demonstration project 
 under this section.
 (B) Budget neutrality.--In conducting the 
 demonstration project under this section, the Secretary 
 shall ensure that the aggregate payments made by the 
 Secretary do not exceed the amount which the Secretary 
 estimates would have been paid if the demonstration 
 project under this section was not implemented.
 (2) HRSA.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the 
 Office of Rural Health Policy of the Health Resources and 
 Services Administration $800,000 for each of fiscal years 2010, 
 2011, and 2012 for the purpose of carrying out the duties of 
 such Office under the demonstration project under this section, 
 to remain available for the duration of the demonstration 
 project.
 (h) Report.--
 (1) Interim report.--Not later than the date that is 2 
 years after the date on which the demonstration project under 
 this section is implemented, the Administrator of the Office of 
 Rural Health Policy of the Health Resources and Services 
 Administration, in coordination with the Administrator of the 
 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, shall submit a report 
 to Congress on the status of the demonstration project that 
 includes initial recommendations on ways to improve access to, 
 and the availability of, health care services in eligible 
 counties based on the findings of the demonstration project.
 (2) Final report.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 completion of the demonstration project, the Administrator of 
 the Office of Rural Health Policy of the Health Resources and 
 Services Administration, in coordination with the Administrator 
 of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, shall submit a 
 report to Congress on such project, together with 
 recommendations for such legislation and administrative action 
 as the Secretary determines appropriate.
 (i) Waiver Authority.--The Secretary may waive such requirements of 
titles XVIII and XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et 
seq.; 1396 et seq.) as may be necessary and appropriate for the purpose 
of carrying out the demonstration project under this section.
 (j) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Extended care services.--The term ``extended care 
 services'' means the following:
 (A) Home health services.
 (B) Covered skilled nursing facility services.
 (C) Hospice care.
 (2) Covered skilled nursing facility services.--The term 
 ``covered skilled nursing facility services'' has the meaning 
 given such term in section 1888(e)(2)(A) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395yy(e)(2)(A)).
 (3) Critical access hospital.--The term ``critical access 
 hospital'' means a facility designated as a critical access 
 hospital under section 1820(c) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-
 4(c)).
 (4) Home health services.--The term ``home health 
 services'' has the meaning given such term in section 1861(m) 
 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(m)).
 (5) Hospice care.--The term ``hospice care'' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 1861(dd) of such Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395x(dd)).
 (6) Medicaid program.--The term ``Medicaid program'' means 
 the program under title XIX of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et 
 seq.).
 (7) Medicare program.--The term ``Medicare program'' means 
 the program under title XVIII of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et 
 seq.).
 (8) Other essential health care services.--The term ``other 
 essential health care services'' means the following:
 (A) Ambulance services (as described in section 
 1861(s)(7) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395x(s)(7))).
 (B) Rural health clinic services.
 (C) Public health services (as defined by the 
 Secretary).
 (D) Other health care services determined 
 appropriate by the Secretary.
 (9) Rural health clinic services.--The term ``rural health 
 clinic services'' has the meaning given such term in section 
 1861(aa)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(aa)(1)).
 (10) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.

SEC. 124. EXTENSION OF THE RECLASSIFICATION OF CERTAIN HOSPITALS.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (a) of section 106 of division B of the 
Tax Relief and Health Care Act of 2006 (42 U.S.C. 1395 note), as 
amended by section 117 of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Extension 
Act of 2007 (Public Law 110-173), is amended by striking ``September 
30, 2008'' and inserting ``September 30, 2009''.
 (b) Special Exception Reclassifications.--Section 117(a)(2) of the 
Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Extension Act of 2007 (Public Law 110-
173) is amended by striking ``September 30, 2008'' and inserting 
``September 30, 2009''.

SEC. 125. REVOCATION OF UNIQUE DEEMING AUTHORITY OF THE JOINT 
 COMMISSION.

 (a) Revocation.--Section 1865 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395bb) is amended--
 (1) by striking subsection (a); and
 (2) by redesignating subsections (b), (c), (d), and (e) as 
 subsections (a), (b), (c), and (d), respectively.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 1865 of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395bb) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)(1), as redesignated by subsection 
 (a)(2), by striking ``In addition, if'' and inserting ``If'';
 (B) in subsection (b), as so redesignated--
 (i) by striking ``released to him by the Joint 
 Commission on Accreditation of Hospitals,'' and 
 inserting ``released to the Secretary by''; and
 (ii) by striking the comma after ``Association'';
 (C) in subsection (c), as so redesignated, by striking 
 ``pursuant to subsection (a) or (b)(1)'' and inserting 
 ``pursuant to subsection (a)(1)''; and
 (D) in subsection (d), as so redesignated, by striking 
 ``pursuant to subsection (a) or (b)(1)'' and inserting 
 ``pursuant to subsection (a)(1)''.
 (2) Section 1861(e) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(e)) 
is amended in the fourth sentence by striking ``and (ii) is accredited 
by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Hospitals, or is accredited 
by or approved by a program of the country in which such institution is 
located if the Secretary finds the accreditation or comparable approval 
standards of such program to be essentially equivalent to those of the 
Joint Commission on Accreditation of Hospitals'' and inserting ``and 
(ii) is accredited by a national accreditation body recognized by the 
Secretary under section 1865(a), or is accredited by or approved by a 
program of the country in which such institution is located if the 
Secretary finds the accreditation or comparable approval standards of 
such program to be essentially equivalent to those of such a national 
accreditation body.''.
 (3) Section 1864(c) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395aa(c)) is amended by striking ``pursuant to subsection (a) or 
(b)(1) of section 1865'' and inserting ``pursuant to section 
1865(a)(1)''.
 (4) Section 1875(b) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395ll(b)) is amended by striking ``the Joint Commission on 
Accreditation of Hospitals,'' and inserting ``national accreditation 
bodies under section 1865(a)''.
 (5) Section 1834(a)(20)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395m(a)(20)(B)) is amended by striking ``section 1865(b)'' and 
inserting ``section 1865(a)''.
 (6) Section 1852(e)(4)(C) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395w-22(e)(4)(C)) is amended by striking ``section 1865(b)(2)'' and 
inserting ``section 1865(a)(2)''.
 (c) Authority To Recognize the Joint Commission as a National 
Accreditation Body.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services may 
recognize the Joint Commission as a national accreditation body under 
section 1865 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395bb), as amended 
by this section, upon such terms and conditions, and upon submission of 
such information, as the Secretary may require.
 (d) Effective Date; Transition Rule.--(1) Subject to paragraph (2), 
the amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to 
accreditations of hospitals granted on or after the date that is 24 
months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) For purposes of title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395 et seq.), the amendments made by this section shall not 
effect the accreditation of a hospital by the Joint Commission, or 
under accreditation or comparable approval standards found to be 
essentially equivalent to accreditation or approval standards of the 
Joint Commission, for the period of time applicable under such 
accreditation.

 Subtitle C--Provisions Relating to Part B

 PART I--PHYSICIANS' SERVICES

SEC. 131. PHYSICIAN PAYMENT, EFFICIENCY, AND QUALITY IMPROVEMENTS.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Increase in update for the second half of 2008 and for 
 2009.--
 (A) For the second half of 2008.--Section 
 1848(d)(8) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-
 4(d)(8)), as added by section 101 of the Medicare, 
 Medicaid, and SCHIP Extension Act of 2007 (Public Law 
 110-173), is amended--
 (i) in the heading, by striking ``a portion 
 of'';
 (ii) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``for 
 the period beginning on January 1, 2008, and 
 ending on June 30, 2008,''; and
 (iii) in subparagraph (B)--
 (I) in the heading, by striking 
 ``the remaining portion of 2008 and''; 
 and
 (II) by striking ``for the period 
 beginning on July 1, 2008, and ending 
 on December 31, 2008, and''.
 (B) For 2009.--Section 1848(d) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(d)), as amended by 
 section 101 of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP 
 Extension Act of 2007 (Public Law 110-173), is amended 
 by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(9) Update for 2009.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to paragraphs (7)(B) and 
 (8)(B), in lieu of the update to the single conversion 
 factor established in paragraph (1)(C) that would 
 otherwise apply for 2009, the update to the single 
 conversion factor shall be 1.1 percent.
 ``(B) No effect on computation of conversion factor 
 for 2010 and subsequent years.--The conversion factor 
 under this subsection shall be computed under paragraph 
 (1)(A) for 2010 and subsequent years as if subparagraph 
 (A) had never applied.''.
 (2) Beneficiary premium protection.--Section 1839(g) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395r(g)) is amended--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as 
 subparagraphs (A) and (B), respectively, and moving 
 such subparagraphs 2 ems to the right;
 (B) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by 
 striking ``shall exclude an estimate'' and inserting 
 ``shall exclude--
 ``(1) an estimate''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(2) with respect to the monthly premium rate under 
 subsection (a)(3) for 2009, [$_________] of benefits and 
 administrative costs.''.
 (3) Revision of the physician assistance and quality 
 initiative fund.--Section 1848(l)(2) of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(l)(2)), as amended by section 101(a)(2) of 
 the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Extension Act of 2007 (Public 
 Law 110-173), is amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (A)--
 (i) by striking clause (i)(III); and
 (ii) by striking clause (ii)(III); and
 (B) in subparagraph (B)--
 (i) in clause (i), by adding ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (ii) in clause (ii), by striking ``; and'' 
 and inserting a period; and
 (iii) by striking clause (iii).
 (b) Extension and Improvement of the Quality Reporting System.--
 (1) System.--Section 1848(k)(2) of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(k)(2)), as amended by section 101(b)(1) of 
 the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Extension Act of 2007 (Public 
 Law 110-173), is amended by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraphs:
 ``(C) For 2010 and subsequent years.--
 ``(i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), 
 for purposes of reporting data on quality 
 measures for covered professional services 
 furnished during 2010 and each subsequent year, 
 subject to subsection (m)(3)(C), the quality 
 measures (including electronic prescribing 
 quality measures) specified under this 
 paragraph shall be such measures selected by 
 the Secretary from measures that have been 
 endorsed by the entity with a contract with the 
 Secretary under section 1890(a).
 ``(ii) Exception.--In the case of a 
 specified area or medical topic determined 
 appropriate by the Secretary for which a 
 feasible and practical measure has not been 
 endorsed by the entity with a contract under 
 section 1890(a), the Secretary may specify a 
 measure that is not so endorsed as long as due 
 consideration is given to measures that have 
 been endorsed or adopted by a consensus 
 organization identified by the Secretary, such 
 as the AQA alliance.
 ``(D) Opportunity to provide input on measures for 
 2009 and subsequent years.--For each quality measure 
 (including an electronic prescribing quality measure) 
 adopted by the Secretary under subparagraph (B) (with 
 respect to 2009) or subparagraph (C), the Secretary 
 shall ensure that eligible professionals have the 
 opportunity to provide input during the development, 
 endorsement, or selection of measures applicable to 
 services they furnish.''.
 (2) Redesignation of reporting system.--Subsection (c) of 
 section 101 of division B of the Tax Relief and Health Care Act 
 of 2006 (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4 note), as amended by section 
 101(b)(2) of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Extension Act of 
 2007 (Public Law 110-173), is redesignated as subsection (m) of 
 section 1848 of the Social Security Act.
 (3) Incentive payments under reporting system.--Section 
 1848(m) of the Social Security Act, as redesignated by 
 paragraph (2), is amended--
 (A) by amending the heading to read as follows: 
 ``Incentive Payments for Quality Reporting'';
 (B) by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(1) Incentive payments.--
 ``(A) In general.--For 2007 through 2010, with 
 respect to covered professional services furnished 
 during a reporting period by an eligible professional, 
 if--
 ``(i) there are any quality measures that 
 have been established under the physician 
 reporting system that are applicable to any 
 such services furnished by such professional 
 for such reporting period; and
 ``(ii) the eligible professional 
 satisfactorily submits (as determined under 
 this subsection) to the Secretary data on such 
 quality measures in accordance with such 
 reporting system for such reporting period,
 in addition to the amount otherwise paid under this 
 part, there also shall be paid to the eligible 
 professional (or to an employer or facility in the 
 cases described in clause (A) of section 1842(b)(6)) 
 or, in the case of a group practice under paragraph 
 (3)(C), to the group practice, from the Federal 
 Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund established 
 under section 1841 an amount equal to the applicable 
 quality percent of the Secretary's estimate (based on 
 claims submitted not later than 2 months after the end 
 of the reporting period) of the allowed charges under 
 this part for all such covered professional services 
 furnished by the eligible professional (or, in the case 
 of a group practice under paragraph (3)(C), by the 
 group practice) during the reporting period.
 ``(B) Applicable quality percent.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), the term `applicable quality percent' 
 means--
 ``(i) for 2007 and 2008, 1.5 percent; and
 ``(ii) for 2009 and 2010, 2.0 percent.'';
 (C) by striking paragraph (3) and redesignating 
 paragraph (2) as paragraph (3);
 (D) in paragraph (3), as so redesignated--
 (i) in the matter preceding subparagraph 
 (A), by striking ``For purposes'' and inserting 
 the following:
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes'';
 (ii) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) and 
 (B) as clauses (i) and (ii), respectively, and 
 moving the indentation of such clauses 2 ems to 
 the right;
 (iii) in subparagraph (A), as added by 
 clause (i), by adding at the end the following 
 flush sentence:
 ``For years after 2008, quality measures for purposes 
 of this subparagraph shall not include electronic 
 prescribing quality measures.''; and
 (iv) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraphs:
 ``(C) Satisfactory reporting measures for group 
 practices.--
 ``(i) In general.--By January 1, 2010, the 
 Secretary shall establish and have in place a 
 process under which eligible professionals in a 
 group practice (as defined by the Secretary) 
 shall be treated as satisfactorily submitting 
 data on quality measures under subparagraph (A) 
 and as meeting the requirement described in 
 subparagraph (B)(ii) for covered professional 
 services for a reporting period (or, for 
 purposes of subsection (a)(5), for a reporting 
 period for a year) if, in lieu of reporting 
 measures under subsection (k)(2)(C), the group 
 practice reports measures determined 
 appropriate by the Secretary, such as measures 
 that target high-cost chronic conditions and 
 preventive care, in a form and manner, and at a 
 time, specified by the Secretary.
 ``(ii) Statistical sampling model.--The 
 process under clause (i) shall provide for the 
 use of a statistical sampling model to submit 
 data on measures, such as the model used under 
 the Physician Group Practice demonstration 
 project under section 1866A.
 ``(iii) No double payments.--Payments to a 
 group practice under this subsection by reason 
 of the process under clause (i) shall be in 
 lieu of the payments that would otherwise be 
 made under this subsection to eligible 
 professionals in the group practice for 
 satisfactorily submitting data on quality 
 measures.
 ``(D) Authority to revise satisfactorily reporting 
 data.--For years after 2009, the Secretary, in 
 consultation with stakeholders and experts, may revise 
 the criteria under this subsection for satisfactorily 
 submitting data on quality measures under subparagraph 
 (A) and the criteria for submitting data on electronic 
 prescribing quality measures under subparagraph 
 (B)(ii).'';
 (E) in paragraph (5)--
 (i) in subparagraph (C), by inserting ``for 
 2007, 2008, and 2009,'' after ``provision of 
 law,'';
 (ii) in subparagraph (D)--
 (I) in clause (i)--
 (aa) by inserting ``for 
 2007 and 2008'' after ``under 
 this subsection''; and
 (bb) by striking 
 ``paragraph (2)'' and inserting 
 ``this subsection'';
 (II) in clause (ii), by striking 
 ``shall'' and inserting ``may establish 
 procedures to''; and
 (III) in clause (iii)--
 (aa) by inserting ``(or, in 
 the case of a group practice 
 under paragraph (3)(C), the 
 group practice)'' after ``an 
 eligible professional'';
 (bb) by striking ``bonus 
 incentive payment'' and 
 inserting ``incentive payment 
 under this subsection''; and
 (cc) by adding at the end 
 the following new sentence: 
 ``If such payments for such 
 period have already been made, 
 the Secretary shall recoup such 
 payments from the eligible 
 professional (or the group 
 practice).'';
 (iii) in subparagraph (E)--
 (I) by striking ``(i) in general.--
 '';
 (II) by striking clause (ii);
 (III) by redesignating subclauses 
 (I) through (IV) as clauses (i) through 
 (iv), respectively, and moving the 
 indentation of such clauses 2 ems to 
 the left;
 (IV) in clause (ii), as so 
 redesignated, by striking ``paragraph 
 (2)'' and inserting ``this 
 subsection''; and
 (V) in clause (iv), as so 
 redesignated--
 (aa) by striking ``the 
 bonus'' and inserting ``any''; 
 and
 (bb) by inserting ``and the 
 payment adjustment under 
 subsection (a)(5)(A)'' before 
 the period at the end;
 (iv) in subparagraph (F)--
 (I) by striking ``2009, paragraph 
 (3) shall not apply, and'' and 
 inserting ``subsequent years,''; and
 (II) by striking ``paragraph (2)'' 
 and inserting ``this subsection''; and
 (v) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(G) Posting on website.--The Secretary shall post 
 on the Internet website of the Centers for Medicare & 
 Medicaid Services, in an easily understandable format, 
 a list of the names of the following:
 ``(i) The eligible professionals (or, in 
 the case of reporting under paragraph (3)(C), 
 the group practices) who satisfactorily 
 submitted data on quality measures under this 
 subsection.
 ``(ii) The eligible professionals (or, in 
 the case of reporting under paragraph (3)(C), 
 the group practices) who are successful 
 electronic prescribers.''; and
 (F) in paragraph (6), by striking subparagraph (C) 
 and inserting the following:
 ``(C) Reporting period.--
 ``(i) In general.--Subject to clauses (ii) 
 and (iii), the term `reporting period' means--
 ``(I) for 2007, the period 
 beginning on July 1, 2007, and ending 
 on December 31, 2007; and
 ``(II) for 2008, 2009, 2010, and 
 2011, the entire year.
 ``(ii) Authority to revise reporting 
 period.--For years after 2009, the Secretary 
 may revise the reporting period under clause 
 (i) if the Secretary determines such revision 
 is appropriate, produces valid results on 
 measures reported, and is consistent with the 
 goals of maximizing scientific validity and 
 reducing administrative burden. If the 
 Secretary revises such period pursuant to the 
 preceding sentence, the term `reporting period' 
 shall mean such revised period.
 ``(iii) Reference.--Any reference in this 
 subsection to a reporting period with respect 
 to the application of subsection (a)(5) shall 
 be deemed a reference to the reporting period 
 under subparagraph (D)(iii) of such 
 subsection.''.
 (4) Inclusion of qualified audiologists as eligible 
 professionals.--
 (A) In general.--Section 1848(k)(3)(B) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(k)(3)(B)), is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new clause:
 ``(iv) Beginning with 2009, a qualified 
 audiologist (as defined in section 
 1861(ll)(3)(B)).''.
 (B) No change in billing.--Nothing in the amendment 
 made by subparagraph (A) shall be construed to change 
 the way in which billing for audiology services (as 
 defined in section 1861(ll)(2) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(ll)(2))) occurs under title XVIII 
 of such Act as of July 1, 2008.
 (5) Conforming amendments.--Section 1848(m) of the Social 
 Security Act, as added and amended by paragraphs (2) and (3), 
 is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (5)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A)--
 (I) by striking ``section 1848(k) 
 of the Social Security Act, as added by 
 subsection (b),'' and inserting 
 ``subsection (k)''; and
 (II) by striking ``such section'' 
 and inserting ``such subsection'';
 (ii) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l)'';
 (iii) in subparagraph (E), in the matter 
 preceding clause (i), by striking ``1869 or 
 1878 of the Social Security Act or otherwise'' 
 and inserting ``1869, section 1878, or 
 otherwise''; and
 (iv) in subparagraph (F)--
 (I) by striking ``paragraph (2)(B) 
 of section 1848(k) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(k))'' 
 and inserting ``subsection (k)(2)(B)''; 
 and
 (II) by striking ``paragraph (4) of 
 such section'' and inserting 
 ``subsection (k)(4)'';
 (B) in paragraph (6)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by striking 
 ``section 1848(k)(3) of the Social Security 
 Act, as added by subsection (b)'' and inserting 
 ``subsection (k)(3)''; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (B), by striking 
 ``section 1848(k) of the Social Security Act, 
 as added by subsection (b)'' and inserting 
 ``subsection (k)''; and
 (C) by striking paragraph (6)(D).
 (6) No affect on incentive payments for 2007 or 2008.--
 Nothing in the amendments made by this subsection or section 
 132 shall affect the operation of the provisions of section 
 1848(m) of the Social Security Act, as redesignated and amended 
 by such subsection and section, with respect to 2007 or 2008.
 (c) Physician Feedback Program To Improve Efficiency and Control 
Costs.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1848 of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4), as amended by subsection (b), is amended 
 by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(n) Physician Feedback Program.--
 ``(1) Establishment.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a 
 Physician Feedback Program (in this subsection referred 
 to as the `Program') under which the Secretary shall 
 use claims data under this title (and may use other 
 data) to provide confidential reports to physicians 
 (and, as determined appropriate by the Secretary, to 
 groups of physicians) that measure the resources 
 involved in furnishing care to individuals under this 
 title. If determined appropriate by the Secretary, the 
 Secretary may include information on the quality of 
 care furnished to individuals under this title by the 
 physician (or group of physicians) in such reports.
 ``(B) Resource use.--The resources described in 
 subparagraph (A) may be measured--
 ``(i) on an episode basis;
 ``(ii) on a per capita basis; or
 ``(iii) on both an episode and a per capita 
 basis.
 ``(2) Implementation.--The Secretary shall implement the 
 Program by not later than January 1, 2009.
 ``(3) Data for reports.--To the extent practicable, reports 
 under the Program shall be based on the most recent data 
 available.
 ``(4) Authority to focus application.--The Secretary may 
 focus the application of the Program as appropriate, such as 
 focusing the Program on--
 ``(A) physician specialties that account for a 
 certain percentage of all spending for physicians' 
 services under this title;
 ``(B) physicians who treat conditions that have a 
 high cost or a high volume, or both, under this title;
 ``(C) physicians who use a high amount of resources 
 compared to other physicians;
 ``(D) physicians practicing in certain geographic 
 areas; or
 ``(E) physicians who treat a minimum number of 
 individuals under this title.
 ``(5) Authority to exclude certain information if 
 insufficient information.--The Secretary may exclude certain 
 information regarding a service from a report under the Program 
 with respect to a physician (or group of physicians) if the 
 Secretary determines that there is insufficient information 
 relating to that service to provide a valid report on that 
 service.
 ``(6) Adjustment of data.--To the extent practicable, the 
 Secretary shall make appropriate adjustments to the data used 
 in preparing reports under the Program, such as adjustments to 
 take into account variations in health status and other patient 
 characteristics.
 ``(7) Education and outreach.--The Secretary shall provide 
 for education and outreach activities to physicians on the 
 operation of, and methodologies employed under, the Program.
 ``(8) Disclosure exemption.--Reports under the Program 
 shall be exempt from disclosure under section 552 of title 5, 
 United States Code.''.
 (2) GAO study and report on the physician feedback 
 program.--
 (A) Study.--The Comptroller General of the United 
 States shall conduct a study of the Physician Feedback 
 Program conducted under section 1848(n) of the Social 
 Security Act, as added by paragraph (1), including the 
 implementation of the Program.
 (B) Report.--Not later than March 1, 2011, the 
 Comptroller General of the United States shall submit a 
 report to Congress containing the results of the study 
 conducted under subparagraph (A), together with 
 recommendations for such legislation and administrative 
 action as the Comptroller General determines 
 appropriate.
 (d) Plan for Transition to Value-Based Purchasing Program for 
Physicians and Other Practitioners.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 shall develop a plan to transition to a value-based purchasing 
 program for payment under the Medicare program for covered 
 professional services (as defined in section 1848(k)(3)(A) of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(k)(3)(A))).
 (2) Report.--Not later than May 1, 2010, the Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services shall submit a report to Congress 
 containing the plan developed under paragraph (1), together 
 with recommendations for such legislation and administrative 
 action as the Secretary determines appropriate.

SEC. 132. INCENTIVES FOR ELECTRONIC PRESCRIBING.

 (a) Incentive Payments.--Section 1848(m) of the Social Security 
Act, as added and amended by section 131(b), is amended--
 (1) by inserting after paragraph (1), the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(2) Incentive payments for electronic prescribing.--
 ``(A) In general.--For 2009 through 2013, with 
 respect to covered professional services furnished 
 during a reporting period by an eligible professional, 
 if the eligible professional is a successful electronic 
 prescriber for such reporting period, in addition to 
 the amount otherwise paid under this part, there also 
 shall be paid to the eligible professional (or to an 
 employer or facility in the cases described in clause 
 (A) of section 1842(b)(6)) or, in the case of a group 
 practice under paragraph (3)(C), to the group practice, 
 from the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust 
 Fund established under section 1841 an amount equal to 
 the applicable electronic prescribing percent of the 
 Secretary's estimate (based on claims submitted not 
 later than 2 months after the end of the reporting 
 period) of the allowed charges under this part for all 
 such covered professional services furnished by the 
 eligible professional (or, in the case of a group 
 practice under paragraph (3)(C), by the group practice) 
 during the reporting period.
 ``(B) Limitation with respect to electronic 
 prescribing quality measures.--The provisions of this 
 paragraph and subsection (a)(5) shall not apply to an 
 eligible professional (or, in the case of a group 
 practice under paragraph (3)(C), to the group practice) 
 if, for the reporting period (or, for purposes of 
 subsection (a)(5), for the reporting period for a 
 year)--
 ``(i) the allowed charges under this part 
 for all covered professional services furnished 
 by the eligible professional (or group, as 
 applicable) for the codes to which the 
 electronic prescribing quality measure applies 
 (as identified by the Secretary and published 
 on the Internet website of the Centers for 
 Medicare & Medicaid Services as of January 1, 
 2008, and as subsequently modified by the 
 Secretary) are less than 10 percent of the 
 total of the allowed charges under this part 
 for all such covered professional services 
 furnished by the eligible professional (or the 
 group, as applicable); or
 ``(ii) if determined appropriate by the 
 Secretary, the eligible professional does not 
 submit (including both electronically and 
 nonelectronically) a sufficient number (as 
 determined by the Secretary) of prescriptions 
 under part D.
 If the Secretary makes the determination to apply 
 clause (ii) for a period, then clause (i) shall not 
 apply for such period.
 ``(C) Applicable electronic prescribing percent.--
 For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `applicable 
 electronic prescribing percent' means--
 ``(i) for 2009 and 2010, 2.0 percent;
 ``(ii) for 2011 and 2012, 1.0 percent; and
 ``(iii) for 2013, 0.5 percent.'';
 (2) in paragraph (3), as redesignated by section 131(b)--
 (A) in the heading, by inserting ``and successful 
 electronic prescriber'' after ``reporting''; and
 (B) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(B) Successful electronic prescriber.--
 ``(i) In general.--For purposes of 
 paragraph (2) and subsection (a)(5), an 
 eligible professional shall be treated as a 
 successful electronic prescriber for a 
 reporting period (or, for purposes of 
 subsection (a)(5), for the reporting period for 
 a year) if the eligible professional meets the 
 requirement described in clause (ii), or, if 
 the Secretary determines appropriate, the 
 requirement described in clause (iii). If the 
 Secretary makes the determination under the 
 preceding sentence to apply the requirement 
 described in clause (iii) for a period, then 
 the requirement described in clause (ii) shall 
 not apply for such period.
 ``(ii) Requirement for submitting data on 
 electronic prescribing quality measures.--The 
 requirement described in this clause is that, 
 with respect to covered professional services 
 furnished by an eligible professional during a 
 reporting period (or, for purposes of 
 subsection (a)(5), for the reporting period for 
 a year), if there are any electronic 
 prescribing quality measures that have been 
 established under the physician reporting 
 system and are applicable to any such services 
 furnished by such professional for the period, 
 such professional reported each such measure 
 under such system in at least 50 percent of the 
 cases in which such measure is reportable by 
 such professional under such system.
 ``(iii) Requirement for electronically 
 prescribing under part d.--The requirement 
 described in this clause is that the eligible 
 professional electronically submitted a 
 sufficient number (as determined by the 
 Secretary) of prescriptions under part D during 
 the reporting period (or, for purposes of 
 subsection (a)(5), for the reporting period for 
 a year).
 ``(iv) Use of part d data.--Notwithstanding 
 sections 1860D-15(d)(2)(B) and 1860D-15(f)(2), 
 the Secretary may use data regarding drug 
 claims submitted for purposes of section 1860D-
 15 that are necessary for purposes of clause 
 (iii), paragraph (2)(B)(ii), and paragraph 
 (5)(G).
 ``(v) Standards for electronic 
 prescribing.--To the extent practicable, in 
 determining whether eligible professionals meet 
 the requirements under clauses (ii) and (iii) 
 for purposes of clause (i), the Secretary shall 
 ensure that eligible professionals utilize 
 electronic prescribing systems in compliance 
 with standards established for such systems 
 pursuant to the Part D Electronic Prescribing 
 Program under section 1860D-4(e).''; and
 (3) in paragraph (5)(E), by striking clause (iii) and 
 inserting the following new clause:
 ``(iii) the determination of a successful 
 electronic prescriber under paragraph (3), the 
 limitation under paragraph (2)(B), and the 
 exception under subsection (a)(5)(B); and''.
 (b) Incentive Payment Adjustment.--Section 1848(a) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(a)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new paragraph:
 ``(5) Incentives for electronic prescribing.--
 ``(A) Adjustment.--
 ``(i) In general.--Subject to subparagraph 
 (B) and subsection (m)(2)(B), with respect to 
 covered professional services furnished by an 
 eligible professional during 2012 or any 
 subsequent year, if the eligible professional 
 is not a successful electronic prescriber for 
 the reporting period for the year (as 
 determined under subsection (m)(3)(B)), the fee 
 schedule amount for such services furnished by 
 such professional during the year (including 
 the fee schedule amount for purposes of 
 determining a payment based on such amount) 
 shall be equal to the applicable percent of the 
 fee schedule amount that would otherwise apply 
 to such services under this subsection 
 (determined after application of paragraph (3) 
 but without regard to this paragraph).
 ``(ii) Applicable percent.--For purposes of 
 clause (i), the term `applicable percent' 
 means--
 ``(I) for 2012, 99 percent;
 ``(II) for 2012, 98.5 percent; and
 ``(III) for 2014 and each 
 subsequent year, 98 percent.
 ``(B) Significant hardship exception.--The 
 Secretary may, on a case-by-case basis, exempt an 
 eligible professional from the application of the 
 payment adjustment under subparagraph (A) if the 
 Secretary determines, subject to annual renewal, that 
 compliance with the requirement for being a successful 
 electronic prescriber would result in a significant 
 hardship, such as in the case of an eligible 
 professional who practices in a rural area without 
 sufficient Internet access.
 ``(C) Application.--
 ``(i) Physician reporting system rules.--
 Paragraphs (5), (6), and (8) of subsection (k) 
 shall apply for purposes of this paragraph in 
 the same manner as they apply for purposes of 
 such subsection.
 ``(ii) Incentive payment validation 
 rules.--Clauses (ii) and (iii) of subsection 
 (m)(5)(D) shall apply for purposes of this 
 paragraph in a similar manner as they apply for 
 purposes of such subsection.
 ``(D) Definitions.--For purposes of this paragraph:
 ``(i) Eligible professional; covered 
 professional services.--The terms `eligible 
 professional' and `covered professional 
 services' have the meanings given such terms in 
 subsection (k)(3).
 ``(ii) Physician reporting system.--The 
 term `physician reporting system' means the 
 system established under subsection (k).
 ``(iii) Reporting period.--The term 
 `reporting period' means, with respect to a 
 year, a period specified by the Secretary.''.
 (c) GAO Report on Electronic Prescribing.--Not later than September 
1, 2012, the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to 
Congress a report on the implementation of the incentives for 
electronic prescribing established under the provisions of, and 
amendments made by, this section. Such report shall include information 
regarding the following:
 (1) The percentage of eligible professionals (as defined in 
 section 1848(k)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-
 4(k)(3))) that are using electronic prescribing systems, 
 including a determination of whether less than 50 percent of 
 eligible professionals are using electronic prescribing 
 systems.
 (2) If less than 50 percent of eligible professionals are 
 using electronic prescribing systems, recommendations for 
 increasing the use of electronic prescribing systems by 
 eligible professionals, such as changes to the incentive 
 payment adjustments established under section 1848(a)(5) of 
 such Act, as added by subsection (b).
 (3) The estimated savings to the Medicare program under 
 title XVIII of such Act resulting from the use of electronic 
 prescribing systems.
 (4) Reductions in avoidable medical errors resulting from 
 the use of electronic prescribing systems.
 (5) The extent to which the privacy and security of the 
 personal health information of Medicare beneficiaries is 
 protected when such beneficiaries' prescription drug data and 
 usage information is used for purposes other than their direct 
 clinical care, including--
 (A) whether information identifying the beneficiary 
 is, and remains, removed from data regarding the 
 beneficiary's prescription drug utilization; and
 (B) the extent to which current law requires 
 sufficient and appropriate oversight and audit 
 capabilities to monitor the practice of prescription 
 drug data mining.
 (6) Such other recommendations and administrative action as 
 the Comptroller General determines to be appropriate.

SEC. 133. EXPANDING ACCESS TO PRIMARY CARE SERVICES.

 (a) Incentive Payment Program for Primary Care Services Furnished 
in Physician Scarcity Areas.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1833 of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1395l) is amended by adding at the end the following 
 new subsection:
 ``(v) Incentive Payments for Primary Care Services Furnished in 
Physician Scarcity Areas.--
 ``(1) In general.--In the case of primary care services 
 furnished on or after January 1, 2011, by a primary care 
 physician in a primary care scarcity county, in addition to the 
 amount of payment that would otherwise be made for such 
 services under this part, there also shall be paid (on a 
 monthly or quarterly basis) an amount equal to 5 percent of the 
 payment amount for the service under this part.
 ``(2) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Primary care physician.--The term `primary 
 care physician' means a physician (as described in 
 section 1861(r)(1)) for whom primary care services 
 accounted for at least a specified percent (as 
 determined by the Secretary) of the allowed charges 
 under this part for such physician in a prior period as 
 determined appropriate by the Secretary.
 ``(B) Primary care scarcity county.--The term 
 `primary care scarcity county' means the primary care 
 scarcity counties that the Secretary was using under 
 subsection (u) with respect to physicians' services 
 furnished on December 31, 2007.
 ``(C) Primary care services.--The term `primary 
 care services' means procedure codes for services in 
 the category of the Healthcare Common Procedure Coding 
 System, as established by the Secretary under section 
 1848(c)(5) (as of December 31, 2008 and as subsequently 
 modified by the Secretary) consisting of evaluation and 
 management services, but limited to such procedure 
 codes in the category of office or other outpatient 
 services, and consisting of subcategories of such 
 procedure codes for services for both new and 
 established patients.
 ``(3) Judicial review.--There shall be no administrative or 
 judicial review under section 1869, 1878, or otherwise, 
 respecting the identification of primary care physicians, 
 primary care specialty areas, or primary care services under 
 this subsection.''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Section 1834(g)(2)(B) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(g)(2)(B)) is amended by 
 adding at the end the following sentence: ``Section 1833(v) 
 shall not be taken into account in determining the amounts that 
 would otherwise be paid pursuant to the preceding sentence.''.
 (b) Revisions to the Medicare Medical Home Demonstration Project.--
 (1) Authority to expand.--Section 204(b) of division B of 
 the Tax Relief and Health Care Act of 2006 (42 U.S.C. 1395b-1 
 note) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``The project'' 
 and inserting ``Subject to paragraph (3), the 
 project''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(3) Expansion.--The Secretary may expand the duration and 
 the scope of the project under paragraph (1), to an extent 
 determined appropriate by the Secretary, if the Secretary 
 determines that such expansion will result in any of the 
 following conditions being met:
 ``(A) The expansion of the project is expected to 
 improve the quality of patient care without increasing 
 spending under the Medicare program (not taking into 
 account amounts available under subsection (g)).
 ``(B) The expansion of the project is expected to 
 reduce spending under the Medicare program (not taking 
 into account amounts available under subsection (g)) 
 without reducing the quality of patient care.''.
 (2) Funding and application.--Section 204 of division B of 
 the Tax Relief and Health Care Act of 2006 (42 U.S.C. 1395b-1 
 note) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
 subsections:
 ``(g) Funding From SMI Trust Fund.--There shall be available, from 
the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund (under section 
1841 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395t)), the amount of 
$100,000,000 to carry out the project.
 ``(h) Application.--Chapter 35 of title 44, United States Code, 
shall not apply to the conduct of the project.''.
 (c) Application of Budget-Neutrality Adjustor to Conversion 
Factor.--Section 1848(c)(2)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395w-4(c)(2)(B)) is amended by inserting at the end the following new 
clause:
 ``(iv) Alternative application of budget-
 neutrality adjustment.--Notwithstanding 
 subsection (d)(9)(A), effective for fee 
 schedules established beginning with 2009, with 
 respect to the 5-year review of work relative 
 value units used in fee schedules for 2007 and 
 2008, in lieu of continuing to apply budget-
 neutrality adjustments required under clause 
 (ii) for 2007 and 2008 to work relative value 
 units, the Secretary shall apply such budget-
 neutrality adjustments to the conversion factor 
 otherwise determined for years beginning with 
 2009.''.

SEC. 134. EXTENSION OF FLOOR ON MEDICARE WORK GEOGRAPHIC ADJUSTMENT 
 UNDER THE MEDICARE PHYSICIAN FEE SCHEDULE.

 (a) In General.--Section 1848(e)(1)(E) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(e)(1)(E)), as amended by section 103 of the 
Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Extension Act of 2007 (Public Law 110-
173), is amended by striking ``before July 1, 2008'' and inserting 
``before January 1, 2010''.
 (b) Treatment of Physicians' Services Furnished in Certain Areas.--
Section 1848(e)(1)(G) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-
4(e)(1)(G)) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: 
``For purposes of payment for services furnished in the State described 
in the preceding sentence on or after January 1, 2009, after 
calculating the work geographic index in subparagraph (A)(iii), the 
Secretary shall increase the work geographic index to 1.5 if such index 
would otherwise be less than 1.5''.
 (c) Technical Correction.--Section 602(1) of the Medicare 
Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 (Public 
Law 108-173; 117 Stat. 2301) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(1) in subparagraph (A), by striking `subparagraphs (B), 
 (C), and (E)' and inserting `subparagraphs (B), (C), (E), and 
 (G)'; and''.

SEC. 135. IMAGING PROVISIONS.

 (a) Accreditation Requirement.--
 (1) Accreditation requirement.--Section 1834 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m) is amended by inserting after 
 subsection (d) the following new subsection:
 ``(e) Accreditation Requirement for Advanced Diagnostic Imaging 
Services.--
 ``(1) In general.--
 ``(A) In general.--Beginning with January 1, 2012, 
 with respect to the technical component of advanced 
 diagnostic imaging services for which payment is made 
 under the fee schedule established under section 
 1848(b) and that are furnished by a supplier, payment 
 may only be made if such supplier is accredited by an 
 accreditation organization designated by the Secretary 
 under paragraph (2)(B)(i).
 ``(B) Advanced diagnostic imaging services 
 defined.--In this subsection, the term `advanced 
 diagnostic imaging services' includes--
 ``(i) diagnostic magnetic resonance 
 imaging, computed tomography, and nuclear 
 medicine (including positron emission 
 tomography); and
 ``(ii) such other diagnostic imaging 
 services, including services described in 
 section 1848(b)(4)(B) (excluding X-ray, 
 ultrasound, and fluoroscopy), as specified by 
 the Secretary in consultation with physician 
 specialty organizations and other stakeholders.
 ``(C) Supplier defined.--In this subsection, the 
 term `supplier' has the meaning given such term in 
 section 1861(d).
 ``(2) Accreditation organizations.--
 ``(A) Factors for designation of accreditation 
 organizations.--The Secretary shall consider the 
 following factors in designating accreditation 
 organizations under subparagraph (B)(i) and in 
 reviewing and modifying the list of accreditation 
 organizations designated pursuant to subparagraph (C):
 ``(i) The ability of the organization to 
 conduct timely reviews of accreditation 
 applications.
 ``(ii) Whether the organization has 
 established a process for the timely 
 integration of new advanced diagnostic imaging 
 services into the organization's accreditation 
 program.
 ``(iii) Whether the organization uses 
 random site visits, site audits, or other 
 strategies for ensuring accredited suppliers 
 maintain adherence to the criteria described in 
 paragraph (3).
 ``(iv) The ability of the organization to 
 take into account the capacities of suppliers 
 located in a rural area (as defined in section 
 1886(d)(2)(D)).
 ``(v) Whether the organization has 
 established reasonable fees to be charged to 
 suppliers applying for accreditation.
 ``(vi) Such other factors as the Secretary 
 determines appropriate.
 ``(B) Designation.--Not later than January 1, 2010, 
 the Secretary shall designate organizations to accredit 
 suppliers furnishing the technical component of 
 advanced diagnostic imaging services. The list of 
 accreditation organizations so designated may be 
 modified pursuant to subparagraph (C).
 ``(C) Review and modification of list of 
 accreditation organizations.--
 ``(i) In general.--The Secretary shall 
 review the list of accreditation organizations 
 designated under subparagraph (B) taking into 
 account the factors under subparagraph (A). 
 Taking into account the results of such review, 
 the Secretary may, by regulation, modify the 
 list of accreditation organizations designated 
 under subparagraph (B).
 ``(ii) Special rule for accreditations done 
 prior to removal from list of designated 
 accreditation organizations.--In the case where 
 the Secretary removes an organization from the 
 list of accreditation organizations designated 
 under subparagraph (B), any supplier that is 
 accredited by the organization during the 
 period beginning on the date on which the 
 organization is designated as an accreditation 
 organization under subparagraph (B) and ending 
 on the date on which the organization is 
 removed from such list shall be considered to 
 have been accredited by an organization 
 designated by the Secretary under subparagraph 
 (B) for the remaining period such accreditation 
 is in effect.
 ``(3) Criteria for accreditation.--The Secretary shall 
 establish procedures to ensure that the criteria used by an 
 accreditation organization designated under paragraph (2)(B) to 
 evaluate a supplier that furnishes the technical component of 
 advanced diagnostic imaging services for the purpose of 
 accreditation of such supplier is specific to each imaging 
 modality. Such criteria shall include--
 ``(A) standards for qualifications of medical 
 personnel who are not physicians and who furnish the 
 technical component of advanced diagnostic imaging 
 services;
 ``(B) standards for qualifications and 
 responsibilities of medical directors and supervising 
 physicians, including standards that recognize the 
 considerations described in paragraph (4);
 ``(C) procedures to ensure that equipment used in 
 furnishing the technical component of advanced 
 diagnostic imaging services meets performance 
 specifications;
 ``(D) standards that require the supplier have 
 procedures in place to ensure the safety of persons who 
 furnish the technical component of advanced diagnostic 
 imaging services and individuals to whom such services 
 are furnished;
 ``(E) standards that require the establishment and 
 maintenance of a quality assurance and quality control 
 program by the supplier that is adequate and 
 appropriate to ensure the reliability, clarity, and 
 accuracy of the technical quality of diagnostic images 
 produced by such supplier; and
 ``(F) any other standards or procedures the 
 Secretary determines appropriate.
 ``(4) Recognition in standards for the evaluation of 
 medical directors and supervising physicians.--The standards 
 described in paragraph (3)(B) shall recognize whether a medical 
 director or supervising physician--
 ``(A) in a particular specialty receives training 
 in advanced diagnostic imaging services in a residency 
 program;
 ``(B) has attained, through experience, the 
 necessary expertise to be a medical director or a 
 supervising physician;
 ``(C) has completed any continuing medical 
 education courses relating to such services; or
 ``(D) has met such other standards as the Secretary 
 determines appropriate.
 ``(5) Rule for accreditations made prior to designation.--
 In the case of a supplier that is accredited before January 1, 
 2010, by an accreditation organization designated by the 
 Secretary under paragraph (2)(B) as of January 1, 2010, such 
 supplier shall be considered to have been accredited by an 
 organization designated by the Secretary under such paragraph 
 as of January 1, 2012, for the remaining period such 
 accreditation is in effect.''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) In general.--Section 1862(a) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y(a)) is amended--
 (i) in paragraph (21), by striking ``or'' 
 at the end;
 (ii) in paragraph (22), by striking the 
 period at the end and inserting ``; or''; and
 (iii) by inserting after paragraph (22) the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(23) which are the technical component of advanced 
 diagnostic imaging services described in section 1834(e)(1)(B) 
 for which payment is made under the fee schedule established 
 under section 1848(b) and that are furnished by a supplier (as 
 defined in section 1861(d)), if such supplier is not accredited 
 by an accreditation organization designated by the Secretary 
 under section 1834(e)(2)(B).''.
 (B) Effective date.--The amendments made by this 
 paragraph shall apply to advanced diagnostic imaging 
 services furnished on or after January 1, 2012.
 (b) Demonstration Project To Assess the Appropriate Use of Imaging 
Services.--
 (1) Conduct of demonstration project.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services (in this section referred to as the 
 ``Secretary'') shall conduct a demonstration project 
 using the models described in paragraph (2)(E) to 
 collect data regarding physician compliance with 
 appropriateness criteria selected under paragraph 
 (2)(D) in order to determine the appropriateness of 
 advanced diagnostic imaging services furnished to 
 Medicare beneficiaries.
 (B) Advanced diagnostic imaging services.--In this 
 subsection, the term ``advanced diagnostic imaging 
 services'' has the meaning given such term in section 
 1834(e)(1)(B) of the Social Security Act, as added by 
 subsection (a).
 (C) Authority to focus demonstration project.--The 
 Secretary may focus the demonstration project with 
 respect to certain advanced diagnostic imaging 
 services, such as services that account for a large 
 amount of expenditures under the Medicare program, 
 services that have recently experienced a high rate of 
 growth, or services for which appropriateness criteria 
 exists.
 (2) Implementation and design of demonstration project.--
 (A) Implementation and duration.--
 (i) Implementation.--The Secretary shall 
 implement the demonstration project under this 
 subsection not later than January 1, 2010.
 (ii) Duration.--The Secretary shall conduct 
 the demonstration project under this subsection 
 for a 2-year period.
 (B) Application and selection of participating 
 physicians.--
 (i) Application.--Each physician that 
 desires to participate in the demonstration 
 project under this subsection shall submit an 
 application to the Secretary at such time, in 
 such manner, and containing such information as 
 the Secretary may require.
 (ii) Selection.--The Secretary shall select 
 physicians to participate in the demonstration 
 project under this subsection from among 
 physicians submitting applications under clause 
 (i). The Secretary shall ensure that the 
 physicians selected--
 (I) represent a wide range of 
 geographic areas, demographic 
 characteristics (such as urban, rural, 
 and suburban), and practice settings 
 (such as private and academic 
 practices); and
 (II) have the capability to submit 
 data to the Secretary (or an entity 
 under a subcontract with the Secretary) 
 in an electronic format in accordance 
 with standards established by the 
 Secretary.
 (C) Administrative costs and incentives.--The 
 Secretary shall--
 (i) reimburse physicians for reasonable 
 administrative costs incurred in participating 
 in the demonstration project under this 
 subsection; and
 (ii) provide reasonable incentives to 
 physicians to encourage participation in the 
 demonstration project under this subsection.
 (D) Use of appropriateness criteria.--
 (i) In general.--The Secretary, in 
 consultation with medical specialty societies 
 and other stakeholders, shall select criteria 
 with respect to the clinical appropriateness of 
 advanced diagnostic imaging services for use in 
 the demonstration project under this 
 subsection.
 (ii) Criteria selected.--Any criteria 
 selected under clause (i) shall--
 (I) be developed or endorsed by a 
 medical specialty society; and
 (II) be developed in adherence to 
 appropriateness principles developed by 
 a consensus organization, such as the 
 AQA alliance.
 (E) Models for collecting data regarding physician 
 compliance with selected criteria.--Subject to 
 subparagraph (H), in carrying out the demonstration 
 project under this subsection, the Secretary shall use 
 each of the following models for collecting data 
 regarding physician compliance with appropriateness 
 criteria selected under subparagraph (D):
 (i) A model described in subparagraph (F).
 (ii) A model described in subparagraph (G).
 (iii) Any other model that the Secretary 
 determines to be useful in evaluating the use 
 of appropriateness criteria for advanced 
 diagnostic imaging services.
 (F) Point of service model described.--A model 
 described in this subparagraph is a model that--
 (i) uses an electronic or paper intake form 
 that--
 (I) contains a certification by the 
 physician furnishing the imaging 
 service that the data on the intake 
 form was confirmed with the Medicare 
 beneficiary before the service was 
 furnished;
 (II) contains standardized data 
 elements for diagnosis, service 
 ordered, service furnished, and such 
 other information determined by the 
 Secretary, in consultation with medical 
 specialty societies and other 
 stakeholders, to be germane to 
 evaluating the effectiveness of the use 
 of appropriateness criteria selected 
 under subparagraph (D); and
 (III) is accessible to physicians 
 participating in the demonstration 
 project under this subsection in a 
 format that allows for the electronic 
 submission of such form; and
 (ii) provides for feedback reports in 
 accordance with paragraph (3)(B).
 (G) Point of order model described.--A model 
 described in this subparagraph is a model that--
 (i) uses a computerized order-entry system 
 that requires the transmittal of relevant 
 supporting information at the time of referral 
 for advanced diagnostic imaging services and 
 provides automated decision-support feedback to 
 the referring physician regarding the 
 appropriateness of furnishing such imaging 
 services; and
 (ii) provides for feedback reports in 
 accordance with paragraph (3)(B).
 (H) Limitation.--In no case may the Secretary use 
 prior authorization--
 (i) as a model for collecting data 
 regarding physician compliance with 
 appropriateness criteria selected under 
 subparagraph (D) under the demonstration 
 project under this subsection; or
 (ii) under any model used for collecting 
 such data under the demonstration project.
 (I) Required contracts and performance standards 
 for certain entities.--
 (i) In general.--The Secretary shall enter 
 into contracts with entities to carry out the 
 model described in subparagraph (G).
 (ii) Performance standards.--The Secretary 
 shall establish and enforce performance 
 standards for such entities under the contracts 
 entered into under clause (i), including 
 performance standards with respect to--
 (I) the satisfaction of Medicare 
 beneficiaries who are furnished 
 advanced diagnostic imaging services by 
 a physician participating in the 
 demonstration project;
 (II) the satisfaction of physicians 
 participating in the demonstration 
 project;
 (III) if applicable, timelines for 
 the provision of feedback reports under 
 paragraph (3)(B); and
 (IV) any other areas determined 
 appropriate by the Secretary.
 (3) Comparison of utilization of advanced diagnostic 
 imaging services and feedback reports.--
 (A) Comparison of utilization of advanced 
 diagnostic imaging services.--The Secretary shall 
 consult with medical specialty societies and other 
 stakeholders to develop mechanisms for comparing the 
 utilization of advanced diagnostic imaging services by 
 physicians participating in the demonstration project 
 under this subsection against--
 (i) the appropriateness criteria selected 
 under paragraph (2)(D); and
 (ii) to the extent feasible, the 
 utilization of such services by physicians not 
 participating in the demonstration project.
 (B) Feedback reports.--The Secretary shall, in 
 consultation with medical specialty societies and other 
 stakeholders, develop mechanisms to provide feedback 
 reports to physicians participating in the 
 demonstration project under this subsection. Such 
 feedback reports shall include--
 (i) a profile of the rate of compliance by 
 the physician with appropriateness criteria 
 selected under paragraph (2)(D), including a 
 comparison of--
 (I) the rate of compliance by the 
 physician with such criteria; and
 (II) the rate of compliance by the 
 physician's peers (as defined by the 
 Secretary) with such criteria; and
 (ii) to the extent feasible, a comparison 
 of--
 (I) the rate of utilization of 
 advanced diagnostic imaging services by 
 the physician; and
 (II) the rate of utilization of 
 such services by the physician's peers 
 (as defined by the Secretary) who are 
 not participating in the demonstration 
 project.
 (4) Conduct of demonstration project and waiver.--
 (A) Conduct of demonstration project.--Chapter 35 
 of title 44, United States Code, shall not apply to the 
 conduct of the demonstration project under this 
 subsection.
 (B) Waiver.--The Secretary may waive such 
 provisions of titles XI and XVIII of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1301 et seq.; 1395 et seq.) as 
 may be necessary to carry out the demonstration project 
 under this subsection.
 (5) Evaluation and report.--
 (A) Evaluation.--The Secretary shall evaluate the 
 demonstration project under this subsection to--
 (i) assess the timeliness and efficacy of 
 the demonstration project;
 (ii) assess the performance of entities 
 under a contract entered into under paragraph 
 (2)(I)(i);
 (iii) analyze data--
 (I) on the rates of appropriate, 
 uncertain, and inappropriate advanced 
 diagnostic imaging services furnished 
 by physicians participating in the 
 demonstration project;
 (II) on patterns and trends in the 
 appropriateness and inappropriateness 
 of such services furnished by such 
 physicians;
 (III) on patterns and trends in 
 national and regional variations of 
 care with respect to the furnishing of 
 such services; and
 (IV) on the correlation between the 
 appropriateness of the services 
 furnished and image results; and
 (iv) address--
 (I) the thresholds used under the 
 demonstration project to identify 
 acceptable and outlier levels of 
 performance with respect to the 
 appropriateness of advanced diagnostic 
 imaging services furnished;
 (II) whether prospective use of 
 appropriateness criteria could have an 
 effect on the volume of such services 
 furnished;
 (III) whether expansion of the use 
 of appropriateness criteria with 
 respect to such services to a broader 
 population of Medicare beneficiaries 
 would be advisable;
 (IV) whether, under such an 
 expansion, physicians who demonstrate 
 consistent compliance with such 
 appropriateness criteria should be 
 exempted from certain requirements;
 (V) the use of incident-specific 
 versus practice-specific outlier 
 information in formulating future 
 recommendations with respect to the use 
 of appropriateness criteria for such 
 services under the Medicare program; 
 and
 (VI) the potential for using 
 methods (including financial 
 incentives), in addition to those used 
 under the models under the 
 demonstration project, to ensure 
 compliance with such criteria.
 (B) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 completion of the demonstration project under this 
 subsection, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a 
 report containing the results of the evaluation of the 
 demonstration project conducted under subparagraph (A), 
 together with recommendations for such legislation and 
 administrative action as the Secretary determines 
 appropriate.
 (6) Funding.--The Secretary shall provide for the transfer 
 from the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund 
 established under section 1841 of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395t) of $10,000,000, for carrying out the 
 demonstration project under this subsection (including costs 
 associated with administering the demonstration project, 
 reimbursing physicians for administrative costs and providing 
 incentives to encourage participation under paragraph (2)(C), 
 entering into contracts under paragraph (2)(I), and evaluating 
 the demonstration project under paragraph (5)).
 (c) GAO Studies and Reports.--
 (1) Study on accreditation requirement for advanced 
 diagnostic imaging services.--
 (A) Study.--
 (i) In general.--The Comptroller General of 
 the United States (in this subsection referred 
 to as the ``Comptroller General'') shall 
 conduct a study, by imaging modality, on--
 (I) the effect of the accreditation 
 requirement under section 1834(e) of 
 the Social Security Act, as added by 
 subsection (a); and
 (II) any other relevant questions 
 involving access to, and the value of, 
 advanced diagnostic imaging services 
 for Medicare beneficiaries.
 (ii) Issues.--The study conducted under 
 clause (i) shall examine the following:
 (I) The impact of such 
 accreditation requirement on the 
 number, type, and quality of imaging 
 services furnished to Medicare 
 beneficiaries.
 (II) The cost of such accreditation 
 requirement, including costs to 
 facilities of compliance with such 
 requirement and costs to the Secretary 
 of administering such requirement.
 (III) Access to imaging services by 
 Medicare beneficiaries, especially in 
 rural areas, before and after 
 implementation of such accreditation 
 requirement.
 (IV) Such other issues as the 
 Secretary determines appropriate.
 (B) Reports.--
 (i) Preliminary report.--Not later than 
 March 1, 2013, the Comptroller General shall 
 submit a preliminary report to Congress on the 
 study conducted under subparagraph (A).
 (ii) Final report.--Not later than March 1, 
 2014, the Comptroller General shall submit a 
 final report to Congress on the study conducted 
 under subparagraph (A), together with 
 recommendations for such legislation and 
 administrative action as the Comptroller 
 General determines appropriate.
 (2) Study on interest rate and equipment utilization 
 assumptions used in determining practice expense.--
 (A) Study.--
 (i) In general.--The Comptroller General 
 shall conduct a study on the assumptions used 
 for interest rate and equipment utilization in 
 the methodology for determination of practice 
 expense relative value units under section 
 1848(c)(2)(C)(ii) of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(c)(2)(C)(ii)) with respect 
 to imaging services.
 (ii) Collection of data.--In conducting the 
 study under clause (i), the Comptroller General 
 shall collect data on imaging equipment 
 utilization for different modalities of imaging 
 equipment used in--
 (I) different types of practices; 
 and
 (II) different geographic areas.
 (B) Report.--Not later than June 1, 2010, the 
 Comptroller General shall submit to Congress a report 
 containing the results of the study conducted under 
 subparagraph (A), including the data collected under 
 clause (ii) of such subparagraph, together with 
 recommendations for such legislation and administrative 
 action as the Comptroller General determines 
 appropriate.

SEC. 136. EXTENSION OF TREATMENT OF CERTAIN PHYSICIAN PATHOLOGY 
 SERVICES UNDER MEDICARE.

 Section 542(c) of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Benefits 
Improvement and Protection Act of 2000 (as enacted into law by section 
1(a)(6) of Public Law 106-554), as amended by section 732 of the 
Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 
(42 U.S.C. 1395w-4 note), section 104 of division B of the Tax Relief 
and Health Care Act of 2006 (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4 note), and section 104 
of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Extension Act of 2007 (Public Law 
110-173), is amended by striking ``2007, and the first 6 months of 
2008'' and inserting ``2007, 2008, and 2009''.

SEC. 137. ACCOMMODATION OF PHYSICIANS ORDERED TO ACTIVE DUTY IN THE 
 ARMED SERVICES.

 Section 1842(b)(6)(D)(iii) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395u(b)(6)(D)(iii)), as amended by section 116 of the Medicare, 
Medicaid, and SCHIP Extension Act of 2007 (Public Law 110-173), is 
amended by striking ``(before July 1, 2008)''.

SEC. 138. ADJUSTMENT FOR MEDICARE MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES.

 (a) Payment Adjustment.--
 (1) In general.--For purposes of payment for services 
 furnished under the physician fee schedule under section 1848 
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4) during the 
 period beginning on July 1, 2008, and ending on December 31, 
 2009, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall increase 
 the fee schedule otherwise applicable for specified services by 
 5 percent.
 (2) Nonapplication of budget-neutrality.--The budget-
 neutrality provision of section 1848(c)(2)(B)(ii) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(c)(2)(B)(ii)) shall not apply 
 to the adjustments described in paragraph (1).
 (b) Definition of Specified Services.--In this section, the term 
``specified services'' means procedure codes for services in the 
categories of the Health Care Common Procedure Coding System, 
established by the Secretary of Health and Human Services under section 
1848(c)(5) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(c)(5)), as of 
July 1, 2007, and as subsequently modified by the Secretary, consisting 
of psychiatric therapeutic procedures furnished in office or other 
outpatient facility settings or in inpatient hospital, partial 
hospital, or residential care facility settings, but only with respect 
to such services in such categories that are in the subcategories of 
services which are--
 (1) insight oriented, behavior modifying, or supportive 
 psychotherapy; or
 (2) interactive psychotherapy.
 (c) Implementation.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 
the Secretary may implement this section by program instruction or 
otherwise.

SEC. 139. IMPROVEMENTS FOR MEDICARE ANESTHESIA TEACHING PROGRAMS.

 (a) Special Payment Rule for Teaching Anesthesiologists.--Section 
1848(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(a)), as amended 
by section 132(b), is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (4)(A), by inserting ``except as provided 
 in paragraph (5),'' after ``anesthesia cases,''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(6) Special rule for teaching anesthesiologists.--With 
 respect to physicians' services furnished on or after January 
 1, 2010, in the case of teaching anesthesiologists involved in 
 the training of physician residents in a single anesthesia case 
 or two concurrent anesthesia cases, the fee schedule amount to 
 be applied shall be 100 percent of the fee schedule amount 
 otherwise applicable under this section if the anesthesia 
 services were personally performed by the teaching 
 anesthesiologist alone and paragraph (4) shall not apply if--
 ``(A) the teaching anesthesiologist is present 
 during all critical or key portions of the anesthesia 
 service or procedure involved; and
 ``(B) the teaching anesthesiologist (or another 
 anesthesiologist with whom the teaching 
 anesthesiologist has entered into an arrangement) is 
 immediately available to furnish anesthesia services 
 during the entire procedure.''.
 (b) Treatment of Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetists.--With 
respect to items and services furnished on or after January 1, 2010, 
the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall make appropriate 
adjustments to payments under the Medicare program under title XVIII of 
the Social Security Act for teaching certified registered nurse 
anesthetists to implement a policy with respect to teaching certified 
registered nurse anesthetists that--
 (1) is consistent with the adjustments made by the special 
 rule for teaching anesthesiologists under section 1848(a)(6) of 
 the Social Security Act, as added by subsection (a); and
 (2) maintains the existing payment differences between 
 teaching anesthesiologists and teaching certified registered 
 nurse anesthetists.

 PART II--OTHER PAYMENT AND COVERAGE IMPROVEMENTS

SEC. 141. EXTENSION OF EXCEPTIONS PROCESS FOR MEDICARE THERAPY CAPS.

 Section 1833(g)(5) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395l(g)(5)), as amended by section 105 of the Medicare, Medicaid, and 
SCHIP Extension Act of 2007 (Public Law 110-173), is amended by 
striking ``June 30, 2008'' and inserting ``December 31, 2009''.

SEC. 142. EXTENSION OF PAYMENT RULE FOR BRACHYTHERAPY AND THERAPEUTIC 
 RADIOPHARMACEUTICALS.

 Section 1833(t)(16)(C) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395l(t)(16)(C)), as amended by section 106 of the Medicare, Medicaid, 
and SCHIP Extension Act of 2007 (Public Law 110-173), is amended by 
striking ``July 1, 2008'' each place it appears and inserting ``January 
1, 2010''.

SEC. 143. SPEECH-LANGUAGE PATHOLOGY SERVICES.

 (a) In General.--Section 1861(ll) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395x(ll)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (2) and (3) as paragraphs 
 (3) and (4), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(2) The term `outpatient speech-language pathology services' has 
the meaning given the term `outpatient physical therapy services' in 
subsection (p), except that in applying such subsection--
 ``(A) `speech-language pathology' shall be substituted for 
 `physical therapy' each place it appears; and
 ``(B) `speech-language pathologist' shall be substituted 
 for `physical therapist' each place it appears.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 1832(a)(2)(C) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395k(a)(2)(C)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``and outpatient'' and inserting 
 ``, outpatient''; and
 (B) by inserting before the semicolon at the end 
 the following: ``, and outpatient speech-language 
 pathology services (other than services to which the 
 second sentence of section 1861(p) applies through the 
 application of section 1861(ll)(2))''.
 (2) Subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section 1833(a)(8) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(a)(8)) are each amended by 
 striking ``(which includes outpatient speech-language pathology 
 services)'' and inserting ``, outpatient speech-language 
 pathology services,''.
 (3) Section 1833(g)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395l(g)(1)) is amended--
 (A) by inserting ``and speech-language pathology 
 services of the type described in such section through 
 the application of section 1861(ll)(2)'' after 
 ``1861(p)''; and
 (B) by inserting ``and speech-language pathology 
 services'' after ``and physical therapy services''.
 (4) The second sentence of section 1835(a) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395n(a)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``section 1861(g)'' and inserting 
 ``subsection (g) or (ll)(2) of section 1861'' each 
 place it appears; and
 (B) by inserting ``or outpatient speech-language 
 pathology services, respectively'' after ``occupational 
 therapy services''.
 (5) Section 1861(p) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395x(p)) is amended by striking the fourth sentence.
 (6) Section 1861(s)(2)(D) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395x(s)(2)(D)) is amended by inserting ``, outpatient 
 speech-language pathology services,'' after ``physical therapy 
 services''.
 (7) Section 1862(a)(20) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395y(a)(20)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``outpatient occupational therapy 
 services or outpatient physical therapy services'' and 
 inserting ``outpatient physical therapy services, 
 outpatient speech-language pathology services, or 
 outpatient occupational therapy services''; and
 (B) by striking ``section 1861(g)'' and inserting 
 ``subsection (g) or (ll)(2) of section 1861''.
 (8) Section 1866(e)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395cc(e)(1)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``section 1861(g)'' and inserting 
 ``subsection (g) or (ll)(2) of section 1861'' the first 
 two places it appears;
 (B) by striking ``defined) or'' and inserting 
 ``defined),''; and
 (C) by inserting before the semicolon at the end 
 the following: ``, or (through the operation of section 
 1861(ll)(2)) with respect to the furnishing of 
 outpatient speech-language pathology''.
 (9) Section 1877(h)(6) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395nn(h)(6)) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(L) Outpatient speech-language pathology 
 services.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to services furnished on or after July 1, 2009.
 (d) Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to 
affect existing regulations and policies of the Centers for Medicare & 
Medicaid Services that require physician oversight of care as a 
condition of payment for speech-language pathology services under part 
B of the Medicare program.

SEC. 144. PAYMENT AND COVERAGE IMPROVEMENTS FOR PATIENTS WITH CHRONIC 
 OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEASE AND OTHER CONDITIONS.

 (a) Coverage of Pulmonary and Cardiac Rehabilitation.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1861 of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1395x), as amended by section 101(a), is amended--
 (A) in subsection (s)(2)--
 (i) in subparagraph (AA), by striking 
 ``and'' at the end;
 (ii) in subparagraph (BB), by adding 
 ``and'' after the semicolon at the end; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following 
 new subparagraph:
 ``(CC) items and services furnished under a cardiac 
 rehabilitation program (as defined in subsection 
 (eee)(1)) or under a pulmonary rehabilitation program 
 (as defined in subsection (fff)(1));''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 subsections:

 ``Cardiac Rehabilitation Program

 ``(eee)(1) The term `cardiac rehabilitation program' means a 
physician-supervised program (as described in paragraph (2)) that 
furnishes the items and services described in paragraph (3).
 ``(2) A program described in this paragraph is a program under 
which--
 ``(A) items and services under the program are delivered--
 ``(i) in a physician's office;
 ``(ii) in a hospital on an outpatient basis; or
 ``(iii) in other settings determined appropriate by 
 the Secretary.
 ``(B) a physician is immediately available and accessible 
 for medical consultation and medical emergencies at all times 
 items and services are being furnished under the program, 
 except that, in the case of items and services furnished under 
 such a program in a hospital, such availability shall be 
 presumed; and
 ``(C) individualized treatment is furnished under a written 
 plan established, reviewed, and signed by a physician every 30 
 days that describes--
 ``(i) the individual's diagnosis;
 ``(ii) the type, amount, frequency, and duration of 
 the items and services furnished under the plan; and
 ``(iii) the goals set for the individual under the 
 plan.
 ``(3) The items and services described in this paragraph are--
 ``(A) physician-prescribed exercise;
 ``(B) cardiac risk factor modification, including 
 education, counseling, and behavioral intervention (to the 
 extent such education, counseling, and behavioral intervention 
 is closely related to the individual's care and treatment and 
 is tailored to the individual's needs);
 ``(C) psychosocial assessment;
 ``(D) outcomes assessment; and
 ``(E) such other items and services as the Secretary may 
 determine, but only if such items and services are--
 ``(i) reasonable and necessary for the diagnosis or 
 active treatment of the individual's condition;
 ``(ii) reasonably expected to improve or maintain 
 the individual's condition and functional level; and
 ``(iii) furnished under such guidelines relating to 
 the frequency and duration of such items and services 
 as the Secretary shall establish, taking into account 
 accepted norms of medical practice and the reasonable 
 expectation of improvement of the individual.
 ``(4) The Secretary shall establish standards to ensure that a 
physician with expertise in the management of individuals with cardiac 
pathophysiology who is licensed to practice medicine in the State in 
which a cardiac rehabilitation program (or the intensive cardiac 
rehabilitation program, as the case may be) is offered--
 ``(A) is responsible for such program; and
 ``(B) in consultation with appropriate staff, is involved 
 substantially in directing the progress of individual in the 
 program.

 ``Pulmonary Rehabilitation Program

 ``(fff)(1) The term `pulmonary rehabilitation program' means a 
physician-supervised program (as described in subsection (eee)(2) with 
respect to a program under this subsection) that furnishes the items 
and services described in paragraph (2).
 ``(2) The items and services described in this paragraph are--
 ``(A) physician-prescribed exercise;
 ``(B) education or training (to the extent the education or 
 training is closely and clearly related to the individual's 
 care and treatment and is tailored to such individual's needs);
 ``(C) psychosocial assessment;
 ``(D) outcomes assessment; and
 ``(E) such other items and services as the Secretary may 
 determine, but only if such items and services are--
 ``(i) reasonable and necessary for the diagnosis or 
 active treatment of the individual's condition;
 ``(ii) reasonably expected to improve or maintain 
 the individual's condition and functional level; and
 ``(iii) furnished under such guidelines relating to 
 the frequency and duration of such items and services 
 as the Secretary shall establish, taking into account 
 accepted norms of medical practice and the reasonable 
 expectation of improvement of the individual.
 ``(3) The Secretary shall establish standards to ensure that a 
physician with expertise in the management of individuals with 
respiratory pathophysiology who is licensed to practice medicine in the 
State in which a pulmonary rehabilitation program is offered--
 ``(A) is responsible for such program; and
 ``(B) in consultation with appropriate staff, is involved 
 substantially in directing the progress of individual in the 
 program.''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply to items and services furnished on or after January 
 1, 2010.
 (b) Repeal of Transfer of Ownership of Oxygen Equipment.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1834(a)(5)(F) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(a)(5)(F)) is amended--
 (A) in the heading, by striking ``Ownership of 
 equipment'' and inserting ``Rental cap''; and
 (B) by striking clause (ii) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(ii) Payments and rules after rental 
 cap.--After the 36th continuous month during 
 which payment is made for the equipment under 
 this paragraph--
 ``(I) the supplier furnishing such 
 equipment under this subsection shall 
 continue to furnish the equipment 
 during any period of medical need for 
 the remainder of the reasonable useful 
 lifetime of the equipment, as 
 determined by the Secretary;
 ``(II) payments for oxygen shall 
 continue to be made in the amount 
 recognized for oxygen under paragraph 
 (9) for the period of medical need; and
 ``(III) maintenance and servicing 
 payments shall, if the Secretary 
 determines such payments are reasonable 
 and necessary, be made (for parts and 
 labor not covered by the supplier's or 
 manufacturer's warranty, as determined 
 by the Secretary to be appropriate for 
 the equipment), and such payments shall 
 be in an amount determined to be 
 appropriate by the Secretary.''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by paragraph (1) 
 shall take effect on January 1, 2009.
 (c) Revision of Payment for Oxygen and Oxygen Equipment, Portable 
Oxygen Equipment, and Oxygen for Stationary Equipment.--
 (1) Separate payment for oxygen equipment and oxygen for 
 stationary equipment.--Section 1834(a) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(a)) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(22) Additional special payment rule beginning in 2009.--
 ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding the preceding 
 provisions of this subsection, for oxygen equipment 
 (other than portable oxygen and oxygen equipment) 
 furnished during 2009, the payment amount otherwise 
 determined under this subsection for such equipment 
 shall be equal to--
 ``(i) the amount of the monthly payment 
 amount otherwise established by the Secretary 
 under this subsection for oxygen and oxygen 
 equipment (other than portable oxygen 
 equipment) furnished in 2009; minus
 ``(ii) 71 percent of the amount of the 
 monthly payment amount established by the 
 Secretary under this subsection for oxygen for 
 stationary equipment furnished in such year.
 ``(B) Application of update to special payment 
 amount.--The covered item update under paragraph (14) 
 for oxygen equipment for 2010 and each subsequent year 
 shall be applied to the payment amount under 
 subparagraph (A) unless payment is made for such items 
 and supplies under section 1847.''.
 (2) Add-on payment for oxygen for stationary oxygen 
 equipment.--Section 1834(a)(5) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395m(a)(5)) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(G) Add-on for oxygen for stationary oxygen 
 equipment.--In the case of oxygen furnished on or after 
 January 1, 2009, when oxygen is used with stationary 
 oxygen equipment, the payment amount recognized under 
 subparagraph (A) shall be increased by the amount 
 established by the Secretary for such oxygen (or 71 
 percent of such amount during the rental period for 
 such equipment).''.
 (3) Equalizing add-on payment for oxygen for portable 
 oxygen and oxygen equipment during monthly rental period and 
 payment for such oxygen and oxygen equipment after such rental 
 period.--Section 1834(a)(9) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395m(a)(9)) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(E) Special rule for add-on payment for portable 
 oxygen and oxygen equipment.--In the case of oxygen and 
 oxygen equipment furnished on or after January 1, 2009, 
 for purposes of paragraph (5)(B), the monthly amount 
 recognized under this paragraph for portable oxygen and 
 oxygen equipment in a year shall be equal to the 
 monthly payment amount for portable oxygen and oxygen 
 equipment applicable for the year under this subsection 
 after the end of the 36-month period under paragraph 
 (5)(F).''.
 (4) Special rule for add-on payments for oxygen generating 
 portable equipment.--Section 1834(a)(9) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(a)(9)), as amended by paragraph (3), is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(F) Special rule for add-on payment for oxygen 
 generating portable equipment.--In the case of oxygen 
 generating portable equipment, as defined by the 
 Secretary, furnished on or after January 1, 2009, the 
 Secretary shall make the following monthly add-on 
 payments during the 36-month rental period under 
 paragraph (5)(F):
 ``(i) An amount equal to the monthly 
 payment amount specified in subparagraph (E) 
 for the month.
 ``(ii) An amount equal to the monthly 
 payment amount otherwise established by the 
 Secretary under this subsection for such 
 equipment for the month that recognizes that 
 such equipment substitutes for the delivery of 
 portable oxygen and oxygen contents during the 
 remaining useful life of the equipment that 
 occurs after the end of such 36-month rental 
 period.''.
 (5) Cap on total monthly payment for liquid or gaseous 
 stationary and portable systems.--Section 1834(a)(5) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(a)(5)), as amended by 
 paragraph (2), is amended by adding at the end the following 
 new subparagraph:
 ``(H) Cap on total payments for liquid or gaseous 
 stationary and portable systems.--In the case of a 
 liquid or gaseous stationary and portable system 
 furnished on or after January 1, 2009, the total 
 monthly amount recognized under this part for such 
 system for a month (including any add-on payments under 
 this subsection) may not exceed the total monthly 
 amount that would have otherwise been recognized under 
 this part for such system for the month (including any 
 add-on payments under this subsection) if the 
 amendments made by section 144(c) of the Medicare 
 Improvements for Patients and Providers Act of 2008 had 
 not been enacted.''.
 (6) Conforming amendments.--(A) Section 1834(a)(5)(A) of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(a)(5)(A)) is amended--
 (i) by inserting ``and, in the case of items and 
 services furnished on or after January 1, 2009, other 
 than oxygen for stationary equipment'' after ``portable 
 oxygen equipment''; and
 (ii) by striking ``subparagraphs (B), (C), (E), and 
 (F)'' and inserting ``the succeeding provisions of this 
 paragraph''.
 (B) Section 1834(a)(9) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395m(a)(9)) is amended--
 (i) in the first sentence of the matter preceding 
 subparagraph (A), by striking ``For purposes'' and 
 inserting ``Subject to paragraphs (21) and (22), for 
 purposes''; and
 (ii) in the second sentence of the matter preceding 
 subparagraph (A)--
 (I) by inserting ``and, in the case of 
 items and services furnished on or after 
 January 1, 2009, other than oxygen for 
 stationary equipment'' after ``portable oxygen 
 equipment'';
 (II) by striking ``and'' before ``(ii)'' 
 and inserting a comma; and
 (III) by inserting ``, and (iii) in the 
 case of items and services furnished on or 
 after January 1, 2009, for oxygen for 
 stationary equipment'' before ``(each such 
 group''.
 (d) Application to Competitive Bidding.--The amendments made by 
subsections (b) and (c) shall not apply to contracts entered into under 
section 1847 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-3) prior to 
September 1, 2008, pursuant to the implementation of subsection 
(a)(1)(B)(i)(I) of such section 1847.
 (e) Institute of Medicine Study and Report on Payments for 
Different Classes of Oxygen Equipment.--
 (1) Study.--Not later than 3 months after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services shall enter into a contract with the Institute of 
 Medicine of the National Academies (in this section referred to 
 as the ``Institute'') under which the Institute shall conduct a 
 study on the furnishing of, and payments for, oxygen and oxygen 
 equipment under the Medicare program. Such study shall include 
 an analysis of the following:
 (A) The costs and activities associated with 
 furnishing different modalities of oxygen equipment 
 (covering gaseous and liquid portable equipment and 
 oxygen generating portable equipment), including--
 (i) the acquisition cost of the oxygen 
 equipment;
 (ii) the delivery and refilling of oxygen 
 contents for stationary and portable systems, 
 including the frequency of delivery;
 (iii) the delivery of the equipment and the 
 provision of supplies and accessories;
 (iv) training and education, intake of 
 patient information and related documentation, 
 and responding to beneficiary inquiries;
 (v) servicing of different types of oxygen 
 and oxygen equipment, including--
 (I) the type and frequency of 
 routine and nonroutine servicing 
 furnished, and variation across 
 suppliers in furnishing such servicing; 
 and
 (II) the extent to which emergency 
 or after hours servicing is needed and 
 furnished; and
 (vi) other items or activities involved 
 with furnishing oxygen and oxygen equipment not 
 described in clauses (i) though (v).
 (B) Whether the various items and activities 
 described in subparagraph (A) are medically necessary 
 and affect patient outcomes.
 (C)(i) The adequacy of Medicare payment rates for 
 oxygen equipment and necessary servicing and items and 
 activities furnished in connection with the provision 
 of oxygen and oxygen equipment; and
 (ii) how such payment rates compare to 
 competitively bid rates.
 (D) Whether payment rates for oxygen and oxygen 
 equipment under the Medicare program should vary 
 depending on the modality of oxygen equipment used or 
 should be the same for all modalities.
 (E) The adequacy of add-on payments under the 
 Medicare program for--
 (i) contents for stationary equipment;
 (ii) contents for portable equipment; and
 (iii) oxygen-generating portable equipment.
 (F)(i) Whether, during the rental period for oxygen 
 equipment under the Medicare program, payment for such 
 equipment and servicing should be bundled together or 
 whether separate payments are appropriate; and
 (ii) if separate payments are appropriate, how the 
 payment should be allocated between equipment and 
 servicing.
 (G) Options that could be considered for suppliers 
 to document or report under the Medicare program 
 detailed information on activities related to 
 furnishing oxygen and oxygen equipment to Medicare 
 beneficiaries.
 (2) Survey.--In conducting the study under paragraph (1), 
 the Institute shall conduct a survey of suppliers of oxygen and 
 oxygen equipment to obtain data on items described in paragraph 
 (1)(A).
 (3) Report.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Institute shall submit to the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services a report containing the 
 results of the study conducted under paragraph (1), together 
 with such recommendations as the Institute determines 
 appropriate.
 (4) Funding.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, 
 the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall provide for 
 the transfer, from the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance 
 Trust Fund established under section 1841 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395t), of $5,000,000 to the Centers 
 for Medicare & Medicaid Services Program Management Account.

SEC. 145. REVISION OF PAYMENT FOR POWER-DRIVEN WHEELCHAIRS.

 (a) In General.--Section 1834(a)(7)(A) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395m(a)(7)(A)) is amended--
 (1) in clause (i)--
 (A) in subclause (II), by inserting ``subclause 
 (III) and'' after ``Subject to''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 subclause:
 ``(III) Special rule for power-
 driven wheelchairs.--For purposes of 
 payment for power-driven wheelchairs, 
 subclause (II) shall be applied by 
 substituting `15 percent' and `6 
 percent' for `10 percent' and `7.5 
 percent', respectively.''; and
 (2) in clause (iii)--
 (A) in the heading, by inserting ``complex, 
 rehabilitative'' before ``power-driven''; and
 (B) by inserting ``complex, rehabilitative'' before 
 ``power-driven''.
 (b) Technical Amendment.--Section 1834(a)(7)(C)(ii)(II) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(a)(7)(C)(ii)(II)) is amended by 
striking ``(A)(ii) or''.
 (c) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the amendments 
 made by subsection (a) shall take effect on January 1, 2009, 
 and shall apply to power-driven wheelchairs furnished on or 
 after such date.
 (2) Application to competitive bidding.--The amendments 
 made by subsection (a) shall not apply to contracts entered 
 into under section 1847 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395w-3) prior to January 1, 2009, pursuant to the 
 implementation of subsection (a)(1)(B)(i)(I) of such section 
 1847.

SEC. 146. CLINICAL LABORATORY TESTS.

 (a) Repeal of Medicare Competitive Bidding Demonstration Project 
for Clinical Laboratory Services.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1847 of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1395w-3) is amended by striking subsection (e).
 (2) Conforming amendments.--Section 1833(a)(1)(D) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(a)(1)(D)) is amended--
 (A) by inserting ``or'' before ``(ii)''; and
 (B) by striking ``or (iii) on the basis'' and all 
 that follows before the comma at the end.
 (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) Clinical Laboratory Test Fee Schedule Update Adjustment.--
Section 1833(h)(2)(A)(i) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395l(h)(2)(A)(ii)) is amended by inserting ``minus, for each of the 
years 2009 through 2013, 0.5 percentage points'' after ``city 
average)''.

SEC. 147. IMPROVED ACCESS TO AMBULANCE SERVICES.

 (a) Extension of Increased Medicare Payments for Ground Ambulance 
Services.--Section 1834(l)(13) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395m(l)(13)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A)--
 (A) in the matter preceding clause (i), by 
 inserting ``and for such services furnished on or after 
 July 1, 2008, and before January 1, 2010'' after 
 ``2007,'';
 (B) in clause (i), by inserting ``(or 3 percent if 
 such service is furnished on or after July 1, 2008, and 
 before January 1, 2010)'' after ``2 percent''; and
 (C) in clause (ii), by inserting ``(or 2 percent if 
 such service is furnished on or after July 1, 2008, and 
 before January 1, 2010)'' after ``1 percent''; and
 (2) in subparagraph (B)--
 (A) in the heading, by striking ``2006'' and 
 inserting ``applicable period''; and
 (B) by inserting ``applicable'' before ``period''.
 (b) Air Ambulance Payment Improvements.--
 (1) Treatment of certain areas for payment for air 
 ambulance services under the ambulance fee schedule.--
 Notwithstanding any other provision of law, for purposes of 
 making payments under section 1834(l) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(l)) for air ambulance services furnished 
 during the period beginning on July 1, 2008, and ending on 
 December 31, 2009, any area that was designated as a rural area 
 for purposes of making payments under such section for air 
 ambulance services furnished on December 31, 2006, shall be 
 treated as a rural area for purposes of making payments under 
 such section for air ambulance services furnished during such 
 period.
 (2) Clarification regarding satisfaction of requirement of 
 medically necessary.--
 (A) In general.--Section 1834(l)(14)(B)(i) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(l)(14)(B)(i)) is 
 amended by striking ``reasonably determines or 
 certifies'' and inserting ``certifies or reasonably 
 determines''.
 (B) Effective date.--The amendment made by 
 subparagraph (A) shall apply to services furnished on 
 or after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 148. EXTENSION AND EXPANSION OF THE MEDICARE HOLD HARMLESS 
 PROVISION UNDER THE PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT SYSTEM FOR 
 HOSPITAL OUTPATIENT DEPARTMENT (HOPD) SERVICES FOR 
 CERTAIN HOSPITALS.

 Section 1833(t)(7)(D)(i) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395l(t)(7)(D)(i)) is amended--
 (1) in subclause (II)--
 (A) in the first sentence, by striking ``2009'' and 
 inserting ``2010''; and
 (B) by striking the second sentence and inserting 
 the following new sentence: ``For purposes of the 
 preceding sentence, the applicable percentage shall be 
 95 percent with respect to covered OPD services 
 furnished in 2006, 90 percent with respect to such 
 services furnished in 2007, and 85 percent with respect 
 to such services furnished in 2008 or 2009.''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subclause:
 ``(III) In the case of a sole community 
 hospital (as defined in section 
 1886(d)(5)(D)(iii)) that has not more than 100 
 beds, for covered OPD services furnished on or 
 after January 1, 2009, and before January 1, 
 2010, for which the PPS amount is less than the 
 pre-BBA amount, the amount of payment under 
 this subsection shall be increased by 85 
 percent of the amount of such difference.''.

SEC. 149. CLARIFICATION OF PAYMENT FOR CLINICAL LABORATORY TESTS 
 FURNISHED BY CRITICAL ACCESS HOSPITALS.

 (a) In General.--Section 1834(g)(4) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395m(g)(4)) is amended--
 (1) in the heading, by striking ``no beneficiary cost-
 sharing for'' and inserting ``treatment of''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``For 
 purposes of the preceding sentence and section 1861(mm)(3), 
 clinical diagnostic laboratory services furnished by a critical 
 access hospital shall be treated as being furnished as part of 
 outpatient critical access services without regard to whether 
 the individual with respect to whom such services are furnished 
 is physically present in the critical access hospital, or in a 
 skilled nursing facility or a clinic (including a rural health 
 clinic) that is operated by a critical access hospital, at the 
 time the specimen is collected.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to services furnished on or after July 1, 2009.

SEC. 150. ADDING CERTAIN ENTITIES AS ORIGINATING SITES FOR PAYMENT OF 
 TELEHEALTH SERVICES.

 (a) In General.--Section 1834(m)(4)(C)(ii) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(m)(4)(C)(ii)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new subclauses:
 ``(VI) A hospital-based or critical 
 access hospital-based renal dialysis 
 center (including satellites).
 ``(VII) A skilled nursing facility 
 (as defined in section 1819(a)).
 ``(VIII) A community mental health 
 center (as defined in section 
 1861(ff)(3)(B)).''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 1888(e)(2)(A)(ii) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395yy(e)(2)(A)(ii)) is amended by inserting 
``telehealth services furnished under section 1834(m)(4)(C)(ii)(VII),'' 
after ``section 1861(s)(2),''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to services furnished on or after January 1, 2009.

SEC. 151. MEDPAC STUDY AND REPORT ON IMPROVING CHRONIC CARE 
 DEMONSTRATION PROGRAMS.

 (a) Study.--The Medicare Payment Advisory Commission shall conduct 
a study on the feasability and advisability of establishing a Medicare 
Chronic Care Practice Research Network that would serve as a standing 
network of providers testing new models of care coordination and other 
care approaches for chronically ill beneficiaries, including the 
initiation, operation, evaluation, and, if appropriate, expansion of 
such models to the broader Medicare patient population.
 (b) Report.--Not later than June 15, 2009, the Medicare Payment 
Advisory Commission shall submit to Congress a report containing the 
results of the study conducted under subsection (a).

SEC. 152. INCREASE OF FQHC PAYMENT LIMITS.

 (a) In General.--Section 1833 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395l), as amended by section 133(a), is amended by adding at the end 
the following new subsection:
 ``(w) Increase of FQHC Payment Limits.--In the case of services 
furnished by federally qualified health centers (as defined in section 
1861(aa)(4)), the Secretary shall establish payment limits with respect 
to such services under this part for services furnished--
 ``(1) in 2010, at the limits otherwise established under 
 this part for such year increased by $5; and
 ``(2) in a subsequent year, at the limits established under 
 this subsection for the previous year increased by the 
 percentage increase in the MEI (as defined in section 
 1842(i)(3)) for such subsequent year.''.
 (b) Study and Report on the Effects and Adequacy of the Medicare 
Federally Qualified Health Center Payment Structure.--
 (1) Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States 
 shall conduct a study to determine whether the structure for 
 payments for services furnished by federally qualified health 
 centers (as defined in section 1861(aa)(4) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(aa)(4)) under part B of title 
 XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395j et seq.) 
 adequately reimburses federally qualified health centers for 
 the care furnished to Medicare beneficiaries. In conducting 
 such study, the Comptroller General shall--
 (A) use the most current cost report data 
 available;
 (B) examine the effects of the payment limits 
 established with respect to such services under such 
 part B on the ability of federally qualified health 
 centers to furnish care to Medicare beneficiaries; and
 (C) examine the cost of furnishing services covered 
 under the Medicare program as of the date of the 
 enactment of this Act that were not covered under such 
 program as of the date on which the Secretary 
 determined the payment rate for federally qualified 
 health centers in 1991.
 (2) Report.--Not later than 15 months after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United 
 States shall submit to Congress a report on the study conducted 
 under paragraph (1), together with recommendations for such 
 legislation and administrative action the Comptroller General 
 determines appropriate, taking into consideration the structure 
 and adequacy of the prospective payment methodology used to 
 make payments to federally qualified health centers under the 
 Medicaid program under title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.).

SEC. 153. KIDNEY DISEASE EDUCATION AND AWARENESS PROVISIONS.

 (a) Chronic Kidney Disease Initiatives.--Part P of title III of the 
Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 280g et seq.) is amended by adding 
at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 399R. CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE INITIATIVES.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall establish pilot projects 
to--
 ``(1) increase public and medical community awareness 
 (particularly of those who treat patients with diabetes and 
 hypertension) regarding chronic kidney disease, focusing on 
 prevention;
 ``(2) increase screening for chronic kidney disease, 
 focusing on Medicare beneficiaries at risk of chronic kidney 
 disease; and
 ``(3) enhance surveillance systems to better assess the 
 prevalence and incidence of chronic kidney disease.
 ``(b) Scope and Duration.--
 ``(1) Scope.--The Secretary shall select at least 3 States 
 in which to conduct pilot projects under this section.
 ``(2) Duration.--The pilot projects under this section 
 shall be conducted for a period that is not longer than 5 years 
 and shall begin on January 1, 2009.
 ``(c) Evaluation and Report.--The Comptroller General of the United 
States shall conduct an evaluation of the pilot projects conducted 
under this section. Not later than 12 months after the date on which 
the pilot projects are completed, the Comptroller General shall submit 
to Congress a report on the evaluation.
 ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as may be necessary for the purpose of carrying 
out this section.''.
 (b) Medicare Coverage of Kidney Disease Patient Education 
Services.--
 (1) Coverage of kidney disease education services.--
 (A) Coverage.--Section 1861(s)(2) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(s)(2)), as amended by 
 section 144(a), is amended--
 (i) in subparagraph (BB), by striking 
 ``and'' after the semicolon at the end;
 (ii) in subparagraph (CC), by adding 
 ``and'' after the semicolon at the end; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following 
 new subparagraph:
 ``(DD) kidney disease education services (as defined in 
 subsection (ggg));''.
 (B) Services described.--Section 1861 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x), as amended by section 
 144(a), is amended by adding at the end the following 
 new subsection:

 ``Kidney Disease Education Services

 ``(ggg)(1) The term `kidney disease education services' means 
educational services that are--
 ``(A) furnished to an individual with stage IV chronic 
 kidney disease who, according to accepted clinical guidelines 
 identified by the Secretary, will require dialysis or a kidney 
 transplant;
 ``(B) furnished, upon the referral of the physician 
 managing the individual's kidney condition, by a qualified 
 person (as defined in paragraph (2)); and
 ``(C) designed--
 ``(i) to provide comprehensive information 
 (consistent with the standards set under paragraph (3)) 
 regarding--
 ``(I) the management of comorbidities, 
 including for purposes of delaying the need for 
 dialysis;
 ``(II) the prevention of uremic 
 complications; and
 ``(III) each option for renal replacement 
 therapy (including hemodialysis and peritoneal 
 dialysis at home and in-center as well as 
 vascular access options and transplantation);
 ``(ii) to ensure that the individual has the 
 opportunity to actively participate in the choice of 
 therapy; and
 ``(iii) to be tailored to meet the needs of the 
 individual involved.
 ``(2)(A) The term `qualified person' means--
 ``(i) a physician (as defined in section 1861(r)(1)) or a 
 physician assistant, nurse practitioner, or clinical nurse 
 specialist (as defined in section 1861(aa)(5)), who furnishes 
 services for which payment may be made under the fee schedule 
 established under section 1848; and
 ``(ii) a provider of services located in a rural area (as 
 defined in section 1886(d)(2)(D)).
 ``(B) Such term does not include a provider of services (other than 
a provider of services described in subparagraph (A)(ii)) or a renal 
dialysis facility.
 ``(3) The Secretary shall set standards for the content of such 
information to be provided under paragraph (1)(C)(i) after consulting 
with physicians, other health professionals, health educators, 
professional organizations, accrediting organizations, kidney patient 
organizations, dialysis facilities, transplant centers, network 
organizations described in section 1881(c)(2), and other knowledgeable 
persons. To the extent possible the Secretary shall consult with 
persons or entities described in the previous sentence, other than a 
dialysis facility, that has not received industry funding from a drug 
or biological manufacturer or dialysis facility.
 ``(4) No individual shall be furnished more than 6 sessions of 
kidney disease education services under this title.''.
 (C) Payment under the physician fee schedule.--
 Section 1848(j)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395w-4(j)(3)), is amended by inserting 
 ``(2)(DD),'' after ``(2)(AA),''.
 (D) Limitation on number of sessions.--Section 
 1862(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395y(a)(1)) is amended--
 (i) in subparagraph (M), by striking 
 ``and'' at the end;
 (ii) in subparagraph (N), by striking the 
 semicolon at the end and inserting ``, and''; 
 and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following 
 new subparagraph:
 ``(O) in the case of kidney disease education services (as 
 defined in paragraph (1) of section 1861(ggg)), which are 
 furnished in excess of the number of sessions covered under 
 paragraph (4) of such section;''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply to services furnished on or after January 1, 2010.

SEC. 154. RENAL DIALYSIS PROVISIONS.

 (a) Composite Rate.--
 (1) Update.--Section 1881(b)(12)(G) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395rr(b)(12)(G)) is amended--
 (A) in clause (i), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (B) in clause (ii)--
 (i) by inserting ``and before January 1, 
 2009,'' after ``April 1, 2007,''; and
 (ii) by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting a semicolon; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new clauses:
 ``(iii) furnished on or after January 1, 2009, and before 
 January 1, 2010, by 1.0 percent above the amount of such 
 composite rate component for such services furnished on 
 December 31, 2008; and
 ``(iv) furnished on or after January 1, 2010, by 1.0 
 percent above the amount of such composite rate component for 
 such services furnished on December 31, 2009.''.
 (2) Site neutral composite rate.--Section 1881(b)(12)(A) of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395rr(b)(12)(A)) is amended 
 by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``Under such 
 system, the payment rate for dialysis services furnished on or 
 after January 1, 2009, by providers of services shall be the 
 same as the payment rate (computed without regard to this 
 sentence) for such services furnished by renal dialysis 
 facilities, and in applying the geographic index under 
 subparagraph (D) to providers of services, the labor share 
 shall be based on the labor share otherwise applied for renal 
 dialysis facilities.''.
 (b) Development of ESRD Bundled Payment System.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1881(b) of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1395rr(b)) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(14)(A)(i) Subject to subparagraph (E), for services furnished on 
or after January 1, 2011, the Secretary shall implement a payment 
system under which a single payment is made under this title to a 
provider of services or a renal dialysis facility for renal dialysis 
services (as defined in subparagraph (B)) in lieu of any other payment 
(including a payment adjustment under paragraph (12)(B)(ii)) and for 
such services and items furnished pursuant to paragraph (4).
 ``(ii) In implementing the system under this paragraph the 
Secretary shall ensure that the estimated total amount of payments 
under this title for 2011 for renal dialysis services shall equal 98 
percent of the estimated total amount of payments for renal dialysis 
services, including payments under paragraph (12)(B)(ii), that would 
have been made under this title with respect to services furnished in 
2011 if such system had not been implemented. In making the estimation 
under subclause (I), the Secretary shall use per patient utilization 
data from 2007, 2008, or 2009, whichever has the lowest per patient 
utilization.
 ``(B) For purposes of this paragraph, the term `renal dialysis 
services' includes--
 ``(i) items and services included in the composite rate for 
 renal dialysis services as of December 31, 2010;
 ``(ii) erythropoiesis stimulating agents and any oral form 
 of such agents that are furnished to individuals for the 
 treatment of end stage renal disease;
 ``(iii) other drugs and biologicals that are furnished to 
 individuals for the treatment of end stage renal disease and 
 for which payment was (before the application of this 
 paragraph) made separately under this title, and any oral 
 equivalent form of such drug or biological; and
 ``(iv) diagnostic laboratory tests and other items and 
 services not described in clause (i) that are furnished to 
 individuals for the treatment of end stage renal disease.
Such term does not include vaccines.
 ``(C) The system under this paragraph may provide for payment on 
the basis of services furnished during a week or month or such other 
appropriate unit of payment as the Secretary specifies.
 ``(D) Such system--
 ``(i) shall include a payment adjustment based on case mix 
 that may take into account patient weight, body mass index, 
 comorbidities, length of time on dialysis, age, race, 
 ethnicity, and other appropriate factors;
 ``(ii) shall include a payment adjustment for high cost 
 outliers due to unusual variations in the type or amount of 
 medically necessary care, including variations in the amount of 
 erythropoiesis stimulating agents necessary for anemia 
 management;
 ``(iii) shall include a payment adjustment that reflects 
 the extent to which costs incurred by low-volume facilities (as 
 defined by the Secretary) in furnishing renal dialysis services 
 exceed the costs incurred by other facilities in furnishing 
 such services, and for payment for renal dialysis services 
 furnished on or after January 1, 2011, and before January 1, 
 2014, such payment adjustment shall not be less than 10 
 percent; and
 ``(iv) may include such other payment adjustments as the 
 Secretary determines appropriate, such as a payment 
 adjustment--
 ``(I) for pediatric providers of services and renal 
 dialysis facilities;
 ``(II) by a geographic index, such as the index 
 referred to in paragraph (12)(D), as the Secretary 
 determines to be appropriate; and
 ``(III) for providers of services or renal dialysis 
 facilities located in rural areas.
The Secretary shall take into consideration the unique treatment needs 
of children and young adults in establishing such system.
 ``(E)(i) The Secretary shall provide for a four-year phase-in (in 
equal increments) of the payment amount under the payment system under 
this paragraph, with such payment amount being fully implemented for 
renal dialysis services furnished on or after January 1, 2014.
 ``(ii) A provider of services or renal dialysis facility may make a 
one-time election to be excluded from the phase-in under clause (i) and 
be paid entirely based on the payment amount under the payment system 
under this paragraph. Such an election shall be made prior to January 
1, 2011, in a form and manner specified by the Secretary, and is final 
and may not be rescinded.
 ``(iii) The Secretary shall make an adjustment to the payments 
under this paragraph for years during which the phase-in under clause 
(i) is applicable so that the estimated total amount of payments under 
this paragraph, including payments under this subparagraph, shall equal 
the estimated total amount of payments that would otherwise occur under 
this paragraph without such phase-in.
 ``(F)(i) Subject to clause (ii), beginning in 2012, the Secretary 
shall annually increase payment amounts established under this 
paragraph by an ESRD market basket percentage increase factor for a 
bundled payment system for renal dialysis services that reflects 
changes over time in the prices of an appropriate mix of goods and 
services included in renal dialysis services minus 1.0 percentage 
point.
 ``(ii) For years during which a phase-in of the payment system 
pursuant to subparagraph (E) is applicable, the following rules shall 
apply to the portion of the payment under the system that is based on 
the payment of the composite rate that would otherwise apply if the 
system under this paragraph had not been enacted:
 ``(I) The update under clause (i) shall not apply.
 ``(II) The Secretary shall annually increase such composite 
 rate by the ESRD market basket percentage increase factor 
 described in clause (i) minus 1.0 percentage point.
 ``(G) There shall be no administrative or judicial review under 
section 1869, section 1878, or otherwise of the determination of 
payment amounts under subparagraph (A), the establishment of an 
appropriate unit of payment under subparagraph (C), the identification 
of renal dialysis services included in the bundled payment, the 
adjustments under subparagraph (D), the application of the phase-in 
under subparagraph (E), and the establishment of the market basket 
percentage increase factors under subparagraph (F).
 ``(H) Erythropoiesis stimulating agents and other drugs and 
biologicals shall be treated as prescribed and dispensed or 
administered and available only under part B if they are--
 ``(i) furnished to an individual for the treatment of end 
 stage renal disease; and
 ``(ii) included in subparagraph (B) for purposes of payment 
 under this paragraph.''.
 (2) Prohibition of unbundling.--Section 1862(a) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y(a)), as amended by section 
 135(a)(2), is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (22), by striking ``or'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in paragraph (23), by striking the period at 
 the end and inserting ``; or''; and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (23) the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(24) where such expenses are for renal dialysis services 
 (as defined in subparagraph (B) of section 1881(b)(14)) for 
 which payment is made under such section unless such payment is 
 made under such section to a provider of services or a renal 
 dialysis facility for such services.''.
 (3) Conforming amendments.--(A) Section 1881(b) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395rr(b)) is amended--
 (i) in paragraph (12)(A), by striking ``In lieu of 
 payment'' and inserting ``Subject to paragraph (14), in 
 lieu of payment'';
 (ii) in the second sentence of paragraph (12)(F)--
 (I) by inserting ``or paragraph (14)'' 
 after ``this paragraph''; and
 (II) by inserting ``or under the system 
 under paragraph (14)'' after ``subparagraph 
 (B)''; and
 (iii) in paragraph (13)--
 (I) in subparagraph (A), in the matter 
 preceding clause (i), by striking ``The payment 
 amounts'' and inserting ``Subject to paragraph 
 (14), the payment amounts''; and
 (II) in subparagraph (B)--
 (aa) in clause (i), by striking 
 ``(i)'' after ``(B)'' and by inserting 
 ``, subject to paragraph (14)'' before 
 the period at the end; and
 (bb) by striking clause (ii).
 (B) Section 1861(s)(2)(F) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395x(s)(2)(F)) is amended by inserting ``, and, for 
 items and services furnished on or after January 1, 2011, renal 
 dialysis services (as defined in section 1881(b)(14)(B))'' 
 before the semicolon at the end.
 (C) Section 623(e) of the Medicare Prescription Drug, 
 Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 (42 U.S.C. 1395rr 
 note) is repealed.
 (4) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this subsection or 
 the amendments made by this subsection shall be construed as 
 authorizing or requiring the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services to make payments under the payment system implemented 
 under paragraph (14)(A)(i) of section 1881(b) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395rr(b)), as added by paragraph (1), 
 for any unrecovered amount for any bad debt attributable to 
 deductible and coinsurance on items and services not included 
 in the basic case-mix adjusted composite rate under paragraph 
 (12) of such section as in effect before the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.
 (c) Quality Incentives in the End-Stage Renal Disease Program.--
Section 1881 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395rr) is amended 
by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(h) Quality Incentives in the End-Stage Renal Disease Program.--
 ``(1) Quality incentives.--
 ``(A) In general.--With respect to renal dialysis 
 services (as defined in subsection (b)(14)(B)) 
 furnished on or after January 1, 2012, in the case of a 
 provider of services or a renal dialysis facility that 
 does not meet the requirement described in subparagraph 
 (B) with respect to the year, payments otherwise made 
 to such provider or facility under the system under 
 subsection (b)(14) for such services shall be reduced 
 by up to 2.0 percent, as determined appropriate by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(B) Requirement.--The requirement described in 
 this subparagraph is that the provider or facility 
 meets (or exceeds) the total performance score under 
 paragraph (3) with respect to performance standards 
 established by the Secretary with respect to measures 
 specified in paragraph (2).
 ``(C) No effect in subsequent years.--The reduction 
 under subparagraph (A) shall apply only with respect to 
 the year involved, and the Secretary shall not take 
 into account such reduction in computing the single 
 payment amount under the system under paragraph (14) in 
 a subsequent year.
 ``(2) Measures.--
 ``(A) In general.--The measures specified under 
 this paragraph with respect to the year involved shall 
 include--
 ``(i) measures on anemia management that 
 reflect the labeling approved by the Food and 
 Drug Administration for such management and 
 measures on dialysis adequacy;
 ``(ii) to the extent feasible, such measure 
 (or measures) of patient satisfaction as the 
 Secretary shall specify; and
 ``(iii) such other measures as the 
 Secretary specifies, including, to the extent 
 feasible, measures on--
 ``(I) iron management;
 ``(II) bone mineral metabolism; and
 ``(III) vascular access, including 
 for maximizing the placement of 
 arterial venous fistula.
 ``(B) Use of endorsed measures.--
 ``(i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), 
 any measure specified by the Secretary under 
 subparagraph (A)(iii) must have been endorsed 
 by the entity with a contract under section 
 1890(a).
 ``(ii) Exception.--In the case of a 
 specified area or medical topic determined 
 appropriate by the Secretary for which a 
 feasible and practical measure has not been 
 endorsed by the entity with a contract under 
 section 1890(a), the Secretary may specify a 
 measure that is not so endorsed as long as due 
 consideration is given to measures that have 
 been endorsed or adopted by a consensus 
 organization identified by the Secretary.
 ``(C) Updating measures.--The Secretary shall 
 establish a process for updating the measures specified 
 under subparagraph (A) in consultation with interested 
 parties.
 ``(D) Consideration.--In specifying measures under 
 subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall consider the 
 availability of measures that address the unique 
 treatment needs of children and young adults with 
 kidney failure.
 ``(3) Performance scores.--
 ``(A) Total performance score.--
 ``(i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), 
 the Secretary shall develop a methodology for 
 assessing the total performance of each 
 provider of services and renal dialysis 
 facility based on performance standards with 
 respect to the measures selected under 
 paragraph (2) for a performance period 
 established under paragraph (4)(D) (in this 
 subsection referred to as the `total 
 performance score').
 ``(ii) Application.--For providers of 
 services and renal dialysis facilities that do 
 not meet (or exceed) the total performance 
 score established by the Secretary, the 
 Secretary shall ensure that the application of 
 the methodology developed under clause (i) 
 results in an appropriate distribution of 
 reductions in payment under paragraph (1) among 
 providers and facilities achieving different 
 levels of total performance scores, with 
 providers and facilities achieving the lowest 
 total performance scores receiving the largest 
 reduction in payment under paragraph (1)(A).
 ``(iii) Weighting of measures.--In 
 calculating the total performance score, the 
 Secretary shall weight the scores with respect 
 to individual measures calculated under 
 subparagraph (B) to reflect priorities for 
 quality improvement, such as weighting scores 
 to ensure that providers of services and renal 
 dialysis facilities have strong incentives to 
 meet or exceed anemia management and dialysis 
 adequacy performance standards, as determined 
 appropriate by the Secretary.
 ``(B) Performance score with respect to individual 
 measures.--The Secretary shall also calculate separate 
 performance scores for each measure, including for 
 dialysis adequacy and anemia management.
 ``(4) Performance standards.--
 ``(A) Establishment.--Subject to subparagraph (E), 
 the Secretary shall establish performance standards 
 with respect to measures selected under paragraph (2) 
 for a performance period with respect to a year (as 
 established under subparagraph (D)).
 ``(B) Achievement and improvement.--The performance 
 standards established under subparagraph (A) shall 
 include levels of achievement and improvement, as 
 determined appropriate by the Secretary.
 ``(C) Timing.--The Secretary shall establish the 
 performance standards under subparagraph (A) prior to 
 the beginning of the performance period for the year 
 involved.
 ``(D) Performance period.--The Secretary shall 
 establish the performance period with respect to a 
 year. Such performance period shall occur prior to the 
 beginning of such year.
 ``(E) Special rule.--The Secretary shall initially 
 use as the performance standard for the measures 
 specified under paragraph (2)(A)(i) for a provider of 
 services or a renal dialysis facility the lesser of--
 ``(i) the performance of such provider or 
 facility for such measures in the year selected 
 by the Secretary under the second sentence of 
 subsection (b)(14)(A)(ii); or
 ``(ii) a performance standard based on the 
 national performance rates for such measures in 
 a period determined by the Secretary.
 ``(5) Limitation on review.--There shall be no 
 administrative or judicial review under section 1869, section 
 1878, or otherwise of the following:
 ``(A) The determination of the amount of the 
 payment reduction under paragraph (1).
 ``(B) The establishment of the performance 
 standards and the performance period under paragraph 
 (4).
 ``(C) The specification of measures under paragraph 
 (2).
 ``(D) The methodology developed under paragraph (3) 
 that is used to calculate total performance scores and 
 performance scores for individual measures.
 ``(6) Public reporting.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall establish 
 procedures for making information regarding performance 
 under this subsection available to the public, 
 including--
 ``(i) the total performance score achieved 
 by the provider of services or renal dialysis 
 facility under paragraph (3) and appropriate 
 comparisons of providers of services and renal 
 dialysis facilities to the national average 
 with respect to such scores; and
 ``(ii) the performance score achieved by 
 the provider or facility with respect to 
 individual measures.
 ``(B) Opportunity to review.--The procedures 
 established under subparagraph (A) shall ensure that a 
 provider of services and a renal dialysis facility has 
 the opportunity to review the information that is to be 
 made public with respect to the provider or facility 
 prior to such data being made public.
 ``(C) Certificates.--
 ``(i) In general.--The Secretary shall 
 provide certificates to providers of services 
 and renal dialysis facilities who furnish renal 
 dialysis services under this section to display 
 in patient areas. The certificate shall 
 indicate the total performance score achieved 
 by the provider or facility under paragraph 
 (3).
 ``(ii) Display.--Each facility or provider 
 receiving a certificate under clause (i) shall 
 prominently display the certificate at the 
 provider or facility.
 ``(D) Web-based list.--The Secretary shall 
 establish a list of providers of services and renal 
 dialysis facilities who furnish renal dialysis services 
 under this section that indicates the total performance 
 score and the performance score for individual measures 
 achieved by the provider and facility under paragraph 
 (3). Such information shall be posted on the Internet 
 website of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
 in an easily understandable format.''.
 (d) GAO Report on ESRD Bundling System and Quality Initiative.--Not 
later than March 1, 2013, the Comptroller General of the United States 
shall submit to Congress a report on the implementation of the payment 
system under subsection (b)(14) of section 1881 of the Social Security 
Act (as added by subsection (b)) for renal dialysis services and 
related services (defined in subparagraph (B) of such subsection 
(b)(14)) and the quality initiative under subsection (h) of such 
section 1881 (as added by subsection (b)). Such report shall include 
the following information:
 (1) The changes in utilization rates for erythropoiesis 
 stimulating agents.
 (2) The mode of administering such agents, including 
 information on the proportion of individuals receiving such 
 agents intravenously as compared to subcutaneously.
 (3) An analysis of the payment adjustment under 
 subparagraph (D)(iii) of such subsection (b)(14), including an 
 examination of the extent to which costs incurred by rural, 
 low-volume providers and facilities (as defined by the 
 Secretary) in furnishing renal dialysis services exceed the 
 costs incurred by other providers and facilities in furnishing 
 such services, and a recommendation regarding the 
 appropriateness of such adjustment.
 (4) The changes, if any, in utilization rates of drugs and 
 biologicals that the Secretary identifies under subparagraph 
 (B)(iii) of such subsection (b)(14), and any oral equivalent or 
 oral substitutable forms of such drugs and biologicals or of 
 drugs and biologicals described in clause (ii), that have 
 occurred after implementation of the payment system under such 
 subsection (b)(14).
 (5) Any other information or recommendations for 
 legislative and administrative actions determined appropriate 
 by the Comptroller General.

 Subtitle D--Provisions Relating to Part C

SEC. 161. PHASE-OUT OF INDIRECT MEDICAL EDUCATION (IME).

 (a) In General.--Section 1853(k) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395w-23(k)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), in the matter preceding subparagraph 
 (A), by striking ``paragraph (2)'' and inserting ``paragraphs 
 (2) and (4)''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Phase-out of the indirect costs of medical education 
 from capitation rates.--
 ``(A) In general.--After determining the applicable 
 amount for an area for a year under paragraph (1) 
 (beginning with 2010), the Secretary shall adjust such 
 applicable amount to exclude from such applicable 
 amount the phase-in percentage (as defined in 
 subparagraph (B)(i)) for the year of the Secretary's 
 estimate of the standardized costs for payments under 
 section 1886(d)(5)(B) in the area for the year. Any 
 adjustment under the preceding sentence shall be made 
 prior to the application of paragraph (2).
 ``(B) Percentages defined.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph:
 ``(i) Phase-in percentage.--The term 
 `phase-in percentage' means, for an area for a 
 year, the ratio (expressed as a percentage, but 
 in no case greater than 100 percent) of--
 ``(I) the maximum cumulative 
 adjustment percentage for the year (as 
 defined in clause (ii)); to
 ``(II) the standardized IME cost 
 percentage (as defined in clause (iii)) 
 for the area and year.
 ``(ii) Maximum cumulative adjustment 
 percentage.--The term `maximum cumulative 
 adjustment percentage' means, for--
 ``(I) 2010, [0.65] percent; and
 ``(II) a subsequent year, the 
 maximum cumulative adjustment 
 percentage for the previous year 
 increased by [0.65] percentage points.
 ``(iii) Standardized ime cost percentage.--
 The term `standardized IME cost percentage' 
 means, for an area for a year, the per capita 
 costs for payments under section 1886(d)(5)(B) 
 (expressed as a percentage of the fee-for-
 service amount specified in subparagraph (C)) 
 for the area and the year.
 ``(C) Fee-for-service amount.--The fee-for-service 
 amount specified in this subparagraph for an area for a 
 year is the amount specified under subsection (c)(1)(D) 
 for the area and the year.''.
 (b) Excluding Adjustment From the Update.--Section 1853(k)(1)(B)(i) 
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-23(k)(1)(B)(i)) is amended 
by striking ``paragraph (2)'' and inserting ``paragraphs (2) and (4)''.
 (c) Hold Harmless for PACE Program Payments.--Section 1894(d) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395eee(d)) is amended by adding at 
the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(3) Capitation rates determined without regard to the 
 phase-out of the indirect costs of medical education from the 
 annual medicare advantage capitation rate.--Capitation amounts 
 under this subsection shall be determined without regard to the 
 application of section 1853(k)(4).''.

SEC. 162. REVISIONS TO REQUIREMENTS FOR MEDICARE ADVANTAGE PRIVATE FEE-
 FOR-SERVICE PLANS.

 (a) Requirements To Assure Access to Network Coverage.--
 (1) Individual market.--Section 1852(d) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-22(d)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (4), in the second sentence, by 
 striking ``The Secretary'' and inserting ``Subject to 
 paragraph (5), the Secretary''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(5) Requirement of certain nonemployer medicare advantage 
 private fee-for-service plans to use contracts with 
 providers.--
 ``(A) In general.--For plan year 2011 and 
 subsequent plan years, in the case of a Medicare 
 Advantage private fee-for-service plan not described in 
 paragraph (1) or (2) of section 1857(i) operating in a 
 network area (as defined in subparagraph (B)), the plan 
 shall meet the access standards under paragraph (4) in 
 that area only through entering into written contracts 
 as provided for under subparagraph (B) of such 
 paragraph and not, in whole or in part, through the 
 establishment of payment rates meeting the requirements 
 under subparagraph (A) of such paragraph.
 ``(B) Network area defined.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), the term `network area' means, for a 
 plan year, an area which the Secretary identifies (in 
 the Secretary's announcement of the proposed payment 
 rates for the previous plan year under section 
 1853(b)(1)(B)) as having at least 2 network-based plans 
 (as defined in subparagraph (C)) with enrollment under 
 this part as of the first day of the year in which such 
 announcement is made.
 ``(C) Network-based plan defined.--
 ``(i) In general.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (B), the term `network-based plan' 
 means--
 ``(I) except as provided in clause 
 (ii), a Medicare Advantage plan that is 
 a coordinated care plan described in 
 section 1851(a)(2)(A)(i);
 ``(II) a network-based MSA plan; 
 and
 ``(III) a reasonable cost 
 reimbursement plan under section 1876.
 ``(ii) Exclusion of non-network regional 
 ppos.--The term `network-based plan' shall not 
 include an MA regional plan that, with respect 
 to the area, meets access adequacy standards 
 under this part substantially through the 
 authority of section 422.112(a)(1)(ii) of title 
 42, Code of Federal Regulations, rather than 
 through written contracts.''.
 (2) Employer plans.--Section 1852(d) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-22(d)), as amended by paragraph (1), is 
 amended--
 (A) in paragraph (4), in the second sentence, by 
 striking ``paragraph (5)'' and inserting ``paragraphs 
 (5) and (6)''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(6) Requirement of all employer medicare advantage 
 private fee-for-service plans to use contracts with 
 providers.--For plan year 2011 and subsequent plan years, in 
 the case of a Medicare Advantage private fee-for-service plan 
 that is described in paragraph (1) or (2) of section 1857(i), 
 the plan shall meet the access standards under paragraph (4) 
 only through entering into written contracts as provided for 
 under subparagraph (B) of such paragraph and not, in whole or 
 in part, through the establishment of payment rates meeting the 
 requirements under subparagraph (A) of such paragraph.''.
 (3) Access requirements.--
 (A) In general.--Section 1852(d)(4)(B) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-22(d)(4)(B)) is 
 amended by striking ``a sufficient number'' through 
 ``terms of the plan'' and inserting ``a sufficient 
 number and range of providers within such category to 
 meet the access standards in subparagraphs (A) through 
 (E) of paragraph (1)''.
 (B) Effective date.--The amendment made by 
 subparagraph (A) shall apply to plan year 2010 and 
 subsequent plan years.
 (b) Clarification Regarding Utilization.--Section 1859(b)(2) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-28(b)(2)) is amended by adding at 
the end the following flush sentence:
 ``Nothing in subparagraph (B) shall be construed to preclude a 
 plan from varying rates for such a provider based on the 
 specialty of the provider, the location of the provider, or 
 other factors related to such provider that are not related to 
 utilization, or to preclude a plan from increasing rates for 
 such a provider based on increased utilization of specified 
 preventive or screening services.''.

SEC. 163. REVISIONS TO QUALITY IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS.

 (a) Requirement for MA Private Fee-for-Service and MSA Plans To 
Have a Quality Improvement Program.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1852(e)(1) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-112(e)(1)) is amended by striking ``(other 
 than an MA private fee-for-service plan or an MSA plan)''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) 
 shall apply to plan years beginning on or after January 1, 
 2010.
 (b) Data Collection Requirements for MA Regional Plans, MA Private 
Fee-for-Service Plans, and MSA Plans.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1852(e)(3)(A) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-22(e)(3)(A)) is amended--
 (A) in clause (i), by adding at the end the 
 following new sentence: ``With respect to MA private 
 fee-for-service plans and MSA plans, such requirements 
 may not exceed the requirements under this subparagraph 
 with respect to MA local plans that are preferred 
 provider organization plans, except that the limitation 
 under clause (iii) shall not apply and such 
 requirements shall apply regardless of whether or not 
 the services are furnished by providers of services, 
 physicians, or other health care practitioners and 
 suppliers that have contracts with the organization 
 offering the MA private fee-for-service plan or the MSA 
 plan.''
 (B) by striking clause (ii)--
 (C) in clause (iii)--
 (i) in the heading--
 (I) by inserting ``local'' after 
 ``to''; and
 (II) by inserting ``and ma regional 
 plans'' after ``organizations''; and
 (ii) by inserting ``and to MA regional 
 plans'' after ``organization plans''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by paragraph (1) 
 shall apply to plan years beginning on or after January 1, 
 2010.

SEC. 164. REVISIONS RELATING TO SPECIALIZED MEDICARE ADVANTAGE PLANS 
 FOR SPECIAL NEEDS INDIVIDUALS.

 (a) Extension of Authority To Restrict Enrollment.--Section 1859(f) 
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-28(f)), as amended by 
section 108(a) of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Extension Act of 
2007 (Public Law 110-173) is amended by striking ``2010'' and inserting 
``2011''.
 (b) Moratorium on Authority To Designate Other Plans as Specialized 
MA Plans.--During the period beginning on January 1, 2010, and ending 
on December 31, 2010, the Secretary of Health and Human Services may 
not exercise the authority provided under section 231(d) of the 
Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 
(42 U.S.C. 1395w-21 note) to designate other plans as specialized MA 
plans for special needs individuals.
 (c) Requirements for Enrollment.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1859 of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1395w-28) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (b)(6)(A), by inserting ``and 
 that, as of January 1, 2010, meets the applicable 
 requirements of paragraph (2), (3), or (4) of 
 subsection (f), as the case may be'' before the period 
 at the end; and
 (B) in subsection (f)--
 (i) by amending the heading to read as 
 follows: ``Requirements Regarding Enrollment in 
 Specialized MA Plans for Special Needs 
 Individuals'';
 (ii) by designating the sentence beginning 
 ``In the case of'' as paragraph (1) with the 
 heading ``Requirements for enrollment.--'' and 
 with appropriate indentation; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following 
 new paragraphs:
 ``(2) Additional requirements for institutional snps.--In 
 the case of a specialized MA plan for special needs individuals 
 described in subsection (b)(6)(B)(i), the applicable 
 requirements described in this paragraph are as follows:
 ``(A) Each individual that enrolls in the plan on 
 or after January 1, 2010, is a special needs 
 individuals described in subsection (b)(6)(B)(i). In 
 the case of an individual who is living in the 
 community but requires an institutional level of care, 
 such individual shall not be considered a special needs 
 individual described in subsection (b)(6)(B)(i) unless 
 the determination that the individual requires an 
 institutional level of care was made--
 ``(i) using a State assessment tool of the 
 State in which the individual resides; and
 ``(ii) by an entity other than the 
 organization offering the plan.
 ``(B) The plan meets the requirements described in 
 paragraph (5).
 ``(3) Additional requirements for dual snps.--In the case 
 of a specialized MA plan for special needs individuals 
 described in subsection (b)(6)(B)(ii), the applicable 
 requirements described in this paragraph are as follows:
 ``(A) Each individual that enrolls in the plan on 
 or after January 1, 2010, is a special needs 
 individuals described in subsection (b)(6)(B)(ii).
 ``(B) The plan meets the requirements described in 
 paragraph (5).
 ``(C) The plan provides each prospective enrollee, 
 prior to enrollment, with a comprehensive written 
 statement (using standardized content and format 
 established by the Secretary) that describes--
 ``(i) the benefits and cost-sharing 
 protections that the individual is entitled to 
 under the State Medicaid program under title 
 XIX; and
 ``(ii) which of such benefits and cost-
 sharing protections are covered under the plan.
 Such statement shall be included with any description 
 of benefits offered by the plan.
 ``(D) The plan has a contract with the State 
 Medicaid agency to provide benefits, or arrange for 
 benefits to be provided, for which such individual is 
 entitled to receive as medical assistance under title 
 XIX. Such benefits may include long-term care services 
 consistent with State policy.
 ``(4) Additional requirements for severe or disabling 
 chronic condition snps.--In the case of a specialized MA plan 
 for special needs individuals described in subsection 
 (b)(6)(B)(iii), the applicable requirements described in this 
 paragraph are as follows:
 ``(A) Each individual that enrolls in the plan on 
 or after January 1, 2010, is a special needs individual 
 described in subsection (b)(6)(B)(iii).
 ``(B) The plan meets the requirements described in 
 paragraph (5).''.
 (2) Authority to operate but no service area expansion for 
 dual snps that do not meet certain requirements.--
 Notwithstanding subsection (f) of section 1859 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-28), during the period beginning 
 on January 1, 2010, and ending on December 31, 2010, in the 
 case of a specialized Medicare Advantage plan for special needs 
 individuals described in subsection (b)(6)(B)(ii) of such 
 section, as amended by this section, that does not meet the 
 requirement described in subsection (f)(3)(D) of such section, 
 the Secretary of Health and Human Services--
 (A) shall permit such plan to be offered under part 
 C of title XVIII of such Act; and
 (B) shall not permit an expansion of the service 
 area of the plan under such part C.
 (3) Resources for state medicaid agencies.--The Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services shall provide for the designation 
 of appropriate staff and resources that can address State 
 inquiries with respect to the coordination of State and Federal 
 policies for specialized MA plans for special needs individuals 
 described in section 1859(b)(6)(B)(ii) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-28(b)(6)(B)(ii)), as amended by this 
 section.
 (4) No requirement for contract.--Nothing in the provisions 
 of, or amendments made by, this subsection shall require a 
 State to enter into a contract with a Medicare Advantage 
 organization with respect to a specialized MA plan for special 
 needs individuals described in section 1859(b)(6)(B)(ii) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-28(b)(6)(B)(ii)), as 
 amended by this section.
 (d) Care Management Requirements for All SNPs.--
 (1) Requirements.--Section 1859(f) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-28(f)), as amended by subsection (c)(1), 
 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(5) Care management requirements for all snps.--The 
 requirements described in this paragraph are that the 
 organization offering a specialized MA plan for special needs 
 individuals described in subsection (b)(6)(B)(i)--
 ``(A) have in place an evidenced-based model of 
 care with appropriate networks of providers and 
 specialists; and
 ``(B) with respect to each individual enrolled in 
 the plan--
 ``(i) conduct an initial assessment and an 
 annual reassessment of the individual's 
 physical, psychosocial, and functional needs;
 ``(ii) develop a plan, in consultation with 
 the individual as feasible, that identifies 
 goals and objectives, including measurable 
 outcomes as well as specific services and 
 benefits to be provided; and
 ``(iii) use an interdisciplinary team in 
 the management of care.''.
 (2) Review to ensure compliance with care management 
 requirements.--Section 1857(d) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395w-27(d)) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(6) Review to ensure compliance with care management 
 requirements for specialized medicare advantage plans for 
 special needs individuals.--In conjunction with the periodic 
 audit of a specialized Medicare Advantage plan for special 
 needs individuals under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall 
 conduct a review to ensure that such organization offering the 
 plan meets the requirements described in section 1859(f)(5).''.
 (e) Clarification of the Definition of a Severe or Disabling 
Chronic Conditions Specialized Needs Individual.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1859(b)(6)(B)(iii) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-28(b)(6)(B)(iii)) is amended by 
 inserting ``who have one or more comorbid and medically complex 
 chronic conditions that are substantially disabling or life 
 threatening, have a high risk of hospitalization or other 
 significant adverse health outcomes, and require specialized 
 delivery systems across domains of care'' before the period at 
 the end.
 (2) Panel.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 shall convene a panel of clinical advisors to determine the 
 conditions that meet the definition of severe and disabling 
 chronic conditions under section 1859(b)(6)(B)(iii) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-28(b)(6)(B)(iii)), as 
 amended by paragraph (1). The panel shall include the Director 
 of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (or the 
 Director's designee).
 (f) Special Requirements Regarding Quality Reporting for 
Specialized MA Plans for Special Needs Individuals.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1852(e)(3)(A) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-22(e)(3)(A)), as amended by 
 section 163, is amended by inserting after clause (i) the 
 following new clause:
 ``(ii) Special requirements for specialized 
 ma plans for special needs individuals.--In 
 addition to the data required to be collected, 
 analyzed, and reported under clause (i) and 
 notwithstanding the limitations under 
 subparagraph (B), as part of the quality 
 improvement program under paragraph (1), each 
 MA organization offering a specialized Medicare 
 Advantage plan for special needs individuals 
 shall provide for the collection, analysis, and 
 reporting of data that permits the measurement 
 of health outcomes and other indices of quality 
 with respect to the requirements described in 
 paragraphs (2) through (5) of subsection (f). 
 Such data may be based on claims data and shall 
 be at the plan level.''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) 
 shall take effect on a date specified by the Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services (but in no case later than January 1, 
 2010), and shall apply to all specialized Medicare Advantage 
 plans for special needs individuals regardless of when the plan 
 first entered the Medicare Advantage program under part C of 
 title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
 (g) Effective Date and Application.--The amendments made by 
subsections (c)(1), (d), and (e)(1) shall apply to plan years beginning 
on or after January 1, 2010, and shall apply to all specialized 
Medicare Advantage plans for special needs individuals regardless of 
when the plan first entered the Medicare Advantage program under part C 
of title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
 (h) No Affect on Medicaid Benefits for Duals.--Nothing in the 
provisions of, or amendments made by, this section shall affect the 
benefits available under the Medicaid program under title XIX of the 
Social Security Act for special needs individuals described in section 
1859(b)(6)(B)(ii) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-28(b)(6)(B)(ii)).

SEC. 165. LIMITATION ON OUT-OF-POCKET COSTS FOR DUAL ELIGIBLES AND 
 QUALIFIED MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES ENROLLED IN A 
 SPECIALIZED MEDICARE ADVANTAGE PLAN FOR SPECIAL NEEDS 
 INDIVIDUALS.

 (a) In General.--Section 1852(a) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395w-22(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(7) Limitation on cost-sharing for dual eligibles and 
 qualified medicare beneficiaries.--In the case of an individual 
 who is a full-benefit dual eligible individual (as defined in 
 section 1935(c)(6)) or a qualified medicare beneficiary (as 
 defined in section 1905(p)(1)) and who is enrolled in a 
 specialized Medicare Advantage plan for special needs 
 individuals described in section 1859(b)(6)(B)(ii), the plan 
 may not impose cost-sharing that exceeds the amount of cost-
 sharing that would be permitted with respect to the individual 
 under title XIX if the individual were not enrolled in such 
 plan.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2010.

SEC. 166. ADJUSTMENT TO THE MEDICARE ADVANTAGE STABILIZATION FUND.

 Section 1858(e)(2)(A)(i) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395w-27a(e)(2)(A)(i)), as amended by section 110 of the Medicare, 
Medicaid, and SCHIP Extension Act of 2007 (Public Law 110-173), is 
amended--
 (1) by striking ``2013'' and inserting ``2014''; and
 (2) by striking ``$1,790,000,000'' and inserting ``$1''.

SEC. 167. ACCESS TO MEDICARE REASONABLE COST CONTRACT PLANS.

 (a) Extension of Reasonable Cost Contracts.--Section 
1876(h)(5)(C)(ii) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395mm(h)(5)(C)(ii)), as amended by section 109 of the Medicare, 
Medicaid, and SCHIP Extension Act of 2007 (Public Law 110-173), is 
amended by striking ``January 1, 2009'' and inserting ``January 1, 
2010'' in the matter preceding subclause (I).
 (b) Requirement for at Least Two Medicare Advantage Organizations 
To Be Offering a Plan in an Area for the Prohibition To Be 
Applicable.--Subclauses (I) and (II) of section 1876(h)(5)(C)(ii) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395mm(h)(5)(C)(ii)) are each 
amended by inserting ``, provided that all such plans are not offered 
by the same Medicare Advantage organization'' after ``clause (iii)''.
 (c) Revision of Requirements for a Plan That Are Used To Determine 
if Prohibition Is Applicable.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1876(h)(5)(C)(iii)(I) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395mm(h)(5)(C)(iii)(I)) is 
 amended by inserting ``that are not in another Metropolitan 
 Statistical Area with a population of more than 250,000'' after 
 ``such Metropolitan Statistical Area''.
 (2) Clarification.--Section 1876(h)(5)(C)(iii)(I) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395mm(h)(5)(C)(iii)(I)) is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``If 
 the service area includes a portion in more than 1 Metropolitan 
 Statistical Area with a population of more than 250,000, the 
 minimum enrollment determination under the preceding sentence 
 shall be made with respect to each such Metropolitan 
 Statistical Area (and such applicable contiguous counties to 
 such Metropolitan Statistical Area).''.
 (d) GAO Study and Report.--
 (1) Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States 
 shall conduct a study of the reasons (if any) why reasonable 
 cost contracts under section 1876(h) of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1395mm(h)) are unable to become Medicare Advantage 
 plans under part C of title XVIII of such Act.
 (2) Report.--Not later than December 31, 2009, the 
 Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to 
 Congress a report containing the results of the study conducted 
 under paragraph (1), together with recommendations for such 
 legislation and administrative action as the Comptroller 
 General determines appropriate.

SEC. 168. MEDPAC STUDY AND REPORT ON QUALITY MEASURES.

 (a) Study.--The Medicare Payment Advisory Commission shall conduct 
a study on how comparable measures of performance and patient 
experience can be collected and reported by 2011 for the Medicare 
Advantage program under part C of title XVIII of the Social Security 
Act and the original Medicare fee-for-service program under parts A and 
B of such title. Such study shall address technical issues, such as 
data requirements, in addition to issues relating to appropriate 
quality benchmarks that--
 (1) compare the quality of care Medicare beneficiaries 
 receive across Medicare Advantage plans; and
 (2) compare the quality of care Medicare beneficiaries 
 receive under Medicare Advantage plans and under the original 
 Medicare fee-for-service program.
 (b) Report.--Not later than March 31, 2010, the Medicare Payment 
Advisory Commission shall submit to Congress a report containing the 
results of the study conducted under subsection (a), together with 
recommendations for such legislation and administrative action as the 
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission determines appropriate.

SEC. 169. MEDPAC STUDY AND REPORT ON MEDICARE ADVANTAGE PAYMENTS.

 (a) Study.--The Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (in this 
section referred to as the ``Commission'') shall conduct a study of the 
following:
 (1) The correlation between--
 (A) the costs that Medicare Advantage organizations 
 with respect to Medicare Advantage plans incur in 
 providing coverage under the plan for items and 
 services covered under the original Medicare fee-for-
 service program under parts A and B of title XVIII of 
 the Social Security Act, as reflected in plan bids; and
 (B) county-level spending under such original 
 Medicare fee-for-service program on a per capita basis, 
 as calculated by the Chief Actuary of the Centers for 
 Medicare & Medicaid Services.
 The study with respect to the issue described in the preceding 
 sentence shall include differences in correlation statistics by 
 plan type and geographic area.
 (2) Based on these results of the study with respect to the 
 issue described in paragraph (1), and other data the Commission 
 determines appropriate--
 (A) alternate approaches to payment with respect to 
 a Medicare beneficiary enrolled in a Medicare Advantage 
 plan other than through county-level payment area 
 equivalents.
 (B) the accuracy and completeness of county-level 
 estimates of per capita spending under such original 
 Medicare fee-for-service program (including counties in 
 Puerto Rico), as used to determine the annual Medicare 
 Advantage capitation rate under section 1853 of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-23), and whether 
 such estimates include--
 (i) expenditures with respect to Medicare 
 beneficiaries at facilities of the Department 
 of Veterans Affairs; and
 (ii) all appropriate administrative 
 expenses, including claims processing.
 (3) Ways to improve the accuracy and completeness of 
 county-level estimates of per capita spending described in 
 paragraph (2)(B).
 (b) Report.--Not later than March 31, 2010, the Commission shall 
submit to Congress a report containing the results of the study 
conducted under subsection (a), together with recommendations for such 
legislation and administrative action as the Commission determines 
appropriate.

 Subtitle E--Provisions Relating to Part D

 PART I--IMPROVING PHARMACY ACCESS

SEC. 171. PROMPT PAYMENT BY PRESCRIPTION DRUG PLANS AND MA-PD PLANS 
 UNDER PART D.

 (a) Prompt Payment by Prescription Drug Plans.--Section 1860D-12(b) 
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-112(b)) is amended by 
adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Prompt payment of clean claims.--
 ``(A) Prompt payment.--
 ``(i) In general.--Each contract entered 
 into with a PDP sponsor under this part with 
 respect to a prescription drug plan offered by 
 such sponsor shall provide that payment shall 
 be issued, mailed, or otherwise transmitted 
 with respect to all clean claims submitted by 
 pharmacies (other than pharmacies that dispense 
 drugs by mail order only or are located in, or 
 contract with, a long-term care facility) under 
 this part within the applicable number of 
 calendar days after the date on which the claim 
 is received.
 ``(ii) Clean claim defined.--In this 
 paragraph, the term `clean claim' means a claim 
 that has no defect or impropriety (including 
 any lack of any required substantiating 
 documentation) or particular circumstance 
 requiring special treatment that prevents 
 timely payment from being made on the claim 
 under this part.
 ``(iii) Date of receipt of claim.--In this 
 paragraph, a claim is considered to have been 
 received--
 ``(I) with respect to claims 
 submitted electronically, on the date 
 on which the claim is transferred; and
 ``(II) with respect to claims 
 submitted otherwise, on the 5th day 
 after the postmark date of the claim or 
 the date specified in the time stamp of 
 the transmission.
 ``(B) Applicable number of calendar days defined.--
 In this paragraph, the term `applicable number of 
 calendar days' means--
 ``(i) with respect to claims submitted 
 electronically, 14 days; and
 ``(ii) with respect to claims submitted 
 otherwise, 30 days.
 ``(C) Interest payment.--
 ``(i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), 
 if payment is not issued, mailed, or otherwise 
 transmitted within the applicable number of 
 calendar days (as defined in subparagraph (B)) 
 after a clean claim is received, the PDP 
 sponsor shall pay interest to the pharmacy that 
 submitted the claim at a rate equal to the 
 weighted average of interest on 3-month 
 marketable Treasury securities determined for 
 such period, increased by 0.1 percentage point 
 for the period beginning on the day after the 
 required payment date and ending on the date on 
 which payment is made (as determined under 
 subparagraph (D)(iv)). Interest amounts paid 
 under this subparagraph shall not be counted 
 against the administrative costs of a 
 prescription drug plan or treated as allowable 
 risk corridor costs under section 1860D-15(e).
 ``(ii) Authority not to charge interest.--
 The Secretary may provide that a PDP sponsor is 
 not charged interest under clause (i) in the 
 case where there are exigent circumstances, 
 including natural disasters and other unique 
 and unexpected events, that prevent the timely 
 processing of claims.
 ``(D) Procedures involving claims.--
 ``(i) Claim deemed to be clean.--A claim is 
 deemed to be a clean claim if the PDP sponsor 
 involved does not provide notice to the 
 claimant of any deficiency in the claim--
 ``(I) with respect to claims 
 submitted electronically, within 10 
 days after the date on which the claim 
 is received; and
 ``(II) with respect to claims 
 submitted otherwise, within 15 days 
 after the date on which the claim is 
 received.
 ``(ii) Claim determined to not be a clean 
 claim.--
 ``(I) In general.--If a PDP sponsor 
 determines that a submitted claim is 
 not a clean claim, the PDP sponsor 
 shall, not later than the end of the 
 period described in clause (i), notify 
 the claimant of such determination. 
 Such notification shall specify all 
 defects or improprieties in the claim 
 and shall list all additional 
 information or documents necessary for 
 the proper processing and payment of 
 the claim.
 ``(II) Determination after 
 submission of additional information.--
 A claim is deemed to be a clean claim 
 under this paragraph if the PDP sponsor 
 involved does not provide notice to the 
 claimant of any defect or impropriety 
 in the claim within 10 days of the date 
 on which additional information is 
 received under subclause (I).
 ``(iii) Obligation to pay.--A claim 
 submitted to a PDP sponsor that is not paid or 
 contested by the sponsor within the applicable 
 number of days (as defined in subparagraph (B)) 
 after the date on which the claim is received 
 shall be deemed to be a clean claim and shall 
 be paid by the PDP sponsor in accordance with 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(iv) Date of payment of claim.--Payment 
 of a clean claim under such subparagraph is 
 considered to have been made on the date on 
 which--
 ``(I) with respect to claims paid 
 electronically, the payment is 
 transferred; and
 ``(II) with respect to claims paid 
 otherwise, the payment is submitted to 
 the United States Postal Service or 
 common carrier for delivery.
 ``(E) Electronic transfer of funds.--A PDP sponsor 
 shall pay all clean claims submitted electronically by 
 electronic transfer of funds if the pharmacy so 
 requests or has so requested previously. In the case 
 where such payment is made electronically, remittance 
 may be made by the PDP sponsor electronically as well.
 ``(F) Protecting the rights of claimants.--
 ``(i) In general.--Nothing in this 
 paragraph shall be construed to prohibit or 
 limit a claim or action not covered by the 
 subject matter of this section that any 
 individual or organization has against a 
 provider or a PDP sponsor.
 ``(ii) Anti-retaliation.--Consistent with 
 applicable Federal or State law, a PDP sponsor 
 shall not retaliate against an individual or 
 provider for exercising a right of action under 
 this subparagraph.
 ``(G) Rule of construction.--A determination under 
 this paragraph that a claim submitted by a pharmacy is 
 a clean claim shall not be construed as a positive 
 determination regarding eligibility for payment under 
 this title, nor is it an indication of government 
 approval of, or acquiescence regarding, the claim 
 submitted. The determination shall not relieve any 
 party of civil or criminal liability with respect to 
 the claim, nor does it offer a defense to any 
 administrative, civil, or criminal action with respect 
 to the claim.''.
 (b) Prompt Payment by MA-PD Plans.--Section 1857(f) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-27) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new paragraph:
 ``(3) Incorporation of certain prescription drug plan 
 contract requirements.--The following provisions shall apply to 
 contracts with a Medicare Advantage organization offering an 
 MA-PD plan in the same manner as they apply to contracts with a 
 PDP sponsor offering a prescription drug plan under part D:
 ``(A) Prompt payment.--Section 1860D-12(b)(4).''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2010.

SEC. 172. SUBMISSION OF CLAIMS BY PHARMACIES LOCATED IN OR CONTRACTING 
 WITH LONG-TERM CARE FACILITIES.

 (a) Submission of Claims by Pharmacies Located in or Contracting 
With Long-Term Care Facilities.--
 (1) Submission of claims to prescription drug plans.--
 Section 1860D-12(b) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395w-112(b)), as amended by section 171(a), is amended by 
 adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(5) Submission of claims by pharmacies located in or 
 contracting with long-term care facilities.--Each contract 
 entered into with a PDP sponsor under this part with respect to 
 a prescription drug plan offered by such sponsor shall provide 
 that a pharmacy located in, or having a contract with, a long-
 term care facility shall have not less than 30 days (but not 
 more than 90 days) to submit claims to the sponsor for 
 reimbursement under the plan.''.
 (2) Submission of claims to ma-pd plans.--Section 
 1857(f)(3) of the Social Security Act, as added by section 
 171(b), is amended by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(B) Submission of claims by pharmacies located in 
 or contracting with long-term care facilities.--Section 
 1860D-12(b)(5).''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2010.

SEC. 173. REGULAR UPDATE OF PRESCRIPTION DRUG PRICING STANDARD.

 (a) Requirement for Prescription Drug Plans.--Section 1860D-12(b) 
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-112(b)), as amended by 
section 172(a)(1), is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(6) Regular update of prescription drug pricing 
 standard.--If the PDP sponsor of a prescription drug plan uses 
 a standard for reimbursement of pharmacies based on the cost of 
 a drug, each contract entered into with such sponsor under this 
 part with respect to the plan shall provide that the sponsor 
 shall update such standard not less frequently than once every 
 7 days, beginning with an initial update on January 1 of each 
 year, to accurately reflect the market price of acquiring the 
 drug.''.
 (b) Requirement for MA-PD Plans.--Section 1857(f)(3) of the Social 
Security Act, as amended by section 172(a)(2), is amended by adding at 
the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(C) Regular update of prescription drug pricing 
 standard.--Section 1860D-12(b)(6).''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2009.

 PART II--OTHER PROVISIONS

SEC. 175. INCLUSION OF BARBITURATES AND BENZODIAZEPINES AS COVERED PART 
 D DRUGS.

 (a) In General.--Section 1860D-2(e)(2)(A) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-102(e)(2)(A)) is amended by inserting after 
``agents),'' the following ``other than subparagraph (I) of such 
section (relating to barbiturates) if the barbiturate is used in the 
treatment of epilepsy, cancer, or a chronic mental health disorder, and 
other than subparagraph (J) of such section (relating to 
benzodiazepines),''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to prescriptions dispensed on or after January 1, 2012.

SEC. 176. FORMULARY REQUIREMENTS WITH RESPECT TO CERTAIN CATEGORIES OR 
 CLASSES OF DRUGS.

 Section 1860D-4(b)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-
104(b)(3)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (C)(i), by striking ``The formulary'' 
 and inserting ``Subject to subparagraph (G), the formulary''; 
 and
 (2) by inserting after subparagraph (F) the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(G) Required inclusion of drugs in certain 
 categories and classes.--
 ``(i) Identification of drugs in certain 
 categories and classes.--Beginning with plan 
 year 2010, the Secretary shall identify, as 
 appropriate, categories and classes of drugs 
 for which both of the following criteria are 
 met:
 ``(I) Restricted access to drugs in 
 the category or class would have major 
 or life threatening clinical 
 consequences for individuals who have a 
 disease or disorder treated by the 
 drugs in such category or class.
 ``(II) There is significant 
 clinical need for such individuals to 
 have access to multiple drugs within a 
 category or class due to unique 
 chemical actions and pharmacological 
 effects of the drugs within the 
 category or class, such as drugs used 
 in the treatment of cancer.
 ``(ii) Formulary requirements.--Subject to 
 clause (iii), PDP sponsors offering 
 prescription drug plans shall be required to 
 include all covered part D drugs in the 
 categories and classes identified by the 
 Secretary under clause (i).
 ``(iii) Exceptions.--The Secretary may 
 establish exceptions that permits a PDP sponsor 
 of a prescription drug plan to exclude from its 
 formulary a particular covered part D drug in a 
 category or class that is otherwise required to 
 be included in the formulary under clause (ii) 
 (or to otherwise limit access to such a drug). 
 Any exceptions established under the preceding 
 sentence shall be provided under a process 
 that--
 ``(I) ensures that any exception to 
 such requirement is based upon 
 scientific evidence and medical 
 standards of practice; and
 ``(II) includes a public notice and 
 comment period.''.

 Subtitle F--Other Provisions

SEC. 181. USE OF PART D DATA.

 Section 1860D-12(b)(3)(D) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395w-112(b)(3)(D)) is amended by adding at the end the following 
sentence: ``Notwithstanding any other provision of law, information 
provided to the Secretary under the application of section 1857(e)(1) 
to contracts under this section under the preceding sentence may be 
used for the purposes of carrying out this part, improving public 
health through research on the utilization, safety, effectiveness, 
quality, and efficiency of health care services (as the Secretary 
determines appropriate), and conducting Congressional oversight, 
monitoring, and analysis of the program under this title.''.

SEC. 182. REVISION OF DEFINITION OF MEDICALLY ACCEPTED INDICATION FOR 
 DRUGS.

 (a) Revision of Definition for Part D Drugs.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1860D-2(e)(1) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-102(e)(1)) is amended, in the 
 matter following subparagraph (B)--
 (A) by striking ``(as defined in section 
 1927(k)(6))'' and inserting ``(as defined in paragraph 
 (4))''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(4) Medically accepted indication defined.--
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (1), 
 the term `medically accepted indication' has the 
 meaning given that term--
 ``(i) in the case of a covered part D drug 
 used in an anticancer chemotherapeutic regimen, 
 in section 1861(t)(2)(B), except that in 
 applying such section--
 ``(I) `prescription drug plan or 
 MA-PD plan' shall be substituted for 
 `carrier' each place it appears; and
 ``(II) subject to subparagraph (B), 
 the compendia described in section 
 1927(g)(1)(B)(i)(III) shall be included 
 in the list of compendia described in 
 clause (ii)(I) section 1861(t)(2)(B); 
 and
 ``(ii) in the case of any other covered 
 part D drug, in section 1927(k)(6).
 ``(B) Conflict of interest.--On and after January 
 1, 2010, subparagraph (A)(i)(II) shall not apply unless 
 the compendia described in section 
 1927(g)(1)(B)(i)(III) meets the requirement in the 
 third sentence of section 1861(t)(2)(B).
 ``(C) Update.--For purposes of applying 
 subparagraph (A)(ii), the Secretary shall revise the 
 list of compendia described in section 1927(g)(1)(B)(i) 
 as is appropriate for identifying medically accepted 
 indications for drugs. Any such revision shall be done 
 in a manner consistent with the process for revising 
 compendia under section 1861(t)(2)(B).''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply to plan years beginning on or after January 1, 
 2009.
 (b) Conflicts of Interest.--Section 1861(t)(2)(B) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(t)(2)(B)) is amended by adding at the end 
the following new sentence: ``On and after January 1, 2010, no 
compendia may be included on the list of compendia under this 
subparagraph unless the compendia has a publicly transparent process 
for evaluating therapies and for identifying potential conflicts of 
interests.''.

SEC. 183. CONTRACT WITH A CONSENSUS-BASED ENTITY REGARDING PERFORMANCE 
 MEASUREMENT.

 (a) Contract.--
 (1) In general.--Part E of title XVIII of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x et seq.) is amended by inserting 
 after section 1889 the following new section:

 ``contract with a consensus-based entity regarding performance 
 measurement

 ``Sec. 1890. (a) Contract.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of activities conducted 
 under this Act, the Secretary shall identify and have in effect 
 a contract with a consensus-based entity, such as the National 
 Quality Forum, that meets the requirements described in 
 subsection (c). Such contract shall provide that the entity 
 will perform the duties described in subsection (b).
 ``(2) Timing for first contract.--As soon as practicable 
 after the date of the enactment of this subsection, the 
 Secretary shall enter into the first contract under paragraph 
 (1).
 ``(3) Period of contract.--A contract under paragraph (1) 
 shall be for a period of 4 years (except as may be renewed 
 after a subsequent bidding process).
 ``(4) Competitive procedures.--Competitive procedures (as 
 defined in section 4(5) of the Office of Federal Procurement 
 Policy Act (41 U.S.C. 403(5))) shall be used to enter into a 
 contract under paragraph (1).
 ``(b) Duties.--The duties described in this subsection are the 
following:
 ``(1) Priority setting process.--The entity shall 
 synthesize evidence and convene key stakeholders to make 
 recommendations, with respect to activities conducted under 
 this Act, on an integrated national strategy and priorities for 
 health care performance measurement in all applicable settings. 
 In making such recommendations, the entity shall--
 ``(A) ensure that priority is given to measures--
 ``(i) that address the health care provided 
 to patients with prevalent, high-cost chronic 
 diseases;
 ``(ii) with the greatest potential for 
 improving the quality, efficiency, and patient-
 centeredness of health care; and
 ``(iii) that may be implemented rapidly due 
 to existing evidence, standards of care, or 
 other reasons; and
 ``(B) take into account measures that--
 ``(i) may assist consumers and patients in 
 making informed health care decisions;
 ``(ii) address health disparities across 
 groups and areas; and
 ``(iii) address the continuum of care a 
 patient receives, including services furnished 
 by multiple health care providers or 
 practitioners and across multiple settings.
 ``(2) Endorsement of measures.--The entity shall provide 
 for the endorsement of standardized health care performance 
 measures. The endorsement process under the preceding sentence 
 shall consider whether a measure--
 ``(A) is evidence-based, reliable, valid, 
 verifiable, relevant to enhanced health outcomes, 
 actionable at the caregiver level, feasible to collect 
 and report, and responsive to variations in patient 
 characteristics, such as health status, language 
 capabilities, race or ethnicity, and income level; and
 ``(B) is consistent across types of health care 
 providers, including hospitals and physicians.
 ``(3) Maintenance of measures.--The entity shall establish 
 and implement a process to ensure that measures endorsed under 
 paragraph (2) are updated (or retired if obsolete) as new 
 evidence is developed.
 ``(4) Promotion of the development of electronic health 
 records.--The entity shall promote the development and use of 
 electronic health records that contain the functionality for 
 automated collection, aggregation, and transmission of 
 performance measurement information.
 ``(5) Annual report to congress and the secretary; 
 secretarial publication and comment.--
 ``(A) Annual report.--By not later than March 1 of 
 each year (beginning with 2009), the entity shall 
 submit to Congress and the Secretary a report 
 containing a description of--
 ``(i) the implementation of quality 
 measurement initiatives under this Act and the 
 coordination of such initiatives with quality 
 initiatives implemented by other payers;
 ``(ii) the recommendations made under 
 paragraph (1); and
 ``(iii) the performance by the entity of 
 the duties required under the contract entered 
 into with the Secretary under subsection (a).
 ``(B) Secretarial review and publication of annual 
 report.--Not later than 6 months after receiving a 
 report under subparagraph (A) for a year, the Secretary 
 shall--
 ``(i) review such report; and
 ``(ii) publish such report in the Federal 
 Register, together with any comments of the 
 Secretary on such report.
 ``(c) Requirements Described.--The requirements described in this 
subsection are the following:
 ``(1) Private nonprofit.--The entity is a private nonprofit 
 entity governed by a board.
 ``(2) Board membership.--The members of the board of the 
 entity include--
 ``(A) representatives of health plans and health 
 care providers and practitioners or representatives of 
 groups representing such health plans and health care 
 providers and practitioners;
 ``(B) health care consumers or representatives of 
 groups representing health care consumers; and
 ``(C) representatives of purchasers and employers 
 or representatives of groups representing purchasers or 
 employers.
 ``(3) Entity membership.--The membership of the entity 
 includes persons who have experience with--
 ``(A) urban health care issues;
 ``(B) safety net health care issues;
 ``(C) rural and frontier health care issues; and
 ``(D) health care quality and safety issues.
 ``(4) Open and transparent.--With respect to matters 
 related to the contract with the Secretary under subsection 
 (a), the entity conducts its business in an open and 
 transparent manner and provides the opportunity for public 
 comment on its activities.
 ``(5) Voluntary consensus standards setting organization.--
 The entity operates as a voluntary consensus standards setting 
 organization as defined for purposes of section 12(d) of the 
 National Technology Transfer and Advancement Act of 1995 
 (Public Law 104-113) and Office of Management and Budget 
 Revised Circular A-119 (published in the Federal Register on 
 February 10, 1998).
 ``(6) Experience.--The entity has at least 4 years of 
 experience in establishing national consensus standards.
 ``(7) Membership fees.--If the entity requires a membership 
 fee for participation in the functions of the entity, such fees 
 shall be reasonable and adjusted based on the capacity of the 
 potential member to pay the fee. In no case shall membership 
 fees pose a barrier to the participation of individuals or 
 groups with low or nominal resources to participate in the 
 functions of the entity.
 ``(d) Funding.--For purposes of carrying out this section, the 
Secretary shall provide for the transfer, from the Federal Hospital 
Insurance Trust Fund under section 1817 and the Federal Supplementary 
Medical Insurance Trust Fund under section 1841 (in such proportion as 
the Secretary determines appropriate), of $10,000,000 to the Centers 
for Medicare & Medicaid Services Program Management Account for each of 
fiscal years 2009 through 2012.''.
 (2) Sense of the senate.--It is the Sense of the Senate 
 that the selection by the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services of an entity to contract with under section 1890(a) of 
 the Social Security Act, as added by paragraph (1), should not 
 be construed as diminishing the significant contributions of 
 the Boards of Medicine, the quality alliances, and other 
 clinical and technical experts to efforts to measure and 
 improve the quality of health care services.
 (b) GAO Study and Reports on the Performance and Costs of the 
Consensus-Based Entity Under the Contract.--
 (1) In general.--The Comptroller General of the United 
 States shall conduct a study on--
 (A) the performance of the entity with a contract 
 with the Secretary of Health and Human Services under 
 section 1890(a) of the Social Security Act, as added by 
 subsection (a), of its duties under such contract; and
 (B) the costs incurred by such entity in performing 
 such duties.
 (2) Reports.--Not later than 18 months and 36 months after 
 the effective date of the first contract entered into under 
 such section 1890(a), the Comptroller General of the United 
 States shall submit to Congress a report containing the results 
 of the study conducted under paragraph (1), together with 
 recommendations for such legislation and administrative action 
 as the Comptroller General determines appropriate.

SEC. 184. COST-SHARING FOR CLINICAL TRIALS.

 Section 1833 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l), as 
amended by section 152(a), is amended by adding at the end the 
following new subsection:
 ``(x) Methods of Payment.--The Secretary may develop alternative 
methods of payment for items and services provided under clinical 
trials and comparative effectiveness studies sponsored or supported by 
an agency of the Department of Health and Human Services, as determined 
by the Secretary, to those that would otherwise apply under this 
section, to the extent such alternative methods are necessary to 
preserve the scientific validity of such trials or studies, such as in 
the case where masking the identity of interventions from patients and 
investigators is necessary to comply with the particular trial or study 
design.''.

SEC. 185. ADDRESSING HEALTH CARE DISPARITIES.

 Title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) is 
amended by inserting after section 1808 the following new section:

 ``addressing health care disparities

 ``Sec. 1809. (a) Evaluating Data Collection Approaches.--The 
Secretary shall evaluate approaches for the collection of data under 
this title, to be performed in conjunction with existing quality 
reporting requirements and programs under this title, that allow for 
the ongoing, accurate, and timely collection and evaluation of data on 
disparities in health care services and performance on the basis of 
race, ethnicity, and gender. In conducting such evaluation, the 
Secretary shall consider the following objectives:
 ``(1) Protecting patient privacy.
 ``(2) Minimizing the administrative burdens of data 
 collection and reporting on providers and health plans 
 participating under this title.
 ``(3) Improving Medicare program data on race, ethnicity, 
 and gender.
 ``(b) Reports to Congress.--
 ``(1) Report on evaluation.--Not later than 18 months after 
 the date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary shall 
 submit to Congress a report on the evaluation conducted under 
 subsection (a). Such report shall, taking into consideration 
 the results of such evaluation--
 ``(A) identify approaches (including defining 
 methodologies) for identifying and collecting and 
 evaluating data on health care disparities on the basis 
 of race, ethnicity, and gender for the original 
 Medicare fee-for-service program under parts A and B, 
 the Medicare Advantage program under part C, and the 
 Medicare prescription drug program under part D; and
 ``(B) include recommendations on the most effective 
 strategies and approaches to reporting HEDIS quality 
 measures as required under section 1852(e)(3) and other 
 nationally recognized quality performance measures, as 
 appropriate, on the basis of race, ethnicity, and 
 gender.
 ``(2) Reports on data analyses.--Not later than 4 years 
 after the date of the enactment of this section, and 4 years 
 thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report 
 that includes recommendations for improving the identification 
 of health care disparities for Medicare beneficiaries based on 
 analyses of the data collected under subsection (c).
 ``(c) Implementing Effective Approaches.--Not later than 24 months 
after the date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary shall 
implement the approaches identified in the report submitted under 
subsection (b)(1) for the ongoing, accurate, and timely collection and 
evaluation of data on health care disparities on the basis of race, 
ethnicity, and gender.''.

SEC. 186. DEMONSTRATION TO IMPROVE CARE TO PREVIOUSLY UNINSURED.

 (a) Establishment.--Within one year after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary (in this section referred to as the 
``Secretary'') shall establish a demonstration project to determine the 
greatest needs and most effective methods of outreach to medicare 
beneficiaries who were previously uninsured.
 (b) Scope.--The demonstration shall be in no fewer than 10 sites, 
and shall include state health insurance assistance programs, community 
health centers, community-based organizations, community health 
workers, and other service providers under parts A, B, and C of title 
XVIII of the Social Security Act. Grantees that are plans operating 
under part C shall document that enrollees who were previously 
uninsured receive the ``Welcome to Medicare'' physical exam.
 (c) Duration.--The Secretary shall conduct the demonstration 
project for a period of 2 years.
 (d) Report and Evaluation.--The Secretary shall conduct an 
evaluation of the demonstration and not later than 1 year after the 
completion of the project shall submit to Congress a report including 
the following:
 (1) An analysis of the effectiveness of outreach activities 
 targeting beneficiaries who were previously uninsured, such as 
 revising outreach and enrollment materials (including the 
 potential for use of video information), providing one-on-one 
 counseling, working with community health workers, and amending 
 the Medicare and You handbook.
 (2) The effect of such outreach on beneficiary access to 
 care, utilization of services, efficiency and cost-
 effectiveness of health care delivery, patient satisfaction, 
 and select health outcomes.

SEC. 187. OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL REPORT ON COMPLIANCE WITH AND 
 ENFORCEMENT OF NATIONAL STANDARDS ON CULTURALLY AND 
 LINGUISTICALLY APPROPRIATE SERVICES (CLAS) IN MEDICARE.

 (a) Report.--Not later than two years after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Inspector General of the Department of 
Health and Human Services shall prepare and publish a report on--
 (1) the extent to which Medicare providers and plans are 
 complying with the Office for Civil Rights' Guidance to Federal 
 Financial Assistance Recipients Regarding Title VI Prohibition 
 Against National Origin Discrimination Affecting Limited 
 English Proficient Persons and the Office of Minority Health's 
 Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate Services Standards in 
 health care; and
 (2) a description of the costs associated with or savings 
 related to the provision of language services.
Such report shall include recommendations on improving compliance with 
CLAS Standards and recommendations on improving enforcement of CLAS 
Standards.
 (b) Implementation.--Not later than one year after the date of 
publication of the report under subsection (a), the Department of 
Health and Human Services shall implement changes responsive to any 
deficiencies identified in the report.

SEC. 188. MEDICARE IMPROVEMENT FUNDING.

 (a) Medicare Improvement Fund.--Title XVIII of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new section:

 ``medicare improvement fund

 ``Sec. 1898. (a) Establishment.--
 ``The Secretary shall establish under this title a Medicare 
 Improvement Fund (in this section referred to as the `Fund') 
 which shall be available to the Secretary to make improvements 
 under the original fee-for-service program under parts A and B 
 for individuals entitled to, or enrolled for, benefits under 
 part A or enrolled under part B.
 ``(b) Funding.--
 ``(1) In general.--There shall be available to the Fund, 
 for expenditures from the Fund for services furnished during 
 fiscal year [2014], $[______].
 ``(2) Payment from trust funds.--The amount specified under 
 paragraph (1) shall be available to the Fund, as expenditures 
 are made from the Fund, from the Federal Hospital Insurance 
 Trust Fund and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance 
 Trust Fund in such proportion as the Secretary determines 
 appropriate.
 ``(3) Funding limitation.--Amounts in the Fund shall be 
 available in advance of appropriations but only if the total 
 amount obligated from the Fund does not exceed the amount 
 available to the Fund under paragraph (1). The Secretary may 
 obligate funds from the Fund only if the Secretary determines 
 (and the Chief Actuary of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
 Services and the appropriate budget officer certify) that there 
 are available in the Fund sufficient amounts to cover all such 
 obligations incurred consistent with the previous sentence.''.
 (b) Implementation.--For purposes of carrying out the provisions 
of, and amendments made by, this Act, in addition to any other amounts 
provided in such provisions and amendments, the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services shall provide for the transfer, from the Federal 
Hospital Insurance Trust Fund under section 1817 of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i) and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance 
Trust Fund under section 1841 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395t), in the 
same proportion as the Secretary determines under section 1853(f) of 
such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-23(f)), of $140,000,000 to the Centers for 
Medicare & Medicaid Services Program Management Account for the period 
of fiscal years 2009 through 2013.

 TITLE II--MEDICAID

SEC. 201. EXTENSION OF TRANSITIONAL MEDICAL ASSISTANCE (TMA) AND 
 ABSTINENCE EDUCATION PROGRAM.

 Section 401 of division B of the Tax Relief and Health Care Act of 
2006 (Public Law 109-432, 120 Stat. 2994), as amended by section 1 of 
Public Law 110-48 (121 Stat. 244), section 2 of the TMA, Abstinence, 
Education, and QI Programs Extension Act of 2007 (Public Law 110-90, 
121 Stat. 984), and section 202 of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP 
Extension Act of 2007 (Public Law 110-173) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``June 30, 2008'' and inserting ``December 
 31, 2009'';
 (2) by striking ``the third quarter of fiscal year 2008'' 
 and inserting ``the first quarter of fiscal year 2010''; and
 (3) by striking ``the third quarter of fiscal year 2007'' 
 and inserting ``the first quarter of fiscal year 2008''.

SEC. 202. MEDICAID DSH EXTENSION.

 Section 1923(f)(6) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-
4(f)(6)) is amended--
 (1) in the heading, by striking ``fiscal year 2007 and 
 portions of fiscal year 2008'' and inserting ``fiscal years 
 2007 through 2009 and the first calendar quarter of fiscal year 
 2010''; and
 (2) in subparagraph (A)--
 (A) in clause (i)--
 (i) in the second sentence--
 (I) by striking ``fiscal year 2008 
 for the period ending on June 30, 
 2008'' and inserting ``fiscal years 
 2008 and 2009''; and
 (II) by striking ``\3/4\ of''; and
 (ii) by adding at the end the following new 
 sentences: ``Only with respect to fiscal year 
 2010 for the period ending on December 31, 
 2009, the DSH allotment for Tennessee for such 
 portion of the fiscal year, notwithstanding 
 such table or terms, shall be \1/4\ of the 
 amount specified in the first sentence for 
 fiscal year 2007.'';
 (B) in clause (ii), by striking ``or for a period 
 in fiscal year 2008'' and inserting ``, 2008, 2009, or 
 for a period in fiscal year 2010'';
 (C) in clause (iv)--
 (i) in the heading, by striking ``fiscal 
 year 2007 and fiscal year 2008'' and inserting 
 ``fiscal years 2007 through 2009 and the first 
 calendar quarter of fiscal year 2010'';
 (ii) in subclause (I), by striking ``or for 
 a period in fiscal year 2008'' and inserting 
 ``, 2008, 2009, or for a period in fiscal year 
 2010''; and
 (iii) in subclause (II), by striking ``or 
 for a period in fiscal year 2008'' and 
 inserting ``, 2008, 2009, or for a period in 
 fiscal year 2010''; and
 (3) in subparagraph (B)(i)--
 (A) in the first sentence, by striking ``fiscal 
 year 2007'' and inserting ``each of fiscal years 2007 
 through 2009''; and
 (B) by striking the second sentence and inserting 
 the following: ``Only with respect to fiscal year 2010 
 for the period ending on December 31, 2009, the DSH 
 allotment for Hawaii for such portion of the fiscal 
 year, notwithstanding the table set forth in paragraph 
 (2), shall be $2,500,000.''.

SEC. 203. PHARMACY REIMBURSEMENT UNDER MEDICAID.

 (a) Delay in New Payment Limits for Multiple Source Drugs Under 
Medicaid.--Notwithstanding paragraphs (4) and (5) of subsection (e) of 
section 1927 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8) or part 447 
of title 42, Code of Federal Regulations (as in effect on the date of 
the enactment of this Act), the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
shall not require a State to establish prior to September 30, 2009, 
payment limits for multiple source drugs under a State Medicaid plan 
that do not exceed the specific upper limit established under section 
447.514(b) of title 42, Code of Federal Regulations (as so in effect) 
and shall permit any State to continue to receive Federal financial 
participation for payments for such drugs that do not exceed the 
specific upper limit that would have applied to such payments under 
section 447.332 of title 42, Code of Federal Regulations (as in effect 
on December 31, 2006).
 (b) Temporary Suspension of Updated Publicly Available AMP Data.--
Notwithstanding clause (v) of section 1927(b)(3)(D) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(b)(3)(D)), the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services shall not, prior to September 30, 2009, make publicly 
available any AMP disclosed to the Secretary.
 (c) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (1) The term ``multiple source drug'' has the meaning given 
 that term in section 1927(k)(7)(A)(i) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(k)(7)(A)(i)); and
 (2) The term ``AMP'' has the meaning given ``average 
 manufacturer price'' in section 1927(k)(1) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(k)(1)) and ``AMP'' in section 
 447.504(a) of title 42, Code of Federal Regulations (as in 
 effect on the date of the enactment of this Act).

SEC. 204. REVIEW OF ADMINISTRATIVE CLAIM DETERMINATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 1116 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1316) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(e)(1) Whenever the Secretary determines that any item or class 
of items on account of which Federal financial participation is claimed 
under title XIX shall be disallowed for such participation, the State 
shall be entitled to and upon request shall receive a reconsideration 
of the disallowance, provided that such request is made during the 60-
day period that begins on the date the State receives notice of the 
disallowance.
 ``(2)(A) A State may appeal a disallowance of a claim for federal 
financial participation under title XIX by the Secretary, or an 
unfavorable reconsideration of a disallowance, during the 60-day period 
that begins on the date the State receives notice of the disallowance 
or of the unfavorable reconsideration, in whole or in part, to the 
Departmental Appeals Board, established in the Department of Health and 
Human Services (in this paragraph referred to as the `Board'), by 
filing a notice of appeal with the Board.
 ``(B) The Board shall consider a State's appeal of a disallowance 
of such a claim (or of an unfavorable reconsideration of a 
disallowance) on the basis of such documentation as the State may 
submit and as the Board may require to support the final decision of 
the Board. In deciding whether to uphold a disallowance of such a claim 
or any portion thereof, the Board shall be bound by all applicable laws 
and regulations and shall conduct a thorough review of the issues, 
taking into account all relevant evidence. The Board's decision of an 
appeal under subparagraph (A) shall be the final decision of the 
Secretary and shall be subject to reconsideration by the Board only 
upon motion of either party filed during the 60-day period that begins 
on the date of the Board's decision or to judicial review in accordance 
with subparagraph (C).
 ``(C) A State may obtain judicial review of a decision of the Board 
by filing an action in any United States District Court located within 
the appealing State (or, if several States jointly appeal the 
disallowance of claims for Federal financial participation under 
section 1903, in any United States District Court that is located 
within any State that is a party to the appeal) or the United States 
District Court for the District of Columbia. Such an action may only be 
filed--
 ``(i) if no motion for reconsideration was filed within the 
 60-day period specified in subparagraph (B), during such 60-day 
 period; or
 ``(ii) if such a motion was filed within such period, 
 during the 60-day period that begins on the date of the Board's 
 decision on such motion.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 1116(d) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
1316(d)) is amended by striking ``or XIX,''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section take 
effect on the date of the enactment of this Act and apply to any 
disallowance of a claim for Federal financial participation under title 
XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) made on or 
after such date or during the 60-day period prior to such date.

 TITLE III--MISCELLANEOUS

SEC. 301. EXTENSION OF TANF SUPPLEMENTAL GRANTS.

 (a) Extension Through Fiscal Year 2009.--Section 7101(a) of the 
Deficit Reduction Act of 2005 (Public Law 109-171; 120 Stat. 135) is 
amended by striking ``fiscal year 2008'' and inserting ``fiscal year 
2009''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 403(a)(3)(H)(ii) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 603(a)(3)(H)(ii)) is amended to read as 
follows:
 ``(ii) subparagraph (G) shall be applied as 
 if `fiscal year 2009' were substituted for 
 `fiscal year 2001'; and''.

SEC. 302. 70 PERCENT FEDERAL MATCHING FOR FOSTER CARE AND ADOPTION 
 ASSISTANCE FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.

 (a) In General.--Section 474(a) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 674(a)) is amended in each of paragraphs (1) and (2) by striking 
``(as defined in section 1905(b) of this Act)'' and inserting ``(which 
shall be as defined in section 1905(b), in the case of a State other 
than the District of Columbia, or 70 percent, in the case of the 
District of Columbia)''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
take effect on October 1, 2008, and shall apply to calendar quarters 
beginning on or after that date.

SEC. 303. EXTENSION OF SPECIAL DIABETES GRANT PROGRAMS.

 (a) Special Diabetes Programs for Type I Diabetes.--Section 
330B(b)(2)(C) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254c-2(b)(2)) 
is amended by striking ``2009'' and inserting ``2011''.
 (b) Special Diabetes Programs for Indians.--Section 330C(c)(2)(C) 
of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254c-3(c)(2)(C)) is amended 
by striking ``2009'' and inserting ``2011''.
 (c) Report on Grant Programs.--Section 4923(b) of the Balanced 
Budget Act of 1997 (42 U.S.C. 1254c-2 note), as amended by section 
931(c) of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Benefits Improvement and 
Protection Act of 2000, as enacted into law by section 1(a)(6) of 
Public Law 106-554, and section 1(c) of Public Law 107-360, is 
amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) by striking ``a final report'' and inserting 
 ``a second interim report''; and
 (B) by striking the period at the end and inserting 
 ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(3) a report on such evaluation not later than January 1, 
 2011.''.

SEC. 304. IOM REPORTS ON BEST PRACTICES FOR CONDUCTING SYSTEMATIC 
 REVIEWS OF CLINICAL EFFECTIVENESS RESEARCH AND FOR 
 DEVELOPING CLINICAL PROTOCOLS.

 (a) Systematic Reviews of Clinical Effectiveness Research.--
 (1) Study.--Not later than 60 days after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services shall enter into a contract with the Institute of 
 Medicine of the National Academies (in this section referred to 
 as the ``Institute'') under which the Institute shall conduct a 
 study to identify the methodological standards for conducting 
 systematic reviews of clinical effectiveness research on health 
 and health care in order to ensure that organizations 
 conducting such reviews have information on methods that are 
 objective, scientifically valid, and consistent.
 (2) Report.--Not later than 18 months after the effective 
 date of the contract under paragraph (1), the Institute, as 
 part of such contract, shall submit to the Secretary of Health 
 and Human Services and the appropriate committees of 
 jurisdiction of Congress a report containing the results of the 
 study conducted under paragraph (1), together with 
 recommendations for such legislation and administrative action 
 as the Institute determines appropriate.
 (3) Participation.--The contract under paragraph (1) shall 
 require that stakeholders with expertise in conducting clinical 
 effectiveness research participate on the panel responsible for 
 conducting the study under paragraph (1) and preparing the 
 report under paragraph (2).
 (b) Clinical Protocols.--
 (1) Study.--Not later than 60 days after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services shall enter into a contract with the Institute of 
 Medicine of the National Academies (in this section referred to 
 as the ``Institute'') under which the Institute shall conduct a 
 study on the best methods used in developing clinical practice 
 guidelines in order to ensure that organizations developing 
 such guidelines have information on approaches that are 
 objective, scientifically valid, and consistent.
 (2) Report.--Not later than 18 months after the effective 
 date of the contract under paragraph (1), the Institute, as 
 part of such contract, shall submit to the Secretary of Health 
 and Human Services and the appropriate committees of 
 jurisdiction of Congress a report containing the results of the 
 study conducted under paragraph (1), together with 
 recommendations for such legislation and administrative action 
 as the Institute determines appropriate.
 (3) Participation.--The contract under paragraph (1) shall 
 require that stakeholders with expertise in making clinical 
 recommendations participate on the panel responsible for 
 conducting the study under paragraph (1) and preparing the 
 report under paragraph (2).
 (c) Funding.--Out of any funds in the Treasury not otherwise 
appropriated, there are appropriated for the period of fiscal years 
2009 and 2010, $3,000,000 to carry out this section.
 Calendar No. 772

110th CONGRESS

 2d Session

 S. 3101

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To amend titles XVIII and XIX of the Social Security Act to extend 
expiring provisions under the Medicare program, to improve beneficiary 
access to preventive and mental health services, to enhance low-income 
 benefit programs, and to maintain access to care in rural areas, 
 including pharmacy access, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 June 9, 2008

 Read the second time and placed on the calendar