S 2696 IS
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2696
To establish a comprehensive policy with respect to the provision of health
care coverage and services to individuals with severe mental illnesses,
and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
May 12 (legislative day, MARCH 26), 1992
Mr. DOMENICI (for himself and Mr. DANFORTH) introduced the following bill;
which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources
A BILL
To establish a comprehensive policy with respect to the provision of health
care coverage and services to individuals with severe mental illnesses,
and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Equitable Health Care for Severe Mental
 Illnesses Act of 1992'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 Congress finds that--
 (1) American families should have health insurance protection for the
 costs of treating severe mental illnesses that is commensurate with the
 protection provided for other illnesses;
 (2) currently, many private health insurance policies and public insurance
 programs discriminate against persons with severe mental illnesses by
 providing more restrictive coverage for treatments of those illnesses
 compared to coverage provided for treatments of other medical problems;
 (3) many health insurance plans limit the number of days allowed for
 facility care or limit the number of outpatient visits allowed for the
 treatment of severe mental illnesses while providing no limit for the
 treatment of other physical illnesses;
 (4) only 21 percent of all health insurance policies provide inpatient
 coverage for severe mental illnesses comparable to coverage for other
 illnesses, and only two percent have comparable outpatient coverage;
 (5) only two percent of Americans with private health care coverage have
 policies that adequately and fairly cover severe mental illnesses;
 (6) over 60 percent of health maintenance and preferred provider
 organizations specifically exclude treatment for those with severe mental
 illnesses;
 (7) health care reform plans designed to make health care more accessible
 and affordable often incorporate the policies that are discriminatory with
 respect to persons with severe mental illnesses which now exist in common
 private health insurance plans;
 (8) unequal health insurance coverage contributes to the destructive and
 unfair stigmatization of persons with severe mental illnesses, illnesses
 that are beyond the control of the individuals, just like cancer, diabetes,
 and other serious physical health problems;
 (9) schizophrenia strikes more than 2,500,000 Americans over the course
 of their lifetimes, and approximately 30 percent of all hospitalized
 psychiatric patients in the Untied States suffer from this most disabling
 group of mental disorders;
 (10) left untreated, severe mental illnesses are some of the most disabling
 and destructive illnesses afflicting Americans;
 (11) studies have found that perhaps 90 percent of all persons who commit
 suicide suffer from a treatable severe mental illness, such as schizophrenia,
 depression, or manic depressive illness;
 (12) some 10 percent of all inmates, or 100,000 people, in prisons and jails
 in the United States suffer from schizophrenia or manic-depressive psychosis;
 (13) severe mental illness places an individual at high risk for
 homelessness, as approximately one-third of the Nation's 600,000 homeless
 persons suffer from severe mental illnesses;
 (14) many persons suffering from severe mental illnesses can be treated
 effectively;
 (15) eighty to 90 percent of those suffering from depression respond
 quickly to treatment and 80 percent of the victims of schizophrenia can
 be relieved of acute symptoms with proper medication;
 (16) about 95 percent of what is known about both normal and abnormal
 structure and function of the brain has been learned in the last 10 years,
 but millions of severely mentally ill people have yet to benefit from
 these startling research advances in clinical and basic neuroscience;
 (17) ensuring adequate health insurance coverage for the treatment of severe
 mental illnesses can reduce health and societal costs in the long-run by
 preventing more costly interventions later in the lives of persons with
 untreated severe mental illnesses and by helping those with severe mental
 illnesses, many of whom are young adults, remain productive members of
 society; and
 (18) legislation to reform the health care system should not condone or
 perpetuate discrimination against persons with severe mental illnesses.
SEC. 3. STATEMENT OF POLICY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- It is the policy of the United States that--
 (1) persons with severe mental illnesses must not be discriminated against
 in the health care system; and
 (2) health care coverage, whether provided through public or private health
 insurance or any other means of financing, must provide for the treatment
 of severe mental illnesses in a manner that is equitable and commensurate
 with that provided for other major physical illnesses.
 (b) CONSTRUCTION- Subsection (a) shall not be construed to preclude the
 adoption of laws or policies requiring or providing for appropriate and
 equitable coverage for other mental health services.
SEC. 4. NONDISCRIMINATORY AND EQUITABLE HEALTH CARE COVERAGE.
 (a) DESCRIPTION- With respect to persons with severe mental illnesses,
 to be considered nondiscriminatory and equitable under this Act, health
 care coverage shall cover services that are essential to the effective
 treatment of severe mental illnesses in a manner that--
 (1) is not more restrictive than coverage provided for other major physical
 illnesses;
 (2) provides adequate financial protection to the person requiring the
 medical treatment for a severe mental illness; and
 (3) is consistent with effective and common methods of controlling health
 care costs for other major physical illnesses.
 (b) A MODEL PLAN- Health care coverage provided through public or private
 health insurance or any other means of financing which incorporate the
 following provisions with respect to the care associated with severe mental
 illnesses would be consistent with the policy set forth in section 3:
 (1) Stop-loss protection for catastrophic expenses.
 (2) Coverage of facility based care, with cost control using precertification
 review, a mixed prospective and cost-based payment method, and a deductible
 equal to one day's cost at the facility.
 (3) Coverage of outpatient medical management with coinsurance and provider
 reimbursement set on a par with other medical procedures to encourage
 the use of cost-effective ambulatory treatment, including treatment in
 non-traditional settings.
 (4) Coverage of visits for psychotherapy, with coinsurance and fees set
 to ensure effective cost control of high demand services.
 (5) Coverage of prescription drugs essential to the cost effective treatment
 of severe mental illnesses.
SEC. 5. COMMITMENT TO POLICY.
 It is the purpose of this Act to commit the Congress and the Executive
 Branch to incorporating the policy set forth in section 3 through efforts,
 including the enactment of legislation, which are intended to improve
 access to or control the costs of health care.