.AEMD30AFAEMD10AFAEMD31AFAEMD32AFAEMD33AFAEMD34AFAEMD35AFAEMD34AFAEMD33AFAEMD36AFAEMD37AFAEMD38AFAEMD39AFAEMD40AFAEMD41AFAEMD42AFAEMD43AFAEMD44AFAEMD45AFAEMD46AFAEMD47AFAEMD48AFAEMD49AFAEMD50AFAEMD51AFAEMD52AFAEMD53AFAEMD54AFAEMD55AFAEMD56AFAEMD57AFAEMD58AFAEMD59AFAEMD60AFAEMD61AFAEMD62AFAEMD63AFAEMD64AFAEMD65AFAEMD66AFAEMD67AFAEMD68AFAEMD69AFAEMD70AFAEMD31AF
S 1777 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1777
To amend the Public Health Service Act to establish the authority for the
regulation of mammography services and radiological equipment, and for
other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
October 1 (legislative day, SEPTEMBER 19), 1991
Mr. ADAMS (for himself, Ms. MIKULSKI, and Mr. DURENBERGER) introduced the
following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Labor
and Human Resources
A BILL
To amend the Public Health Service Act to establish the authority for the
regulation of mammography services and radiological equipment, and for
other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `The Breast Cancer Screening Safety Act
 of 1991'.
SEC. 2. CERTIFICATION OF MAMMOGRAPHY FACILITIES.
 Part F of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262 et
 seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new subpart:
`Subpart 3--Mammography Facilities
`SEC. 354. CERTIFICATION OF MAMMOGRAPHY FACILITIES.
 `(a) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section:
 `(1) ACCREDITATION BODY- The term `accreditation body' means a body that
 has been approved by the Secretary under subsection (e)(2)(A) to accredit
 facilities.
 `(2) CERTIFICATE- The term `certificate' means the certificate described
 in subsection (b)(1).
 `(3) CERTIFIED FACILITY- The term `certified facility' means a facility to
 which the Secretary has issued and, if appropriate, renewed a certificate
 in accordance with subsection (c).
 `(4) FACILITY- The term `facility' means a hospital outpatient department,
 clinic, radiology practice, or mobile unit, an office of a physician,
 or other facility, as determined by the Secretary, that conducts breast
 cancer screening or diagnosis through mammography for the diagnosis or
 further examination of cancerous or potentially cancerous breast tissue.
 `(5) MAMMOGRAM- The term `mammogram' means a radiographic image produced
 through mammography.
 `(6) MAMMOGRAPHY- The term `mammography' means radiography of the breast
 for the purpose of enabling a physician to determine the presence, size,
 location, and extent of cancerous or potentially cancerous breast tissue.
 `(b) CERTIFICATE REQUIREMENT-
 `(1) CERTIFICATE- No facility may conduct an examination or procedure
 described in paragraph (2) in performing mammography after December 31,
 1993, unless the facility obtains a certificate--
 `(A) that is issued and, if applicable, renewed by, the Secretary in
 accordance with subsection (c); and
 `(B) that is applicable to the examination or procedure to be conducted.
 `(2) EXAMINATION OR PROCEDURE- A facility shall obtain a certificate in
 order to--
 `(A) operate equipment that is used to image the breast in performing
 mammography and that has been sold or offered for sale in interstate
 commerce;
 `(B) interpret a screening mammogram or diagnostic mammogram produced by
 the equipment;
 `(C) perform needle localization or other procedures in which mammography
 equipment is used; or
 `(D) inspect the equipment and conduct oversight of quality assurance
 practices at a facility with the equipment.
 `(c) Issuance and Renewal of Certificates-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary, acting through the Director for the Centers
 for Disease Control, may issue or renew a certificate for a facility if
 the person, entity, agent, or body described in subsection (d)(1) meets
 the applicable requirements of subsection (d) with respect to the facility.
 `(2) TERM- The Secretary may issue or renew a certificate under this
 section for not more than 2 years.
 `(d) APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE- The Secretary may issue or renew a
 certificate for a facility if--
 `(1) the person or entity who owns or leases the facility or an authorized
 agent of the person, or, in the case of a facility accredited by an
 accreditation body under subsection (e), the accreditation body, submits
 to the Secretary, in such form and manner as the Secretary shall prescribe,
 an application that contains--
 `(A) a description of the manufacturer, model, and type of each x-ray
 machine, image receptor, and processor operated in the performance of
 mammography at the facility;
 `(B) a description of the procedures currently used to provide mammography,
 or other procedures related to the detection of cancerous or potentially
 cancerous breast tissue, at the facility, including--
 `(i) the number and types of procedures performed;
 `(ii) the methodologies for mammography; and
 `(iii) the qualifications (educational background, training, and experience)
 of the personnel performing radiological procedures, the medical physicist
 inspecting mammography equipment at the facility, and the physicians
 reading and interpreting the results from the procedures; and
 `(C) in the case of a facility accredited under subsection (e), proof of
 accreditation and information indicating the basis for the accreditation; and
 `(2) the person, entity, or agent submits to the Secretary--
 `(A) a satisfactory assurance that the facility will be operated in
 accordance with standards established by the Secretary under subsection (f);
 `(B) a satisfactory assurance that the facility will--
 `(i) permit inspections by the Secretary under subsection (g);
 `(ii) make such records and information available, and submit such reports,
 to the Secretary as the Secretary may reasonably require; and
 `(iii) update the information submitted under paragraph (1) or (2) not
 later than 6 months after the date the information becomes incomplete or
 inaccurate; and
 `(C) such other information as the Secretary may require.
 `(e) ACCREDITATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may consider a facility to be accredited
 for purposes of subsection (d)(1) if the facility--
 `(A) meets the standards of an approved accreditation body; and
 `(B) authorizes the accreditation body to submit to the Secretary (or
 such State agency as the Secretary may designate) such information as the
 Secretary may require.
 `(2) APPROVAL OF ACCREDITATION BODIES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may approve a private nonprofit organization
 to accredit facilities for purposes of subsection (d)(1) if the accreditation
 body provides satisfactory assurances that the body will--
 `(i) comply with the requirements described in paragraphs (4) and (5);
 `(ii) submit to the Secretary the name of any facility for which the
 accreditation body denies, suspends, withdraws, or revokes accreditation, or
 against which the body takes any other action, within 30 days of the action;
 `(iii) notify the Secretary at least 30 days before the accreditation body
 changes the standards of the body; and
 `(iv) notify each facility accredited by the accreditation body if the
 Secretary withdraws approval of the accreditation body under paragraph
 (3), within 21 days of the withdrawal.
 `(B) CRITERIA AND PROCEDURES- The Secretary shall promulgate regulations
 under which the Secretary may approve an accreditation body.
 `(3) WITHDRAWAL OF APPROVAL-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall promulgate standards under which
 the Secretary may withdraw the approval of an accreditation body if
 the Secretary determines that the accreditation body does not meet the
 requirements of clauses (i) through (iv) of paragraph (2)(A).
 `(B) EFFECT OF WITHDRAWAL- If the Secretary withdraws the approval of an
 accreditation body under subparagraph (A), the certificate of any facility
 accredited by the body shall continue in effect until the date specified by
 the Secretary at the time the Secretary approves, under paragraph (2)(A),
 an accreditation body that may accredit the facility.
 `(4) ACCREDITATION- In determining whether or not to accredit a facility,
 an approved accreditation body shall--
 `(A) inspect facilities using inspectors who the Secretary determines are
 qualified to evaluate the equipment used by the facilities in performing
 mammograms;
 `(B) inspect facilities with such frequency as the Secretary may determine
 to be necessary; and
 `(C) apply standards equal to or more stringent than the standards
 established by the Secretary under subsection (f).
 `(5) COMPLIANCE- An approved accreditation body shall take measures to
 ensure that facilities accredited by the body will continue to meet the
 standards of the accreditation body.
 `(6) REVOCATION OF ACCREDITATION- If an accreditation body withdraws or
 revokes the accreditation of a facility, the certificate of the facility
 shall continue in effect until the later of--
 `(A) 90 days after the facility receives notice of the withdrawal or
 revocation of the accreditation; or
 `(B) the effective date of any action taken by the Secretary under subsection
 (h) or (i).
 `(7) EVALUATION AND REPORT-
 `(A) EVALUATION- The Secretary shall evaluate annually the performance of
 each approved accreditation body by--
 `(i) inspecting under subsection (g) a sufficient number of the facilities
 accredited by the body to allow a reasonable estimate of the performance
 of the body; and
 `(ii) such additional means as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
 `(B) REPORT- The Secretary shall annually prepare and submit to the
 appropriate committees of Congress, a report that describes the results
 of the evaluation conducted in accordance with subparagraph (A).
 `(f) QUALITY STANDARDS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall establish standards for facilities
 to assure the safety and accuracy of mammography, including--
 `(A) standards that require establishment and maintenance of a quality
 assurance and quality control program that is adequate and appropriate to
 ensure the reliability, clarity, and accurate interpretation of radiologic
 images;
 `(B) standards that require use of radiological equipment specifically
 designed for mammography, including radiologic standards;
 `(C) a requirement that personnel who perform mammograms be--
 `(i) licensed by a State to perform radiological procedures; or
 `(ii) certified as qualified to perform radiological procedures as described
 in paragraph (3)(A);
 `(D) minimum training and performance standards for personnel who perform
 mammograms;
 `(E) a requirement that mammograms be interpreted by a physician who is
 certified as qualified to interpret screening mammography procedures by--
 `(i) a board described in paragraph (3)(B); or
 `(ii) a program that complies with the standards described in paragraph
 (3)(C);
 `(F) requirements that--
 `(i) a facility that performs the original mammogram and the first
 screening mammogram of a woman maintain the mammograms in the permanent
 medical records of the woman; and
 `(ii) a facility that performs any mammogram maintain the mammogram for
 not less than 5 years; and
 `(G) a requirement that a medical physicist who is qualified in mammography
 and certified by a board described in paragraph (3)(D) perform an annual
 inspection of screening mammography equipment and oversight of quality
 assurance practices at each facility.
 `(2) CONSIDERATIONS- In developing standards under paragraph (1), the
 Secretary shall consider--
 `(A) standards issued by the American College of Radiology;
 `(B) the examinations and procedures performed and the methodologies
 employed by facilities, including--
 `(i) monitoring repeat mammograms;
 `(ii) submitting mammograms to peer review panels for second readings;
 `(iii) performing a second reading within the facility; and
 `(iv) following up patient biopsies;
 `(C) the complexity of the process for performing mammograms;
 `(D) the degree of independent judgment involved in performing mammograms;
 `(E) the calibration and quality control requirements of the radiological
 equipment used, including image quality and dose;
 `(F) the difficulty in reading and interpreting mammogram results;
 `(G) the value of a requirement for physical consultation at the facility,
 independent of the regulatory inspection process described in subsection
 (g); and
 `(H) such other factors as the Secretary considers relevant.
 `(3) CERTIFICATION OF PERSONNEL- The Secretary shall by regulation--
 `(A) specify organizations eligible to certify individuals to perform
 radiological procedures;
 `(B) specify boards eligible to certify individuals to interpret screening
 mammograms;
 `(C) establish standards regarding the qualifications for individuals
 described in subparagraph (B) for programs certifying the individuals; and
 `(D) specify boards eligible to certify individuals qualified to inspect
 screening mammography equipment and to oversee quality assurance practices
 at mammography facilities.
 `(g) INSPECTIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may enter and inspect certified facilities
 to determine compliance with the standards established under subsection (f).
 `(2) TIMING- The Secretary may conduct announced or unannounced inspections
 during the regular hours of operation of the facilities.
 `(3) IDENTIFICATION- The Secretary may conduct inspections only on presenting
 identification to the owner, operator, or agent in charge of the facility
 to be inspected.
 `(4) SCOPE OF INSPECTION- In conducting inspections, the Secretary--
 `(A) shall have access to all equipment, materials, records, and information
 that the Secretary considers necessary to determine whether the facility
 is being operated in accordance with this section; and
 `(B) may copy, or require the facility to submit to the Secretary, any of
 the materials, records, or information.
 `(5) ELEMENTS OF INSPECTION- All inspections shall include an inspection
 of the beam quality, average glandular dose, and phantom image quality of
 the mammography system, and other features as determined by the Secretary.
 `(6) QUALIFICATIONS OF INSPECTORS- Qualified radiological physicists shall
 conduct all inspections. The Secretary may designate a Federal officer
 or employee to conduct inspections, or request that a State designate an
 officer or employee to conduct the inspections.
 `(7) FREQUENCY- The Secretary shall conduct inspections of certified
 facilities not less often than annually.
 `(8) RECORDS OF INSPECTIONS- Each facility shall maintain records of an
 inspection for not less than 7 years after the date of the inspection.
 `(h) INTERMEDIATE SANCTIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may impose sanctions under this subsection
 in lieu of the actions authorized by subsection (i) if a facility receives
 notification--
 `(A) that the Secretary has determined that the facility is not in compliance
 with the standards established under subsection (f) or the requirements
 described in clauses (i) through (iii) of subsection (d)(2)(B), in the
 case of a facility accredited by an accreditation body from which the
 Secretary has withdrawn approval under subsection (e)(3); or
 `(B) that the accreditation body that accredited the facility under
 subsection (e) has withdrawn or revoked the accreditation of the facility.
 `(2) TIMING- The Secretary may not impose sanctions under this subsection
 until the Secretary determines, not earlier than 60 days after the date of
 the notification described in subparagraph (A), that a certified facility
 has failed to take corrective action to bring the facility into substantial
 compliance with the standards or the requirements, as appropriate.
 `(3) TYPES OF INTERMEDIATE SANCTIONS- The Secretary may impose sanctions
 under this subsection consisting of--
 `(A) directed plans of correction;
 `(B) civil money penalties in an amount not to exceed $10,000 for each
 failure to substantially comply with, or each day on which a facility fails
 to substantially comply with, the standards established under subsection
 (f) or the requirements described in clauses (i) through (iii) of subsection
 (d)(2)(B); or
 `(C) payment for the cost of onsite monitoring.
 `(4) PROCEDURES- The Secretary shall develop and implement procedures
 under which the Secretary may impose intermediate sanctions under this
 subsection. The procedures shall--
 `(A) specify the time and the manner in which the Secretary may impose
 sanctions;
 `(B) provide for notice to the owner or operator of the facility;
 `(C) provide a reasonable opportunity for the owner or operator to respond
 to the proposed sanction; and
 `(D) include appropriate procedures for appealing determinations relating
 to the imposition of intermediate sanctions.
 `(i) SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, AND LIMITATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The certificate of a facility issued under this section may
 be suspended, revoked, or limited if the Secretary finds, after providing,
 except as provided in paragraph (2), reasonable notice and an opportunity
 for a hearing to the owner or operator of the facility, that the owner,
 operator, or any employee of the facility--
 `(A) has been guilty of misrepresentation in obtaining the certificate;
 `(B) has performed, or represented the facility as entitled to perform,
 a type of examination or procedure described in subparagraphs (A) through
 (C) of subsection (b)(2) that is outside the scope of the certificate for
 the facility;
 `(C) has failed to comply with the requirements of subsection (d)(2)(B)(iii)
 or the standards established by the Secretary under subsection (f);
 `(D) has failed to comply with reasonable requests of the Secretary for
 any record, information, report, or material that the Secretary concludes
 is necessary to determine the continued eligibility of the facility for a
 certificate or continued compliance with the standards established under
 subsection (f);
 `(E) has refused a reasonable request of the Secretary, any Federal officer
 or employee duly designated by the Secretary, or any State officer
 or employee duly designated by the State, for permission to inspect
 the facility or the operations and pertinent records of the facility in
 accordance with subsection (g);
 `(F) has violated or aided and abetted in the violation of any provision
 of, or regulation promulgated under, this section; or
 `(G) has failed to comply with an intermediate sanction imposed under
 subsection (h).
 `(2) ACTION BEFORE A HEARING-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may suspend or limit the certificate of
 the facility before holding a hearing required by paragraph (1) if the
 Secretary makes the finding described in paragraph (1) and determines that--
 `(i) the failure of a facility to comply with the standards established
 by the Secretary under subsection (f) presents an imminent and serious
 risk to human health; or
 `(ii) a facility has engaged in an action described in subparagraph (D)
 or (E) of paragraph (1).
 `(B) HEARING- If the Secretary suspends or limits a certificate under
 subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall provide an opportunity for a
 hearing to the owner or operator of the facility not later than 60 days
 from the effective date of the suspension or limitation. The suspension
 or limitation shall remain in effect until the decision of the Secretary
 made after the hearing.
 `(3) INELIGIBILITY TO OWN OR OPERATE FACILITIES AFTER REVOCATION- If the
 Secretary revokes the certificate of a facility on the basis of an act
 described in paragraph (1), no person who owned or operated the facility at
 the time of the act may, within 2 years of the revocation of the certificate,
 own or operate a facility that requires a certificate under this section.
 `(j) INJUNCTIONS- If the Secretary determines that continuation of any
 activity related to the provision of mammography by a facility would
 constitute a significant hazard to the public health, the Secretary may
 bring suit in the district court of the United States for the district in
 which the facility is situated to enjoin continuation of the activity. Upon
 a proper showing, the district court shall grant a temporary injunction or
 restraining order against continuation of the activity without requiring
 the Secretary to post a bond, pending issuance of a final order under
 this subsection.
 `(k) JUDICIAL REVIEW-
 `(1) PETITION- If the Secretary imposes an intermediate sanction on a
 facility under subsection (h) or suspends, revokes, or limits the certificate
 of a facility under subsection (i), the owner or operator of the facility
 may, not later than 60 days after the date the action of the Secretary
 becomes final, file a petition with the United States court of appeals for
 the circuit in which the facility is situated for judicial review of the
 action. As soon as practicable after receipt of the petition, the clerk of
 the court shall transmit a copy of the petition to the Secretary or other
 officer designated by the Secretary. As soon as practicable after receipt
 of the copy, the Secretary shall file in the court the record on which the
 action of the Secretary is based, as provided in section 2112 of title 28,
 United States Code.
 `(2) ADDITIONAL EVIDENCE- If the petitioner applies to the court for leave
 to adduce additional evidence, and shows to the satisfaction of the court
 that the additional evidence is material and that there were reasonable
 grounds for the failure to adduce such evidence in the proceeding before
 the Secretary, the court may order the additional evidence (and evidence
 in rebuttal of the additional evidence) to be taken before the Secretary,
 and to be adduced upon the hearing in such manner and upon such terms
 and conditions as the court may determine to be proper. The Secretary may
 modify the findings of the Secretary as to the facts, or make new findings,
 by reason of the additional evidence so taken, and the Secretary shall file
 the modified or new findings, and the recommendations of the Secretary,
 if any, for the modification or setting aside of the original action of
 the Secretary with the return of the additional evidence.
 `(3) JUDGMENT OF COURT- Upon the filing of the petition referred to in
 paragraph (1), the court shall have jurisdiction to affirm the action, or to
 set the action aside in whole or in part, temporarily or permanently. The
 findings of the Secretary as to the facts, if supported by substantial
 evidence, shall be conclusive.
 `(4) FINALITY OF JUDGMENT- The judgment of the court affirming or setting
 aside, in whole or in part, any action of the Secretary shall be final,
 subject to review by the Supreme Court of the United States upon certiorari
 or certification, as provided in section 1254 of title 28, United States
 Code.
 `(l) SANCTIONS- Any person who intentionally violates any requirement of
 this section or any regulation promulgated under this section--
 `(1) shall be imprisoned for not more than 1 year or fined in accordance
 with title 18, United States Code, or both; and
 `(2) for a second or subsequent offense shall be imprisoned for not more than
 3 years or fined in accordance with title 18, United States Code, or both.
 `(m) FEES-
 `(1) CERTIFICATE FEES- The Secretary shall require payment of fees for
 the issuance and renewal of certificates.
 `(2) ADDITIONAL FEES- The Secretary shall require the payment of fees for
 inspections of facilities that were accredited by accreditation bodies
 from whom the Secretary withdrew approval under subsection (e)(3).
 `(3) CRITERIA-
 `(A) CERTIFICATE FEES- Fees imposed under paragraph (1) shall be sufficient
 to cover the general costs of administering this section except for costs
 described in subparagraph (B), including--
 `(i) evaluating and monitoring quality assurance and quality control
 programs;
 `(ii) excluding and monitoring accreditation bodies; and
 `(iii) monitoring compliance with the requirements of this section.
 `(B) ADDITIONAL FEES- Fees imposed under paragraph (2) shall be sufficient
 to cover the cost of the Secretary in carrying out the inspections.
 `(n) INFORMATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Not later than April 1, 1994, and annually thereafter, the
 Secretary shall compile and make available to physicians and the general
 public information that the Secretary determines is useful in evaluating
 the performance of a facility, including a list of facilities--
 `(A) that have been convicted under Federal or State laws relating to
 fraud and abuse, false billings, or kickbacks;
 `(B) that have been subject to intermediate sanctions under subsection
 (h), together with a statement of the reasons for the sanctions;
 `(C) that have had certificates revoked, suspended, or limited under
 subsection (i), together with a statement of the reasons for the revocation,
 suspension, or limitation;
 `(D) against which the Secretary has taken action under subsection (j),
 together with a statement of the reasons for the action;
 `(E) that have been the subject of a sanction under subsection (l),
 together with a statement of the reasons for the sanction; and
 `(F) whose accreditation has been withdrawn or revoked, together with a
 statement of the reasons of the withdrawal or revocation.
 `(2) DATE- The information to be compiled under paragraph (1) shall be
 information for the calendar year preceding the date the information is
 to be made available to the public.
 `(3) EXPLANATORY INFORMATION- The information to be compiled under
 paragraph (1) shall be accompanied by such explanatory information as may
 be appropriate to assist in the interpretation of the information compiled
 under the paragraph.
 `(o) DELEGATION- In carrying out this section, the Secretary may enter into
 an agreement with a Federal, State, or local public agency or nonprofit
 private organization, use the services or facilities of the agency
 or nonprofit private organization, and pay for the services or use of
 facilities in advance or by way of reimbursement, and in such installments,
 as the Secretary may determine.
 `(p) STATE AND LOCAL LAWS-
 `(1) CONSISTENT LAWS- Except as provided in paragraph (2), nothing in this
 section shall be construed as affecting the power of any State or locality
 to enact and enforce laws relating to the matters covered by this section
 to the extent that the laws are not inconsistent with this section or with
 the regulations issued under this section.
 `(2) MORE STRINGENT LAWS- If a State or locality enacts laws relating
 to matters covered by this section that provide for requirements equal
 to or more stringent than the requirements of this section or than the
 regulations issued under this section, the Secretary may exempt facilities
 in that State or locality from compliance with this section.
 `(q) MAMMOGRAPHY REGISTRY-
 `(1) RESEARCH-
 `(A) ESTABLISHMENT OF GRANTS- The Secretary shall make grants to such
 entities as the Secretary may determine to be appropriate to conduct research
 on new methods of establishing a Mammography Registry, including archiving
 and retrieval of mammography images, physician reports, and outcome and
 followup information.
 `(B) USE OF FUNDS- Grants awarded under subparagraph (A) may be used--
 `(i) to study--
 `(I) improved methods of mammography film duplication, centralized digital
 archiving, and individual patient archiving in a Mammography Registry; and
 `(II) mechanisms for limiting access and maintaining confidentiality of
 all stored data; and
 `(ii) to conduct pilot testing of the methods and mechanisms described in
 subclauses (I) and (II) of clause (i) on a limited basis.
 `(C) GRANT APPLICATION- To be eligible to receive funds under this paragraph,
 an entity shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time,
 in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
 `(D) REPORT- A recipient of a grant under this paragraph shall submit a
 report to the Secretary containing the results of the study and testing
 conducted under clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph (B), along with
 recommendations for methods of establishing a Mammography Registry.
 `(2) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary shall establish a Mammography Registry
 based on the recommendations contained in the report described in paragraph
 (1)(D).
 `(3) STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES- The Secretary shall establish standards
 and procedures for the operation of the Mammography Registry, including
 procedures to maintain confidentiality of patient records.
 `(4) INFORMATION- The Secretary may require that facilities provide to
 the Mammography Registry relevant data that could help in the research of
 the causes, characteristics, and prevalance of, and potential treatments
 for, breast cancer and benign breast conditions, if the information may
 be disclosed under section 552 of title 5, United States Code. The data
 may include information on patients relating to age, race, geographic
 location, type of breast cancer and benign breast conditions, family history,
 occupational hazards, other medical conditions, uses of mammographic images,
 estrogen replacement, use of oral contraception, number of conceptions or
 births, and age of the patient at each conception or birth.
`SEC. 354A. BREAST CANCER MORTALITY PREVENTION REGIONAL TRAINING CENTERS.
 `(a) GRANTS- The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for
 Disease Control, may make grants to State health departments and other public
 and nonprofit entities with similar capabilities to enhance the capacity
 of health personnel in the area of breast cancer mortality prevention.
 `(b) USE OF FUNDS- A department or entity may use a grant received
 under subsection (a) to establish a breast cancer mortality prevention
 regional training center and develop a training curriculum, which shall
 include emphasis on the design, delivery, and management of comprehensive
 breast cancer programs, including in particular an emphasis on screening,
 follow-up, public education, professional education, quality assurance,
 and surveillance and evaluation.
 `(c) APPLICATION- In order to be eligible to receive a grant under subsection
 (a), a department or entity shall submit an application to the Secretary at
 such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary
 shall require.
 `(d) COLLABORATION- The Secretary shall encourage departments and entities
 that receive grants under subsection (a) to collaborate with academic
 institutions, comprehensive cancer centers, and other groups in the design,
 formulation, and delivery of training programs.
 `(e) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 to carry out this section $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1993 and such sums
 as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1994 and 1995.'.
SEC. 3. APPLICATION OF STANDARDS TO MEDICARE PROGRAM.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1834(c)(3) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395m(c)(3)), as added by section 4163 of the Omnibus Budget
 Reconciliation Act of 1990, is amended to read as follows:
 `(3) QUALITY STANDARDS- Screening mammography performed under this part
 shall be performed--
 `(A) at a certified facility, as defined in section 354(a)(2) of the Public
 Health Service Act, that is in compliance with the requirements described
 in clauses (i) through (iii) of section 354(d)(2)(B) of such Act; and
 `(B) in accordance with the standards established under section 354(f)
 of such Act.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Section 1862(a)(1)(F) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395y(a)(1)(F)) is amended by striking `established under section
 1834(c)(3)' and inserting `described in section 1834(c)(3)'.
 (2) Section 1863 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395z) is amended
 by striking `established under section 1834(c)(3)' and inserting `described
 in section 1834(c)(3)'.
 (3) The first sentence of section 1864(a) of the Social Security Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1395aa(a)) is amended by striking `established under section
 1834(c)(3)' and inserting `described in section 1834(c)(3)'.