HR 3642 SC
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 3642
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to enhance the enforcement
authority of the Food and Drug Administration, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
October 24, 1991
Mr. WAXMAN (for himself and Mr. DINGELL) introduced the following bill;
which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
May 19, 1992
Additional sponsor: Mr. Frost
A BILL
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to enhance the enforcement
authority of the Food and Drug Administration, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; REFERENCE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Food, Drug, Cosmetic,
 and Device Enforcement Amendments of 1991'.
 (b) REFERENCE- Except as otherwise provided, whenever in this Act an
 amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of,
 a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made
 to a section or other provision of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
 (c) TABLE OF CONTENTS-
Sec. 1. Short title; reference; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Judicial recall authority.
Sec. 3. Administrative recall authority.
Sec. 4. Seizure and embargo authority.
Sec. 5. Subpoena authority.
Sec. 6. Civil money penalties.
Sec. 7. Inspections, records, and reports.
Sec. 8. Imported products.
Sec. 9. Interstate commerce.
Sec. 10. Biological products.
Sec. 11. Technical amendments.
SEC. 2. JUDICIAL RECALL AUTHORITY.
 (a) AMENDMENT- Section 302(a) (21 U.S.C. 332(a)) is amended by adding
 `(1)' after `(a)' and by adding at the end the following:
 `(2) Any district court of the United States may order any appropriate person
 (including the manufacturer, importer, distributor, or retailer of a food,
 drug, device, or cosmetic) to recall a food, drug, device, or cosmetic
 if the court finds that there is a reasonable probability that the food,
 drug, device, or cosmetic will cause serious adverse health consequences
 or death.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Section 201 (21 U.S.C. 321) is amended by adding at the end the
 following:
 `(bb) The term `recall' means the retrieval, repair, or replacement of a
 product. Such term does not include a stock recovery or market withdrawal
 (as defined in regulations of the Secretary) which is unrelated to health
 consequences of the product involved and to any violation of this Act.
 `(cc) The term `district court of the United States' includes a United
 States court of the Territories.'.
 (2) The heading for section 302 (21 U.S.C. 332) is amended by inserting
 `AND RECALL' after `INJUNCTION'.
SEC. 3. ADMINISTRATIVE RECALL AUTHORITY.
 (a) AMENDMENT- Chapter III is amended by adding at the end the following:
`RECALL
 `SEC. 308. (a)(1) If, after providing notice and an opportunity for an
 informal hearing, the Secretary determines that there is a reasonable
 probability that a food, drug, or cosmetic will cause serious adverse health
 consequences or death, the Secretary shall issue an order requiring the
 appropriate parties (including the manufacturer, importer, distributor,
 or retailer of such food, drug, or cosmetic) to immediately cease
 any distribution of the food, drug, or cosmetic and to recall it from
 commercial distribution and use. The type and length of hearing shall
 be determined by the Secretary as appropriate in the circumstances at
 issue. Such order shall specify a timetable in which the recall of the
 food, drug, or cosmetic shall occur and shall require periodic reports to
 the Secretary describing the progress of the recall. Such an order shall
 be considered final agency action.
 `(2) An order issued under paragraph (1)--
 `(A) shall not include the recall of a food, drug, or cosmetic from
 individuals, and
 `(B) shall provide for notice to individuals subject to risks associated
 with such food, drug, or cosmetic.
In providing the notice required by subparagraph (B), the Secretary may use
the assistance of health professionals. If a significant number of individuals
described in such subparagraph cannot be identified, the Secretary shall
notify the individuals pursuant to section 705(b).
 `(b) Manufacturers, distributors, and importers of foods, drugs, devices, or
 cosmetics shall report to the Secretary any recall of a food, drug, device,
 or cosmetic initiated by the manufacturer, distributor, or importer. Such
 a report shall be made not later than 5 days after such a recall or within
 such shorter period as the Secretary may by regulation require.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 301 (21 U.S.C. 331) is amended by adding
 at the end the following:
 `(u) The failure to comply with a recall order under 308(a) or a requirement
 to report under section 308(b).'.
SEC. 4. SEIZURE AND EMBARGO AUTHORITY.
 (a) SEIZURE- Section 304(a) (21 U.S.C. 334(a)) is amended, in the first
 sentence of paragraph (1), by striking out `Any article' and all that follows
 through `shall be liable' and inserting in lieu thereof `Any article of food,
 drug, device, or cosmetic that is in violation of this Act shall be liable'.
 (b) EMBARGO-
 (1) TEMPORARY DETENTION-
 (A) Section 304(g)(1) (21 U.S.C. 334(g)(1)) is amended--
 (i)(I) in the first sentence, by striking out all that precedes `such
 officer or employee' and inserting in lieu thereof `If, during an inspection
 conducted under section 704, an officer or employee of the Department has
 reason to believe that a food, drug, device, or cosmetic is in violation
 of this Act,',
 (II) in such first sentence, by striking out `he' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `the Secretary' and by striking out `the device' and inserting
 in lieu thereof `the product',
 (ii) by striking out the last two sentences, and in the second and third
 sentences, by striking out `a device' each place it appears and inserting
 in lieu thereof `a product', and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following: `A detention order under this
 paragraph shall be considered final agency action.'.
 (B) Within 6 months of the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary
 of Health and Human Services shall propose a revision to the regulations
 in effect on such date under section 304(g) of the Federal Food, Drug,
 and Cosmetic Act to include food, drugs, and cosmetics. Within 6 months of
 the date such proposed revision is published in the Federal Register, the
 Secretary shall issue a final revision of such regulations. If the Secretary
 does not issue a final revision of such regulations upon the expiration
 of such 12 months, the Congress finds that there is good cause for the
 proposed revision to be considered the final revision of such regulations
 without response to comment because the implementation of the amendments to
 such section 304(g) is essential to protect the public health. Consequently
 in such event, the proposed revision of such regulations shall become the
 final revision. There shall be promptly published in the Federal Register a
 notice of the new status of the proposed revision. If the proposed revision
 of such regulations becomes final under this subparagraph, the Secretary
 shall complete the rulemaking begun with such proposed revision.
 (2) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (A) Section 301(r) (21 U.S.C. 331(r)) is amended--
 (i) by striking out `device' the first time it occurs and inserting in
 lieu thereof `food, drug, device, or cosmetic', and
 (ii) by striking out `the device' and inserting in lieu thereof `such
 product'.
 (B) Section 304(g)(2) (21 U.S.C. 334(g)(2)) is amended by striking out
 `device' each place it appears and inserting in lieu thereof `product'.
SEC. 5. SUBPOENA AUTHORITY.
 Section 307 (21 U.S.C. 337) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(c)(1) For the purpose of any hearing, investigation, or other proceeding
 (other than a rule making) respecting a violation of this Act which the
 Commissioner determines there is reason to believe may have occurred,
 the Commissioner may issue subpoenas requiring--
 `(A) the attendance and testimony of witnesses, and
 `(B) the production of documentary evidence,
relevant to the subject matter of the proceeding with respect to which
the subpoena is issued. Such a subpoena shall be issued in accordance
with regulations or guidelines issued by the Secretary. Such attendance
of witnesses and production of evidence at the designated place of such
proceeding may be required from any place in the United States or in any
territory or possession of the United States. Subpoenas of the Commissioner
shall be served by a person authorized by the Commissioner by delivering a
copy thereof to the person named therein or by certified mail addressed to
such person at such person's last known dwelling place or principal place of
business. A verified return by the person so serving the subpoena setting
forth the manner of service, or, in the case of service by certified mail,
the return post office receipt therefor signed by the person so served, shall
be proof of service. Witnesses so subpoenaed shall be paid the same fees
and mileage as are paid witnesses in the district courts of the United States.
 `(2) The Commissioner may not delegate the authority to issue a subpoena
 under paragraph (1) except to a Deputy Commissioner, an Associate
 Commissioner, the head of the legal division of the Food and Drug
 Administration, or an administrative law judge presiding over a hearing
 for which a subpoena is to be issued.
 `(d) In case of a refusal to obey a subpoena duly served upon any person
 under subsection (c), any district court of the United States for the
 judicial district in which such person charged with refusal to obey is found,
 resides, or transacts business, upon application by the Commissioner, shall
 have jurisdiction to issue an order requiring such person to appear and give
 testimony or to appear and produce evidence, or both. The failure to obey
 such order of the court may be punished by the court as contempt thereof.
 `(e) No subpoena issued under subsection (c) may require the disclosure
 of any record--
 `(1) identifying any formula or process information which is a trade secret,
 `(2) identifying an individual named in a medical file or an individual
 who is a research subject of a clinical trial, or
 `(3) which may not be inspected under section 704(a)(1),
unless the Commissioner has made a finding that such information is necessary
for the hearing, investigation, or other proceeding for which the subpoena was
issued and has instituted appropriate measures to protect the confidentiality
of such record. The Commissioner may not delegate the authority to make the
finding prescribed in this subsection.'.
SEC. 6. CIVIL MONEY PENALTIES.
 Chapter III, as amended by section 3(a), is amended by adding at the end
 the following new section:
`CIVIL MONEY PENALTIES
 `SEC. 309. (a) Any person that--
 `(1) violates any requirement of this Act other than a requirement relating
 to devices, or
 `(2) in connection with a matter under the jurisdiction of the Food and
 Drug Administration under this Act--
 `(A) knowingly made or caused to be made, to any officer, employee, or
 agent of the Department, a false statement or representation with relation
 to a material fact,
 `(B) knowingly failed to disclose, to an officer, employee, or agent of the
 Department, a material fact which such person has an obligation to disclose,
 `(C) bribed or attempted to bribe, or paid or attempted to pay an illegal
 gratuity to, any officer, employee, or agent of the Department,
 `(D) destroyed, altered, removed, or secreted, or procured the destruction,
 alteration, removal, or secretion of, any material document or other
 material evidence which was the property of or in the possession of the
 Department, for the purpose of interfering with the Department's discharge
 of its responsibilities, or
 `(E) knowingly obstructed an investigation of the Department,
shall be subject to a civil money penalty assessed under subsection (b). If
a person commits a violation described in paragraph (1) or (2), such person
shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $250,000 in the case of
an individual, or $1,000,000 in the case of any other person, for each act
described in such paragraph, except that if the civil penalty is assessed for
multiple violations of paragraph (1), the civil penalty for any individual
or person shall be not more than $5,000,000 for all violations adjudicated
in a single proceeding.
 `(b)(1) A civil money penalty under subsection (a) shall be assessed by the
 Secretary by an order determined on the record after affording the person
 written notice and an opportunity for an agency hearing on disputed issues
 of material fact and the amount of the penalty.
 `(2) The Secretary may not initiate an action under paragraph (1) with
 respect to any act with respect to which civil money penalties are to be
 assessed more than 6 years after the date when facts, material to such act,
 are known or reasonably should have been known by the Secretary, but in
 no event more than 10 years after the date on which the act took place.
 `(c) In determining the amount of any penalty imposed pursuant to subsection
 (a), the Secretary shall take into account such matters as justice may
 require, including, as the Secretary finds appropriate, the nature of the
 act subject to penalty, the degree of culpability, the gain or advantage to
 the person or cost or other injury to others resulting from the violative
 act, any history of prior offenses, and the financial condition of the
 person subject to penalty.
 `(d) Any person that is subject to an order assessing a penalty under
 subsection (b)(1) may obtain a review of such order by the United States
 Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia or for any other circuit in
 which the person resides or in which the person has its principal place
 of business, by filing a petition with such court within 60 days following
 the date of the order.
 `(e)(1) Civil money penalties assessed on a person under subsection (b)(1)
 may be recovered in a civil action in the name of the United States brought
 by the Secretary in accordance with paragraph (2) or by the Attorney
 General in the United States district court for any district in which
 such person resides or transacts business. The amount of such penalty,
 including any amount agreed upon in compromise, may be deducted from any
 sum then or later owing by the United States to the person against whom
 the penalty has been imposed.
 `(2) Before initiating an action under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall
 notify the Attorney General of the Secretary's intent to initiate such an
 action. The Secretary shall not initiate such an action until after--
 `(A) the Attorney General has advised the Secretary of the Attorney
 General's decision not to proceed with criminal prosecution, or
 `(B) 60 days have elapsed without the Secretary having been notified by
 the Attorney General of a decision to proceed with criminal prosecution.
 `(f) For purposes of this section, the term `knowingly' means that a person,
 with respect to information or an action--
 `(1) has actual knowledge of the information or action, or
 `(2) acts in deliberate ignorance or reckless disregard of the truth or
 falsity of the information or of the action.'.
SEC. 7. INSPECTIONS, RECORDS, AND REPORTS.
 (a) GENERAL AUTHORITY- Section 704(a) (21 U.S.C. 374(a)) is amended--
 (1) by striking out the second sentence of paragraph (1) and in the first
 sentence of paragraph (1), by striking out `are authorized' and all that
 follows and inserting in lieu thereof `are authorized--
 `(A) to enter and inspect at reasonable times, within reasonable limits,
 and in a reasonable manner--
 `(i) any factory, warehouse, or establishment (including consulting
 laboratories) in which--
 `(I) food, drugs, devices, or cosmetics, or
 `(II) packaging, labeling, or containers for such products,
are manufactured, processed, packed, or held for introduction into interstate
commerce or after such introduction, or
 `(ii) any vehicle being used to transport or hold such products in
 interstate commerce;
 `(B) to collect and retain samples of articles referred to in subparagraph
 (A) or of any other thing found during an inspection under such subparagraph
 and bearing on whether such articles are in violation of this Act; and
 `(C) to copy any records subject to an inspection under subparagraph
 (A) and to document or make records of such inspection by the use of
 photographic equipment.
An inspection under subparagraph (A) shall extend to all things (including
equipment, finished and unfinished materials, containers, labeling, records,
files, papers, processes, controls, and facilities) bearing on whether the
articles are in violation of this Act.',
 (2) in the third sentence of paragraph (1) (as amended by paragraph (1) of
 this subsection), by striking out `the preceding sentence' and inserting
 in lieu thereof `this paragraph', by striking out `and data relating to
 other' and inserting in lieu thereof `, data relating to other', and by
 inserting after `505(j)' the following: `, and to other data relating to a
 food or cosmetic which data is subject to similar reporting and inspection
 requirements',
 (3) by adding after the third sentence in paragraph (1) (as amended by
 paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection) the following: `No inspection
 under this paragraph shall extend to records disclosing the identity of
 any spice, flavoring, or color which is not required to be certified under
 section 706(c) if the factory, warehouse, or establishment inspected is not
 engaged in the manufacture or sale of such spice, flavoring, or color.', and
 (4) in paragraph (2), by striking out `The provisions of the second sentence
 of paragraph (1)' and inserting in lieu thereof `An inspection of records
 under paragraph (1)(C)'.
 (b) RECORDS- Section 704(e) (21 U.S.C. 374(e)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `this subsection or' before `section 519', and
 (2) by inserting after `(e)' the following new sentence: `Each manufacturer,
 importer, and distributor of products regulated under this Act and each
 owner, operator, or agent in charge of a factory, warehouse, consulting
 laboratory, or other establishment subject to inspection under subsection
 (a) shall maintain such records and make such reports as the Secretary
 determines by regulation to be necessary to enable the manufacturer,
 importer, or distributor or owner, operator, or agent to carry out its
 responsibilities under this Act.'.
 (c) OTHER AUTHORITIES- Section 702(e) (21 U.S.C. 372(e)) is amended--
 (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking out `relating to
 counterfeit drugs' and inserting in lieu thereof `relating to counterfeit
 drugs, the illegal distribution of steroids or steroid substitutes, or a
 violation of section 301(t)', and
 (2) in paragraph (4)--
 (A) by striking out `with respect to such drugs',
 (B) by striking out `his' and inserting in lieu thereof `such officer or
 employee's', and
 (C) by striking out `he' and inserting in lieu thereof `such officer
 or employee'.
 (d) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) The heading for section 704 (21 U.S.C. 374) is amended to read as
 follows: `inspections, records, and reports'.
 (2) Section 301(e) (21 U.S.C. 331(e)) is amended by striking out `or 519'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `519, or 704(e)'.
SEC. 8. IMPORTED PRODUCTS.
 (a) AMENDMENTS- Section 801 (21 U.S.C. 381) is amended--
 (1) in the third sentence of subsection (a), by striking out `, or in
 violation of section 505' and inserting in lieu thereof `, in violation
 of section 505, or otherwise in violation of this Act', and
 (2) by striking out the fourth sentence of subsection (a) and inserting in
 lieu thereof the following: `If an article which is refused admission is
 to be exported, the Secretary of the Treasury shall require the importer
 of such article to mark it `REFUSED ENTRY INTO THE UNITED STATES' before
 it is exported and to report to the Secretary the intended destination of
 such article. Before such an article may be exported, the Secretary of the
 Treasury shall certify to the Secretary of Health and Human Services that
 the article has been marked as required.',
 (3) by inserting before the first sentence of subsection (a) the following:
 `The Secretary of the Treasury shall provide notification to the Secretary
 of Health and Human Services of food, drugs, devices, and cosmetics which
 are being imported or offered for import into the United States.',
 (4) by striking out in the last sentence of subsection (a) `third' and
 inserting in lieu thereof `fourth',
 (5) in the first sentence of subsection (b), by striking out `by him of
 a good and sufficient bond providing for' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `by the owner or consignee of a good and sufficient bond which is equal to
 at least 3 times the invoice value of such article and which provides for',
 (6) by striking out the period at the end of the second sentence of
 subsection (b) and inserting in lieu thereof a comma and the following:
 `except that if the Secretary of Health and Human Services finds that there
 is a reasonable probability that the use of, or exposure to, such article
 will cause significant adverse health consequences or death, the article
 shall be destroyed in accordance with subsection (c).',
 (7) in the last sentence of subsection (b), by striking out `or other
 action' and inserting in lieu thereof `, other action' and by inserting
 after `authorization' the following: `, or destruction under subsection (c)',
 (8) by striking out `(b) Pending' and inserting in lieu thereof `(b)(1)
 Except as provided in paragraph (2), pending' and by adding at the end of
 subsection (b) the following:
 `(2) The Secretary of the Treasury shall, upon a determination of the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, refuse to authorize delivery of
 an article to the owner or consignee of the article in accordance with
 paragraph (1). If the Secretary of the Treasury refuses to authorize the
 delivery of an article, the article shall remain under the physical custody
 of the Secretary of the Treasury pending decision as to its admission.',
 (9) by striking out `this subsection' in paragraph (1) of subsection (b)
 (as amended by paragraph (8)) and inserting in lieu thereof `this paragraph'.
 (10) by redesignating subsections (c), (d), and (e) as subsections (d), (e),
 and (f), respectively, and by inserting after subsection (b) the following:
 `(c) As to any article which is refused admission under subsection (a)--
 `(1) in the case of an article which the Secretary of Health and Human
 Services finds, after affording the owner or consignee an opportunity to
 correct the deficency which caused the article to be in violation of this
 Act and for an informal hearing, that there is a reasonable probability that
 the use of, or exposure to, such article will cause significant adverse
 health consequences or death, the Secretary of the Treasury shall cause
 the destruction of such article--
 `(A) in not less than 10 days after the date of a decision in a hearing, or
 `(B) in not less than 10 days after the date of the notice of such refusal,
whichever is later, or
 `(2) in the case of any other article, the Secretary of the Treasury shall
 cause the destruction of such article unless such article is exported,
 under regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury, within 30
 days of the date of notice of such refusal or within such additional time
 as may be prescribed pursuant to such regulations.
A decision on a hearing under paragraph (1) is final agency action.', and
 (11) by adding at the end the following:
 `(g) The owner or consignee of an article, a sample of which was delivered to
 the Secretary of Health and Human Services or was examined under subsection
 (a), may not make a claim for a payment for such sample.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Section 301(t) (21 U.S.C. 331(t)) is amended by striking out `801(d)(1)'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `801(e)(1)'.
 (2) Section 301 (21 U.S.C. 331) (as amended by section 3(b)) is amended
 by adding at the end the following:
 `(v) The failure to place on an article a mark required by section 801(a)
 or the removal or alteration of such a mark.'.
 (3) Section 303(b)(1) (21 U.S.C. 333(b)(1)) is amended by striking out
 `801(d)(1)' and inserting in lieu thereof `801(e)(1)'.
 (4) Section 304(d)(1) (21 U.S.C. 334(d)(1)) is amended--
 (A) by striking out `801(d)' the first time it appears and inserting in
 lieu thereof `801(f)', and
 (B) by striking out `801(d)' each time it appears and inserting in lieu
 thereof `801(e)'.
 (5) Section 802 (21 U.S.C. 382) is amended, in subsections (b)(1)(G)
 and (f)(1)(E), by striking out `801(d)(1)' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `801(e)(1)'.
SEC. 9. INTERSTATE COMMERCE.
 Section 709 (21 U.S.C. 379a) is amended by striking out `device' and
 inserting in lieu thereof `food, drug, device, or cosmetic,'.
SEC. 10. BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS.
 (a) TRANSFER- Section 351 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262)
 is transferred to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, inserted after
 section 505, redesignated as section 505A, and amended--
 (1) by striking out `(1)' in subsection (d) and by striking out paragraph
 (2) of such subsection,
 (2) by striking out subsection (f) and redesignating subsections (g) and
 (h) as subsections (f) and (g), respectively, and
 (3) by amending subsection (f) (as so redesignated) to read as follows:
 `(f) This section shall not be construed to affect, modify, repeal,
 or supersede any other provision of this Act and no other provision of
 this Act shall be construed to affect, modify, repeal, or supersede any
 provision of this section.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) The Public Health Service Act is amended--
 (A) in section 227(c)(5) (42 U.S.C. 236), by striking out `section 351 of
 this Act' and inserting in lieu thereof `section 505A of such Act',
 (B) in section 352 (42 U.S.C. 263), by striking out `section 351' each place
 it occurs and inserting in lieu thereof `section 505A of the Federal Food,
 Drug, and Cosmetic Act',
 (C) in section 2122(b)(2) (42 U.S.C. 300aa-22(b)(2)), by striking out
 `and section 351 of the Public Health Service Act', and
 (D) in section 2123(d)(2)(A) (42 U.S.C. 300aa-23(d)(2)(A)), by striking out
 `section 351' and inserting in lieu thereof `section 505A of such Act'.
 (2) The Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (as amended by section 8(b)),
 is amended--
 (A) by adding at the end of section 301 (21 U.S.C. 331) the following:
 `(w) The violation or the aiding or abetting a violation of section 505A.',
 (B) in section 525(a) (21 U.S.C. 360aa(a)(3)), by striking out `section
 351 of the Public Health Service Act' each place it occurs and inserting
 in lieu thereof `section 505A',
 (C) in section 526 (21 U.S.C. 360bb), by striking out `section 351 of
 the Public Health Service Act' each place it occurs and inserting in lieu
 thereof `section 505A',
 (D) in section 527(a) (21 U.S.C. 360cc(a)(3)), by striking out `section
 351 of the Public Health Service Act' each place it occurs and inserting
 in lieu thereof `section 505A',
 (E) in section 802 (21 U.S.C. 382), by striking out `section 351 of the
 Public Health Service Act' each place it occurs and inserting in lieu
 thereof `section 505A', and
 (F) in section 902(c) (21 U.S.C. 392(c)), by striking out `the provisions of
 section 351 of the Public Health Service Act (relating to viruses, serums,
 toxins, and analogous products applicable to man);' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `section 505A;'.
 (3) Section 28(b)(2)(A)(ii)(II) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is
 amended by striking out `section 351 of the Public Health Service Act'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `section 505A of such Act'.
 (4) Section 156 of title 35, United States Code, is amended--
 (A) in subsection (f)(4)(A), by striking out `section 351 of the Public
 Health Service Act' and inserting in lieu thereof `section 505A of the
 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act',
 (B) in subsection (g)(1)(B)(i), by striking out `351' and inserting in
 lieu thereof `505A', and
 (C) in subsection (g)(1)(B)(ii), by striking out `section 351' and inserting
 in lieu thereof `section 505A'.
SEC. 11. TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS.
 Sections 201 (c), (d), and (y), 505A(c), and 801 (21 U.S.C. 321 (c), (d),
 and (y)) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act are each amended by
 striking out `Health, Education, and Welfare' each place it appears and
 inserting in lieu thereof `Health and Human Services' and section 201(d)
 (21 U.S.C. 321(d)) is amended by adding before the period the following:
 `and the term `Commissioner' means the Commissioner of Food and Drugs'.