S 1074 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1074
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to revise the authority
under that Act to regulate pesticide chemical residues in food.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
May 14 (legislative day, APRIL 25), 1991
Mr. KENNEDY (for himself and Mr. DODD) introduced the following bill; which
was read twice and referred to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources
A BILL
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to revise the authority
under that Act to regulate pesticide chemical residues in food.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE, REFERENCE, TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Safety of Pesticides in
 Food Act of 1991'.
 (b) REFERENCE- Whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in
 terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the
 reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision
 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
 (c) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents of this Act is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title, reference, table of contents.
Sec. 2. Definitions.
Sec. 3. Tolerances and exemptions for pesticide chemical residues.
`Sec. 408. Tolerances and exemptions for pesticide chemical residues.
`(a) Requirement for tolerance or exemption.
`(b) Tolerances.
`(c) Exemptions.
`(d) Petitions and action on Administrator's own initiative.
`(e) Special data requirements.
`(f) Confidentiality of data.
`(g) Access to data in support of petition.
`(h) Access to data after decision.
`(i) Definitions.
`(j) Existing pesticide chemical residues.
`(k) F.D.A. monitoring of pesticide chemical residues.
`(l) Fees.
`(m) Judicial review.'.
Sec. 4. Evaluation of existing pesticide chemical residue tolerances and
exemptions.
Sec. 5. Review of generally recognized as safe pesticide chemical residues.
Sec. 6. Review of existing methods of analysis.
Sec. 7. Fees.
Sec. 8. Definitions.
SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.
 (a) PESTICIDE-
 (1) Section 201(q) (21 U.S.C. 321(q)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(q)(1) The term `pesticide chemical' means--
 `(A) any substance which is a pesticide within the meaning of the Federal
 Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act, and
 `(B) each active and inert ingredient of the pesticide within the meaning
 of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act.
 `(2) The term `pesticide chemical residue' means a residue in or on food of--
 `(A) any pesticide chemical, or
 `(B) any other substance that is present in the commodity or food as a
 result of the metabolism or other degradation of a pesticide chemical,
regardless of whether the residue may be detected.'.
 (2) Section 201(s) (21 U.S.C. 321(s)) is amended by striking out paragraphs
 (1) and (2) and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
 `(1) pesticide chemical residue; or', and by redesignating paragraphs (3),
 (4), and (5) as paragraphs (2), (3), and (4), respectively.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Section 201 (21 U.S.C. 321) is amended by adding at the end the
 following:
 `(bb) The term `processed food' means any food which has been subject to
 processing from a raw agricultural commodity.
 `(cc) The term `Administrator' means the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency.'.
 (2) Section 402(a)(2) (21 U.S.C. 342(a)(2)) is amended--
 (A) by amending clause (A)(i) to read as follows: `(i) a pesticide chemical
 residue',
 (B) by amending clause (B) to read as follows: `(B) if it is, or it bears
 or contains, a pesticide chemical residue unsafe within the meaning of
 section 408(a)', and
 (C) in clause (C), by striking out `: Provided, That' through `; or'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `; or'.
SEC. 3. TOLERANCES AND EXEMPTIONS FOR PESTICIDE CHEMICAL RESIDUES.
 Section 408 (21 U.S.C. 346a) is amended to read as follows:
`TOLERANCES AND EXEMPTIONS FOR PESTICIDE CHEMICAL RESIDUES
 `SEC. 408. (a) REQUIREMENT FOR TOLERANCE OR EXEMPTION-
 `(1) GENERAL RULE- Any pesticide chemical residue shall be deemed unsafe
 for the purpose of section 402(a)(2)(B) unless--
 `(A) a tolerance for such residue is in effect under this section and the
 quantity of such residue is within the limits of such tolerance, or
 `(B) an exemption for such residue is in effect under this section and
 such residue complies with such exemption.
 `(2) EFFECT OF A TOLERANCE OR EXEMPTION- While a tolerance or exemption
 from the requirement for a tolerance is in effect under this section for
 a pesticide chemical residue with respect to any food, such food shall not
 by reason of bearing or containing any amount of such residue be considered
 to be adulterated within the meaning of section 402(a)(1).
 `(b) TOLERANCES-
 `(1) AUTHORITY- The Administrator may promulgate regulations establishing,
 modifying, or revoking a tolerance for a pesticide chemical residue--
 `(A) in response to a petition filed under subsection (d)(1), or
 `(B) on the Administrator's initiative under subsection (d)(4).
A regulation under this paragraph may provide for an expiration date for
the tolerance.
 `(2) STANDARD-
 `(A) GENERAL RULE- Except as provided in subparagraph (F)--
 `(i) a tolerance may be established for a pesticide chemical residue only
 if the risk to human health from dietary exposure to the pesticide chemical
 residue is negligible, and
 `(ii) the tolerance for a pesticide chemical residue shall be revoked
 or modified unless the risk to human health from dietary exposure to the
 pesticide chemical residue is negligible.
 `(B) NEGLIGIBLE RISK-
 `(i) GENERAL RULE- For purposes of this paragraph, a risk to human health
 from dietary exposure to a pesticide chemical residue is negligible only
 if dietary exposure to the residue is reasonably certain to cause no harm
 to human health and the tolerance for such residue meets the requirements
 of clause (ii) or (iii).
 `(ii) THRESHOLD PESTICIDES- If the Administrator is able to identify a
 level at which a pesticide chemical residue will not cause or contribute
 to any known or anticipated harm to human health, the Administrator may
 establish or leave in effect a level for a tolerance for such residue
 only if the Administrator finds that such tolerance will provide an ample
 margin of safety, for each population group set out in subparagraph (E),
 which is based on consideration of--
 `(I) the nature of the toxic effects caused by such residue and data
 regarding the prevalence of the same effects caused by other chemicals,
 `(II) the validity, completeness, and the reliability of the data about
 the pesticide chemical residue,
 `(III) the variability of individual sensitivities and the sensitivities
 of population subgroups to the adverse effects from such residue, and
 `(IV) the possibility that human susceptibility to such adverse effects
 is significantly greater than that of test animals.
For purposes of this clause, a margin of safety for a level of a pesticide
chemical residue is not ample unless human exposure per unit of body
measurement to the pesticide chemical residue and other chemicals which cause
the same effect is at least 100 times less than the no observable effect
level in animals on which the pesticide chemical residue was tested, and,
if human data are available, at least 10 times less than the no observable
effect level in humans exposed to such residue. The no observable effect
level is the level of exposure to a pesticide chemical which reliable data,
derived from exposure of humans or animals to the pesticide chemical,
demonstrate will cause no adverse effect.
 `(iii) NON-THRESHOLD PESTICIDES- If the Administrator is not able to identify
 a level at which a pesticide chemical residue will not cause or contribute
 to any known or anticipated harm to human health or if the Administrator
 finds that a pesticide chemical residue causes cancer in animals or humans,
 the Administrator may establish a level for a tolerance for such residue
 or leave a level in effect for such residue only if the Administrator
 finds that such level--
 `(I) will not cause or contribute in individuals exposed to such pesticide
 chemical residue a lifetime risk of an adverse human health effect which
 occurs at a rate of one in a million or a risk of an adverse human health
 effect which occurs at a rate of one in a million divided by 70 for any
 single year of exposure during the first 5 years of the life of an exposed
 person, using conservative risk assessment models,
 `(II) is the lowest level reasonably required to allow the accomplishment
 of the physical or other technical effect for which the use of the pesticide
 chemical involved is intended, and
 `(III) in the case of processed food, is the lowest level that occurs
 if such pesticide chemical residue is removed to the extent possible in
 accordance with good manufacturing practice.
 `(C) EXPOSURE- Except as provided in subparagraph (D), in determining
 dietary exposure to a pesticide chemical residue for purposes of this
 paragraph, the Administrator shall--
 `(i)(I) use only reliable, statistically significant data regarding the
 dietary exposure to persons who have consumed the food for which the
 tolerance for the residue is proposed or is in effect, `(II) take into
 account all other tolerances in effect for the same pesticide chemical
 residue, and `(III) take into account all other sources (including
 drinking water if data demonstrating widespread or significant regional
 contamination in drinking water are available) of dietary exposure to the
 same pesticide chemical residue, and
 `(ii) consider the exposure to be the level of exposure that would occur if
 all the food, for which the tolerance for the pesticide chemical residue is
 proposed or in effect, has amounts of the pesticide chemical residue equal
 to the tolerance proposed or in effect, if all other sources of dietary
 exposure to such residue described in clause (i)(III) occur, and if human
 exposure to the pesticide chemical residue at the tolerance level occurs
 for a period equal to a lifetime.
 `(D) SPECIAL EXPOSURE RULE- The Administrator may calculate dietary exposure
 based on the percent of the food in which the pesticide chemical residue
 actually occurs if the Administrator determines on the basis of reliable,
 statistically significant data--
 `(i) the percent of such food in which such residue actually occurs and
 that such percent is not likely to increase significantly in the subsequent
 5 years,
 `(ii) the national distribution of such percent of such food does not vary
 significantly from the distribution of the total amount of such food, and
 `(iii) the risk to humans from dietary exposure to such residue and all
 the other pesticide chemical residues which have a tolerance for the same
 use for such food and are commonly used on the food is negligible.
The Administrator shall reevaluate the determination every 5 years after the
date of the determination. If under such a reevaluation the Administrator
finds that the determination is not justified, the Administrator shall
promptly issue a regulation requiring that the tolerance involved be set
without invoking the special exposure rule in this subparagraph.
 `(E) POPULATION COVERED- In determining if the dietary exposure to a
 pesticide chemical residue is negligible, the Administrator shall evaluate
 the risk to--
 `(i) infants of the age 0 to 1,
 `(ii) children of the age 1 to 2,
 `(iii) children of the age 2 to 3,
 `(iv) children of the age 3 to 4,
 `(v) children of the age 4 to 5,
 `(vi) children of the age 6 to 10,
 `(vii) adolescents of the age 11 to 18,
 `(viii) other population groups which have been identified by the
 Administrator to have special food consumption patterns or for which data
 are sufficient to demonstrate special food consumption patterns, and
 `(ix) the entire population,
who consume food with such pesticide chemical residue.
 `(F) UNAVOIDABLE PERSISTENCE- If a tolerance or an exemption from the
 requirement for a tolerance for a pesticide chemical residue is revoked and
 the Administrator finds the pesticide chemical residue will unavoidably
 persist in the environment and contaminate food, the Administrator shall
 establish a new tolerance under subsection (d)(4) for the pesticide chemical
 residue. The level permitted by the tolerance shall not be greater than
 the lowest level that permits only such unavoidable levels to remain in
 food. The Administrator shall evaluate any such tolerance at least once a
 year to determine whether modification of such tolerance is necessary so
 that the tolerance provides only for the level of the pesticide chemical
 residue that is unavoidable.
 `(G) PRACTICAL METHODS OF ANALYSIS-
 `(i) GENERAL RULE- A tolerance for a pesticide chemical residue shall
 not be established or allowed to remain in effect unless the Administrator
 determines, after consultation with the Secretary, that (I) there is a method
 for detecting and measuring the levels of such pesticide chemical residue
 in or on a food which will detect the residue at the level established by
 the tolerance, and (II) except as provided in clause (ii), such method
 is the best available, practical method. A method shall be considered
 practical only if it is a multi-residue method that can be performed by the
 Secretary on a routine basis as part of surveillance and compliance sampling
 of foods for pesticide chemical residues with the personnel, equipment,
 and other resources available to the Secretary, or, if no multi-residue
 method is available, only if it can be so performed by the Secretary.
 `(ii) SPECIAL RULE- If the Administrator determines that a practical
 method of analysis for a pesticide chemical residue is not available, the
 Administrator shall identify the best available method which is designed to
 identify the lowest detectable amount of the pesticide chemical residue. The
 Administrator shall, every 2 years after the date of the determination
 under this clause, reevaluate the determination.
 `(3) CONSISTENT APPLICATION- The Administrator shall issue guidelines
 providing for the consistent application of the requirements of paragraphs
 (1) and (2).
 `(c) EXEMPTIONS-
 `(1) AUTHORITY- The Administrator may promulgate regulations establishing or
 revoking an exemption from the requirement for a tolerance for a pesticide
 chemical residue--
 `(A) in response to a petition filed under subsection (d)(1), or
 `(B) on the Administrator's initiative under subsection (d)(4).
Such a regulation may provide for an expiration date for the exemption.
 `(2) STANDARD-
 `(A) AUTHORITY AND RISK STANDARD-
 `(i) ESTABLISHMENT- An exemption may be established for a pesticide
 chemical residue if such residue is not a human or animal carcinogen
 and otherwise presents no risk to human health, including the health of
 individuals in the population groups set out in subsection (b)(2)(E),
 from dietary exposure to such residue.
 `(ii) REVOCATION- An exemption shall be revoked unless the residue is not
 a human or animal carcinogen and it does not present any risk to human
 health, including the health of individuals in the population groups set
 out in subsection (b)(2)(E), from dietary exposure to such residue.
 `(iii) TOLERANCE- No exemption may be established or allowed to remain
 in effect for a pesticide chemical residue for which there is in effect
 a tolerance.
 `(B) EXPOSURE- For purposes of subparagraph (A), in determining dietary
 exposure to a pesticide chemical residue, the Administrator shall--
 `(i) use only reliable, statistically significant data regarding the dietary
 exposure resulting from the consumption of the food for which the exemption
 for such residue is proposed or is in effect,
 `(ii) take into account all other exemptions in effect for such residue
 and all other sources (including drinking water if data demonstrating
 widespread or significant regional contamination in drinking water are
 available) of dietary exposure to such residue, and
 `(iii) consider the exposure to be the level of exposure that would occur
 if all the food, for which the tolerance for such residue is proposed or in
 effect, has amounts of such residue equal to the tolerance proposed or in
 effect, if all other sources of dietary exposure to such residue described
 in clause (ii) occur, and if human exposure to the pesticide chemical
 residue at the tolerance level occurs for a period equal to a lifetime.
 `(C) PRACTICAL METHODS OF ANALYSIS- An exemption for a pesticide chemical
 residue shall not be established or allowed to remain in effect unless
 the Administrator determines, after consultation with the Secretary, that
 there is a method for detecting and measuring the levels of such pesticide
 chemical residue on a food and that such method is the best available,
 practical method, as defined in subsection (b)(2)(G).
 `(3) CONSISTENT APPLICATION- The Administrator shall issue guidelines
 providing for the consistent application of the requirements of paragraphs
 (1) and (2).
 `(d) PETITIONS AND ACTION ON ADMINISTRATOR'S OWN INITIATIVE-
 `(1) GENERAL RULE FOR PETITIONS- Any person may file with the Administrator
 a petition proposing the issuance of a regulation establishing, modifying,
 or revoking a tolerance or exemption for a pesticide chemical residue.
 `(2) REQUIREMENTS FOR PETITIONS TO ESTABLISH A TOLERANCE OR EXEMPTION-
 A petition under paragraph (1) to establish a tolerance or exemption for
 a pesticide chemical residue shall contain--
 `(A) an informative summary of the petition and of the data, information,
 and arguments submitted or cited in support of the petition, including a
 summary of the reports required under subparagraph (D) respecting the safety
 of the pesticide chemical residue and a characterization of the exposure
 to the pesticide chemical residue due to any tolerance or exemption already
 granted for such residue and the additional exposure to such residue which
 would result if the requested tolerance or exemption were granted,
 `(B) a proposed tolerance for such residue, if a tolerance is proposed,
 `(C) the name, chemical identity, and composition of the pesticide chemical
 which produces such residue,
 `(D) reports of tests and investigations made with respect to the safety of
 such pesticide chemical, including complete information as to the methods
 and controls used in conducting such tests and investigations,
 `(E) data showing the amount, frequency, method, and time of application
 of such pesticide chemical,
 `(F) reports of tests and investigations made with respect to the nature
 and amount of the pesticide chemical residue that is likely to remain in
 or on food when ready for sale to consumers, including a description of
 the analytical methods used,
 `(G) description of methods for detecting and measuring the levels of such
 pesticide chemical residue in or on the food which meet the requirements
 of subsection (b)(2)(G) or (c)(2)(C),
 `(H) reports of investigations conducted on the effects of processing
 methods used to produce food on the level and identity of such pesticide
 chemical residue,
 `(I) if the petition relates to a tolerance for a pesticide chemical
 residue which may occur in processed food, information demonstrating the
 lowest level that occurs if the residue has been removed to the extent
 possible in accordance with good manufacturing practice,
 `(J) if the petition is for a pesticide chemical residue which is described
 in subsection (b)(2)(B)(iii), all relevant data bearing on the physical or
 other technical effect the pesticide chemical involved is intended to have
 and the quantity of the pesticide chemical residue required to accomplish
 such effect,
 `(K) such other data and information (including a sample of the pesticide
 chemical from which the pesticide chemical residue is derived) as the
 Administrator may require to support the petition.
If information or data required by this paragraph are available to the
Administrator, the person submitting the petition may in lieu of submitting
the information or data cite the availability of the information or data.
 `(3) ACTIONS ON PETITIONS-
 `(A) NOTICE- Within 45 days of the filing of a petition under paragraph
 (1) for the establishment of a tolerance or an exemption, the Administrator
 shall determine if the petition complies with the requirements of paragraph
 (2). If the Administrator determines that the petition complies with such
 requirements, the Administrator shall publish a notice of the filing of the
 petition. If the Administrator determines that the petition does not comply
 with such requirements, the Administrator shall notify the petitioner of
 such determination. A notice published under this subparagraph shall--
 `(i) announce the availability of a complete description of the analytical
 methods available to the Administrator for the detection and measurement of
 the pesticide chemical residue with respect to which the petition is filed,
 `(ii) include the summary required by paragraph (2)(A), and
 `(iii) provide at least 30 days for comments on the petition.
 `(B) ACTION- The Administrator shall, within 270 days of the publication
 of a notice under subparagraph (A) with respect to a petition and after
 giving due consideration to the petition, any comments on the petition,
 and any other information available to the Administrator--
 `(i) issue a final regulation in accordance with the petition establishing
 a tolerance or exemption for the pesticide chemical residue,
 `(ii) issue a proposed regulation establishing a tolerance or exemption
 for the pesticide chemical residue which is different from the tolerance
 or exemption requested in the petition, or
 `(iii) issue an order denying the petition.
 `(C) MODIFICATION OR REVOCATION- Within 45 days of the filing of a petition
 under paragraph (1) for the modification or revocation of a tolerance
 or exemption, the Administrator shall publish a notice of the filing of
 the petition. Such notice shall contain the full petition or a summary
 of the petition and shall provide at least 30 days for comments on the
 petition. The Administrator shall, within 270 days of the publication
 of the notice under subparagraph (A) and after giving due consideration
 to the petition, any comments on the petition, and any other information
 available to the Administrator--
 `(i) issue a final regulation in accordance with the petition modifying
 or revoking a tolerance or exemption for the pesticide chemical residue,
 `(ii) issue a proposed regulation modifying or revoking a tolerance or
 exemption for the pesticide chemical residue which is different from the
 modification or revocation requested in the petition, or
 `(iii) issue an order denying the petition.
 `(D) COMMENTS AND FINAL REGULATIONS- If the Administrator issues a proposed
 regulation under subparagraph (B)(ii) or (C)(ii), the Administrator shall
 allow at least 30 days for comments on such proposed regulations. The
 Administrator shall issue a final decision within 180 days of the date of
 the publication of the proposed regulations.
 `(E) PRIORITIES- The Administrator shall give priority to petitions for
 the establishment of a tolerance for a pesticide chemical residue which
 appears to have a significantly lower risk to human health from dietary
 exposure than pesticide chemical residues which have tolerances in effect
 for the same or similar uses.
 `(4) ACTION ON THE ADMINISTRATOR'S OWN INITIATIVE-
 `(A) GENERAL RULE- The Administrator may, on the Administrator's own
 initiative, issue a final regulation establishing, modifying, or revoking
 a tolerance or exemption for a pesticide chemical residue.
 `(B) NOTICE- Before issuing a final regulation under subparagraph (A),
 the Administrator shall issue a notice of proposed rulemaking and provide
 a period of not less than 30 days for public comment on the proposed
 regulation unless the Administrator finds that it would be contrary to
 the public interest to do so and states the reasons for that finding in
 the notice of the final regulation.
 `(5) EFFECTIVE DATE-
 `(A) GENERAL RULE- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), a final regulation
 issued under paragraph (3) or (4) shall take effect upon publication.
 `(B) DELAY-
 `(i) GENERAL RULE- If a regulation issued under paragraph (3) or (4)
 revokes or modifies a tolerance for a pesticide chemical residue or revokes
 an exemption for a pesticide chemical residue, the Administrator may, in
 accordance with clause (ii), delay the effective date of the regulation
 to permit the tolerance or exemption to remain in effect at the level in
 effect immediately before such regulation is issued only--
 `(I) for foods which, on the date of the publication of the regulation,
 contain such pesticide chemical residue in an amount which is not more than
 the amount which could legally be applied on the date the Administrator
 acted under paragraph (3) or (4), and
 `(II) if dietary exposure to the pesticide chemical residue in or on
 the foods described in subclause (I) meets the negligible risk standard
 prescribed by subsection (b)(2) during the period of delay of the effective
 date.
 `(ii) PERIOD OF DELAY- If the Administrator finds that delay of the
 effective date of such a revocation or modification is consistent with
 the public health, the Administrator may delay such date under clause
 (i) for each type of food which contains such pesticide chemical residue
 for the period that is required for such food to be sold to consumers in
 the course of the usual practice for persons engaged in the production,
 processing, transportation, storage, and distribution of that type of food.
 `(e) SPECIAL DATA REQUIREMENTS-
 `(1) DETERMINATION OF INADEQUATE DATA- If a tolerance or exemption is in
 effect for a pesticide chemical residue and the Administrator determines that
 data contained in the petition, which had been submitted under subsection
 (d)(1) for its establishment or under this section before the date of the
 enactment of this paragraph, are not adequate to support the continuation
 of such tolerance or exemption because--
 `(A) based on the data contained in the petition and other data available
 to the Administrator, the Administrator determines that dietary exposure
 to such pesticide chemical residue may present a risk to human health that
 is greater than the standard prescribed by subsection (b)(2) or (c)(2), or
 `(B) the data contained in the petition are insufficient to determine if
 the tolerance or exemption meets the requirements of subsection (b)(2) or
 (c)(2) or the requirements of subsection (d)(2),
the Administrator shall take the action described in paragraph (2).
 `(2) ACTION BY ADMINISTRATOR- When the Administrator makes the determination
 described in paragraph (1) with respect to a tolerance or exemption for
 a pesticide chemical residue, the Administrator shall--
 `(A) within 30 days of the determination under paragraph (1)(A), initiate
 an action under subsection (d)(4) to modify or revoke the tolerance or
 exemption so that it meets the standard under subsection (b)(2) or (c)(2),
 and within one year of such determination issue a final regulation to
 complete such action, and
 `(B) within 30 days of the date of the determination under paragraph
 (1)(B), require the submission of data to support--
 `(i) the existing tolerance or exemption, or
 `(ii) a new tolerance or exemption for such residue,
which meets the standard under subsection (b)(2) or (c)(2),
 `(3) SUBMISSION OF REQUIRED DATA- When the Administrator requires the
 submission of data under paragraph (2)(B), the Administrator shall publish
 an order--
 `(A) requiring one or more interested persons to notify the Administrator
 that such person will submit the required data,
 `(B) describing the type of data required to be submitted,
 `(C) describing the reports required to be made during and after the
 collection of the data, and
 `(D) establishing deadlines for the actions described in subparagraphs
 (A) and (C).
 `(4) DEADLINES-
 `(A) GENERAL RULE- Except as provided in subparagraphs (B) and (C),
 if an order is issued under paragraph (3) with respect to a tolerance
 or exemption and a deadline in the order is not met, the tolerance or
 exemption is revoked, effective 45 days after the date the deadline is not
 met. Immediately after such deadline is not met, the Administrator shall
 publish a notice of the revocation.
 `(B) EXTENSION REQUEST- Any person may request the Administrator to issue
 an order to extend the deadline established under paragraph (3)(D) before
 expiration of the deadline. The Administrator may grant such a request only
 if the person submitting the request notified the Administrator pursuant to
 paragraph (3)(A) in compliance with the deadline established under paragraph
 (3)(C) and if the Administrator finds that extraordinary circumstances
 beyond the control of such person prevented such person from submitting the
 required data. If the Administrator issues an order extending a deadline--
 `(i) the Administrator may extend the deadline for a period no longer than
 such time as is necessary for such person to submit the data, and
 `(ii) the Administrator shall establish a new deadline in accordance with
 paragraph (3)(D).
 `(C) DELAY- If a tolerance or exemption is revoked under subparagraph
 (A), the Administrator may delay the effective date of the revocation in
 accordance with subsection (d)(5)(B).
 `(5) EVALUATION OF DATA- Within 90 days of the date of the receipt of
 data under paragraph (3), the Administrator shall evaluate such data and
 determine whether action is required under subsection (d)(4) with respect
 to the tolerance or exemption for the pesticide chemical residue for which
 the data were submitted so that such tolerance meets the negligible risk
 standard prescribed under subsection (b)(2) or (c)(2). If the Administrator
 determines that action under subsection (d)(4) is required, the Administrator
 shall complete such action within one year of the date of such determination.
 `(f) CONFIDENTIALITY OF DATA-
 `(1) GENERAL RULE- Data submitted to the Administrator in support of a
 petition under subsection (d)(2), which have not previously been made
 available to the public without restriction, shall, upon request of the
 petitioner, be considered as entitled to confidential treatment by the
 Administrator until publication of a regulation or order under subsection
 (d)(3) in response to the petition unless disclosure of such data is
 required by subsection (d)(3)(A)(ii) or subsection (g) or is allowed by
 paragraph (2) of this subsection.
 `(2) DISCLOSURE- Data that are entitled to confidential treatment under
 paragraph (1) until publication of a regulation or order under subsection
 (d)(3) may be revealed to--
 `(A) either House of Congress or any committee or subcommittee thereof to the
 extent of matter within the jurisdiction of the committee or subcommittee,
 `(B) any officer or employee of the United States in connection with the
 official duties of such officer or employee under any law for the protection
 of health or the environment or for specific law enforcement purposes,
 `(C) any officer or employee of a State in connection with the official
 duties of such officer or employee under any law of the State for the
 protection of health or the environment or for specific law enforcement
 purposes, or
 `(D) contractors with the United States authorized by the Administrator
 to examine such data in the carrying out of contracts under such statutes
 under such security requirements as the Administrator may provide.
 `(g) ACCESS TO DATA IN SUPPORT OF PETITION-
 `(1) GENERAL RULE- If data in support of a petition is submitted to the
 Administrator, the Administrator, before acting on such petition, shall
 provide, in accordance with this subsection, public access to health and
 safety data that are submitted or cited in support of such petition. To
 obtain access to such data, a person shall, not later than 30 days after
 the publication under subsection (d)(3) of a notice of the filing of a
 petition, send by certified mail to the Administrator and to the petitioner
 a request for such access and the affirmation required by paragraph
 (2). The Administrator shall grant such request unless, within 15 days
 after the receipt by the Administrator of such request and affirmation,
 the petitioner submits to the Administrator an objection to the request
 asserting that the affirmation is inaccurate and other reasons for the
 objection. If an objection to a request is submitted to the Administrator
 within such 15-day period, the Administrator shall determine whether to
 grant the request within 5 days after the receipt of the objection. If the
 Administrator determines to grant the request, access shall not be permitted
 until 5 days after the petitioner making the objection has been notified
 that access has been granted. If access to data is denied, comments on
 the petition for which such data were submitted or cited shall be filed
 within 30 days after the decision of the Administrator denying access.
 `(2) RESTRICTION- Data referred to in paragraph (1) may be made available
 only to a person who provides an affirmation (and such supporting evidence
 as the Administrator may require) which--
 `(A) states that the person is not engaged in, and is neither employed
 by nor acting (directly or indirectly) on behalf of any other person or
 affiliate thereof engaged in, the production, sale, or distribution of a
 pesticide chemical,
 `(B) identifies any business, employer, or other person, if any, on whose
 behalf the person is requesting access to the data, and
 `(C) states that the person will not intentionally or recklessly violate
 this subsection.
For purposes of this paragraph, an affiliate of a person is a person who
directly or indirectly, through one or more intermediates, controls or is
controlled by or is under common control with the other person. Section 1001
of title 18, United States Code, shall apply to an affirmation made under
this paragraph.
 `(3) COMMENTS-
 `(A) GENERAL RULE- Data supporting a petition may be made available
 under paragraph (1) to a person only for the purpose of permitting the
 person to comment to the Administrator on such petition. Such comments may
 reasonably quote data submitted to the Administrator. No person, including
 the Administrator, may make such comments public before the decision of
 the Administrator on the petition for which such data were submitted or
 after such decision if the petition is denied.
 `(B) RESTRICTIONS- A person who obtains data under paragraph (1) (directly
 or indirectly) may not publish, copy, or transfer the data to any other
 person to obtain approval to sell, manufacture, or distribute a pesticide
 chemical anywhere in the world.
 `(4) PROCEDURE- Data made available under paragraph (1) may be examined at
 an office of the Environmental Protection Agency or an appropriate State
 agency under the conditions prescribed by this subsection and may not be
 removed from such office. The Administrator shall maintain a record of the
 persons who inspect data. A copy of such record shall be sent on request to
 the person who submitted the data. Once access to data supporting a petition
 is granted, the data may be examined and notes may be taken for use in
 developing comments on the petition. Such comments on the petition shall
 be filed within 60 days after the decision of the Administrator granting
 access, unless the comment period is extended by the Administrator for an
 additional 30 days for good cause.
 `(h) ACCESS TO DATA AFTER DECISION- When the Administrator takes final action
 on a petition submitted under subsection (d)(1) or on the Administrator's own
 initiative under subsection (d)(4), the Administrator shall make available
 to the public the administrative record of the decision, including the
 data relied upon for the decision.
 `(i) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section, the terms `modify' and
 `modification' mean the lowering of a tolerance for a pesticide chemical
 residue.
 `(j) EXISTING PESTICIDE CHEMICAL RESIDUES-
 `(1) PESTICIDE CHEMICAL RESIDUES UNDER REGULATIONS UNDER SECTION 406-
 Regulations affecting pesticide chemical residues promulgated, in accordance
 with sections 701(e) and 406(a), upon the basis of public hearings instituted
 before January 1, 1953, shall be deemed to be tolerances issued under this
 section and shall be subject to modification or revocation under subsection
 (d) or (e).
 `(2) PESTICIDE CHEMICAL RESIDUES UNDER REGULATIONS UNDER SECTIONS 408 AND
 409- Regulations establishing tolerances for pesticide chemical residues
 under sections 408 and 409 or exemptions for pesticide chemical residues
 under section 408 on or before the date of the enactment of this subsection
 shall be deemed to be tolerances or exemptions issued under this section and
 shall be subject to modification or revocation under subsection (d) or (e).
 `(3) GENERALLY RECOGNIZED AS SAFE PESTICIDE CHEMICAL RESIDUES UNDER SECTIONS
 408 AND 409-
 `(A) GENERAL RULE- Pesticide chemical residues which on the day before the
 date of the enactment of this paragraph do not have tolerances or exemptions
 from tolerances under this section because they are generally recognized
 as safe under this section or section 409 shall, until the expiration
 of the period prescribed by subparagraph (C), not be considered unsafe
 under section 402(a)(2)(B) solely because the chemicals do not have such
 a tolerance or exemption.
 `(B) GRAS LIST- Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of
 this paragraph--
 `(i) the Administrator shall publish a list of all pesticide chemical
 residues which on the day before such date the Administrator has determined
 are generally recognized as safe under this section or section 409, and
 `(ii) require, with respect to a pesticide chemical residue not on the list
 under clause (i), that any person who before the date of the enactment of
 this paragraph distributed in commerce a pesticide chemical as a pesticide
 chemical which such person determined is generally recognized as safe under
 this section or section 409 to report to the Administrator the identity
 of such pesticide chemical and the data which supports the claim that the
 pesticide chemical is so safe.
 `(C) ADMINISTRATOR'S DETERMINATION- Not later than 270 days from the date
 of the enactment of this paragraph, the Administrator shall determine if
 each pesticide chemical reported to the Administrator in accordance with
 subparagraph (B)(ii) is generally recognized as safe. If the Administrator
 determines that such pesticide chemical is generally recognized as safe,
 the residue of such pesticide chemical shall be considered a pesticide
 chemical residue subject to an exemption under this section which shall
 be subject to modification or revocation under subsection (d) or (e).
 `(k) F.D.A. MONITORING OF PESTICIDE CHEMICAL RESIDUES-
 `(1) The Secretary shall conduct surveillance and compliance sampling
 of food for pesticide chemical residues to determine if the pesticide
 chemical residues are in compliance with this section. In carrying out
 this paragraph, the Secretary shall give priority to foods which contain
 pesticide chemical residues included in a notice under paragraph (2).
 `(2) The Administrator shall notify the Secretary of the pesticide chemical
 residues which the Administrator determines in the administration of this
 section (A) are above the standard prescribed by subsection (b)(2), or
 (B) are not above such standard but which may under certain circumstances
 reach or exceed such standard.
 `(l) FEES- The Administrator shall by regulation require the payment of
 such fees as will in the aggregate, in the judgment of the Administrator,
 be sufficient over a reasonable term to provide, equip, and maintain an
 adequate service for the performance of the Administrator's functions under
 this section. Under such regulations, the performance of the Administrator's
 services or other functions under this section may be conditioned upon
 the payment of such fees. Such regulations may further provide that the
 continuation in effect of a tolerance or exemption shall be conditioned
 upon the payment of an annual fee and for waiver or refund of fees in whole
 or in part when in the judgment of the Administrator such waiver or refund
 is equitable and not contrary to the purposes of this subsection.
 `(m) JUDICIAL REVIEW-
 `(1) REVIEW- Any person (including a person without an economic interest)
 who may be adversely affected by a final regulation or order issued under
 subsection (d)(3), (d)(4), (e)(4), or (j)(3) may obtain judicial review of
 such regulation or order by filing in the United States Court of Appeals
 for the circuit wherein such person resides or has its principal place
 of business, or in the United States Court of Appeals for the District
 of Columbia Circuit, within 60 days after publication of the regulation
 or order under subsection (d)(3), (d)(4), (e)(4), or (j)(3), a petition
 praying that the regulation or order be set aside in whole or in part.
 `(2) REVIEW OF DATA-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Any person (including a person without an economic interest)
 may obtain judicial review of the adequacy of the data made available by the
 Administrator under subsection (h) to support the issuance of a tolerance
 or exemption for a pesticide chemical residue by filing a petition in the
 United States Court of Appeals for the circuit in which such person resides
 or has its principal place of business or in the United States Court of
 Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit for the review of the data.
 `(B) SCOPE OF REVIEW- Review in a proceeding initiated under this paragraph
 shall be limited to whether the data under review are adequate to demonstrate
 that the tolerance or exemption supported by such data meets the standards
 required by subsection (b)(2) or (c)(2) and interpreted by the guidelines
 issued under subsection (b)(3) or (c)(3). Unless the court determines that
 such data are adequate, the court shall revoke the tolerance or exemption
 supported by such data.
 `(C) BURDEN OF PROOF- In any such proceeding the Adminstrator shall have
 the burden of proof on all issues.
 `(3) COURT RESPONSIBILITY- In any action seeking judicial review of actions
 under this section, the court shall have the principal responsibility for
 deciding issues of law.
 `(4) ATTORNEY FEES- Any petitioner who prevails in a proceeding brought
 under this section shall be entitled to recover reasonable attorney fees
 and expenses (including expert witness fees).'.
SEC. 4. EVALUATION OF EXISTING PESTICIDE CHEMICAL RESIDUE TOLERANCES AND
EXEMPTIONS.
 (a) EVALUATION- Within one year of the date of the enactment of this Act,
 the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall, for each
 pesticide chemical residue which has a tolerance or exemption in effect
 under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, evaluate all available
 data with respect to the safety of such pesticide chemical residue and the
 nature and amount of such residue remaining in or on foods and determine if--
 (1) the tolerance or exemption meets the requirements of subsection (b)(2)
 or (c)(2) of such section,
 (2) the tolerance or exemption does not meet such requirements, or
 (3) the data are insufficient to determine if the tolerance or exemption
 meets such requirements.
 (b) SUFFICIENT DATA-
 (1) ACCEPTABLE RISK DATA- If with respect to any pesticide chemical residue
 which is evaluated under subsection (a), the Administrator finds that
 data for the pesticide chemical residue are sufficient to determine that
 the tolerance or exemption for the pesticide chemical residue meets the
 standard under section 408(b)(2) or 408(c)(2) of such Act, the Administrator
 shall publish such finding.
 (2) UNACCEPTABLE RISK DATA- If with respect to any pesticide chemical
 residue which is evaluated under subsection (a), the Administrator finds
 that data for the pesticide chemical residue are sufficient to determine
 that the tolerance or exemption for the pesticide chemical residue does
 not meet the standard under section 408(b)(2) or 408(c)(2) of such Act,
 the Administrator shall, within one year of the date of such finding,
 modify or revoke the tolerance.
 (3) INSUFFICIENT DATA-
 (A) GENERAL RULE- If with respect to any pesticide chemical residue which
 is evaluated under subsection (a), the Administrator determines that the
 data are insufficient to determine whether the tolerance or exemption meets
 the requirements of section 408(b)(2) or 408(c)(2) of the Federal Food,
 Drug, and Cosmetic Act, the Administrator shall establish a schedule for
 the submission of data in accordance with the requirements of section
 408(e)(2)(B) and 408(e)(3) of such Act, which data will be the basis
 for a determination by the Adminstrator as to whether the tolerance or
 exemption meets the standard prescribed by section 408(b)(2) or 408(c)(2)
 of such Act. The Administrator shall--
 (i) within 2 years of the date of the enactment of this Act, make such
 a determination respecting a tolerance or exemption meeting a standard
 under section 408 of such Act for at least 30 percent of the tolerances
 or exemptions in effect for pesticide chemical residues in existence on
 such date,
 (ii) within 4 years of the date of the enactment of this Act, make such a
 determination for at least 60 percent of the tolerances or exemptions in
 effect for pesticide chemical residues in existence on such date,
 (iii) within 6 years of the date of the enactment of this Act, make such
 a determination for at least 90 percent of the tolerances or exemptions
 in effect for pesticide chemical residues in existence on such date, and
 (iv) within 7 years of the date of the enactment of this Act, make such
 a determination for 100 percent of the tolerances or exemptions in effect
 for pesticide chemical residues in existence on such date.
Section 408(e)(4) of such Act shall apply to the deadlines established by
such schedule.
 (B) PRIORITIES- In establishing such schedule, the Administrator shall give
 priority to the consideration of any pesticide chemical residue for which
 there is reason to believe that the tolerance or exemption in effect for
 such residue may present a risk greater than the negligible risk standard
 prescribed by section 408(b)(2) or 408(c)(2) of such Act.
 (C) ACTION BY THE ADMINISTRATOR- If the Administrator determines under
 subparagraph (A) that a tolerance or exemption does not meet the standard
 under subsection (b)(2) or (c)(2) after the submission of data in accordance
 with the schedule prescribed by such subparagraph, the Administrator shall
 take the action described in section 408(e)(2)(A) of the Federal Food,
 Drug, and Cosmetic Act with respect to such tolerance or exemption.
SEC. 5. REVIEW OF EXISTING METHODS OF ANALYSIS.
 Within 180 days of the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator
 of the Environmental Protection Agency shall determine for each method
 of detecting and measuring levels of pesticide chemical residues if the
 requirements of section 408(b)(2)(E) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
 Act have been met. The Administrator shall issue a notice identifying each
 pesticide chemical for which there is such a method which does not meet
 such requirements. Any such method which does not meet such requirements
 shall be revised so that it meets such requirements within 3 years of the
 date of the issuance of the notice. If upon the expiration of such 3 years,
 a method does not meet such requirements, then any tolerance or exemption
 in effect for the pesticide chemical residue subject to such method shall
 be considered revoked.
SEC. 6. FEES.
 The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall by regulation
 require the payment of such fees as will in the aggregate, in the judgment of
 the Administrator, be sufficient over a reasonable term to provide, equip,
 and maintain an adequate service for the performance of the Administrator's
 functions under sections 4, 5, and 6 of this Act.
SEC. 7. DEFINITIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The terms used in sections 4 through 5 of this Act, which
 are the same as the terms used in section 408 of the Federal Food, Drug,
 and Cosmetic Act, shall have the same meaning as is prescribed for those
 terms by sections 201 and 408 of such Act.
 (b) DIETARY EXPOSURE- As used in section 4 of this Act, the term `dietary
 exposure' refers to dietary exposure as determined under section 408(b)(2)(C)
 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
 (c) EXEMPTION- As used in sections 4 through 5 of this Act, the term
 `exemption' means an exemption from the requirement for a tolerance under
 section 408 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.