HR 3155 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3155
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to improve and expand the
inspection and labeling of fish and fish products, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
August 4, 1989
Mr. DINGELL (for himself and Mr. WAXMAN) introduced the following bill;
which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to improve and expand the
inspection and labeling of fish and fish products, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE, REFERENCE.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Fish and Fish Products
 Safety Act of 1989'.
 (b) REFERENCE- Whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in
 terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the
 reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision
 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
SEC. 2. STANDARDS FOR FISH AND FISH PRODUCTS.
 (a) STANDARDS- Chapter IV is amended by adding at the end the following:
`STANDARDS FOR FISH AND FISH PRODUCTS
 `SEC. 413. (a)(1) Fish and fish products shall be deemed to be unsafe for
 human consumption--
 `(A) if the fish or fish products contain a chemical or microbiological
 contaminant, parasite, or toxin for which a standard has been established
 under subsection (b) and the contaminant, parasite, or toxin is not within
 the limits of such standard,
 `(B) if the fish or fish products contain a chemical or microbiological
 contaminant, parasite, or toxin for which no standard has been established
 under subsection (b) and which may render the fish or fish product unsafe
 for human consumption, or
 `(C) if the fish or fish products are harvested in a fish adulteration
 area designated under section 415(c)(2).
 `(2) For purposes of paragraph (1)(C), an area from which shellfish are
 harvested shall be deemed to be a fish adulteration area--
 `(A) unless the State which has jurisdiction over such area has in effect
 a program approved by the Secretary for the regulation of the harvesting
 of shellfish from such area, or
 `(B) if the State which has jurisdiction over such area has under such a
 program prohibited the harvesting of shellfish from such area.
 `(b) The Secretary shall by regulation establish standards for chemical and
 microbiological contaminants, parasites, and toxins in fish and fish products
 to assure that the fish and fish products are safe for human consumption.
 `(c)(1) The Secretary shall by regulation prescribe standards for sanitation
 and quality control for the processing of fish and fish products and for
 facilities engaged in processing of fish or fish products.
 `(2) The Secretary, after consultation with the Secretary of Commerce, may
 promulgate regulations prescribing the conditions under which the label
 of any fish or fish product may display an official mark that signifies
 that the fish or fish product has been processed in accordance with the
 requirements of regulations under paragraph (1).'.
 (b) Conforming Amendments-
 (1) Section 402(a)(1) (21 U.S.C. 342(a)(1)) is amended by striking out
 `If it bears' and inserting in lieu thereof `If it is not fish or a fish
 product and it bears'.
 (2) Section 402 (21 U.S.C. 342) is amended by adding at the end the
 following:
 `(f) If it is unsafe as determined under section 413(a)(1).
 `(g) If it is, or it bears or contains, any fish or fish product, and it
 has been processed in violation of section 413(c)(1).
 (3) Section 403 (21 U.S.C. 343) is amended by adding at the end the
 following:
 `(q) If the labeling or packaging of any fish or fish product contains an
 official mark not authorized under section 413(c)(2).'.
 (c) Regulations-
 (1)(A) Within 30 days of the date of the enactment of this Act the Secretary
 of Health and Human Services shall contract with the National Academy
 of Sciences to identify the chemical and microbiological contaminants,
 parasites, and toxins which are most likely to be found in fish and fish
 products and which are most likely to cause fish or fish products to be
 unsafe for human consumption.
 (B) The National Academy of Sciences shall prepare the report described
 in subparagraph (A) within 6 months of the date of the execution of the
 contract of the Secretary under subparagraph (A).
 (C) The Secretary shall issue proposed regulations to implement sections
 413(a) and 413(b) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act within 6 months
 of the date of receiving the report of the National Academy of Sciences. Not
 later than 6 months after the date the Secretary issues proposed regulations
 the Secretary shall issue final regulations to implement the requirements
 of such sections. In promulgating such regulations, the Secretary shall
 establish standards for those chemical and microbiological contaminants,
 parasites, and toxins which are most likely to be found in fish and fish
 products and which are most likely to cause fish and fish products to be
 unsafe for human consumption.
 (2) The Secretary shall issue proposed regulations to implement section
 413(c) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act within 6 months of the
 date of the enactment of this Act. Not later than 6 months after the date
 the Secretary issues proposed regulations the Secretary shall issue final
 regulations to implement the requirements of such section.
SEC. 3. REGISTRATION.
 (a) REGISTRATION- Chapter IV, as amended by section 3, is amended by adding
 at the end the following:
`REGISTRATION OF FISH AND FISH PRODUCT PROCESSING FACILITIES AND FISH AND
FISH PRODUCT IMPORTERS
 `SEC. 414. (a) During December of each year, any person who owns or operates
 a facility engaged in processing of fish or fish products and any person
 who imports fish or fish products shall register with the Secretary.
 `(b) Any person upon first engaging in--
 `(1) processing fish or fish products in any facility which such person
 owns or operates, or
 `(2) importing fish or fish products,
shall immediately register with the Secretary.
 `(c) Any person registered in accordance with subsection (a) or (b) of
 this section shall immediately register with the Secretary any additional
 facility which such person owns or operates and in which such person begins
 processing or importing fish or fish products.
 `(d)(1) Any person engaged in the processing of fish or fish products and
 required to register a facility under subsection (a) or (b) shall for each
 such facility include as part of such registration and in such manner and
 form as the Secretary may prescribe the following information:
 `(A) The name of the owner or operator of the facility,
 `(B) The principal place of business and the location of each such
 facility, and
 `(C) A list of each fish or fish product processed in or distributed
 through each such facility by brand name or names.
 `(2) Any person engaged in importing fish or fish products and required
 to register under subsection (a) or (b) shall include as part of such
 registration and in such manner and form as the Secretary may prescribe
 the following information:
 `(A) The name of such person,
 `(B) The principal place of business of such person, and
 `(C) A list of each fish or fish product imported by such person by brand
 name or names and the ports through which such person imports such fish
 or fish product.
 `(e) The annual registration shall contain all changes in information
 previously submitted. Information previously submitted shall not be
 submitted in any subsequent registration. The Secretary shall specify
 the circumstances under which any changes in the information previously
 submitted shall be submitted earlier than the annual registration.
 `(f) Any registrant under this section shall notify the Secretary of any
 fish or fish product which such person has discontinued processing or
 importing or has recalled and a brief summary of the reasons therefor,
 as prescribed by the Secretary.
 `(g) Each registrant under this section shall maintain such records and
 make such reports as the Secretary may require by regulation and shall
 provide to the Secretary access to such records.
 `(h) The Secretary may assign a registration number (or numbers) to any
 person or any facility registered in accordance with this section.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 301 (21 U.S.C. 331) is amended by adding
 at the end the following:
 `(u) The failure to register in accordance with section 414.
 `(v) The failure to maintain records or make reports as required under
 section 414(g) and the failure to provide access to the Secretary to
 records required under such section.'.
 (c) REGULATIONS- The Secretary shall issue proposed regulations to implement
 section 414 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act within 6 months of
 the date of the enactment of this Act. Not later than 6 months after the
 date the Secretary issues proposed regulations the Secretary shall issue
 final regulations to implement the requirements of such section.
SEC. 4. FISH AND FISH PRODUCT INSPECTION.
 (a) INSPECTION AUTHORITY- Section 702A of the Federal Food, Drug, and
 Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 372a) is amended--
 (1) by striking out the first two sentences and the fifth and sixth
 sentences,
 (2) in the third sentence, by striking out `Services under this section'
 and inserting in lieu thereof:
 `(d) Services under this section', and
 (3) by inserting after `702A.' the following: `(a)(1) The Secretary shall
 enter pursuant to section 704 and conduct periodic announced and unannounced
 inspections of facilities in which fish and fish products are processed to
 determine if the facilities meet the requirements prescribed under section
 413(c). Facilities in which imported fish and fish products are processed
 shall be inspected at least at the same rate as facilities in which other
 fish and fish products are processed are inspected.
 `(2) The Secretary may authorize State agencies to conduct the inspections
 authorized by paragraph (1) and may pay up to 50 percent of the cost of
 the State agencies in conducting such inspections.
 `(b) The Secretary shall issue regulations to implement subsection (a). Such
 regulations shall include--
 `(1) requirements for sampling of fish and fish products by facilities
 engaged in the processing of fish and fish products to determine compliance
 with section 413(c),
 `(2) requirements for a system to trace contaminated fish and fish
 products, and
 `(3) requirements for the training and certification of employees in fish
 and fish product sanitation and quality control and in compliance with
 section 413(c).
 `(c)(1)(A) The Secretary shall conduct on a regular basis monitoring of
 fish from fish harvest areas to determine--
 `(i) compliance with applicable standards under section 413(a)(1)(A), and
 `(ii) if the fish is unsafe as determined under section 413(a)(1)(B).
 `(B) The Secretary shall conduct on a periodic basis monitoring of fish
 after their harvest and fish products to determine--
 `(i) compliance with applicable standards under section 413(a)(1)(A), and
 `(ii) if the fish or fish products are unsafe as determined under section
 413(a)(1)(B).
 `(2) If as a result of monitoring conducted under paragraph (1), the
 Secretary determines that fish harvested from a particular fish harvest
 area are likely to--
 `(A) exceed the standard established under section 413(b), or
 `(B) if the fish contain a chemical and microbiological contaminant,
 parasite, or toxin for which no standard has been established under section
 413(b), be unsafe for human consumption,
the Secretary shall designate such area as a fish adulteration area.'.
 (b) Conforming Amendments-
 (1) The heading for section 702A (21 U.S.C. 372a) is amended by striking
 out `SEAFOOD' and inserting in lieu thereof `FISH AND FISH PRODUCT'.
 (2) Section 702A, as amended by paragraphs (1) and (2) and by subsection
 (a), is transferred to chapter IV, as amended by section 4, inserted after
 section 414, and redesignated as section 415.
 (c) REGULATIONS- The Secretary shall issue proposed regulations to implement
 section 415 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act within 6 months of
 the date of the enactment of this Act. Not later than 6 months after the
 date the Secretary issues proposed regulations the Secretary shall issue
 final regulations to implement the requirements of such section.
SEC. 5. IMPORTED FISH OR FISH PRODUCTS.
 Section 403 (21 U.S.C. 343), as amended by section 2(b), is amended by
 adding at the end the following:
 `(r) If it is an imported fish or fish product unless its labeling discloses
 the country from which it is imported.'.
SEC. 6. DEFINITIONS.
 Section 201 (21 U.S.C. 321) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(bb) The term `fish' includes freshwater or marine fin fish, crustaceans,
 and molluscs, including shellfish, amphibians, and other forms of aquatic
 animal life.
 `(cc) The term `shellfish' includes any species of molluscan shellfish,
 including any molluscan shellfish (or any part thereof) which is fresh or
 frozen and in its shell, shucked, or otherwise processed.
 `(dd) The term `fish product' includes any edible food product derived
 in whole or in part from fish, including fish that has been processed in
 any manner.
 `(ee) The term `process', with respect to fish or fish products, includes
 handling, storing, preparing, including heading, gutting, or changing into
 a different market form, producing, manufacturing, preserving, packing,
 transporting, or holding.'.
SEC. 7. SERVICE AGREEMENTS.
 Chapter IV, as amended by section 4, is amended by adding at the end
 the following:
`SERVICE AGREEMENTS
 `SEC. 416. The Secretary may, under agreements entered into with Federal
 or State agencies, use on a reimbursable basis or otherwise the personnel,
 services, and facilities of such agencies in conducting registrations,
 inspections, and monitoring under sections 414 and 415.'.
SEC. 8. CIVIL PENALTIES.
 Section 303(a) (21 U.S.C. 333(a)) is amended in paragraph (1) by inserting
 before the period a comma and the following: `except that if such person
 violates section 301 for the first time because of a violation of section
 413(c)(1), such person may be subject to criminal penalties in accordance
 with this paragraph or may be subject to a civil penalty of $10,000'.
SEC. 9. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 (a) SECTION 2- The amendments made by section 2 shall take effect on the
 date of the enactment of this Act, except that the provisions of section
 413 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act which relate to States
 and fish adulteration areas shall take effect--
 (1) upon the expiration of 3 months after the date of the enactment of this
 Act in the case of a State which has authority to regulate the harvesting
 of shellfish, and
 (2) upon the expiration of one year after the date of the enactment of this
 Act in the case of a State which does not have the authority to regulate
 the harvesting of shellfish.
 (b) SECTION 3- The amendments made by section 3 shall take effect--
 (1) upon the promulgation of final regulations of the Secretary implementing
 section 414 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, or
 (2) upon the expiration of one year after the date of the enactment of
 this Act,
whichever occurs first.
 (c) SECTION 4- The amendments made by section 4 shall take effect--
 (1) upon the promulgation of final regulations of the Secretary implementing
 section 415 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, or
 (2) upon the expiration of one year after the date of the enactment of
 this Act,
whichever occurs first.
 (d) SECTION 5- The amendment made by section 5 shall take effect upon the
 expiration of one year from the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 10. PUBLIC AWARENESS.
 The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall establish a comprehensive
 public awareness program on the proper handling and preparation of fish
 and fish products.
SEC. 11. RESEARCH.
 The Secretary of Health and Human Services may conduct, directly or through
 grants or contracts with public or nonprofit private entities or individuals,
 research and demonstrations to assist the Secretary in implementing the
 amendments made by this Act, including--
 (1) to improve sanitation and quality control practices in the processing
 of fish and fish products,
 (2) to develop improved techniques in the conduct of monitoring and
 inspection of fish and fish products under the Federal Food, Drug, and
 Cosmetic Act,
 (3) developing efficient, rapid, and sensitive methods for determining and
 detecting the presence of harmful chemical and microbiological contaminants,
 parasites, and toxins in fish and fish products, and
 (4) determining the sources of contamination of fish and fish products with
 harmful chemical and microbiological contaminants, parasites, and toxins.
SEC. 12. COOPERATION WITH CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL.
 The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall establish, through
 the Centers for Disease Control, an active surveillance system, based
 on a representative proportion of the population of the United States,
 to provide an accurate estimate of the frequency of human disease in the
 United States associated with the consumption of fish and fish products.