HR 2805 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2805
To extend the terms of the olestra patents, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
June 26, 1991
Mr. GRADISON introduced the following bill; which was referred to the
Committee on the Judiciary
A BILL
To extend the terms of the olestra patents, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. PATENT TERM EXTENSION.
 (a) `OLESTRA PATENTS'- The terms of United States Patents numbers 3,600,186,
 4,005,195, 4,005,196, and 4,034,083 (relating to olestra), and any reissues
 of said patents, shall be extended in accordance with section 2.
 (b) PERIOD OF EXTENSION-
 (1) UNEXPIRED PATENTS- In the case of any patent listed in subsection
 (a) that has not expired on the effective date of the first olestra food
 additive regulation, the term of the patent shall be extended for a period
 beginning on the date of its expiration and ending ten years after the
 effective date of the first olestra food additive regulation.
 (2) EXPIRED PATENTS- In the case of any patent listed in subsection (a)
 that has expired on or before the effective date of the first olestra food
 additive regulation, the term of the patent shall be reinstituted for a
 period of ten years beginning on the effective date of the first olestra
 food additive regulation.
SEC. 2. PROCEDURE.
 (a) REQUEST- To receive the patent term extension for each patent under
 section 1, the owner of record of the patent shall, within ninety days after
 the effective date of the first olestra food additive regulation, request
 that the Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks certify its extension.
 (b) CERTIFICATION- On receipt of each request under subsection (a), the
 Commissioner shall, in accordance with section 1, promptly issue to the owner
 of record of the patent a certificate of extension, under seal, stating
 the fact and length of the extension and indicating that the extension
 is limited to the subject matter of the patent insofar as it covers or
 relates to any use as a food or food additive as defined in section 201
 (f) and (s) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321
 (f) and (s)). Such certificate shall be recorded in the official file of
 the patent extended and such certificate shall be considered as part of
 said patent, and an appropriate notice shall be published in the Official
 Gazette of the Patent and Trademark Office.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this Act--
 (a) The term `olestra' means sucrose esterified with four or more fatty
 acid groups; and
 (b) The term `first olestra food additive regulation' means the first
 regulation promulgated by the Secretary of Health and Human Services under
 section 409 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 348)
 authorizing the use of olestra.
SEC. 4. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 The provisions of this Act shall take effect on the date of enactment of
 this Act.