HR 2121 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2121
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to impose an excise tax on premiums
received on health insurance policies which do not meet certain requirements.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
April 29, 1991
Mr. STARK introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Ways and Means
A BILL
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to impose an excise tax on premiums
received on health insurance policies which do not meet certain requirements.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Health Insurance Reform Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. EXCISE TAX ON PREMIUMS RECEIVED ON HEALTH INSURANCE POLICIES WHICH
DO NOT MEET CERTAIN REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Chapter 47 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating
 to excise taxes on qualified pension, etc. plans) is amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new subchapter:
`Subchapter B--Health Insurance Standards
`Sec. 5000A. Failure to satisfy standards for health insurance.
`Sec. 5000B. General issuance requirements.
`Sec. 5000C. Specific contractual requirements.
`Sec. 5000D. Definitions.
`SEC. 5000A. FAILURE TO SATISFY CERTAIN STANDARDS FOR HEALTH INSURANCE.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- In the case of any person issuing applicable accident
 and health insurance contracts, there is hereby imposed a tax on the
 failure of such person to meet at any time during any taxable year--
 `(1) the general issuance requirements of section 5000B, or
 `(2) the specific contractual requirements of section 5000C.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall determine whether any
contract meets the requirements of such sections.
 `(b) AMOUNT OF TAX-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The amount of tax imposed by subsection (a) by reason of
 1 or more failures during a taxable year shall be equal to 100 percent of
 the gross premiums received during such taxable year with respect to all
 accident and health insurance contracts issued by the person on whom such
 tax is imposed.
 `(2) GROSS PREMIUMS- For purposes of paragraph (1), gross premiums shall
 include any consideration received with respect to any accident and health
 insurance contract.
 `(c) LIMITATION ON TAX-
 `(1) TAX NOT TO APPLY WHERE FAILURE NOT DISCOVERED EXERCISING REASONABLE
 DILIGENCE- No tax shall be imposed by subsection (a) with respect to any
 failure for which it is established to the satisfaction of the Secretary
 that the person on whom the tax is imposed did not know, or exercising
 reasonable diligence would not have known, that such failure existed.
 `(2) TAX NOT TO APPLY WHERE FAILURES CORRECTED WITHIN 30 DAYS- No tax
 shall be imposed by subsection (a) with respect to any failure if--
 `(A) such failure was due to reasonable cause and not to willful neglect, and
 `(B) such failure is corrected during the 30-day period beginning on the
 1st date any of the persons on whom the tax is imposed knew, or exercising
 reasonable diligence would have known, that such failure existed.
 `(3) WAIVER BY SECRETARY- In the case of a failure which is due to reasonable
 cause and not to willful neglect, the Secretary may waive part or all of
 the tax imposed by subsection (a).
 `(d) LIABILITY FOR TAX- The person issuing the applicable accident and
 health contract with respect to which a failure occurs shall be liable
 for the tax imposed by subsection (a).
`SEC. 5000B. GENERAL ISSUANCE REQUIREMENTS.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- The requirements of this section are met if a person
 meets--
 `(1) the mandatory policy requirements of subsection (b), and
 `(2) the guaranteed issue requirements of subsection (c).
 `(b) MANDATORY POLICY REQUIREMENTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The requirements of this subsection are met if any person
 issuing accident and health contracts to any employer makes available
 to such employer an accident and health contract which provides benefits
 which are identical to the core benefits described in subsection (d). A
 person shall not be treated as failing to meet the requirements of this
 paragraph if the deductible and copayment requirements are less than those
 in the core benefits.
 `(2) OTHER REQUIREMENTS- The requirements of paragraph (1) are not met
 unless--
 `(A) the contract provides continuous full-year open enrollment (including
 conversions),
 `(B) the premiums for coverage under the contract are determined on the basis
 of the average per capita cost of providing coverage to all individuals
 covered under applicable accident and health insurance contracts issued
 by the person issuing such contract, and
 `(C) individuals leaving the group covered by the contract are offered the
 option to convert to individual coverage at not more than 150 percent of
 the usually applicable community rate for the State in which the contract
 was issued, without any waiting period, without regard to health, and
 without regard to the size of the group.
 `(c) GUARANTEED ISSUE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The requirements of this subsection are met if the person
 offering applicable accident and health insurance contracts issues such
 contracts to any employer seeking to enter into such a contract.
 `(2) EXCEPTIONS FOR CERTAIN EMPLOYERS- Paragraph (1) shall not apply to
 a failure to issue a contract to an eligible employer if such employer is
 unable to pay the premium for such contract.
 `(d) BENEFITS- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) CORE BENEFITS- The term `core benefits' means benefits which are the
 same benefits as are provided under title XVIII of the Social Security
 Act to individuals entitled to benefits under part A, and enrolled under
 part B, of such title.
 `(2) DEDUCTIBLES AND COPAYMENTS- A plan shall not be treated as providing the
 core benefits described in paragraph (1) unless the following requirements
 are met:
 `(A) $500 DEDUCTIBLE PER INDIVIDUAL- The plan does not require a deductible
 amount for any plan year in excess of $500 per individual with respect to
 such benefits.
 `(B) LIMIT ON OUT-OF-POCKET EXPENSES- The plan does not require out-of-pocket
 expenses for any plan year in excess of $2,500 per individual for such
 benefits.
 `(C) CHILDREN-
 `(i) NO DEDUCTIBLES OR COINSURANCE- In the case of children, there shall be
 no coinsurance, deductibles, or copayments applicable to covered benefits
 described in clause (ii).
 `(ii) ADDITIONAL PREVENTIVE BENEFITS- Subject to the periodicity schedule
 established with respect to the services under this clause, for children
 benefits shall be available under the plan for the following items and
 services:
 `(I) Newborn and well-baby care, including normal newborn care and
 pediatrician services for high-risk deliveries.
 `(II) Well-child care, including routine office visits, routine immunizations
 (including the vaccine itself), routine laboratory tests, and preventive
 dental care.
 The Secretary of Health and Human Services, in consultation with the
 American Academy of Pediatrics, shall establish a schedule of periodicity
 which reflects the general, appropriate frequency with which services
 listed in the preceding sentence should be provided to healthy children.
 `(iii) CHILD DEFINED- For purposes of this subparagraph, the term `child'
 means an individual who has not attained age 23.
 `(D) PREGNANCY-RELATED SERVICES-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- In the case of a pregnant woman, benefits under the plan
 shall include entitlement to have payment made for the following, without
 the application of deductibles, coinsurance, or copayments, subject to the
 periodicity schedule established with respect to the services under clause
 (ii):
 `(I) Prenatal care, including care for all complications of pregnancy.
 `(II) Inpatient labor and delivery services.
 `(III) Postnatal care.
 `(IV) Postnatal family planning services.
 `(ii) PERIODICITY SCHEDULE- The Secretary of Health and Human Services,
 in consultation with the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
 shall establish a schedule of periodicity which reflects the general,
 appropriate frequency with which services listed in clause (i) should be
 provided to pregnant women without complications of pregnancy.
 `(iii) PREGNANT WOMAN- For purposes of this subparagraph, the term `pregnant
 woman' means a woman who has been certified by a physician (in a manner
 specified by the Secretary) as being pregnant, until the last day of the
 month in which the 60-day period (beginning on the date of termination of
 the pregnancy) ends.
 `(3) PREEMPTION- No provision of State law shall apply that requires the
 offering, as part of an applicable accident and health insurance contract
 that only provides for core benefits, of any services, category of care,
 or services of any class or type of provider other than core benefits.
 `(4) TREATMENT OF MANAGED CARE- Nothing in this section shall be construed
 as preventing an applicable accident and health insurance contract from--
 `(A) providing benefits through a selected set of providers,
 `(B) providing financial incentives for beneficiaries to use particular
 providers, or
 `(C) providing for utilization review and controls over benefits.
`SEC. 5000C. SPECIFIC CONTRACTUAL REQUIREMENTS.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- The requirements of this section are met if, with
 respect to any applicable accident and health insurance contract, the
 coverage requirements of subsection (b) are met.
 `(b) COVERAGE REQUIREMENTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The requirements of this subsection are met with respect
 to any applicable accident and health contract if, under the terms and
 operation of the contract, the following requirements are met:
 `(A) GUARANTEED ELIGIBILITY- No eligible employee (and the spouse or any
 dependent child of the employee eligible for coverage) may be excluded
 from coverage under the contract.
 `(B) LIMITATIONS ON COVERAGE OF PREEXISTING CONDITIONS-
 `(i) Any limitation under the contract on any preexisting condition may
 not extend beyond the 6-month period beginning with the date an insured
 is first covered by the contract.
 `(ii) The contract offers full coverage for preexisting conditions of
 high-risk individuals without a price differential within a community,
 with reasonable waiting periods as determined or approved under State law
 or regulation, without cancellation of coverage for heavy usage, and without
 regard to age, income, or employment status of individuals under age 65.
 `(C) GUARANTEED RENEWABILITY-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- The contract must be renewed at the election of the
 employer unless the contract is terminated for cause.
 `(ii) CAUSE- For purposes of this subparagraph, the term `cause'--
 `(I) includes nonpayment of premiums, fraud or misrepresentation,
 noncompliance with plan provisions (including participation requirements),
 or misuse of network provisions, but
 `(II) does not include any reason related to risk characteristics.
 `(2) WAITING PERIODS- Paragraph (1)(A) shall not apply to any period an
 eligible employee is excluded from coverage under the contract solely by
 reason of a requirement applicable to all employees that a minimum period
 of service with the employer is required before the employee is eligible
 for such coverage.
`SEC. 5000D. DEFINITIONS.
 `(a) APPLICABLE ACCIDENT AND HEALTH INSURANCE CONTRACT- For purposes of
 this subchapter--
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The term `applicable accident and health insurance contract'
 means a contract under which a person authorized under applicable State
 insurance law provides a health insurance plan or arrangement to any
 group consisting of more than 3 individuals. Such term does not include
 any self-insured plan of an employer and does not include a qualified
 health maintenance organization (as defined in section 1310(d) of the
 Public Health Service Act).
 `(2) CERTAIN CONTRACTS NOT COVERED- The term `applicable accident and
 health insurance contract' does not include any contract--
 `(A) which provides for accident only, dental only, or disability only
 coverage,
 `(B) which provides coverage as a supplement to liability insurance,
 `(C) which provides insurance arising out of a workmens' compensation or
 similar law, or automobile medical-payment insurance, or
 `(D) which provides insurance which is required by law to be contained
 under any self-insured plan of an employer.
 `(b) ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEE- For purposes of this subchapter, the term `eligible
 employee' means any employee other than an employee who works less than
 30 hours per week. For purposes of this paragraph, the term `employee'
 includes a self-employed individual as defined in section 401(c)(1).'
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- So much of chapter 47 of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 as precedes section 5000 is amended to read as follows:
`CHAPTER 47--CERTAIN GROUP HEALTH PLANS
`SUBCHAPTER A. Nonconforming group health plans.
`SUBCHAPTER B. Health insurance standards.
`Subchapter A--Nonconforming Group Health Plans
`Sec. 5000. Certain group health plans.'
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The amendments made by this section shall apply to contracts
 issued, or renewed, after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) GUARANTEED ISSUE- The provisions of section 5000B(c) of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 shall apply to contracts which are issued, or renewed,
 after the date which is 18 months after the date of the enactment of
 this Act.
SEC. 3. HEALTH REINSURANCE TRUST FUND.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subchapter A of chapter 98 of the Internal Revenue Code of
 1986 (relating to trust fund code) is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following new section:
`SEC. 9511. HEALTH REINSURANCE TRUST FUND.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is hereby created in the Treasury of the United
 States a trust fund to be known as the `Health Reinsurance Trust Fund',
 consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited to such
 Trust Fund as provided in this section or section 9602(b).
 `(b) TRANSFERS TO TRUST FUND- There are hereby appropriated to the Health
 Reinsurance Trust Fund amounts equivalent to--
 `(1) the taxes received in the Treasury under section 5000A (relating to
 failure to satisfy certain standards for health insurance), and
 `(2) the taxes received in the Treasury under section 5000F (relating to
 health insurance stop-loss excise tax).
 `(c) EXPENDITURES FROM TRUST FUND-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Amounts in the Health Reinsurance Trust Fund shall be
 available--
 `(A) to provide reimbursement to qualified plans for payments under the
 plan for core benefits for any individual after the plan has expended
 $25,000 in any year for such benefits for the individual, and
 `(B) for the payment of all expenses of administration incurred by the
 Department of Health and Human Services in carrying out subparagraph (A).
The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall provide a procedure for
qualified plans obtaining benefits under subparagraph (A).
 `(2) QUALIFIED PLAN DEFINED- For purposes of this section--
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `qualified plan' means an accident and health
 insurance contract that--
 `(i) is issued by a person in compliance with section 5000B,
 `(ii) meets the specific contractual requirements of section 5000C, and
 `(iii) has applied to the Secretary of Health and Human Services, in
 a form and manner specified by the Secretary, to obtain benefits under
 this subsection.
 `(B) INCLUSION OF SELF-INSURED PLANS AND QUALIFIED HMOS- The term `qualified
 plan' also includes--
 `(i) any self-insured plan of an employer, and
 `(ii) any qualified health maintenance organization (as defined in section
 1310(d) of the Public Health Service Act),
if the plan or organization provides benefits which include at least the
core benefits (as defined in section 5000B(d)) for every individual covered
under the plan.'.
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for such subchapter is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`Sec. 9511. Health Reinsurance Trust Fund.'
SEC. 4. HEALTH INSURANCE STOP-LOSS EXCISE TAX.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Chapter 47 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating
 to certain group health plans) is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following new subchapter:
`Subchapter C--Health Insurance Stop-Loss Tax
`Sec. 5000F. Imposition of tax.
`SEC. 5000F. IMPOSITION OF TAX.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- There is hereby imposed on the providing of coverage by
 any qualified plan (as defined in section 9511(c)(2)) during the calendar
 year a tax equal to the prescribed amount with respect to each individual
 who is covered by such plan at any time during such year.
 `(b) PRESCRIBED AMOUNT- For purposes of subsection (a), the prescribed
 amount for any calendar year is the amount estimated by the Secretary to be
 minimum amount necessary to generate revenues to the Treasury under this
 section which, when added to the revenues to the Treasury under section
 5000A, will be equal to the estimated expenditures (as determined by the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services) of the Health Reinsurance Trust
 Fund during the following calendar year.
 `(c) LIABILITY FOR TAX- The qualified plan shall pay the tax imposed by
 this section.'
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of subchapters for such chapter 47 is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`Subchapter C. Health insurance stop-loss tax.'
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 calendar years ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.