S 769 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 769
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to regulate the manufacture,
sale, promotion, and distribution of tobacco and other products containing
tar, nicotine, additives, carbon monoxide, and other potentially harmful
constituents, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
April 13 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. BINGAMAN (for himself, Mr. BRADLEY, and Mr. CHAFEE) introduced the
following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Commerce,
Science, and Transportation
A BILL
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to regulate the manufacture,
sale, promotion, and distribution of tobacco and other products containing
tar, nicotine, additives, carbon monoxide, and other potentially harmful
constituents, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; REFERENCE.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Tobacco and Nicotine Health
 and Safety Act of 1989'.
 (b) REFERENCE- Whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in
 terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the
 reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision
 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321 et seq.).
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 Congress finds that--
 (1) cigarette smoking and the use of smokeless tobacco products continue
 to represent major health hazards to the American public;
 (2) cigarette smoking continues to be the single most preventable cause
 of death and disability in the United States;
 (3) tobacco products contain hazardous additives, gases, and other chemical
 constituents dangerous to health;
 (4) the use of tobacco products costs the United States more than
 $60,000,000,000 in lost productivity and health care costs;
 (5) tobacco products contain nicotine, a poisonous addictive drug;
 (6) despite the known adverse health effects associated with tobacco,
 it remains one of the least regulated consumer products;
 (7) the tobacco industry spends more than $2,000,000,000 annually to
 promote and sell its products;
 (8) Congress has a major policy-setting role in ensuring that the use of
 tobacco products is discouraged to the maximum extent possible; and
 (9) the application of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21
 U.S.C. 301 et seq.) to tobacco products assures the most effective means
 of regulating the product without the product being banned.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 Section 201 (21 U.S.C. 321) is amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new paragraphs:
 `(bb) The term `tobacco product' means cigarettes, cigars, little cigars,
 pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, snuff, and chewing tobacco.
 `(cc) The term `tobacco additive' means any substance the intended
 use of which results or may reasonably be expected to result, directly
 or indirectly, in its becoming a component or otherwise affecting the
 characteristics of any tobacco product.
 `(dd) The term `constituent' means any element of cigarette mainstream or
 sidestream smoke that is present in quantities that represent a potential
 health hazard or where the health effect is unknown.
 `(ee) The term `tar' means mainstream Total Articulate Matter minus nicotine
 and water.'.
SEC. 4. ENFORCEMENT.
 Section 301 (21 U.S.C. 331) (as amended by section 7(a) of the Prescription
 Drug Marketing Act of 1987 (Public Law 100-293; 102 Stat. 99)) is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(u) The sale or distribution of tobacco products in violation of section
 1001 and the manufacture, importation, or packaging of tobacco products
 in violation of section 1005.'.
SEC. 5. REGULATION.
 (a) CONTROLS- The Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et
 seq.) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new chapter:
`CHAPTER X--TOBACCO PRODUCTS
`SEC. 1001. PROHIBITED ACTS.
 `It shall be unlawful for a tobacco product intended for use by humans
 that contains nicotine or additives or, because of its pharmacological and
 toxicological effects or other potentiality for harmful effects, presents
 risks to health--
 `(1) to be distributed if the product is misbranded as prescribed by
 section 1002;
 `(2) to be distributed if the product is adulterated as prescribed by
 section 1003; or
 `(3) to be distributed as a free sample or to be made available as the
 result of coupons or other materials that allow for the obtaining of free
 or discounted tobacco products.
`SEC. 1002. MISBRANDED TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- A tobacco product shall be deemed to be misbranded--
 `(1) if its labeling is false or misleading in any particular;
 `(2) if the labeling fails to contain the statements required by section
 4 of the Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act (15 U.S.C. 1333) and the
 Comprehensive Smokeless Tobacco Health Education Act of 1986 (15 U.S.C. 4401
 et seq.);
 `(3) if in package form, unless it bears a label containing--
 `(A) the name and place of business of the manufacturer, packer, or
 distributor; and
 `(B) an accurate statement of the quantity of the contents in terms of
 weight, measure, or numerical count;
except that under regulations of the Secretary reasonable variations from
the requirements of this paragraph shall be permitted and exemptions from
such requirements for small packages shall be established;
 `(4) if the manufacturer, importer, or packager of the product does not
 provide the list of additives contained in the product in accordance with
 section 1004(a);
 `(5) if it does not disclose the additives contained in the product as
 required under section 1004(b);
 `(6) if it does not disclose tar, nicotine, carbon monoxide, and other
 constituents as required under section 1005; or
 `(7) if the manufacturer of the product disseminates or causes to be
 disseminated any false tobacco product advertisement--
 `(A) through the use of United States mails or in commerce by any means
 for the purpose of inducing, or that is likely to induce, directly or
 indirectly the purchase of tobacco products; and
 `(B) by any means for the purpose of inducing, or that is likely to induce,
 directly or indirectly the purchase of tobacco products.
 `(b) ADDITIONAL INFORMATION-
 `(1) REQUIRED BY SECRETARY- The Secretary may by regulation require that
 the manufacturer of tobacco products provide consumers of tobacco products
 with additional information, by way of additional labeling of packages,
 requiring inserts, or other means about the adverse effects of tobacco
 products, adequate warnings and directions for use, contraindications,
 adequate warnings against use in pathological conditions, and any information
 considered necessary by the Secretary.
 `(2) DISCRETION OF MANUFACTURER- Nothing in this Act or the Federal
 Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act (15 U.S.C. 1333 et seq.) shall
 prohibit a manufacturer of tobacco products from providing consumers with
 information concerning the adverse effects of tobacco products in addition
 to the information the manufacturer is required to provide pursuant to
 this chapter and the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act (15
 U.S.C. 1333 et seq.).
`SEC. 1003. ADULTERATED TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
 `A tobacco product shall be deemed to be adulterated--
 `(1) if the level of any tobacco additive contained in the product is in
 violation of a requirement under section 1004(b);
 `(2) if the nicotine, tar, carbon monoxide, or other harmful constituent
 level has not been established under section 1005;
 `(3) if it bears or contains any added poisonous or deleterious substance
 that may render it injurious to health;
 `(4) if it contains in whole or in part any filthy, putrid, or decomposed
 substance;
 `(5) if it has been prepared, packed, or held under unsanitary conditions
 whereby it may have become contaminated with filth or whereby it may have
 been rendered injurious to health; or
 `(6) if its container or packaging is composed in whole or in part of any
 poisonous or deleterious substance that may render the contents injurious
 to health.
`SEC. 1004. TOBACCO ADDITIVES.
 `(a) LIST OF ADDITIVES- It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture,
 import, or package for sale or distribution within the United States any
 tobacco product unless such person has provided to the Secretary a complete
 list of each additive used in the manufacture of such tobacco product and
 the relative quantity of such additives.
 `(b) REGULATIONS-
 `(1) DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS- The Secretary shall by regulation prescribe
 any disclosure requirements on packages of tobacco products or by any
 other means to adequately inform the public of the additives contained in
 tobacco products.
 `(2) DETERMINATION BY SECRETARY- If the Secretary determines that any
 tobacco additive in a tobacco product, either by itself or in conjunction
 with any other additive, is unsafe and presents unnecessary increased risks
 to health, the Secretary may require that such level of the additive in
 the tobacco product be reduced or that it be prohibited from use.
 `(3) ADVICE OF EXPERTS- The Secretary may make such a determination only
 with the advice of experts qualified by scientific training and experience
 to evaluate the safety of tobacco additives.
`SEC. 1005. NICOTINE, TAR, CARBON MONOXIDE, AND OTHER HARMFUL CONSTITUENTS.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture,
 import, or package for sale or distribution within the United States
 any tobacco product unless such person has provided the Secretary with a
 complete list of all brands of such tobacco products and until such products
 have been tested by the Secretary to establish the tar, nicotine, carbon
 monoxide, and other harmful constituent (as determined by the Secretary)
 levels for each brand.
 `(b) DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS- The Secretary may by regulation prescribe
 any disclosure requirements on packages of tobacco products or by any
 other means to adequately inform the public of the quantities and levels
 of nicotine, tar, carbon monoxide, or other harmful constituents and
 initiate and carry out any educational activities to adequately inform
 the public that any reduced levels of nicotine, tar, carbon monoxide,
 or other constituents do not necessarily constitute a reduced health risk.
`SEC. 1006. NON-TOBACCO NICOTINE CONTAINING PRODUCTS.
 `Any product that contains nicotine but does not meet the definition of
 tobacco products as contained in section 201(bb) shall be considered to
 be a drug under section 201(g)(1)(C).
`SEC. 1007. REPORTS.
 `The Secretary shall report annually to the Committee on Energy and
 Commerce of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Labor and
 Human Resources of the Senate on--
 `(1) the use of additives in tobacco products, including a list of additives
 that have been prohibited from use in tobacco products;
 `(2) the levels of nicotine, tar, carbon monoxide, and other potentially
 harmful constituents in tobacco products or tobacco smoke and any actions
 the Secretary has taken to reduce the levels of these constituents; and
 `(3) any legislative recommendations that would further reduce the risk
 to health associated with the use of tobacco products, tobacco product
 additives, nicotine, tar, or other potentially harmful constituents.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- Chapter X of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
 (as added by subsection (a)) shall be effective 1 year after the date of
 the enactment of this Act.