HR 3496 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3496
To prohibit the importation into the United States of fish or marine animal
products of Japan, Taiwan, or the Republic of Korea until those countries
cease the practice of driftnet fishing.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
October 19, 1989
Mr. DEFAZIO (for himself, Mrs. UNSOELD, Mr. AUCOIN, and Mr. MILLER of
Washington) introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to
the Committees on Ways and Means and Merchant Marine and Fisheries
A BILL
To prohibit the importation into the United States of fish or marine animal
products of Japan, Taiwan, or the Republic of Korea until those countries
cease the practice of driftnet fishing.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. LIMITATION ON THE IMPORTATION OF FISH PRODUCTS FROM JAPAN, TAIWAN,
AND THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA.
 If the Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of State, determines
 that, at any time, Japan, Taiwan, or the Republic of Korea does not
 prohibit the practice of driftnet fishing by fishing vessels registered
 in that nation, the Secretary shall certify that fact to the Secretary
 of the Treasury. Upon receipt of such a certification with respect to any
 such nation, the Secretary of the Treasury shall prohibit the bringing or
 the importation into the United States of fish and marine animals listed
 pursuant to section 2, or products of such fish and marine animals,
 of that nation or from nations processing such fish and marine animals,
 or products of such fish and marine animals, of the nation subject to the
 certification. Subsections (c) through (h) of section 8 of the Fishermen's
 Protective Act of 1967 (22 U.S.C. 1978(c)-(h)) shall apply with respect
 to any such certification and prohibition.
SEC. 2. FISH PRODUCTS SUBJECT TO IMPORT PROHIBITION.
 The Secretary shall publish and maintain a list of fish and marine animals
 known to be caught, intentionally or unintentionally, in driftnets.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act--
 (1) the terms `driftnet' and `driftnet fishing' have the meanings those
 terms are given in paragraphs (1) and (2), respectively, of section 4003
 of the Driftnet Impact Monitoring, Assessment, and Control Act of 1987
 (16 U.S.C. 1822 note); and
 (2) the term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Commerce.
SEC. 4. INITIAL DETERMINATIONS.
 Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the
 Secretary--
 (1) shall make an initial determination with respect to the application
 of section 1 to each of the nations specified in that section; and
 (2) shall initially establish the list required by section 2.