S 674 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 674
To regulate above ground storage tanks having the capacity to store at least
one million gallons of petroleum, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
March 17 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. HEINZ introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Environment and Public Works
A BILL
To regulate above ground storage tanks having the capacity to store at least
one million gallons of petroleum, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That the Solid Waste Disposal
 Act is amended by adding the following new subtitle after subtitle I:
`Subtitle J--Regulation of Above Ground Storage Tanks
`DEFINITIONS AND EXEMPTIONS
 `SEC. 9020. For purposes of this subtitle--
 `(1) The term `above ground storage tank' means any one or combination of
 tanks located above ground (including underground pipes connected thereto)
 which has or have the capacity to hold, and is or are used to contain an
 accumulation of, at least one million gallons of petroleum. Such term does
 not include any--
 `(A) pipeline facility to the extent (including gathering lines) regulated
 under--
 `(i) the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act of 1968 (49 U.S.C. App. 1671,
 et seq.),
 `(ii) the Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Safety Act of 1979 (49 U.S.C. App. 2001,
 et seq.), or
 `(iii) which is an intrastate pipeline facility regulated under State
 laws comparable to the provisions of law referred to in clause (i) or (ii)
 of this subparagraph,
 `(B) surface impoundment, pit, pond, or lagoon,
 `(C) liquid trap or associated gathering lines directly related to oil or
 gas production and gathering operations.
The term `above ground storage tank' shall not include any pipes connected
to any tank which is described in subparagraphs (A) through (C).
 `(2) The term `petroleum' means petroleum, including crude oil and refined
 products thereof (including fuel oil) or any fraction thereof which is
 liquid at standard conditions of temperature and pressure (60 degrees
 Fahrenheit and 14.7 per square inch absolute).
 `(3) The term `regulated substance' means any substance defined in section
 101(14) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
 Liability Act of 1980 (but not including any substance regulated as a
 hazardous waste under subtitle (C)).
 `(4) The term `owner' means--
 `(A) in the case of an above ground storage tank in use on the date
 of enactment of this section, or brought into use after that date, any
 person who owns an above ground storage tank used for the storage, use,
 or dispensing of petroleum, and
 `(B) in the case of any above ground storage tank in use before the date of
 enactment of this section, but no longer in use after such date of enactment,
 any person who owned such tank immediately before the discontinuation of
 its use.
 `(5) The term `operator' means any person in control of, or having
 responsibility for, the daily operation of the above ground storage tank.
 `(6) The term `release' means any spilling, leaking, emitting, discharging,
 escaping, leaching, or disposing from an above ground storage tank into
 ground water, surface water, surface or subsurface soils.
 `(7) The term `person' has the same meaning as provided in section 1004(15),
 except that such term includes a consortium, a joint venture, a commercial
 entity, and the United States Government.
 `(8) The term `nonoperational storage tank' means any above ground storage
 tank in which petroleum will not be deposited or from which petroleum will
 not be dispensed after the date of the enactment of this section.
`NOTIFICATION
 `SEC. 9021. (a) REQUIREMENTS- (1) Within 18 months after the date of
 enactment of this section, each owner of a storage tank located above
 ground, with a capacity of at least 25,000 gallons, shall notify the State
 or local agency or department designated pursuant to subsection (b)(1)
 of the existence of such tank, specifying the age, size, type, location,
 assembly history, and uses of such tank.
 `(2) Any owner which brings into use a storage tank located above ground,
 with a capacity of at least 25,000 gallons, after the initial notification
 period specified under paragraph (1), shall notify the designated State or
 local agency or department within 30 days of the existence of such tank,
 specifying the age, size, type, location, assembly history, and uses of
 such tank.
 `(3) Paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection shall not apply to tanks
 for which notice was given pursuant to section 103(c) of the Comprehensive
 Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 or section
 9002 of this Act.
 `(4) Beginning 30 days after the Administrator prescribes the form of notice
 pursuant to subsection (b)(2) and for 18 months thereafter, any person
 who deposits petroleum in an above ground storage tank shall reasonably
 notify the owner or operator of such tank of the owner's notification
 requirements pursuant to this subsection.
 `(b) AGENCY DESIGNATION- (1) Within 180 days after the enactment of this
 section, the Governor of each State shall designate the appropriate State
 agency or department or local agencies or departments to receive the
 notifications under subsection (a) (1) or (2).
 `(2) Within 12 months after the date of enactment of this section, the
 Administrator, in consultation with State and local officials designated
 pursuant to paragraph (1), and after notice and opportunity for public
 comment, shall prescribe the form of the notice and the information to be
 included in the notifications under subsection (a) (1) or (2).
 `(c) STATE INVENTORIES- Each State shall make an inventory of all above
 ground storage tanks in such State. In making such an inventory, the State
 shall utilize and aggregate the data in the notification forms submitted
 pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. Each State shall submit such
 aggregated data to the Administrator not later than 24 months after the
 date of enactment of this subsection.
`RELEASE PREVENTION, CORRECTION, AND FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY REGULATIONS
 `SEC. 9022. (a) REGULATIONS- The Administrator, after notice and opportunity
 for public comment, and at least 3 months before the effective dates
 specified in subsection (f), shall promulgate prevention, correction, and
 financial responsibility regulations applicable to owners and operators
 of above ground storage tanks, as may be necessary to protect human health
 and the environment.
 `(b) APPLICABILITY- The regulations issued under this section shall apply
 to above ground storage tanks that--
 `(1) are 30 or more years old;
 `(2) have been reassembled in whole or in part; or
 `(3) have been relocated from their site of original placement.
 `(c)(1) REQUIREMENTS- The regulations promulgated pursuant to this section
 shall include, but need not be limited to, the following requirements
 respecting above ground storage tanks--
 `(A) requirements for inspection of the structural integrity of regulated
 above ground storage tanks;
 `(B) requirements for the granting of operating permits pursuant to an
 inspection by the regulatory authority to ensure the integrity of the tank
 structure in order to prevent a release of petroleum into the environment;
 `(C) requirements for subsequent periodic inspections of the above ground
 storage tanks and renewal of the operating permit;
 `(D) requirements for immediate reporting of any releases and corrective
 action taken in response to a release from an above ground storage tank;
 `(E) requirements for taking corrective action in response to a release
 from an above ground storage tank;
 `(F) requirements for closure of above ground storage tanks to prevent
 future releases of petroleum into the environment; and
 `(G) requirements for maintaining evidence of financial responsibility
 for the estimated costs of closure and for taking corrective action and
 compensating third parties for bodily injury and property damage caused
 by sudden accidental releases arising from operating an above ground
 storage tank.
 `(2) In promulgating regulations under this section, the Administrator may
 take into consideration factors, including, but not limited to: location
 of the tanks, proximity of the tanks to drinking water supplies; age of
 tanks; condition of the tanks; history of maintenance; sizes of the tanks;
 any reassembling or altering of the tanks; type of petroleum contained in
 the tanks; existence of secondary containment designed and constructed to
 contain any release, including a release caused by a sudden and complete
 rupture of the tank; existing State programs regulating above ground
 storage tanks; and current industry recommended practices.
 `(d) FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY-
 `(1)(A) The Administrator, in promulgating financial responsibility
 regulations under this section, shall conduct a study to determine the
 appropriate amounts of coverage, both per occurrence and aggregate. The
 factors to be evaluated by the Administrator in conducting the study
 to determine the appropriate amounts of coverage shall include, but
 not be limited to: the estimated costs of cleaning up navigable waters,
 groundwater, and surface and subsurface soils; the costs of correcting any
 other environmental damage; the costs of mitigating harm to wildlife; the
 costs incurred by Federal, State, and local government entities resulting
 from actions to protect public health and the environment; the costs
 incurred by private third parties due to the release; the availability of
 insurance and other methods of financial responsibility; and the ability
 of owners or operators to self-insure and to establish risk retention groups.
 `(B) On the basis of the results of the study conducted under this
 subsection, the Administrator shall require owners or operators to
 demonstrate financial responsibility for the costs of cleaning up a release
 and compensating third parties injured by a release.
 `(C) The Administrator, in promulgating financial responsibility requirements
 under this section, shall require owners or operators to demonstrate
 financial responsibility in an amount adequate to cover the costs of closure.
 `(2) Financial responsibility required by this subsection may be established
 in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Administrator by any one,
 or any combination, of the following: insurance, guarantee, surety bond,
 letter of credit, qualification as a self-insurer, or any other method
 satisfactory to the Administrator. In promulgating requirements under this
 subsection, the Administrator is authorized to specify policy or other
 contractual terms, conditions, or defenses, which are necessary or are
 unacceptable in establishing such evidence of financial responsibility in
 order to effectuate the purposes of this subtitle.
 `(3) In any case where the owner or operator is in bankruptcy,
 reorganization, or arrangement, pursuant to the Federal Bankruptcy Code
 or where with reasonable diligence jurisdiction in any State court of the
 Federal courts cannot be obtained over an owner or operator likely to
 be solvent at the time of judgment, any claim arising from conduct for
 which evidence of financial responsibility must be provided under this
 subsection may be asserted directly against the guarantor providing such
 evidence of financial responsibility. In the case of any action pursuant
 to this paragraph such guarantor shall be entitled to invoke all rights
 and defenses which would have been available to the owner or operator if
 any action had been brought against the owner or operator by the claimant
 and which would have been available to the guarantor if an action had been
 brought against the guarantor by the owner or operator.
 `(4) The total liability of any guarantor shall be limited to the
 aggregate amount which the guarantor has provided as evidence of financial
 responsibility to the owner or operator under this section. Nothing in
 this subsection shall be construed to limit any other State or Federal
 statutory, contractual or common law liability of a guarantor to its
 owner or operator including, but not limited to, the liability of such
 guarantor for bad faith either in negotiating or in failing to negotiate
 the settlement of any claim. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed
 to diminish the liability of any person under section 107 or 111 of the
 Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of
 1980 or other applicable law.
 `(5) For the purpose of this subsection, the term `guarantor' means any
 person, other than the owner or operator, who provides evidence of financial
 responsibility for an owner or operator under this subsection.
 `(6) The Administrator may waive the financial responsibility requirements
 under this section upon the determination that the owner or operator has
 demonstrated that secondary containment designed and constructed to be
 adequate to hold any release, including a release caused by a sudden and
 complete rupture of the above ground storage tank, exists at the tank site.
 `(e) EFFECTIVE DATE- Regulations issued pursuant to this section shall
 be effective not later than 30 months after the date of enactment of
 this section.
 `(f) EPA Response Program for Petroleum-
 `(1) BEFORE REGULATIONS- Before the effective date of regulations under
 this section, the Administrator (or a State pursuant to paragraph (6)
 of this subsection) is authorized to--
 `(A) require the owner or operator of an above ground storage tank to
 undertake corrective action with respect to any release of petroleum when
 the Administrator (or the State) determines that such corrective action
 will be done properly and promptly by the owner or operator of the above
 ground storage tank from which the release occurs; or
 `(B) undertake corrective action with respect to any release of petroleum
 into the environment from an above ground storage tank if such action is
 necessary, in the judgment of the Administrator (or the State), to protect
 human health and the environment.
The corrective action undertaken or required under this paragraph shall be
such as may be necessary to protect human health and the environment.
 `(2) AFTER REGULATIONS- Following the effective date of regulations under
 subsection (c), all actions or orders of the Administrator (or a State
 pursuant to paragraph (6)) described in paragraph (1) of this subsection
 shall be in conformity with such regulations. Following such effective
 date, the Administrator (or the State) may undertake corrective action
 with respect to any release of petroleum into the environment from an above
 ground storage tank only if such action is necessary, in the judgment of the
 Administrator (or the State), to protect human health and the environment
 and one or more of the following situations exists:
 `(A) A situation which requires prompt action by the Administrator (or
 the State) under this paragraph to protect human health and the environment.
 `(B) The owner or operator of the tank has failed or refused to comply
 with an order of the Administrator under this subsection or section 9025
 or with the order of a State under this subsection to comply with the
 corrective action regulations.
 `(3) CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDERS- The Administrator is authorized to issue
 orders to the owner or operator of an above ground storage tank to carry
 out subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) or to carry out regulations issued
 under subsection (c)(1)(E). A State acting pursuant to paragraph (6) of
 this subsection is authorized to carry out subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1)
 only until the State's program is approved by the Administrator under section
 9023 of this subtitle. Such orders shall be issued and enforced in the same
 manner and subject to the same requirements as orders under section 9025.
 `(4) ALLOWABLE CORRECTIVE ACTIONS- The corrective actions undertaken
 by the Administrator (or a State pursuant to paragraph (6)) may include
 temporary or permanent relocation of residents and alternative household
 water supplies. In connection with the performance of any corrective action
 under paragraph (1) or (3), the Administrator may undertake an exposure
 assessment as defined in paragraph (9) of this subsection or provide for such
 an assessment in a cooperative agreement with a State pursuant to paragraph
 (6) of this subsection. The costs of any such assessment may be treated as
 corrective action for purposes of paragraph (5), relating to cost recovery.
 `(5) Recovery of costs-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Whenever costs have been incurred by the Administrator,
 or by a State pursuant to paragraph (6), for undertaking corrective action
 or enforcement action with respect to the release of petroleum from an
 above ground storage tank, the owner or operator of such tank shall be
 liable to the Administrator or the State for such costs. The liability
 under this paragraph shall be construed to be the standard of liability
 applicable under section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
 `(B) RECOVERY- In determining the equities for seeking the recovery of
 costs under subparagraph (A), the Administrator (or a State pursuant to
 paragraph (6) of this subsection) may consider the amount of financial
 responsibility required to be maintained under subsections (c) and (d)
 of this section and the factors considered in establishing such amount.
 `(C) EFFECT ON LIABILITY-
 `(i) NO TRANSFERS OF LIABILITY- No indemnification, hold harmless, or similar
 agreement or conveyance shall be effective to transfer from the owner or
 operator of any above ground storage tank or from any person who may be
 liable for a release or threat of release under this subsection. Nothing
 in this subsection shall bar any agreement to insure, hold harmless,
 or indemnify a party to such agreement for any liability under this section.
 `(ii) NO BAR TO CAUSE OF ACTION- Nothing in this subsection, including the
 provisions of clause (i) of this subparagraph, shall bar a cause of action
 that an owner or operator or any other person subject to liability under
 this section, or a guarantor, has or would have, by reason of subrogation
 or otherwise against any person.
 `(D) FACILITY- For purposes of this paragraph, the term `facility' means,
 with respect to any owner or operator, all above ground storage tanks used
 for the storage of petroleum which are owned or operated by such owner or
 operator and located on a single parcel of property (or on any contiguous
 or adjacent property).
 `(6) State authorities-
 `(A) GENERAL- A State may exercise the authorities in paragraphs (1) and
 (2) of this subsection, subject to the terms and conditions of paragraphs
 (4), (8), (9), and (10), if--
 `(i) the Administrator determines that the State has the capabilities to
 carry out effective corrective actions and enforcement activities; and
 `(ii) the Administrator enters into a cooperative agreement with the State
 setting out the actions to be undertaken by the State.
 `(B) COST SHARE- Following the effective date of the regulations under
 this section, the State shall pay 10 per centum of the cost of corrective
 actions undertaken either by the Administrator or by the State under a
 cooperative agreement, except that the Administrator may take corrective
 action at a facility where immediate action is necessary to respond to an
 imminent and substantial endangerment to human health or the environment
 if the State fails to pay the cost share.
 `(7) EMERGENCY PROCUREMENT POWERS- Notwithstanding any other provision of
 law, the Administrator may authorize the use of such emergency procurement
 powers as he deems necessary.
 `(8) DEFINITION OF OWNER- As used in this subsection, the term `owner'
 does not include any person who, without participating in the management
 of an above ground storage tank and otherwise not engaged in petroleum
 production, refining, and marketing, holds indicia of ownership primarily
 to protect the owner's security interest in the tank.
 `(9) DEFINITION OF EXPOSURE ASSESSMENT- As used in this subsection, the
 term `exposure assessment' means an assessment to determine the extent of
 exposure of, or potential for exposure of, individuals to petroleum from
 a release from an above ground storage tank based on such factors as the
 nature and extent of contamination and the existence of or potential for
 pathways of human exposure (including ground or surface water contamination,
 air emissions, and food chain contamination), the size of the community
 within the likely pathways of exposure, and the comparison of expected human
 exposure levels to the short-term and long-term health effects associated
 with identified contaminants and any available recommended exposure or
 tolerance limits for such contaminants. Such assessment shall not delay
 corrective action to abate immediate hazards or reduce exposure.
 `(10) FACILITIES WITHOUT FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY- At any facility
 where the owner or operator has failed to maintain evidence of financial
 responsibility in amounts at least equal to the amounts established by
 subsection (d)(1)(B) of this section for whatever reason, the Administrator
 shall use the authorities provided in subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1)
 and paragraph (3) of this subsection and section 9025 of this subtitle to
 order corrective action to clean up such releases. States acting pursuant
 to paragraph (6) of this subsection shall use the authorities provided in
 subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) and paragraph (3) of this subsection to
 order corrective action to clean up such releases. Notwithstanding the
 provisions of this paragraph, the Administrator may take the corrective
 actions authorized by paragraph (4) of this subsection to protect human
 health at such facilities and shall seek full recovery of the costs
 of all such actions pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (5)(A) of
 this subsection and without consideration of the factors in paragraph
 (5)(B) of this subsection. Nothing in this paragraph shall prevent the
 Administrator (or a State pursuant to paragraph (6) of this subsection)
 from taking corrective action at a facility where there is no solvent
 owner or operator or where immediate action is necessary to respond to an
 imminent and substantial endangerment of human health or the environment.
`APPROVAL OF STATE PROGRAMS
 `SEC. 9023. (a) ELEMENTS OF STATE PROGRAM- Beginning 30 months after the
 date of enactment of this section, any State may submit an above ground
 storage tank release prevention, correction, and financial responsibility
 program for review and approval by the Administrator. A State program
 may be approved by the Administrator under this section only if the State
 demonstrates that the State program includes the following requirements
 and provides for adequate enforcement of compliance with such requirements--
 `(1) requirements for inspection of the structural integrity of regulated
 above ground storage tanks;
 `(2) requirements for the granting of operating permits pursuant to an
 inspection by the regular authority to ensure the integrity of the tank
 structure in order to prevent a release of petroleum into the environment;
 `(3) requirements for subsequent periodic inspections of the above ground
 storage tanks and renewal of the operating permit;
 `(4) requirements for immediate reporting of any releases and corrective
 action taken in response to a release from an above ground storage tank;
 `(5) requirements for taking corrective action in response to a release
 from an above ground storage tank;
 `(6) requirements for closure of above ground storage tanks to prevent
 future releases of petroleum into the environment;
 `(7) requirements for maintaining evidence of financial responsibility
 for taking corrective action and compensating third parties for bodily
 injury and property damage caused by sudden accidental releases arising
 from operating above ground storage tank; and
 `(8) requirements--
 `(A) for notifying the appropriate State agency or department (or local
 agency or department) designated according to section 9021(b)(1) of the
 existence of any operational or nonoperational storage tank; and
 `(B) for providing the information required on the form issued pursuant
 to section 9021(b)(2).
 `(b) FEDERAL STANDARDS- (1) A State program submitted under this section
 may be approved only if the requirements under paragraphs (1) through (7)
 of subsection (a) are no less stringent that the corresponding requirements
 standards promulgated by the Administrator pursuant to section 9022(a).
 `(c) EPA DETERMINATION- (1) Within 180 days of the date of receipt of a
 proposed State program, the Administrator shall, after notice and opportunity
 for public comment, make a determination whether the State's program complies
 with the provisions of this section and provides for adequate enforcement
 of compliance with the requirements adopted pursuant to this section.
 `(2) If the Administrator determines that a State program complies with
 the provisions of this section and provides for adequate enforcement
 of compliance with the requirements adopted pursuant to this section,
 he shall approve the State program in lieu of the Federal program and
 the State shall have primary enforcement responsibility with respect to
 requirements of its program.
 `(d) WITHDRAWAL OF AUTHORIZATION- Whenever the Administrator determines
 after a public hearing that a State is not administering and enforcing a
 program authorized under this subtitle in accordance with the provisions
 of this section, he shall so notify the State. If appropriate action is
 not taken within a reasonable time, not to exceed 120 days after such
 notification, the Administrator shall withdraw approval of such program
 and reestablish the Federal program pursuant to this subtitle.
`INSPECTIONS, MONITORING, TESTING, AND CORRECTIVE ACTION
 `SEC. 9024. (a) FURNISHING INFORMATION- For the purposes of issuing and
 renewing operating permits, developing or assisting in the development
 of any regulation, conducting any study, taking any corrective action,
 or enforcing the provisions of this subtitle, any owner or operator of an
 above ground storage tank shall, upon request of any officer, employee,
 or representative of the Environmental Protection Agency, duly designated
 by the Administrator, or upon request of any duly designated officer,
 employee, or representative of a State, with an approved program, acting
 pursuant to subsection (f)(6) of section 9022, furnish information
 relating to such tanks, their associated equipment, their contents,
 conduct monitoring or testing, permit such officer at all reasonable
 times to have access to, and to copy, all records relating to such tanks,
 and to have access for corrective action. For the purposes of issuing and
 renewing operating permits, developing or assisting in the development
 of any regulation, conducting any study, taking corrective action, or
 enforcing the provisions of this subtitle, such officers, employees,
 or representatives are authorized--
 `(1) to enter at reasonable times any establishment or other place where
 an above ground storage tank is located;
 `(2) to inspect and obtain samples from any person of any substance
 contained in such tank;
 `(3) to conduct monitoring or testing of the tanks, associated equipment,
 contents, or surrounding soils, air, surface water or ground water; and
 `(4) to take corrective action.
Each such inspection shall be commenced and completed with reasonable
promptness.
 `(b) CONFIDENTIALITY- (1) Any records, reports, or information obtained
 from any persons under this section shall be available to the public,
 except that upon a showing satisfactory to the Administrator (or the State,
 as the case may be) by any person that records, reports, or information,
 or a particular part thereof, to which the Administrator (or the State,
 as the case may be) or any officer, employee, or representative thereof
 has access under this section if made public, would divulge information
 entitled to protection under section 1905 of title 18 of the United
 States Code, such information or particular portion thereof shall be
 considered confidential in accordance with the purposes of that section,
 except that such record, report, document, or information may be disclosed
 to other officers, employees, or authorized representatives of the United
 States concerned with carrying out this subtitle, or when relevant in any
 proceeding under this subtitle.
 `(2) Any person not subject to the provisions of section 1905 of title
 18 of the United States Code who knowingly and willfully divulges or
 discloses any information entitled to protection under this subsection
 shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $5,000 or
 to imprisonment not to exceed 1 year, or both.
 `(3) In submitting data under this subtitle, a person required to provide
 such data may--
 `(A) designate the data which such person believes is entitled to protection
 under this subsection, and
 `(B) submit such designated data separately from other data submitted
 under this subtitle.
A designation under this paragraph shall be made in writing and in such
manner as the Administrator may prescribe.
 `(4) Notwithstanding any limitation contained in this section or any other
 provision of law, all information reported to, or otherwise obtained, by
 the Administrator (or any representative of the Administrator) under this
 Act shall be made available, upon written request of any duly authorized
 committee of the Congress, to such committee (including records, reports,
 or information obtained by representatives of the Environmental Protection
 Agency).
`FEDERAL ENFORCEMENT
 `SEC. 9025. (a) COMPLIANCE ORDERS- (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2),
 whenever on the basis of any information, the Administrator determines
 that any person is in violation of any requirement of this subtitle, the
 Administrator may issue an order requiring compliance within a reasonable
 specified time period or the Administrator may commence a civil action
 in the United States district court in which the violation occurred for
 appropriate relief, including a temporary or permanent injunction.
 `(2) In the case of a violation of any requirement of this subtitle where
 such violation occurs in a State with a program approved under section 9023,
 the Administrator shall give notice to the State in which such violation
 has occurred prior to issuing an order or commencing a civil action under
 this section.
 `(3) If a violator fails to comply with an order under this subsection
 within the time specified in the order, he shall be liable for a civil
 penalty of not more than $25,000 for each day of continued noncompliance.
 `(b) PROCEDURE- Any order issued under this section shall become final
 unless, no later than 30 days after the order is served, the person or
 persons named therein request a public hearing. Upon such request the
 Administrator shall promptly conduct a public hearing. In connection with any
 proceeding under this section the Administrator may issue subpoenas for the
 attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant papers,
 books, and documents, and may promulgate rules for discovery procedures.
 `(c) CONTENTS OF ORDER- Any order issued under this section shall state
 with reasonable specificity the nature of the violation, specify a
 reasonable time for compliance, and assess a penalty, if any, which the
 Administrator determines is reasonable, taking into account the seriousness
 of the violation and any good faith efforts to comply with the applicable
 requirements.
 `(d) CIVIL PENALTIES- (1) Any owner who knowingly fails to notify or submits
 false information pursuant to section 9021(a) shall be subject to a civil
 penalty not to exceed $10,000 for each tank for which notification is not
 given or false information is submitted.
 `(2) Any owner or operator of an above ground storage tank who fails to
 comply with--
 `(A) any requirement promulgated by the Administrator under section 9022; or
 `(B) any requirement of a State program approved pursuant to section 9023;
shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $10,000 for each tank for
each day of violation.
`FEDERAL FACILITIES
 `SEC. 9026. (a) APPLICATION OF SUBTITLE- Each department, agency, and
 instrumentality of the Federal Government having jurisdiction over any
 above ground storage tank shall be subject to and comply with all Federal,
 State, interstate, and local requirements, applicable to such tank, both
 substantive and procedural, in the same manner, and to the same extent,
 as any other person is subject to such requirements, including payment
 of reasonable service charges. Neither the United States, nor any agent,
 employee, or officer thereof shall be immune or exempt from any process
 or sanction of any State or Federal court with respect to the enforcement
 of any such injunctive relief.
 `(b) PRESIDENTIAL EXEMPTION- The President may exempt any above ground
 storage tanks of any department, agency, or instrumentality in the Executive
 branch from compliance with such a requirement if he determines it to be
 in the paramount interest of the United States to do so. No such exemption
 shall be granted due to lack of appropriations unless the President shall
 have specifically requested such appropriations as a part of the budgetary
 process and the Congress shall have failed to make available such requested
 appropriations. Any exemption shall be for a period not in excess of 1
 year, but additional exemptions may be granted for periods not to exceed 1
 year upon the President's making a new determination. The President shall
 report each January to the Congress all exemptions from the requirements
 of this section granted during the preceding calendar year, together with
 his reason for granting each such exemption.
`JUDICIAL REVIEW
 `SEC. 9027. Section 7006(b) is amended by adding `and section 9022' after
 `section 3005' and adding `and section 9028' after `section 3006'.
`STATE AUTHORITY
 `SEC. 9028. Nothing in this subtitle shall preclude or deny any right of any
 State or political subdivision thereof to adopt or enforce any regulation
 or requirement respecting above ground storage tanks that is more stringent
 than a regulation requirement in effect under this subtitle or to impose
 any additional liability with respect to the release of regulated substances
 within such State or political subdivision.
`STUDY OF ABOVE GROUND STORAGE TANKS
 `SEC. 9029. (a)(1) DEADLINE- Not later than 12 months after the date of
 enactment of this section, the Administrator shall complete a study of
 above ground storage tanks used for the storage of petroleum.
 `(2) ELEMENTS OF STUDIES- The studies under paragraph (1) shall include
 an assessment of the ages, sizes, types (including methods of manufacture,
 coatings, protection systems, the compatibility of the construction materials
 and the installation methods) and locations (including the climate of
 the locations and proximity to drinking water sources) of such tanks;
 soil conditions, water tables, and the hydrogeology of tank locations;
 the relationship between the foregoing factors and the likelihood of
 releases from above ground storage tanks; the effectiveness and costs of
 secondary containment; the effectiveness and costs of inventory systems
 and tank testing systems; and such other factors as the Administrator
 deems appropriate.
 `(3) REPORTS- Upon completion of the studies authorized by this section,
 the Administrator shall submit reports to the President and to the Congress
 containing the results of the studies and recommendations respecting whether
 or not such tanks should be subject to the preceding provisions of this
 subtitle and whether the capacity level of 1,000,000 gallons should be
 revised to a more appropriate level in order to protect human health and
 the environment.
 `(b)(1) DEADLINE- Not later than 12 months after the date of enactment
 of this section, the Administrator shall complete a study of above ground
 storage tanks used for the storage of regulated substances.
 `(2) ELEMENTS OF STUDIES- The studies under paragraph (1) shall include
 an assessment of the ages, sizes, types (including methods of manufacture,
 coatings, protection systems, the compatibility of the construction materials
 and the installation methods) and locations (including the climate of
 the locations and proximity to drinking water sources) of such tanks;
 soil conditions, water tables, and the hydrogeology of tank locations;
 the relationship between the foregoing factors and the likelihood of
 releases from above ground storage tanks; the effectiveness and costs of
 secondary containment; the effectiveness and costs of inventory systems
 and tank testing systems; and such other factors as the Administrator
 deems appropriate.
 `(3) REPORTS- Upon completion of the studies authorized by this section,
 the Administrator shall submit reports to the President and to the Congress
 containing the results of the studies and recommendations respecting
 whether above ground storage tanks containing regulated substances should
 be subject to the preceding provisions of this subtitle.
 `(c) STUDY AND REPORT- The Administrator shall conduct a study and submit
 a report to the Congress regarding the cause and environmental effects of
 the petroleum spill into the Monongahela River on January 2, 1988.
`INSPECTOR TRAINING PROGRAM
 `SEC. 9030. (a) PROGRAM- The Administrator shall, by regulation, establish
 and carry out inspector training programs in all the regional offices of
 the Environmental Protection Agency.
 `(b) INSPECTOR TRAINING PROGRAMS- Inspector training programs under this
 section shall be available to all inspectors carrying out responsibilities
 pursuant to this Act. Such programs shall include, among others, classroom
 based programs, review of regulations of the Environmental Protection Agency,
 apprenticeship programs for prospective inspectors, and the development
 of a nationwide training manual.
`AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS
 `SEC. 9031. For fiscal year 1990, and each of the next following 4
 fiscal years, there are authorized to be appropriated, out of the Leaking
 Underground Storage Tank Fund established by section 9508 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986, such sums as may be necessary to carry out the
 provisions of this subtitle.'.
 SEC. 2. The table of contents of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended
 by inserting the following after the items relating to subtitle I:
`Subtitle J--Regulation of Above Ground Storage Tanks
`Sec. 9020. Definitions and exemptions.
`Sec. 9021. Notification.
`Sec. 9022. Release prevention, correction, and financial responsibility
regulations.
`Sec. 9023. Approval of State programs.
`Sec. 9024. Inspections, monitoring, testing, and corrective action.
`Sec. 9025. Federal enforcement.
`Sec. 9026. Federal facilities.
`Sec. 9027. Judicial review.
`Sec. 9028. State authority.
`Sec. 9029. Study of above ground storage tanks.
`Sec. 9030. Inspector training program.
`Sec. 9031. Authorization of appropriations.'.