[Congressional Bills 107th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 2600 Engrossed in Senate (ES)]

107th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 S. 2600

_______________________________________________________________________

 AN ACT

 To ensure the continued financial capacity of insurers to provide 
 coverage for risks from terrorism.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 
2002''.

SEC. 2. CONGRESSIONAL FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.

 (a) Findings.--The Congress finds that--
 (1) property and casualty insurance firms are important 
 financial institutions, the products of which allow 
 mutualization of risk and the efficient use of financial 
 resources and enhance the ability of the economy to maintain 
 stability, while responding to a variety of economic, 
 political, environmental, and other risks with a minimum of 
 disruption;
 (2) the ability of businesses and individuals to obtain 
 property and casualty insurance at reasonable and predictable 
 prices, in order to spread the risk of both routine and 
 catastrophic loss, is critical to economic growth, urban 
 development, and the construction and maintenance of public and 
 private housing, as well as to the promotion of United States 
 exports and foreign trade in an increasingly interconnected 
 world;
 (3) the ability of the insurance industry to cover the 
 unprecedented financial risks presented by potential acts of 
 terrorism in the United States can be a major factor in the 
 recovery from terrorist attacks, while maintaining the 
 stability of the economy;
 (4) widespread financial market uncertainties have arisen 
 following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, 
 including the absence of information from which financial 
 institutions can make statistically valid estimates of the 
 probability and cost of future terrorist events, and therefore 
 the size, funding, and allocation of the risk of loss caused by 
 such acts of terrorism;
 (5) a decision by property and casualty insurers to deal 
 with such uncertainties, either by terminating property and 
 casualty coverage for losses arising from terrorist events, or 
 by radically escalating premium coverage to compensate for 
 risks of loss that are not readily predictable, could seriously 
 hamper ongoing and planned construction, property acquisition, 
 and other business projects, generate a dramatic increase in 
 rents, and otherwise suppress economic activity; and
 (6) the United States Government should provide temporary 
 financial compensation to insured parties, contributing to the 
 stabilization of the United States economy in a time of 
 national crisis, while the financial services industry develops 
 the systems, mechanisms, products, and programs necessary to 
 create a viable financial services market for private terrorism 
 risk insurance.
 (b) Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to establish a temporary 
Federal program that provides for a transparent system of shared public 
and private compensation for insured losses resulting from acts of 
terrorism, in order to--
 (1) protect consumers by addressing market disruptions and 
 ensure the continued widespread availability and affordability 
 of property and casualty insurance for terrorism risk; and
 (2) allow for a transitional period for the private markets 
 to stabilize, resume pricing of such insurance, and build 
 capacity to absorb any future losses, while preserving State 
 insurance regulation and consumer protections.

SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act, the following definitions shall apply:
 (1) Act of terrorism.--
 (A) Certification.--The term ``act of terrorism'' 
 means any act that is certified by the Secretary, in 
 concurrence with the Secretary of State, and the 
 Attorney General of the United States--
 (i) to be a violent act or an act that is 
 dangerous to--
 (I) human life;
 (II) property; or
 (III) infrastructure;
 (ii) to have resulted in damage within the 
 United States, or outside the United States in 
 the case of an air carrier or vessel described 
 in paragraph (3)(A)(ii); and
 (iii) to have been committed by an 
 individual or individuals acting on behalf of 
 any foreign person or foreign interest, as part 
 of an effort to coerce the civilian population 
 of the United States or to influence the policy 
 or affect the conduct of the United States 
 Government by coercion.
 (B) Limitation.--No act or event shall be certified 
 by the Secretary as an act of terrorism if--
 (i) the act or event is committed in the 
 course of a war declared by the Congress; or
 (ii) losses resulting from the act or 
 event, in the aggregate, do not exceed 
 $5,000,000.
 (C) Determinations final.--Any certification of, or 
 determination not to certify, an act or event as an act 
 of terrorism under this paragraph shall be final, and 
 shall not be subject to judicial review.
 (2) Business interruption coverage.--The term ``business 
 interruption coverage''--
 (A) means coverage of losses for temporary 
 relocation expenses and ongoing expenses, including 
 ordinary wages, where--
 (i) there is physical damage to the 
 business premises of such magnitude that the 
 business cannot open for business;
 (ii) there is physical damage to other 
 property that totally prevents customers or 
 employees from gaining access to the business 
 premises; or
 (iii) the Federal, State, or local 
 government shuts down an area due to physical 
 or environmental damage, thereby preventing 
 customers or employees from gaining access to 
 the business premises; and
 (B) does not include lost profits, other than in 
 the case of a small business concern (as defined in 
 section 3 of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 632) and 
 applicable regulations thereunder) in any case 
 described in clause (i), (ii), or (iii) of subparagraph 
 (A).
 (3) Insured loss.--The term ``insured loss''--
 (A) means any loss resulting from an act of 
 terrorism that is covered by primary property and 
 casualty insurance, including business interruption 
 coverage, issued by a participating insurance company, 
 if such loss--
 (i) occurs within the United States; or
 (ii) occurs to an air carrier (as defined 
 in section 40102 of title 49, United States 
 Code) or to a United States flag vessel (or a 
 vessel based principally in the United States, 
 on which United States income tax is paid and 
 whose insurance coverage is subject to 
 regulation in the United States), regardless of 
 where the loss occurs; and
 (B) excludes coverage under any life or health 
 insurance.
 (4) Market share.--
 (A) In general.--The ``market share'' of a 
 participating insurance company shall be calculated 
 using the total amount of direct written property and 
 casualty insurance premiums for the participating 
 insurance company during the 2-year period preceding 
 the year in which the subject act of terrorism occurred 
 (or during such other period for which adequate data 
 are available, as determined by the Secretary), as a 
 percentage of the aggregate of all such property and 
 casualty insurance premiums industry-wide during that 
 period.
 (B) Adjustments.--The Secretary may adjust the 
 market share of a participating insurance company under 
 subparagraph (A), as necessary to reflect current 
 market participation of that participating insurance 
 company.
 (5) NAIC.--The term ``NAIC'' means the National Association 
 of Insurance Commissioners.
 (6) Participating insurance company.--The term 
 ``participating insurance company'' means any insurance 
 company, including any subsidiary or affiliate thereof--
 (A) that--
 (i) is licensed or admitted to engage in 
 the business of providing primary insurance in 
 any State, and was so licensed or admitted on 
 September 11, 2001; or
 (ii) is not licensed or admitted as 
 described in clause (i), if it is an eligible 
 surplus line carrier listed on the Quarterly 
 Listing of Alien Insurers of the NAIC, or any 
 successor thereto;
 (B) that receives direct premiums for any type of 
 commercial property and casualty insurance coverage or 
 that, not later than 21 days after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, submits written notification to 
 the Secretary of its intent to participate in the 
 Program with regard to personal lines of property and 
 casualty insurance; and
 (C) that meets any other criteria that the 
 Secretary may reasonably prescribe.
 (7) Participating insurance company deductible.--The term 
 ``participating insurance company deductible'' means--
 (A) a participating insurance company's market 
 share, multiplied by $10,000,000,000, with respect to 
 insured losses resulting from an act of terrorism 
 occurring during the 1-year period beginning on the 
 date of enactment of this Act; and
 (B) a participating insurance company's market 
 share, multiplied by $15,000,000,000, with respect to 
 insured losses resulting from an act of terrorism 
 occurring during the 1-year period beginning on the day 
 after the date of expiration of the period described in 
 subparagraph (A), if the Program is extended in 
 accordance with section 6.
 (8) Person.--The term ``person'' means any individual, 
 business or nonprofit entity (including those organized in the 
 form of a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, 
 or association), trust or estate, or a State or political 
 subdivision of a State or other governmental unit.
 (9) Program.--The term ``Program'' means the Terrorism 
 Insured Loss Shared Compensation Program established by this 
 Act.
 (10) Property and casualty insurance.--The term ``property 
 and casualty insurance''--
 (A) means commercial lines of property and casualty 
 insurance, including workers' compensation insurance;
 (B) includes personal lines of property and 
 casualty insurance, if a notification is made in 
 accordance with paragraph (6)(B); and
 (C) does not include--
 (i) Federal crop insurance issued or 
 reinsured under the Federal Crop Insurance Act 
 (7 U.S.C. 1501 et seq.);
 (ii) private mortgage insurance, as that 
 term is defined in section 2 of the Homeowners 
 Protection Act of 1998 (12 U.S.C. 4901); or
 (iii) financial guaranty insurance.
 (11) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of the Treasury.
 (12) State.--The term ``State'' means any State of the 
 United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of 
 Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, 
 American Samoa, Guam, and each of the United States Virgin 
 Islands.
 (13) United states.--The term ``United States'' means the 
 several States, and includes the territorial sea of the United 
 States.
 (14) Rule of construction for dates.--With respect to any 
 reference to a date in this Act, such day shall be construed--
 (A) to begin at 12:01 a.m. on that date; and
 (B) to end at midnight on that date.

SEC. 4. TERRORISM INSURED LOSS SHARED COMPENSATION PROGRAM.

 (a) Establishment of Program.--
 (1) In general.--There is established in the Department of 
 the Treasury the Terrorism Insured Loss Shared Compensation 
 Program.
 (2) Authority of the secretary.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of State or Federal law, the Secretary shall 
 administer the Program, and shall pay the Federal share of 
 compensation for insured losses in accordance with subsection 
 (e).
 (b) Conditions for Federal Payments.--No payment may be made by the 
Secretary under subsection (e), unless--
 (1) a person that suffers an insured loss, or a person 
 acting on behalf of that person, files a claim with a 
 participating insurance company;
 (2) the participating insurance company provides clear and 
 conspicuous disclosure to the policyholder of the premium 
 charged for insured losses covered by the Program and the 
 Federal share of compensation for insured losses under the 
 Program--
 (A) in the case of any policy covering an insured 
 loss that is issued on or after the date of enactment 
 of this Act, on a separate line item in the policy, at 
 the time of offer, purchase, and renewal of the policy; 
 and
 (B) in the case of any policy that is issued before 
 the date of enactment of this Act, as a line item 
 described in subparagraph (A), not later than 90 days 
 after that date of enactment;
 (3) the participating insurance company processes the claim 
 for the insured loss in accordance with its standard business 
 practices, and any reasonable procedures that the Secretary may 
 prescribe; and
 (4) the participating insurance company submits to the 
 Secretary, in accordance with such reasonable procedures as the 
 Secretary may establish--
 (A) a claim for payment of the Federal share of 
 compensation for insured losses under the Program;
 (B) written verification and certification--
 (i) of the underlying claim; and
 (ii) of all payments made for insured 
 losses; and
 (C) certification of its compliance with the 
 provisions of this subsection.
 (c) Mandatory Participation; Mandatory Availability.--Each 
insurance company that meets the definition of a participating 
insurance company under section 3--
 (1) shall participate in the Program;
 (2) shall make available in all of its property and 
 casualty insurance policies (in all of its participating 
 lines), coverage for insured losses; and
 (3) shall make available property and casualty insurance 
 coverage for insured losses that does not differ materially 
 from the terms, amounts, and other coverage limitations 
 applicable to losses arising from events other than acts of 
 terrorism.
 (d) Participation by Self Insured Entities.--
 (1) Determination by the secretary.--The Secretary may, in 
 consultation with the NAIC, establish procedures to allow 
 participation in the Program by municipalities and other 
 governmental or quasi-governmental entities (and by any other 
 entity, as the Secretary deems appropriate) operating through 
 self insurance arrangements that were in existence on September 
 11, 2001, but only if the Secretary makes a determination with 
 regard to participation by any such entity before the 
 occurrence of an act of terrorism in which the entity incurs an 
 insured loss.
 (2) Participation.--If the Secretary makes a determination 
 to allow an entity described in paragraph (1) to participate in 
 the Program, all reports, conditions, requirements, and 
 standards established by this Act for participating insurance 
 companies shall apply to any such entity, as determined to be 
 appropriate by the Secretary.
 (e) Shared Insurance Loss Coverage.--
 (1) Federal share.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to the cap on liability 
 under paragraph (2) and the limitation under paragraph 
 (6), the Federal share of compensation under the 
 Program to be paid by the Secretary for insured losses 
 resulting from an act of terrorism occurring during the 
 1-year period beginning on the date of enactment of 
 this Act--
 (i) shall be equal to 80 percent of that 
 portion of the amount of aggregate insured 
 losses that--
 (I) exceeds the participating 
 insurance company deductibles required 
 to be paid for those insured losses; 
 and
 (II) does not exceed 
 $10,000,000,000; and
 (ii) shall be equal to 90 percent of that 
 portion of the amount of aggregate insured 
 losses that--
 (I) exceeds the participating 
 insurance company deductibles required 
 to be paid for those insured losses; 
 and
 (II) exceeds $10,000,000,000.
 (B) Extension period.--If the Program is extended 
 in accordance with section 6, the Federal share of 
 compensation under the Program to be paid by the 
 Secretary for insured losses resulting from an act of 
 terrorism occurring during the 1-year period beginning 
 on the day after the date of expiration of the period 
 described in subparagraph (A), shall be calculated in 
 accordance with clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph 
 (A), subject to the cap on liability in paragraph (2) 
 and the limitation under paragraph (6).
 (C) Pro rata share.--If, during the period 
 described in subparagraph (A) (or during the period 
 described in subparagraph (B), if the Program is 
 extended in accordance with section 6), the aggregate 
 insured losses for that period exceed $10,000,000,000, 
 the Secretary shall determine the pro rata share for 
 each participating insurance company of the Federal 
 share of compensation for insured losses calculated 
 under subparagraph (A).
 (D) Prohibition on duplicative compensation.--The 
 Federal share of compensation for insured losses under 
 the Program shall be reduced by the amount of 
 compensation provided by the Federal Government for 
 those insured losses under any other Federal insurance 
 or reinsurance program.
 (2) Cap on annual liability.--Notwithstanding paragraph 
 (1), or any other provision of Federal or State law, if the 
 aggregate insured losses exceed $100,000,000,000 during any 
 period referred to in subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph 
 (1)--
 (A) the Secretary shall not make any payment under 
 this Act for any portion of the amount of such losses 
 that exceeds $100,000,000,000; and
 (B) participating insurance companies shall not be 
 liable for the payment of any portion of the amount 
 that exceeds $100,000,000,000.
 (3) Notice to congress.--The Secretary shall notify the 
 Congress if estimated or actual aggregate insured losses exceed 
 $100,000,000,000 in any period described in paragraph (1), and 
 the Congress shall determine the procedures for and the source 
 of any such excess payments.
 (4) Final netting.--The Secretary shall have sole 
 discretion to determine the time at which claims relating to 
 any insured loss or act of terrorism shall become final.
 (5) Determinations final.--Any determination of the 
 Secretary under this subsection shall be final, and shall not 
 be subject to judicial review.
 (6) In-force reinsurance agreements.--For policies covered 
 by reinsurance contracts in force on the date of enactment of 
 this Act, until the in-force reinsurance contract is renewed, 
 amended, or has reached its 1-year anniversary date, any 
 Federal share of compensation due to a participating insurance 
 company for insured losses during the effective period of the 
 Program shall be shared--
 (A) with all reinsurance companies to which the 
 participating insurance company has ceded some share of 
 the insured loss pursuant to an in-force reinsurance 
 contract; and
 (B) in a manner that distributes the Federal share 
 of compensation for insured losses between the 
 participating insurance company and the reinsurance 
 company or companies in the same proportion as the 
 insured losses would have been distributed if the 
 Program did not exist.

SEC. 5. GENERAL AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION OF CLAIMS.

 (a) General Authority.--The Secretary shall have the powers and 
authorities necessary to carry out the Program, including authority--
 (1) to investigate and audit all claims under the Program; 
 and
 (2) to prescribe regulations and procedures to implement 
 the Program.
 (b) Interim Rules and Procedures.--The Secretary shall issue 
interim final rules or procedures specifying the manner in which--
 (1) participating insurance companies may file, verify, and 
 certify claims under the Program;
 (2) the Secretary shall publish or otherwise publicly 
 announce the applicable percentage of insured losses that is 
 the responsibility of participating insurance companies and the 
 percentage that is the responsibility of the Federal Government 
 under the Program;
 (3) the Federal share of compensation for insured losses 
 will be paid under the Program, including payments based on 
 estimates of or actual aggregate insured losses;
 (4) the Secretary may, at any time, seek repayment from or 
 reimburse any participating insurance company, based on 
 estimates of insured losses under the Program, to effectuate 
 the insured loss sharing provisions contained in section 4;
 (5) each participating insurance company that incurs 
 insured losses shall pay its pro rata share of insured losses, 
 in accordance with section 4; and
 (6) the Secretary will determine any final netting of 
 payments for actual insured losses under the Program, including 
 payments owed to the Federal Government from any participating 
 insurance company and any Federal share of compensation for 
 insured losses owed to any participating insurance company, to 
 effectuate the insured loss sharing provisions contained in 
 section 4.
 (c) Subrogation Rights.--The United States shall have the right of 
subrogation with respect to any payment made by the United States under 
the Program.
 (d) Contracts for Services.--The Secretary may employ persons or 
contract for services as may be necessary to implement the Program.
 (e) Civil Penalties.--The Secretary may assess civil money 
penalties for violations of this Act or any rule, regulation, or order 
issued by the Secretary under this Act relating to the submission of 
false or misleading information for purposes of the Program, or any 
failure to repay any amount required to be reimbursed under regulations 
or procedures described in section 5(b). The authority granted under 
this subsection shall continue during any period in which the 
Secretary's authority under section 6(d) is in effect.

SEC. 6. TERMINATION OF PROGRAM; DISCRETIONARY EXTENSION.

 (a) Termination of Program.--
 (1) In general.--The Program shall terminate 1 year after 
 the date of enactment of this Act, unless the Secretary--
 (A) determines, after considering the report and 
 finding required by this section, that the Program 
 should be extended for one additional year, beginning 
 on the day after the date of expiration of the initial 
 1-year period of the Program; and
 (B) promptly notifies the Congress of such 
 determination and the reasons therefor.
 (2) Determination final.--The determination of the 
 Secretary under paragraph (1) shall be final, and shall not be 
 subject to judicial review.
 (3) Termination after extension.--If the Program is 
 extended under paragraph (1), the Program shall terminate 1 
 year after the date of commencement of such extension period.
 (b) Report to Congress.--Not later than 9 months after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit a report to 
Congress--
 (1) regarding--
 (A) the availability of insurance coverage for acts 
 of terrorism;
 (B) the affordability of such coverage, including 
 the effect of such coverage on premiums; and
 (C) the capacity of the insurance industry to 
 absorb future losses resulting from acts of terrorism, 
 taking into account the profitability of the insurance 
 industry; and
 (2) that considers--
 (A) the impact of the Program on each of the 
 factors described in paragraph (1); and
 (B) the probable impact on such factors and on the 
 United States economy if the Program terminates 1 year 
 after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (c) Finding Required.--A determination under subsection (a) to 
extend the Program shall be based on a finding by the Secretary that--
 (1) widespread market uncertainties continue to 
 disrupt the ability of insurance companies to price 
 insurance coverage for losses resulting from acts of 
 terrorism, thereby resulting in the continuing 
 unavailability of affordable insurance for consumers; 
 and
 (2) extending the Program for an additional year 
 would likely encourage economic stabilization and 
 facilitate a transition to a viable market for private 
 terrorism risk insurance.
 (d) Continuing Authority To Pay or Adjust Compensation.--Following 
the termination of the Program under subsection (a), the Secretary may 
take such actions as may be necessary to ensure payment, reimbursement, 
or adjustment of compensation for insured losses arising out of any act 
of terrorism occurring during the period in which the Program was in 
effect under this Act, in accordance with the provisions of section 4 
and regulations promulgated thereunder.
 (e) Repeal; Savings Clause.--This Act is repealed at midnight on 
the final termination date of the Program under subsection (a), except 
that such repeal shall not be construed--
 (1) to prevent the Secretary from taking, or causing to be 
 taken, such actions under subsection (d) of this section and 
 sections 4(e)(4), 4(e)(5), 5(a)(1), 5(c), 5(d), and 5(e) (as in 
 effect on the day before the date of such repeal), and 
 applicable regulations promulgated thereunder, during any 
 period in which the authority of the Secretary under subsection 
 (d) of this section is in effect; or
 (2) to prevent the availability of funding under section 
 9(b) during any period in which the authority of the Secretary 
 under subsection (d) of this section is in effect.
 (f) Sense of the Congress.--It is the sense of the Congress that 
the Secretary should make any determination under subsection (a) in 
sufficient time to enable participating insurance companies to include 
coverage for acts of terrorism in their policies for the second year of 
the Program, if the Program is extended in accordance with this 
section.
 (g) Study and Report on Scope of the Program.--
 (1) Study.--The Secretary, after consultation with the 
 NAIC, representatives of the insurance industry, and other 
 experts in the insurance field, shall conduct a study of the 
 potential effects of acts of terrorism on the availability of 
 life insurance and other lines of insurance coverage.
 (2) Report.--Not later than 9 months after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit a report to 
 the Congress on the results of the study conducted under 
 paragraph (1).
 (h) Reports Regarding Terrorism Risk Insurance Premiums.--
 (1) Report to the naic.--Beginning 6 months after the date 
 of enactment of this Act, and every 6 months thereafter, each 
 participating insurance company shall submit a report to the 
 NAIC that states the premium rates charged by that 
 participating insurance company during the preceding 6-month 
 period for insured losses covered by the Program, and includes 
 an explanation of and justification for those rates.
 (2) Reports forwarded.--The NAIC shall promptly forward 
 copies of each report submitted under paragraph (1) to the 
 Secretary, the Secretary of Commerce, the Chairman of the 
 Federal Trade Commission, and the Comptroller General of the 
 United States.
 (3) Agency reports to congress.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary, the Secretary of 
 Commerce, and the Chairman of the Federal Trade 
 Commission shall submit joint reports to Congress and 
 the Comptroller General of the United States 
 summarizing and evaluating the reports forwarded under 
 paragraph (2).
 (B) Timing.--The reports required under 
 subparagraph (A) shall be submitted--
 (i) 9 months after the date of enactment of 
 this Act; and
 (ii) 12 months after the date of submission 
 of the first report under clause (i).
 (4) GAO evaluation and report.--
 (A) Evaluation.--The Comptroller General of the 
 United States shall evaluate each report submitted 
 under paragraph (3), and upon request, the Secretary, 
 the Secretary of Commerce, the Chairman of the Federal 
 Trade Commission, and the NAIC shall provide to the 
 Comptroller all documents, records, and any other 
 information that the Comptroller deems necessary to 
 carry out such evaluation.
 (B) Report to congress.--Not later than 90 days 
 after receipt of each report submitted under paragraph 
 (3), the Comptroller General of the United States shall 
 submit to Congress a report of the evaluation required 
 by subparagraph (A).

SEC. 7. PRESERVATION OF STATE LAW.

 Nothing in this Act shall affect the jurisdiction or regulatory 
authority of the insurance commissioner (or any agency or office 
performing like functions) of any State over any participating 
insurance company or other person--
 (1) except as specifically provided in this Act; and
 (2) except that--
 (A) the definition of the term ``act of terrorism'' 
 in section 3 shall be the exclusive definition of that 
 term for purposes of compensation for insured losses 
 under this Act, and shall preempt any provision of 
 State law that is inconsistent with that definition, to 
 the extent that such provision of law would otherwise 
 apply to any type of insurance covered by this Act;
 (B) during the period beginning on the date of 
 enactment of this Act and ending at midnight on 
 December 31, 2002, rates for terrorism risk insurance 
 covered by this Act and filed with any State shall not 
 be subject to prior approval or a waiting period, under 
 any law of a State that would otherwise be applicable, 
 except that nothing in this Act affects the ability of 
 any State to invalidate a rate as excessive, 
 inadequate, or unfairly discriminatory; and
 (C) during the period beginning on the date of 
 enactment of this Act and for so long as the Program is 
 in effect, as provided in section 6 (including any 
 period during which the authority of the Secretary 
 under section 6(d) is in effect), books and records of 
 any participating insurance company that are relevant 
 to the Program shall be provided, or caused to be 
 provided, to the Secretary or the designee of the 
 Secretary, upon request by the Secretary or such 
 designee, notwithstanding any provision of the laws of 
 any State prohibiting or limiting such access.

SEC. 8. SENSE OF THE CONGRESS REGARDING CAPACITY BUILDING.

 It is the sense of the Congress that the insurance industry should 
build capacity and aggregate risk to provide affordable property and 
casualty insurance coverage for terrorism risk.

SEC. 9. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS; PAYMENT AUTHORITY.

 (a) Administrative Expenses.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to the Secretary, out of funds in the Treasury not 
otherwise appropriated, such sums as may be necessary for 
administrative expenses of the Program, to remain available until 
expended.
 (b) Payment Authority.--This Act constitutes payment authority in 
advance of appropriation Acts, and represents the obligation of the 
Federal Government to provide for the Federal share of compensation for 
insured losses under the Program.

SEC. 10. PROCEDURES FOR CIVIL ACTIONS.

 (a) Federal Cause of Action.--
 (1) In general.--There shall exist a Federal cause of 
 action for property damage, personal injury, or death arising 
 out of or resulting from an act of terrorism, which shall be 
 the exclusive cause of action and remedy for claims for such 
 property damage, personal injury, or death, except as provided 
 in subsection (d).
 (2) Preemption of state actions.--All State causes of 
 action of any kind for property damage, personal injury, or 
 death arising out of or resulting from an act of terrorism that 
 are otherwise available under State law, are hereby preempted, 
 except as provided in subsection (d).
 (b) Governing Law.--The substantive law for decision in an action 
described in subsection (a)(1) shall be derived from the law, including 
applicable choice of law principles, of the State in which the act of 
terrorism giving rise to the action occurred, except to the extent 
that--
 (1) the law, including choice of law principles, of another 
 State is determined to be applicable to the action by the 
 district court hearing the action; or
 (2) otherwise applicable State law (including that 
 determined pursuant to paragraph (1), is inconsistent with or 
 otherwise preempted by Federal law.
 (c) Punitive Damages.--Any amounts awarded in a civil action 
described in subsection (a)(1) that are attributable to punitive 
damages shall not count as insured losses for purposes of this Act.
 (d) Claims Against Terrorists.--Nothing in this section shall in 
any way be construed to limit the ability of any plaintiff to seek any 
form of recovery from any person, government, or other entity that was 
a participant in, or aider and abettor of, any act of terrorism.
 (e) Effective Period.--This section shall apply only to actions 
described in subsection (a)(1) arising out of or resulting from acts of 
terrorism that occur during the effective period of the Program, 
including, if applicable, any extension period provided for under 
section 6.

SEC. 11. SATISFACTION OF JUDGMENTS FROM FROZEN ASSETS OF TERRORISTS, 
 TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS, AND STATE SPONSORS OF TERRORISM.

 (a) In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and 
except as provided in subsection (b), in every case in which a person 
has obtained a judgment against a terrorist party on a claim based upon 
an act of terrorism or for which a terrorist party is not immune under 
section 1605(a)(7) of title 28, United States Code, the blocked assets 
of that terrorist party (including the blocked assets of any agency or 
instrumentality of that terrorist party) shall be subject to execution 
or attachment in aid of execution in order to satisfy such judgment to 
the extent of any compensatory damages for which such terrorist party 
has been adjudged liable.
 (b) Presidential Waiver.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), upon determining 
 on an asset-by-asset basis that a waiver is necessary in the 
 national security interest, the President may waive the 
 requirements of subsection (a) in connection with (and prior to 
 the enforcement of) any judicial order directing attachment in 
 aid of execution or execution against any property subject to 
 the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations or the Vienna 
 Convention on Consular Relations.
 (2) Exception.--A waiver under this subsection shall not 
 apply to--
 (A) property subject to the Vienna Convention on 
 Diplomatic Relations or the Vienna Convention on 
 Consular Relations that has been used by the United 
 States for any nondiplomatic purpose (including use as 
 rental property), or the proceeds of such use; or
 (B) the proceeds of any sale or transfer for value 
 to a third party of any asset subject to the Vienna 
 Convention on Diplomatic Relations or the Vienna 
 Convention on Consular Relations.
 (c) Special Rule for Cases Against Iran.--Section 2002 of the 
Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000 (Public Law 
106-386; 114 Stat. 1542) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(2)(A)(ii), by inserting after ``July 
 27, 2000'' the following: ``or before October 28, 2000,'';
 (2) in subsection (b)(2)(B), by inserting after ``the date 
 of enactment of this Act'' the following: ``(less amounts 
 therein as to which the United States has an interest in 
 subrogation pursuant to subsection (c) arising prior to the 
 date of entry of the judgment or judgments to be satisfied in 
 whole or in part hereunder).'';
 (3) by redesignating subsections (d), (e), and (f) as 
 subsections (e), (f), and (g), respectively; and
 (4) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new 
 subsection (d):
 ``(d) Distribution of Foreign Military Sales Funds Inadequate to 
Satisfy Full Amount of Compensatory Awards Against Iran.--
 ``(1)(A) In the event that the Secretary determines that 
 the amounts available to be paid under subsection (b)(2) are 
 inadequate to pay the entire amount of compensatory damages 
 awarded in judgments issued as of the date of the enactment of 
 this subsection in cases identified in subsection (a)(2)(A), 
 the Secretary shall, not later than 60 days after such date, 
 make payment from the account specified in subsection (b)(2) to 
 each party to which such judgment has been issued a share of 
 the amounts in that account which are not subject to 
 subrogation to the United States under this Act.
 ``(B) The amount so paid to each such person shall be 
 calculated by the proportion that the amount of compensatory 
 damages awarded in a judgment issued to that particular person 
 bears to the total amount of all compensatory damages awarded 
 to all persons to whom judgments have been issued in cases 
 identified in subsection (a)(2)(A) as of the date referred to 
 in subparagraph (A).
 ``(2) Nothing herein shall bar, or require delay in, 
 enforcement of any judgment to which this subsection applies 
 under any procedure or against assets otherwise available under 
 this section or under any other provision of law.
 ``(3) Any person receiving less than the full amount of 
 compensatory damages awarded to that party in judgments to 
 which this subsection applies shall not be required to make the 
 election set forth in subsection (a)(2)(C) in order to qualify 
 for payment hereunder.''.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``terrorist party'' means a terrorist, a 
 terrorist organization, or a foreign state designated as a 
 state sponsor of terrorism under section 6(j) of the Export 
 Administration Act of 1979 (50 U.S.C. App. 2405(j)) or section 
 620A of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2371).
 (2) The term ``blocked asset'' means any asset seized or 
 frozen by the United States in accordance with law, or 
 otherwise held by the United States without claim of ownership 
 by the United States.
 (3) The term ``property subject to the Vienna Convention on 
 Diplomatic Relations or the Vienna Convention on Consular 
 Relations'' and the term ``asset subject to the Vienna 
 Convention on Diplomatic Relations or the Vienna Convention on 
 Consular Relations'' mean any property or asset, respectively, 
 the attachment in aid of execution or execution of which would 
 result in a violation of an obligation of the United States 
 under the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations or the 
 Vienna Convention on Consular Relations, as the case may be.

 Passed the Senate June 18, 2002.

 Attest:

 Secretary.
107th CONGRESS

 2d Session

 S. 2600

_______________________________________________________________________

 AN ACT

 To ensure the continued financial capacity of insurers to provide 
 coverage for risks from terrorism.