S 472 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 472
To secure the right of women to be free of sexual harassment and violence,
to promote equal opportunity for women, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
February 21 (legislative day, FEBRUARY 6), 1991
Mr. DOLE (for himself, Mr. SIMPSON, Mr. THURMOND, Mr. COCHRAN, Mr. KASTEN,
Mr. BURNS, Mr. D'AMATO, Mr. LUGAR, Mr. MCCAIN, Mr. MURKOWSKI, Mr. ROTH,
Mr. SEYMOUR, Mr. STEVENS, and Mr. WARNER) introduced the following bill;
which was read twice and referred to the Committee on the Judiciary
A BILL
To secure the right of women to be free of sexual harassment and violence,
to promote equal opportunity for women, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Women's Equal Opportunity
 Act of 1991'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--FEDERAL CIVIL RIGHTS REMEDIES
Subtitle A--Federal Remedies for Sexual Harassment in the Workplace
Sec. 101. Findings.
Sec. 102. Enhanced remedies for sexual harassment.
Sec. 103. Expedited injunctive relief for sexual harassment.
Sec. 104. Technical assistance.
Subtitle B--Expansion of Other Federal Civil Rights
Sec. 111. Expansion of protections against all racial discrimination in the
performance of contracts.
Sec. 112. Expansion of right to challenge discriminatory seniority systems.
Sec. 113. Congressional coverage.
Sec. 114. Effective date.
TITLE II--DOMESTIC AND STREET CRIME VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
Subtitle A--Safety on College and University Campuses
Sec. 201. Required campus reporting of sexual assault.
Subtitle B--Stronger Penalties for Federal Sex Offenses
Sec. 211. Capital punishment for murders in connection with sexual assaults
and child molestations.
Sec. 212. Increased penalties for recidivist sex offenders.
Sec. 213. Definition of sexual act for victims below 16 years of age.
Sec. 214. Drug distribution to pregnant women.
Subtitle C--Enhanced Compensation and Restitution for Victims of Sex Crimes
Sec. 221. Short title.
Sec. 222. Findings, purpose, and construction.
Sec. 223. Cause of action.
Sec. 224. Definitions.
Sec. 225. Restitution in sex offense cases.
Subtitle D--Reform of Procedure and Evidentiary Requirements in Sex Offense
and Other Cases
Sec. 231. Admissibility of evidence of similar crimes in sexual assault and
child molestation cases.
Sec. 232. Right of the victim to an impartial jury.
Sec. 233. Rules of professional conduct for lawyers in Federal practice.
Sec. 234. Statutory presumption against child custody.
Sec. 235. Full faith and credit for protective orders.
Sec. 236. HIV testing and penalty enhancement in sexual abuse cases.
Sec. 237. Payment of cost of HIV testing for victim.
Subtitle E--National Task Force on Violence Against Women
Sec. 241. Establishment.
Sec. 242. Duties of task force.
Sec. 243. Membership.
Sec. 244. Pay.
Sec. 245. Executive director and staff.
Sec. 246. Powers of task force.
Sec. 247. Report.
Sec. 248. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 249. Termination.
Subtitle F--Prevention of Sexual Assault
Sec. 251. Education and prevention grants to reduce sexual assaults against
women.
Subtitle G--Domestic Violence Prevention Act of 1991
Sec. 261. Short title.
Sec. 262. Expansion of purpose.
Sec. 263. Expansion of State demonstration grant program.
Sec. 264. Grants for public information campaigns.
Sec. 265. State commissions on domestic violence.
Sec. 266. Indian tribes.
Sec. 267. Funding limitations.
Sec. 268. Grants to entities other than States; local share.
Sec. 269. Shelter and related assistance; rural areas.
Sec. 270. Law enforcement training and technical assistance grants.
Sec. 271. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 272. Report on recordkeeping.
TITLE III--EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES
Subtitle A--Glass Ceiling Commission
Sec. 301. Short title.
Sec. 302. Findings and purpose.
Sec. 303. Establishment of Glass Ceiling Commission.
Sec. 304. Research on advancement of women and minorities to executive
management and senior decisionmaking positions in business.
Sec. 305. Establishment of the National Award for Diversity and Excellence
in American Executive Management.
Sec. 306. Powers of the Commission.
Sec. 307. Confidentiality of information.
Sec. 308. Staff and consultants.
Sec. 309. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 310. Termination.
Subtitle B--Opportunities in Apprenticeship
Sec. 321. Short title.
Sec. 322. Findings and purpose.
Sec. 323. Outreach and education program.
Sec. 324. Preapprenticeship training grant program.
Sec. 325. Study of participation of women and minorities in apprenticeship.
Sec. 326. Authorization of appropriations.
Subtitle C--Opportunities for Alternative Work Arrangements
Sec. 331. Findings.
Sec. 332. Sense of the Congress.
TITLE I--FEDERAL CIVIL RIGHTS REMEDIES
Subtitle A--Federal Remedies for Sexual Harassment in the Workplace
SEC. 101. FINDINGS.
 Congress finds that--
 (1) title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits discrimination
 in the terms and conditions of employment, including sexual harassment in
 the workplace;
 (2) sexual harassment in the workplace can have very serious and lasting
 detrimental effects on the victim of the harassment;
 (3) under the current remedial scheme of title VII, often the only remedies
 that a victim of sexual harassment can obtain are declaratory and injunctive
 relief against the continuation of the harassment;
 (4) as the result of the lack of an effective remedy under title VII for
 sexual harassment, victims of sexual harassment may not receive restitution
 for monetary losses relating to medical and psychological harm caused by
 the misconduct of an employer;
 (5) as the result of the lack of an effective remedy under title VII for
 sexual harassment, victims of sexual harassment who are driven to resign
 from jobs often fail to recover any relief under title VII; and
 (6) additional equitable remedies for sexual harassment in the workplace
 are clearly appropriate and warranted.
SEC. 102. ENHANCED REMEDIES FOR SEXUAL HARASSMENT.
 Section 706(g) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5(g))
 is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(1)' after the subsection designation; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(2)(A) With respect to a complaint involving an alleged unlawful employment
 practice relating to harassment on the basis of sex, the court may, if the
 plaintiff pleads and proves that the respondent intentionally engaged in
 such practice, award to the aggrieved party an amount not to exceed $100,000
 for the first such offense by the respondent, and not to exceed $150,000 for
 each subsequent offense. The court shall exercise the equitable discretion
 of the court and determine whether an enhanced remedy is appropriate under
 this paragraph based upon the criteria set forth in subparagraph (C).
 `(B)(i) In order to obtain an award under subparagraph (A), the plaintiff
 shall demonstrate that--
 `(I) the aggrieved party has submitted the grievance to any grievance
 procedure established by the employer; and
 `(II) the aggrieved party has obtained a determination from the grievance
 procedure, the grievance procedure is inappropriate for resolution of
 sexual harassment complaints, or use of the procedure has resulted in an
 unreasonable delay in resolving the grievance.
 `(ii) The participation by any party in the grievance procedure shall not
 be considered an admission of liability for any purpose, and determinations
 resulting from the grievance procedure shall not be entitled to deference
 in any judicial or administrative proceeding, including a subsequent
 proceeding under this paragraph.
 `(C) In determining the appropriateness and magnitude of an award under
 subparagraph (A), the court shall consider whether--
 `(i) the aggrieved party has incurred any medical bills or suffered any
 monetary or other out-of-pocket loss as a result of the unlawful conduct
 of the employer;
 `(ii) enhanced relief under subsection (a) is necessary to make injunctive
 relief ordered by the court meaningful, considering--
 `(I) the financial resources and employment history of the respondent;
 `(II) whether the respondent has initiated compliance programs designed
 to ensure that the employment practices of the respondent are lawful; and
 `(III) whether the respondent has instituted programs or policies designed
 to prevent, and resolve complaints of, harassment on the basis of sex in
 the workplace.
 `(D)(i) Except as provided in clause (ii), a judge shall hear and determine
 all issues in cases arising under this paragraph.
 `(ii) If a plaintiff seeks a monetary award under paragraph (2)(A) of this
 section and the court determines that such award cannot constitutionally
 be granted unless a jury determines liability on one or more issues with
 respect to which the award is sought, the court may impanel a jury to hear
 and determine such liability issues and no others.
 `(E) For purposes of this paragraph, each distinct, physically separate
 subdivision of a respondent shall be considered a separate respondent if--
 `(i) the subdivision provides separately for the employment practices
 (including hiring and discharge) of the subdivision, without reference to
 the practices of another subdivision; and
 `(ii) the operations of the subdivision are not under the control of
 another subdivision, or under the common control of the subdivision with
 another subdivision.
 `(F) As used in this paragraph, the terms `aggrieved party', `harassment
 on the basis of sex', and `plaintiff' have the meanings given the terms
 in section 706(f)(2)(B)(v).'.
SEC. 103. EXPEDITED INJUNCTIVE RELIEF FOR SEXUAL HARASSMENT.
 Section 706(f)(2) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5(f)(2))
 is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(A)' after the paragraph designation; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph:
 `(B)(i) Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, and except as
 otherwise provided in this subparagraph, a plaintiff who files a charge of
 discrimination alleging that an individual has been subject to harassment
 on the basis of sex in violation of this title shall have the right to
 seek temporary or preliminary injunctive relief against a respondent in
 any court having jurisdiction over such a claim, without regard to any
 period of time following the filing of the charge and without obtaining
 a right-to-sue letter from the Commission.
 `(ii)(I) Except as provided in subclause (II), any order granting the
 relief described in clause (i) shall be issued in accordance with Rule 65
 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
 `(II) If the plaintiff establishes a substantial probability of success on
 the merits of the harassment claim, the continued submission to unlawful
 harassment shall be deemed injury sufficiently irreparable to warrant the
 entry of temporary or preliminary relief.
 `(iii)(I) In order to obtain permanent injunctive relief for a grievance
 under this subparagraph, the plaintiff shall demonstrate that--
 `(aa) the aggrieved party has submitted the grievance to any grievance
 procedure established by the employer; and
 `(bb) the aggrieved party has obtained a determination from the grievance
 procedure, the grievance procedure is inappropriate for resolution of
 sexual harassment complaints, or use of the procedure has resulted in an
 unreasonable delay in resolving the grievance.
 `(II) The participation by any party in the grievance procedure shall not
 be considered an admission of liability for any purpose, and determinations
 resulting from the grievance procedure shall not be entitled to deference
 in any judicial or administrative proceeding, including a subsequent
 proceeding under this subparagraph.
 `(III) The court shall not grant permanent injunctive relief to a plaintiff
 under this section unless such relief is granted simultaneously with or
 after the imposition of a monetary award under subsection (g)(2).
 `(iv) It shall be the duty of a court having jurisdiction over proceedings
 under this section to assign cases for hearing at the earliest practicable
 date and to cause such cases to be expedited in every way practicable.
 `(v) As used in this subparagraph:
 `(I) The term `aggrieved party' means a party suffering an alleged unlawful
 employment practice relating to harassment on the basis of sex in violation
 of this title.
 `(II) The term `harassment on the basis of sex' means unwelcome sexual
 advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct
 of a sexual nature where--
 `(aa) submission to such conduct is made explicitly or implicitly a term
 or condition of employment of an individual;
 `(bb) submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
 as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
 `(cc) such conduct has the purpose or effect of creating a working
 environment that a reasonable person would consider intimidating, hostile,
 or abusive.
 `(III) The term `plaintiff' means an aggrieved party, the Attorney General,
 or the Commission who files the charge described in clause (i).'.
SEC. 104. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of
 this section, the Chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission,
 acting through the Directors of the district offices of the Commission,
 shall establish programs to provide technical assistance concerning sexual
 harassment law to employers who have fewer than 50 employees.
 (b) SUBJECTS- The programs shall provide assistance concerning--
 (1) the requirements of sections 706 (f)(2)(B) and (g)(2) of the Civil
 Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5 (f)(2)(B) and (g)(2)); and
 (2) recommended practices and procedures for avoiding--
 (A) practices that constitute harassment on the basis of sex; and
 (B) litigation related to harassment on the basis of sex.
 (c) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section, the terms `employer' and `employee'
 have the meaning given the terms in section 701 (b) and (f), respectively,
 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e (b) and (f)).
 (d) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 to carry out this section $500,000 for each of fiscal years 1992, 1993,
 and 1994.
Subtitle B--Expansion of Other Federal Civil Rights
SEC. 111. EXPANSION OF PROTECTIONS AGAINST ALL RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN THE
PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACTS.
 Section 1977 of the Revised Statutes (42 U.S.C. 1981) is amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new sentences: `The rights protected by this
 section are protected against impairment by nongovernmental discrimination
 as well as against impairment under color of State law. This section
 affords the same protection against discrimination in the performance,
 breach, modification, or termination of a contract, or in the setting of
 the terms or conditions thereof, as it does in the making or enforcement
 of the contract.'.
SEC. 112. EXPANSION OF RIGHT TO CHALLENGE DISCRIMINATORY SENIORITY SYSTEMS.
 Section 706(e) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5(e))
 is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(1)' after the subsection designation; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(2) For purposes of this section, an alleged unlawful employment practice
 occurs--
 `(A) when a seniority system is adopted, when an individual becomes
 subject to a seniority system, or when a person aggrieved is injured by
 the application of a seniority system or provision of the system; and
 `(B) if the system is alleged to have been adopted for an intentionally
 discriminatory purpose, in violation of this title, whether or not that
 discriminatory purpose is apparent on the face of the seniority provision.'.
SEC. 113. CONGRESSIONAL COVERAGE.
 Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.) is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 719. CONGRESSIONAL COVERAGE.
 `Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, the provisions of this
 title shall apply to the Congress, and the means for enforcing this title
 as such applies to the House of Representatives and the Senate shall be
 as determined by such House of Congress.'.
SEC. 114. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 This title and the amendments made by this title shall take effect on the
 date of enactment of this Act.
TITLE II--DOMESTIC AND STREET CRIME VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
Subtitle A--Safety on College and University Campuses
SEC. 201. REQUIRED CAMPUS REPORTING OF SEXUAL ASSAULT.
 Section 485(f) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1092(f)),
 as added by section 204(a) of the Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act
 of 1990 (Public Law 101-542), is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(F), to read as follows:
 `(F) Statistics concerning the occurrence on campus, during the most recent
 school year, and during the 2 preceding school years for which data are
 available, of the following criminal offenses reported to campus security
 authorities or local police agencies--
 `(i) murder;
 `(ii) rape, sexual assault, or any other abusive sexual conduct;
 `(iii) robbery;
 `(iv) aggravated assault;
 `(v) burglary; and
 `(vi) motor vehicle theft.'; and
 (2) in paragraph (3), to read as follows:
 `(3) Each institution participating in any program under this section
 shall make timely reports on criminal offenses described in paragraph
 (1)(F) that the institution considers to be a threat to other students
 and employees. The institution shall provide the reports to students,
 parents or guardians of students, and employees, at the institution, and
 to local police agencies, in a manner that is timely and that will aid in
 the prevention of similar occurrences.'.
Subtitle B--Stronger Penalties for Federal Sex Offenses
SEC. 211. CAPITAL PUNISHMENT FOR MURDERS IN CONNECTION WITH SEXUAL ASSAULTS
AND CHILD MOLESTATIONS.
 Title 18 of the United States Code is amended--
 (1) by adding at the end of chapter 51 the following new section:
` 1118. Capital Punishment for Murders in Connection with Sexual Assaults
and Child Molestations
 `(a) OFFENSE- It is an offense to cause the death of a person intentionally,
 knowingly, or through recklessness manifesting extreme indifference to
 human life, or to cause the death of a person through the intentional
 infliction of serious bodily injury.
 `(b) FEDERAL JURISDICTION- There is Federal jurisdiction over an offense
 described in this section if the conduct resulting in death occurs in the
 course of another offense against the United States.
 `(c) PENALTY- An offense described in this section is a Class A felony. A
 sentence of death may be imposed for an offense described in this section
 as provided in subsections (d) through (l), except that a sentence of
 death may not be imposed on a defendant who was below the age of eighteen
 at the time of the commission of the crime.
 `(d) MITIGATING FACTORS- In determining whether to recommend a sentence
 of death, the jury shall consider whether any aspect of the defendant's
 character or record or any circumstance of the offense that the defendant
 may proffer as a mitigating factor exists, including the following factors:
 `(1) MENTAL CAPACITY- The defendant's mental capacity to appreciate the
 wrongfulness of his conduct or to conform his conduct to the requirements
 of law was significantly impaired.
 `(2) DURESS- The defendant was under unusual and substantial duress.
 `(3) PARTICIPATION IN OFFENSE MINOR- The defendant is punishable as a
 principal (pursuant to section 2 of this title) in the offense, which was
 committed by another, but the defendant's participation was relatively minor.
 `(e) AGGRAVATING FACTORS- In determining whether to recommend a sentence
 of death, the jury shall consider any aggravating factor for which notice
 has been provided under subsection (f), including the following factors:
 `(1) KILLING IN COURSE OF DESIGNATED SEX CRIMES- The conduct resulting in
 death occurred in the course of an offense defined in chapter 109A, 110,
 or 117 of this title.
 `(2) KILLING IN CONNECTION WITH SEXUAL ASSAULT OR CHILD MOLESTATION- The
 defendant committed a crime of sexual assault or crime of child molestation,
 as defined in subsection (x), in the course of an offense on which Federal
 jurisdiction is based under subsection (b).
 `(3) PRIOR CONVICTION OF SEXUAL ASSAULT OR CHILD MOLESTATION- The defendant
 has previously been convicted of a crime of sexual assault or crime of
 child molestation as defined in subsection (x).
 `(f) NOTICE OF INTENT TO SEEK DEATH PENALTY- If the Government intends to
 seek the death penalty for an offense under this section, the attorney
 for the Government shall file with the court and serve on the defendant
 a notice of such intent. The notice shall be provided a reasonable time
 before the trial or acceptance of a guilty plea, or at such later time
 as the court may permit for good cause. The notice shall set forth the
 aggravating factor or factors set forth in subsection (e) and any other
 aggravating factor or factors that the Government will seek to prove as
 the basis for the death penalty. The factors for which notice is provided
 may include factors concerning the effect of the offense on the victim
 and the family of the victim. The court may permit the attorney for the
 Government to amend the notice upon a showing of good cause.
 `(g) JUDGE AND JURY AT CAPITAL SENTENCING HEARING- A hearing to determine
 whether the death penalty will be imposed for an offense under this section
 shall be conducted by the judge who presided at trial or accepted a guilty
 plea, or by another judge if that judge is not available. The hearing
 shall be conducted before the jury that determined the defendant's guilt
 if that jury is available. A new jury shall be impaneled for the purpose
 of the hearing if the defendant pleaded guilty, the trial of guilt was
 conducted without a jury, the jury that determined the defendant's guilt was
 discharged for good cause, or reconsideration of the sentence is necessary
 after the initial imposition of a sentence of death. A jury impaneled under
 this subsection shall have twelve members unless the parties stipulate to
 a lesser number at any time before the conclusion of the hearing with the
 approval of the judge. Upon motion of the defendant, with the approval of
 the attorney for the Government, the hearing shall be carried out before the
 judge without a jury. If there is no jury, references to `the jury' in this
 section, where applicable, shall be understood as referring to the judge.
 `(h) PROOF OF MITIGATING AND AGGRAVATING FACTORS- No presentence report shall
 be prepared if a capital sentencing hearing is held under this section. Any
 information relevant to the existence of mitigating factors, or to the
 existence of aggravating factors for which notice has been provided under
 subsection (f), may be presented by either the Government or the defendant,
 regardless of its admissibility under the rules governing the admission of
 evidence at criminal trials, except that information may be excluded if its
 probative value is outweighed by the danger of creating unfair prejudice,
 confusing the issues, or misleading the jury. The information presented
 may include trial transcripts and exhibits. The attorney for the Government
 and for the defendant shall be permitted to rebut any information received
 at the hearing, and shall be given fair opportunity to present argument
 as to the adequacy of the information to establish the existence of any
 aggravating or mitigating factor, and as to the appropriateness in that
 case of imposing a sentence of death. The attorney for the Government
 shall open the argument, the defendant shall be permitted to reply, and
 the Government shall then be permitted to reply in rebuttal.
 `(i) FINDINGS OF AGGRAVATING AND MITIGATING FACTORS- The jury shall return
 special findings identifying any aggravating factor or factors for which
 notice has been provided under subsection (f) and which the jury unanimously
 determines have been established by the government beyond a reasonable
 doubt. A mitigating factor is established if the defendant has proven its
 existence by a preponderance of the evidence, and any member of the jury
 who finds the existence of such a factor may regard it as established for
 purposes of this section regardless of the number of jurors who concur
 that the factor has been established.
 `(j) FINDING CONCERNING A SENTENCE OF DEATH- If the jury specially finds
 under subsection (i) that one or more aggravating factors set forth in
 subsection (e) exist, and the jury further finds unanimously that there are
 no mitigating factors or that the aggravating factor or factors specially
 found under subsection (i) outweigh any mitigating factors, then the jury
 shall recommend a sentence of death. In any other case, the jury shall not
 recommend a sentence of death. The jury shall be instructed that it must
 avoid any influence of sympathy, sentiment, passion, prejudice, or other
 arbitrary factors in its decision, and should make such a recommendation
 as the information warrants.
 `(k) SPECIAL PRECAUTION TO ASSURE AGAINST DISCRIMINATION- In a hearing held
 before a jury, the court, before the return of a finding under subsection
 (j), shall instruct the jury that, in considering whether to recommend
 a sentence of death, it shall not consider the race, color, religion,
 national origin, or sex of the defendant or any victim, and that the jury
 is not to recommend a sentence of death unless it has concluded that it
 would recommend a sentence of death for such a crime regardless of the race,
 color, religion, national origin, or sex of the defendant or any victim. The
 jury, upon the return of a finding under subsection (j), shall also return
 to the court a certificate, signed by each juror, that the race, color,
 religion, national origin, or sex of the defendant or any victim did not
 affect the juror's individual decision and that the individual juror would
 have recommended the same sentence for such a crime regardless of the race,
 color, religion, national origin, or sex of the defendant or any victim.
 `(l) IMPOSITION OF A SENTENCE OF DEATH- Upon a recommendation under
 subsection (j) that a sentence of death be imposed, the court shall sentence
 the defendant to death. Otherwise the court shall impose a sentence,
 other than death, authorized by law.
 `(m) REVIEW OF A SENTENCE OF DEATH- The defendant may appeal a sentence
 of death under this section by filing a notice of appeal of the sentence
 within the time provided for filing a notice of appeal of the judgment
 of conviction. An appeal of a sentence under this subsection may be
 consolidated with an appeal of the judgment of conviction and shall have
 priority over all non-capital matters in the court of appeals. The court of
 appeals shall review the entire record in the case including the evidence
 submitted at trial and information submitted during the sentencing hearing,
 the procedures employed in the sentencing hearing, and the special findings
 returned under subsection (i). The court of appeals shall uphold the
 sentence if it determines that the sentence of death was not imposed under
 the influence of passion, prejudice, or any other arbitrary factor, that the
 evidence and information support the special findings under subsection (i),
 and that the proceedings were otherwise free of prejudicial error requiring
 reversal of the sentence that was properly preserved for review and raised
 on appeal. In any other case, the court of appeals shall remand the case for
 reconsideration of the sentence or imposition of another authorized sentence
 as appropriate. The court of appeals shall state in writing the reasons
 for its disposition of an appeal of a sentence of death under this section.
 `(n) IMPLEMENTATION OF SENTENCE OF DEATH- A person sentenced to death
 under this section shall be committed to the custody of the Attorney
 General until exhaustion of the procedures for appeal of the judgment
 of conviction and review of the sentence. When the sentence is to be
 implemented, the Attorney General shall release the person sentenced to
 death to the custody of a United States Marshal. The Marshal shall supervise
 implementation of the sentence in the manner prescribed by the law of the
 State in which the sentence is imposed, or in the manner prescribed by
 the law of another State designated by the court if the law of the State
 in which the sentence was imposed does not provide for implementation
 of a sentence of death. The Marshal may use State or local facilities,
 may use the services of an appropriate State or local official or of a
 person such an official employs, and shall pay the costs thereof in an
 amount approved by the Attorney General.
 `(o) SPECIAL BAR TO EXECUTION OF PREGNANT WOMEN- A sentence of death shall
 not be carried out upon a woman while she is pregnant.
 `(p) CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTION TO PARTICIPATION IN EXECUTION- No employee of
 any State department of corrections or the Federal Bureau of Prisons and no
 person providing services to that department or bureau under contract shall
 be required, as a condition of that employment or contractual obligation,
 to be in attendance at, or to participate in, any execution carried out
 under this section if such participation is contrary to the moral or
 religious convictions of the employee. For purposes of this subsection,
 the term `participate in any execution' includes personal preparation
 of the condemned individual and the apparatus used for the execution,
 and supervision of the activities of other personnel in carrying out
 such activities.
 `(q) APPOINTMENT OF COUNSEL FOR INDIGENT CAPITAL DEFENDANTS- A defendant
 against whom a sentence of death is sought, or on whom a sentence of death
 has been imposed, under this section, shall be entitled to appointment
 of counsel from the commencement of trial proceedings until one of the
 conditions specified in subsection (v) has occurred, if the defendant is or
 becomes financially unable to obtain adequate representation. Counsel shall
 be appointed for trial representation as provided in section 3005 of this
 title, and at least one counsel so appointed shall continue to represent
 the defendant until the conclusion of direct review of the judgment, unless
 replaced by the court with other qualified counsel. Except as otherwise
 provided in this section, the provisions of section 3006A of this title
 shall apply to appointments under this section.
 `(r) REPRESENTATION AFTER FINALITY OF JUDGMENT- When a judgment imposing a
 sentence of death under this section has become final through affirmance by
 the Supreme Court on direct review, denial of certiorari by the Supreme Court
 on direct review, or expiration of the time for seeking direct review in the
 court of appeals or the Supreme Court, the Government shall promptly notify
 the court that imposed the sentence. The court, within 10 days of receipt
 of such notice, shall proceed to make a determination whether the defendant
 is eligible for appointment of counsel for subsequent proceedings. The
 court shall issue an order appointing one or more counsel to represent the
 defendant upon a finding that the defendant is financially unable to obtain
 adequate representation and wishes to have counsel appointed or is unable
 competently to decide whether to accept or reject appointment of counsel. The
 court shall issue an order denying appointment of counsel upon a finding
 that the defendant is financially able to obtain adequate representation or
 that the defendant rejected appointment of counsel with an understanding
 of the consequences of that decision. Counsel appointed pursuant to this
 subsection shall be different from the counsel who represented the defendant
 at trial and on direct review unless the defendant and counsel request a
 continuation or renewal of the earlier representation.
 `(s) STANDARDS FOR COMPETENCE OF COUNSEL- In relation to a defendant who is
 entitled to appointment of counsel under subsections (q) and (r), at least
 one counsel appointed for trial representation must have been admitted to
 the bar for at least 5 years and have at least 3 years of experience in
 the trial of felony cases in the Federal district courts. If new counsel
 is appointed after judgment, at least one counsel so appointed must have
 been admitted to the bar for at least 5 years and have at least 3 years
 of experience in the litigation of felony cases in the Federal courts
 of appeals or the Supreme Court. The court, for good cause, may appoint
 counsel who does not meet these standards, but whose background, knowledge,
 or experience would otherwise enable him or her to properly represent the
 defendant, with due consideration of the seriousness of the penalty and
 the nature of the litigation.
 `(t) CLAIMS OF INEFFECTIVENESS OF COUNSEL IN COLLATERAL PROCEEDINGS- The
 ineffectiveness or incompetence of counsel during proceedings on a motion
 under section 2255 of title 28, United States Code, in a case under this
 section shall not be a ground for relief from the judgment or sentence
 in any proceeding. This limitation shall not preclude the appointment of
 different counsel at any stage of the proceedings.
 `(u) TIME FOR COLLATERAL ATTACK ON DEATH SENTENCE- A motion under section
 2255 of title 28, United States Code, attacking a sentence of death
 under this section, or the conviction on which it is predicated, must be
 filed within 90 days of the issuance of the order under subsection (r)
 appointing or denying the appointment of counsel for such proceedings. The
 court in which the motion is filed, for good cause shown, may extend the
 time for filing for a period not exceeding 60 days. Such a motion shall
 have priority over all non-capital matters in the district court, and in
 the court of appeals on review of the district court's decision.
 `(v) STAY OF EXECUTION- The execution of a sentence of death under this
 section shall be stayed in the course of direct review of the judgment and
 during the litigation of an initial motion in the case under section 2255
 of title 28, United States Code. The stay shall run continuously following
 imposition of the sentence and shall expire if--
 `(1) the defendant fails to file a motion under section 2255 of title 28,
 United States Code, within the time specified in subsection (u), or fails
 to make a timely application for court of appeals review following the
 denial of such a motion by a district court;
 `(2) upon completion of district court and court of appeals review
 under section 2255 of title 28, United States Code, the Supreme Court
 disposes of a petition for certiorari in a manner that leaves the capital
 sentence undisturbed, or the defendant fails to file a timely petition
 for certiorari; or
 `(3) before a district court, in the presence of counsel and after having
 been advised of the consequences of such a decision, the defendant waives the
 right to file a motion under section 2255 of title 28, United States Code.
 `(w) FINALITY OF THE DECISION ON REVIEW- If one of the conditions specified
 in subsection (v) has occurred, no court thereafter shall have the authority
 to enter a stay of execution or grant relief in the case unless--
 `(1) the basis for the stay and request for relief is a claim not presented
 in earlier proceedings;
 `(2) the failure to raise the claim is the result of governmental action in
 violation of the Constitution or laws of the United States, the result of
 the Supreme Court's recognition of a new Federal right that is retroactively
 applicable, or the result of the fact that the factual predicate of the
 claim could not have been discovered through the exercise of reasonable
 diligence in time to present the claim in earlier proceedings; and
 `(3) the facts underlying the claim would be sufficient, if proven, to
 undermine the court's confidence in the determination of guilt on the
 offense or offenses for which the death penalty was imposed.
 `(x) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) `crime of sexual assault' means a crime under Federal or State law
 that involved--
 `(A) contact, without consent, between any part of the defendant's body
 or an object and the genitals or anus of another person;
 `(B) contact, without consent, between the genitals or anus of the defendant
 and any part of the body of another person;
 `(C) deriving sexual pleasure or gratification from the infliction of death,
 bodily injury, or physical pain on another person; or
 `(D) an attempt or conspiracy to engage in any conduct described in
 paragraphs (A) through (C);
 `(2) `crime of child molestation' means a crime under Federal or State
 law that involved--
 `(A) contact between any part of the defendant's body or an object and
 the genitals or anus of a child;
 `(B) contact between the genitals or anus of the defendant and any part
 of the body of a child;
 `(C) deriving sexual pleasure or gratification from the infliction of death,
 bodily injury, or physical pain on a child; or
 `(D) an attempt or conspiracy to engage in any conduct described in
 paragraphs (A) through (C); and
 `(3) `child' means a person below the age of 14.'; and
 (2) by adding the following at the end of the table of sections for
 chapter 51:
`1118. Capital punishment for murders in connection with sexual assaults
and child molestations.'.
SEC. 212. INCREASED PENALTIES FOR RECIDIVIST SEX OFFENDERS.
 (a) REDESIGNATION- Section 2245 of title 18, United States Code, is
 redesignated section 2246.
 (b) NEW SECTION- Chapter 109A of title 18, United States Code, is amended
 by inserting the following new section after section 2244:
` 2245. Penalties for subsequent offenses
 `Any person who violates a provision of this chapter after a prior conviction
 under a provision of this chapter or the law of a State (as defined in
 section 513 of this title) for conduct proscribed by this chapter has
 become final is punishable by a term of imprisonment up to twice that
 otherwise authorized.'.
 (c) TABLE OF SECTIONS- The table of sections for chapter 109A of title 18,
 United States Code, is amended by--
 (1) striking `2245' and inserting in lieu thereof `2246'; and
 (2) inserting the following after the item relating to section 2244:
`2245. Penalties for subsequent offenses.'.
SEC. 213. DEFINITION OF SEXUAL ACT FOR VICTIMS BELOW 16 YEARS OF AGE.
 Paragraph (2) of section 2246 of title 18, United States Code, as
 redesignated by section 212 of this Act, is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (B) by striking `or' after the semicolon;
 (2) in subparagraph (C) by striking `; and' and inserting `; or'; and
 (3) by inserting a new subparagraph (D) as follows:
 `(D) the intentional touching, not through the clothing, of the genitalia
 of another person who has not attained the age of 16 years with an intent
 to abuse, humiliate, harass, degrade, or arouse or gratify the sexual
 desire of any person;'.
SEC. 214. DRUG DISTRIBUTION TO PREGNANT WOMEN.
 Section 418 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 845) is amended
 by inserting `, or to a woman while she is pregnant,' after `to a person
 under twenty-one years of age' in subsection (a) and subsection (b).
Subtitle C--Enhanced Compensation and Restitution for Victims of Sex Crimes
SEC. 221. SHORT TITLE.
 This subtitle may be cited as the `Pornography Victims' Compensation Act
 of 1991'.
SEC. 222. FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND CONSTRUCTION.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds and declares that--
 (1) protecting freedom of speech, within the bounds of safety to individuals
 and society, is essential to the preservation of a just and free society;
 (2) consistent with the constitutional protection of freedom of speech,
 the State has a legitimate interest in restricting sexually explicit
 material, if there is a danger of harm or actual harm to individuals,
 such as the sexual exploitation of children by child pornography or the
 promotion of rape and sexual homicide by violent sexual material;
 (3) the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography in 1986 found clinical
 and experimental evidence of a causal relationship between exposure to
 sexually explicit materials and sexual aggression, including the commission
 of unlawful sexual acts;
 (4) the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography also found evidence
 that sexually explicit material need not be legally obscene to stimulate
 anti-social and potentially unlawful sexual aggression, if the material
 presents violent acts in a clear sexual context, or the sexual abuse
 of children;
 (5) behavioral studies of serial murderers conducted by the Federal Bureau
 of Investigation have revealed a strong correlation between heavy exposure
 to violent sexual material and violent serial criminality;
 (6) investigations conducted by the Child Pornography and Protection Unit
 of the United States Customs Service have revealed a strong correlation
 between heavy consumption of child pornography and child sexual abuse,
 including the use of child pornography to entrap children into the
 performance of sexual acts;
 (7) recent psychological studies indicate a correlation between the growing
 number of children and youths who commit rape and other violent sexual
 offenses, and the declining age of first exposure to sexually explicit
 materials;
 (8) sexual crimes such as rape and child abuse usually leave life-long
 psychological scars that may prevent the victim and his or her family from
 leading normal, fulfilled lives;
 (9) the State has a legitimate interest in protecting its citizens,
 including children, from sexual crimes and in preventing such crimes
 through reasonable, effective, and constitutional means; and
 (10) the State has a legitimate interest in providing adequate compensation
 to the victims of sexual crimes for their physical injuries, complete
 medical and psychological treatment, and continuing pain and suffering.
 (b) PURPOSE- It is the purpose of this subtitle to require the producers,
 distributors, exhibitors, and sellers of sexually explicit material to be
 jointly and severally liable for all damages resulting from any sexual
 offense that was caused, in substantial part, by the sexual offender's
 exposure to the sexually explicit material.
 (c) CONSTRUCTION- The cause of action created by this subtitle shall be
 available in addition to, and not exclusive of, any other civil or criminal
 cause of action against a sex offender for any sexual offense.
SEC. 223. CAUSE OF ACTION.
 (a) CAUSE OF ACTION- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a civil
 action may be instituted in an appropriate United States district court
 against a producer, distributor, exhibitor, or seller of sexually explicit
 material, pursuant to the provisions of this subtitle, by--
 (1) a victim of a rape, sexual assault, act of sexual abuse, sexual murder,
 or other sexual crime as described under the relevant State or Federal
 law, whether or not such rape, assault, abuse, murder, or crime has been
 prosecuted or proven in a separate criminal proceeding,
 (2) the estate of such a victim, or
 (3) the guardian or survivors of any such victim.
 (b) BURDEN OF PROOF- To recover pursuant to the provisions of this subtitle,
 the individual bringing such action must prove, by a preponderance of the
 evidence, that--
 (1) the victim was a victim of a rape, sexual assault, act of sexual abuse,
 sexual murder, or other sexual crime, as defined under the relevant State
 or Federal law, whether or not such rape, assault, abuse, murder, or other
 crime has been prosecuted or proven in a separate criminal proceeding;
 (2) the material--
 (A) is obscene;
 (B) constitutes child pornography; or
 (C) in the case of rape, sexual assault, sexual abuse, sexual murder,
 or any other violent sexual crime, is both sexually explicit and violent;
 (3) the material was a proximate cause of the offense, by inciting the
 sexual offender to commit the offense perpetrated against the victim;
 (4) the defendant is a producer or distributor of the material, or exhibited
 or sold the material to the sexual offender;
 (5) the producer, distributor, exhibitor, or seller of the material knew
 or should have known that such material was sexually explicit; and
 (6) the sale or transport of the material affects interstate or foreign
 commerce.
 (c) PROXIMATE CAUSE OF THE OFFENSE- For purposes of this subtitle, the
 finder of fact may reasonably infer that the material was a proximate
 cause of the offense, by inciting the offender to commit the offense if
 any of the following are found--
 (1) extraordinary similarities between the acts described in such material
 and the actual offense;
 (2) testimony of the offender to the effect that such material incited
 the commission of the offense; and
 (3) testimony of experts that such material incited the offender to commit
 the offense.
 (d) RECOVERY- Any person who has brought an action pursuant to the provisions
 of this subtitle and has met the requirements of the provisions of this
 subtitle shall be awarded economic damages and compensation for pain and
 suffering as well as reasonable attorney's fees and costs of the suit.
 (e) ACTION BARRED AFTER 6 YEARS- Any action commenced under this section
 shall be forever barred unless the complaint is filed within 6 years after
 the right of action first accrued or, in the case of a person under a legal
 disability, not later than 3 years after the termination of such disability.
SEC. 224. DEFINITIONS.
 For the purposes of this subtitle, the term--
 (1) `child pornography' means a description of a minor engaging or
 participating in sexually explicit conduct as defined in section 2256(2)
 of title 18, United States Code;
 (2) `minor' means a person under the age of 18 years;
 (3) `sexual murder' means a murder that follows a rape, sexual assault,
 act of sexual abuse, or other sexual crime;
 (4) `sexually explicit' means the depiction or description of actual
 or simulated--
 (A) sexual intercourse, including genital-genital, oral-genital,
 anal-genital, or oral-anal, whether between persons of the same or
 opposite sex;
 (B) bestiality;
 (C) masturbation;
 (D) lascivious exhibition of the genitals of any person; or
 (E) sadistic or masochistic abuse; and
 (5) `violent' means an act, behavior, or material that depicts or describes
 such act or behavior, in which women, children, or men are--
 (A) victims of sexual crimes such as rape, sexual homicide, or child
 sexual abuse;
 (B) penetrated by animals or inanimate objects; or
 (C) tortured, dismembered, confined, bound, beaten, or injured, in a context
 that makes these experiences sexual or indicates that the victims derive
 sexual pleasure from such experiences.
SEC. 225. RESTITUTION IN SEX OFFENSE CASES.
 Section 3663(b) of title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (3);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (4) and inserting `; and';
 (3) by striking `an offense resulting in bodily injury' in paragraph (3)
 and inserting `an offense described in paragraph (2) or (5) that'; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(5) in the case of an offense under chapter 109A or chapter 110 of
 this title--
 `(A) pay an amount equal to the cost of necessary medical and related
 professional services relating to physical, psychiatric, and psychological
 care, including nonmedical care and treatment rendered in accordance with
 a method of healing recognized by the law of the place of treatment;
 `(B) pay an amount equal to the cost of necessary physical and occupational
 therapy and rehabilitation;
 `(C) reimburse the victim for income lost by such victim as a result of
 the offense;
 `(D) make payment or reimbursement as provided in subparagraphs (A) through
 (C) for costs and losses related to any disease transmitted to the victim
 through the commission of the offense; and
 `(E) reimburse the victim for necessary child care, transportation,
 and other expenses related to participation in the investigation of the
 offense or attendance at proceedings related to the offense.'.
Subtitle D--Reform of Procedure and Evidentiary Requirements in Sex Offense
and Other Cases
SEC. 231. ADMISSIBILITY OF EVIDENCE OF SIMILAR CRIMES IN SEXUAL ASSAULT AND
CHILD MOLESTATION CASES.
 The Federal Rules of Evidence are amended by adding after rule 412 the
 following new rules:
`Rule 413. Evidence of Similar Crimes in Sexual Assault Cases
 `(a) In a criminal case in which the defendant is accused of an offense of
 sexual assault, evidence of the defendant's commission of another offense
 or offenses of sexual assault is admissible, and may be considered for
 its bearing on any matter to which it is relevant.
 `(b) In a case in which the Government intends to offer evidence under
 this rule, the attorney for the Government shall disclose the evidence
 to the defendant, including statements of witnesses or a summary of the
 substance of any testimony that is expected to be offered, at least fifteen
 days before the scheduled date of trial or at such later time as the court
 may allow for good cause.
 `(c) This rule shall not be construed to limit the admission or consideration
 of evidence under any other rule.
 `(d) For purposes of this rule and rule 415, `offense of sexual assault'
 means a crime under Federal law or the law of a State that involved--
 `(1) any conduct proscribed by chapter 109A of title 18, United States Code;
 `(2) contact, without consent, between any part of the defendant's body
 or an object and the genitals or anus of another person;
 `(3) contact, without consent, between the genitals or anus of the defendant
 and any part of another person's body;
 `(4) deriving sexual pleasure or gratification from the infliction of death,
 bodily injury, or physical pain on another person; or
 `(5) an attempt or conspiracy to engage in conduct described in paragraphs
 (1) through (4).
`Rule 414. Evidence of Similar Crimes in Child Molestation Cases
 `(a) In a criminal case in which the defendant is accused of an offense of
 child molestation, evidence of the defendant's commission of another offense
 or offenses of child molestation is admissible, and may be considered for
 its bearing on any matter to which it is relevant.
 `(b) In a case in which the Government intends to offer evidence under
 this rule, the attorney for the Government shall disclose the evidence
 to the defendant, including statements of witnesses or a summary of the
 substance of any testimony that is expected to be offered, at least fifteen
 days before the scheduled date of trial or at such later time as the court
 may allow for good cause.
 `(c) This rule shall not be construed to limit the admission or consideration
 of evidence under any other rule.
 `(d) For purposes of this rule and rule 415, `child' means a person below
 the age of fourteen, and `offense of child molestation' means a crime
 under Federal law or the law of a State that involved--
 `(1) any conduct proscribed by chapter 109A of title 18, United States Code,
 that was committed in relation to a child;
 `(2) any conduct proscribed by chapter 110 of title 18, United States Code;
 `(3) contact between any part of the defendant's body or an object and
 the genitals or anus of a child;
 `(4) contact between the genitals or anus of the defendant and any part
 of the body of a child;
 `(5) deriving sexual pleasure or gratification from the infliction of death,
 bodily injury, or physical pain on a child; or
 `(6) an attempt or conspiracy to engage in conduct described in paragraphs
 (1) through (5).
`Rule 415. Evidence of Similar Acts in Civil Cases Concerning Sexual Assault
or Child Molestation
 `(a) In a civil case in which a claim for damages or other relief is
 predicated on a party's alleged commission of conduct constituting an offense
 of sexual assault or child molestation, evidence of that party's commission
 of another offense or offenses of sexual assault or child molestation is
 admissible and may be considered as provided in rule 413 and rule 414.
 `(b) A party who intends to offer evidence under this rule shall disclose the
 evidence to the party against whom it will be offered, including statements
 of witnesses or a summary of the substance of any testimony that is expected
 to be offered, at least fifteen days before the scheduled date of trial
 or at such later time as the court may allow for good cause.
 `(c) This rule shall not be construed to limit the admission or consideration
 of evidence under any other rule.'.
SEC. 232. RIGHT OF THE VICTIM TO AN IMPARTIAL JURY.
 (a) FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE- Rule 24(b) of the Federal Rules
 of Criminal Procedure is amended by striking `the Government is entitled
 to 6 peremptory challenges and the defendant or defendants jointly to 10
 peremptory challenges' and inserting `each side is entitled to 6 peremptory
 challenges'.
 (b) PROHIBITION OF DISCRIMINATION IN SELECTION OF JURY- Section 243 of title
 18, United States Code, is amended by designating the text of the section as
 subsection (a) and by adding a new subsection at the end thereof as follows:
 `(b) In a proceeding in a court of the United States, an attorney
 representing a criminal defendant shall not exercise peremptory challenges
 to exclude any person from the jury on the basis of race or color, or on
 the basis of any other classification that could not lawfully be used by a
 prosecutor as the basis for exercising peremptory challenges. The prosecutor
 shall have the same right as the defense attorney to challenge the exercise
 of peremptory challenges on this ground. In determining whether a defense
 attorney has engaged in discrimination in violation of this subsection,
 a court shall apply the same standards that would apply in making a
 like determination concerning the exercise of peremptory challenges by
 a prosecutor, and shall have the authority to grant the same relief that
 would be available in case of unlawful discrimination by a prosecutor.'.
SEC. 233. RULES OF PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT FOR LAWYERS IN FEDERAL PRACTICE.
 The following rules, to be known as the Rules of Professional Conduct
 for Lawyers in Federal Practice, are enacted and shall be included as an
 appendix to title 28, United States Code:
`RULES FOR PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT FOR LAWYERS IN FEDERAL PRACTICE
`Rule 1. Scope
`Rule 2. Litigation Abuses Prohibited
`Rule 3. Expediting Litigation
`Rule 4. Duty to Prevent Commission of Crime
`Rule 1. Scope
 `(a) These rules apply to the conduct of lawyers in their representation
 of clients in relation to proceedings and potential proceedings before
 Federal tribunals.
 `(b) For purposes of these rules, `Federal tribunal' and `tribunal' mean
 a court of the United States or an agency of the Federal Government that
 carries out adjudicatory or quasi-adjudicatory functions.
`Rule 2. Litigation Abuses Prohibited
 `(a) A lawyer shall not engage in any action or course of conduct for the
 purpose of increasing the expense of litigation for any person, other than
 a liability under an order or judgment of a tribunal.
 `(b) A lawyer shall not engage in any action or course of conduct that has
 no substantial purpose other than to distress, harass, embarrass, burden,
 or inconvenience another person.
 `(c) A lawyer shall not offer evidence that the lawyers knows to be false
 or attempt to discredit evidence that the lawyer knows to be true.
`Rule 3. Expediting Litigation
 `(a) A lawyer shall seek to bring about the expeditious conduct and
 conclusion of litigation.
 `(b) A lawyer shall not seek a continuance or otherwise attempt to delay
 or prolong proceedings in the hope or expectation that--
 `(1) evidence will become unavailable;
 `(2) evidence will become more subject to impeachment or otherwise less
 useful to another party because of the passage of time; or
 `(3) an advantage will be obtained in relation to another party because
 of the expense, frustration, distress, or other hardship resulting from
 prolonged or delayed proceedings.
`Rule 4. Duty to Prevent Commission of Crime
 `(a) A lawyer may disclose information relating to the representation of
 a client to the extent necessary to prevent the commission of a crime or
 other unlawful act.
 `(b) A lawyer shall disclose information relating to the representation of
 a client where disclosure is required by law. A lawyer shall also disclose
 such information to the extent necessary to prevent--
 `(1) the commission of a crime involving the use or threatened use of
 force against another, or a substantial risk of death or serious injury
 to another; or
 `(2) the commission of a crime of sexual assault or child molestation.
 `(c) For purposes of this rule, the term `crime' means a crime under
 Federal law or the law of a State, and the term `unlawful act' means an
 act in violation of the law of the United States or the law of a State.'.
SEC. 234. STATUTORY PRESUMPTION AGAINST CHILD CUSTODY.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) State courts have often failed to recognize the detrimental effects
 of having as a custodial parent an individual who physically abuses his
 or her spouse, insofar as the courts do not hear or weigh evidence of
 domestic violence in child custody litigation;
 (2) joint custody forced upon hostile parents can create a dangerous
 psychological environment for a child;
 (3) physical abuse of a spouse is relevant to child abuse in child custody
 disputes;
 (4) the effects of physical abuse of a spouse on children include actual
 and potential emotional and physical harm, the negative effects of exposure
 to an inappropriate role model, and the potential for future harm where
 contact with the batterer continues;
 (5) children are emotionally traumatized by witnessing physical abuse of
 a parent;
 (6) children often become targets of physical abuse themselves or are
 injured when they attempt to intervene on behalf of a parent;
 (7) even children who do not directly witness spousal abuse are affected by
 the climate of violence in their homes and experience shock, fear, guilt,
 long lasting impairment of self-esteem, and impairment of developmental
 and socialization skills;
 (8) research into the intergenerational aspects of domestic violence reveals
 that violent tendencies may be passed on from one generation to the next;
 (9) witnessing an aggressive parent as a role model may communicate
 to children that violence is an acceptable tool for resolving marital
 conflict; and
 (10) few States have recognized the interrelated nature of child custody
 and battering and have enacted legislation that allows or requires courts
 to consider evidence of physical abuse of a spouse in child custody cases.
 (b) SENSE OF THE CONGRESS- (1) It is the sense of the Congress that, for
 purposes of determining child custody, credible evidence of physical abuse
 of a spouse should create a statutory presumption that it is detrimental
 to the child to be placed in the custody of the abusive spouse.
 (2) This section is not intended to encourage States to prohibit supervised
 visitation.
SEC. 235. FULL FAITH AND CREDIT FOR PROTECTIVE ORDERS.
 (a) ENFORCEMENT- A protective order issued by a court of a State shall
 have the same full faith and credit in a court in another State that the
 order would have in a court of the State in which issued, and shall be
 enforced by the courts of any State as if it were issued in the State.
 (b) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section:
 (1) The term `protective order' means an order prohibiting or limiting
 violence against, harassment of, contact or communication with, or physical
 proximity to another person.
 (2) The term `State' has the meaning given the term in section 513(c)(5)
 of title 18, United States Code.
SEC. 236. HIV TESTING AND PENALTY ENHANCEMENT IN SEXUAL ABUSE CASES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Chapter 109A of title 18, United States Code, is amended
 by inserting at the end thereof the following new section:
` 2247. Testing for human immunodeficiency virus; disclosure of test results
to victim; effect on penalty
 `(a) TESTING AT TIME OF PRE-TRIAL RELEASE DETERMINATION- In a case in which
 a person is charged with an offense under this chapter, a judicial officer
 issuing an order pursuant to section 3142(a) of this title shall include in
 the order a requirement that a test for the human immunodeficiency virus
 be performed upon the person, and that follow-up tests for the virus be
 performed six months and twelve months following the date of the initial
 test, unless the judicial officer determines that the conduct of the person
 created no risk of transmission of the virus to the victim, and so states
 in the order. The order shall direct that the initial test be performed
 within 24 hours, or as soon thereafter as feasible. The person shall not
 be released from custody until the test is performed.
 `(b) TESTING AT LATER TIME- If a person charged with an offense under this
 chapter was not tested for the human immunodeficiency virus pursuant to
 subsection (a), the court may at a later time direct that such a test be
 performed upon the person, and that follow-up tests be performed six months
 and twelve months following the date of the initial test, if it appears to
 the court that the conduct of the person may have risked transmission of
 the virus to the victim. A testing requirement under this subsection may
 be imposed at any time while the charge is pending, or following conviction
 at any time prior to the person's completion of service of the sentence.
 `(c) TERMINATION OF TESTING REQUIREMENT- A requirement of follow-up testing
 imposed under this section shall be cancelled if any test is positive
 for the virus or the person obtains an acquittal on, or dismissal of,
 all charges under this chapter.
 `(d) DISCLOSURE OF TEST RESULTS- The results of any test for the human
 immunodeficiency virus performed pursuant to an order under this section
 shall be provided to the judicial officer or court. The judicial officer
 or court shall ensure that the results are disclosed only to the victim
 (or to the victim's parent or legal guardian, as appropriate), the attorney
 for the Government, and the person tested.
 `(e) EFFECT ON PENALTY- The United States Sentencing Commission shall
 amend existing guidelines for sentences for offenses under this chapter
 to enhance the sentence if the offender knew or had reason to know that
 he was infected with the human immunodeficiency virus, except where the
 offender did not engage or attempt to engage in conduct creating a risk
 of transmission of the virus to the victim.'.
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The chapter heading for chapter 109A of title 18,
 United States Code, is amended by inserting at the end thereof the following
 new item:
`2247. Testing for human immunodeficiency virus; disclosure of test results
to victim; effect on penalty.'.
SEC. 237. PAYMENT OF COST OF HIV TESTING FOR VICTIM.
 Section 503(c)(7) of the Victims' Rights and Restitution Act of 1990 is
 amended by inserting before the period at the end thereof the following:
 `, the cost of up to two tests of the victim for the human immunodeficiency
 virus during the twelve months following the assault, and the cost of a
 counseling session by a medically trained professional on the accuracy
 of such tests and the risk of transmission of the human immunodeficiency
 virus to the victim as the result of the assault'.
Subtitle E--National Task Force on Violence Against Women
SEC. 241. ESTABLISHMENT.
 Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this subtitle,
 the Attorney General shall establish a task force to be known as the
 `National Task Force on Violence against Women' (referred to in this
 subtitle as the `task force').
SEC. 242. DUTIES OF TASK FORCE.
 (a) GENERAL PURPOSE OF TASK FORCE- The task force shall develop a uniform
 Federal, State, and local law enforcement strategy aimed at protecting
 women against violent crime, punishing persons who commit such crimes,
 and enhancing the rights of victims of such crimes.
 (b) DUTIES OF TASK FORCE- The task force shall perform such functions as
 the Attorney General deems appropriate to carry out the purposes of the
 task force, including--
 (1) considering the reports of past Federal and State task forces or
 commissions on violent crime, family violence, and crime victims, including
 the President's Task Force on Victims of Crime (1982), the Attorney General's
 Task Force on Family Violence (1984), and the task forces and commissions
 established by the States of Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Hawaii, Idaho,
 Indiana, Kansas, Louisiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Nebraska, New Mexico,
 New York, North Carolina, Rhode Island, Virginia, Texas, and Wyoming;
 (2) developing strategies for Federal, State, and local law enforcement
 designated to protect women against violent crime, and to prosecute and
 punish those responsible for such crime;
 (3) evaluating the adequacy of sentencing, incarceration, and release of
 violent offenders against women, and making recommendations designated to
 ensure that such offenders receive appropriate punishment; and
 (4) evaluating the adequacy of the treatment of victims of violent crime
 against women within the criminal justice system, and making recommendations
 designed to improve such treatment.
SEC. 243. MEMBERSHIP.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The task force shall consist of up to 10 members, who shall
 be appointed by the Attorney General not later than 60 days after the date
 of enactment of this subtitle. The Attorney General shall ensure that the
 task force includes representatives of State and local law enforcement,
 the State and local judiciary, and groups dedicated to protecting the
 rights of victims.
 (b) CHAIRMAN- The Attorney General or his designee shall serve as the
 chairman of the task force.
SEC. 244. PAY.
 (a) NO ADDITIONAL COMPENSATION- Members of the task force who are officers or
 employees of a governmental agency shall receive no additional compensation
 by reason of their service on the task force.
 (b) PER DIEM- While away from their homes or regular places of business
 in the performance of duties for the task force, members of the task force
 shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence,
 at rates authorized for employees of agencies under sections 5702 and 5703
 of title 5, United States Code.
SEC. 245. EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND STAFF.
 (a) EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR-
 (1) APPOINTMENT- The task force shall have an Executive Director who shall
 be appointed by the Attorney General not later than 30 days after the task
 force is fully constituted under section 243.
 (2) COMPENSATION- The Executive Director shall be compensated at a rate
 not to exceed the maximum rate of the basic pay payable under GS-18 of
 the General Schedule as contained in title 5, United States Code.
 (b) STAFF- With the approval of the task force, the Executive Director
 may appoint and fix the compensation of such additional personnel as the
 Executive Director considers necessary to carry out the duties of the
 task force.
 (c) APPLICABILITY OF CIVIL SERVICE LAWS- The Executive Director and the
 additional personnel of the task force appointed under subsection (b) may be
 appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code,
 governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without
 regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53
 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
 (d) CONSULTANTS- Subject to such rules as may be prescribed by the task
 force, the Executive Director may procure temporary or intermittent
 services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates
 for individuals not to exceed $200 per day.
SEC. 246. POWERS OF TASK FORCE.
 (a) HEARINGS- For the purpose of carrying out this subtitle, the task
 force may conduct such hearings, sit and act at such times and places,
 take such testimony, and receive such evidence, as the task force considers
 appropriate. The task force may administer oaths before the task force.
 (b) DELEGATION- Any member or employee of the task force may, if authorized
 by the task force, take any action that the task force is authorized to
 take under this subtitle.
 (c) ACCESS TO INFORMATION- The task force may secure directly from any
 executive department or agency such information as may be necessary to
 enable the task force to carry out this subtitle, to the extent access to
 such information is permitted by law. On request of the Attorney General,
 the head of such a department or agency shall furnish such permitted
 information to the task force.
 (d) MAIL- The task force may use the United States mails in the same manner
 and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the
 United States.
SEC. 247. REPORT.
 Not later than 1 year after the date on which the task force is fully
 constituted under section 243, the Attorney General shall submit a detailed
 report to the Congress on the findings and recommendations of the task force.
SEC. 248. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There is authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 1992, $500,000 to
 carry out the purposes of this subtitle.
SEC. 249. TERMINATION.
 The task force shall cease to exist 30 days after the date on which the
 Attorney General's report is submitted under section 247. The Attorney
 General may extend the life of the task force for a period of not to exceed
 one year.
Subtitle F--Prevention of Sexual Assault
SEC. 251. EDUCATION AND PREVENTION GRANTS TO REDUCE SEXUAL ASSAULTS AGAINST
WOMEN.
 The Victims of Crime Act of 1984 is amended by inserting after section 1404
 (42 U.S.C. 10603) the following new section:
`SEC. 1405. RAPE PREVENTION AND EDUCATION PROGRAMS.
 `(a) DEFINITION- As used in this section, the term `rape prevention and
 education' includes education and prevention efforts directed at offenses
 committed by--
 `(1) offenders who are not known to the victim; and
 `(2) offenders known to the victim.
 `(b) ESTABLISHMENT- The Attorney General shall establish a program of
 grants to assist States in supporting rape prevention and education programs.
 `(c) USE OF FUNDS- A State may use a grant awarded under subsection
 (b) to support rape prevention and education programs conducted by rape
 crisis centers or similar nongovernmental nonprofit entities, including
 programs that--
 `(1) conduct educational seminars;
 `(2) operate hotlines;
 `(3) conduct training programs for professionals;
 `(4) prepare informational materials; and
 `(5) undertake other efforts to increase awareness of the facts about,
 or help prevent, sexual assault.
 `(d) APPLICATION- To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection
 (b), a State shall submit an application at such time, in such manner,
 and containing such agreements, assurances, and information as the Attorney
 General determines to be necessary to carry out this section. At a minimum,
 the application shall include--
 `(1) an assurance that the State will use at least 15 percent of the grant
 money made available under this section to support education programs
 targeted for junior high school and high school students; and
 `(2) an assurance that the State will pay for the full cost of forensic
 medical examinations for victims of sexual assault, and will, if the State
 receives funds under section 1403, pay for the cost of the examinations
 with such funds.
 `(e) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 to carry out this section $25,000,000 for each of the 1992 through 1994
 fiscal years.'.
Subtitle G--Domestic Violence Prevention Act of 1991
SEC. 261. SHORT TITLE.
 This subtitle may be cited as the `Domestic Violence Prevention Act of 1991'.
SEC. 262. EXPANSION OF PURPOSE.
 Section 302(1) of the Family Violence Prevention and Services Act (42
 U.S.C. 10401(1)) is amended by striking `to prevent' and inserting `to
 increase public awareness about and prevent'.
SEC. 263. EXPANSION OF STATE DEMONSTRATION GRANT PROGRAM.
 Section 303(a)(1) of the Family Violence Prevention and Services Act
 (42 U.S.C. 10402(a)(1)) is amended by striking `to prevent' and inserting
 `to increase public awareness about and prevent'.
SEC. 264. GRANTS FOR PUBLIC INFORMATION CAMPAIGNS.
 The Family Violence Prevention and Services Act is amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new section:
`GRANTS FOR PUBLIC INFORMATION CAMPAIGNS
 `SEC. 314. (a) The Secretary may make grants to public or private nonprofit
 entities to provide public information campaigns regarding domestic violence
 through the use of public service announcements and informative materials
 that are designed for print media, billboards, public transit advertising,
 electronic broadcast media, and other vehicles for information that shall
 inform the public concerning domestic violence.
 `(b) No grant, contract, or cooperative agreement shall be made or entered
 into under this section unless an application that meets the requirements
 of subsection (c) has been approved by the Secretary.
 `(c) An application submitted under subsection (b) shall--
 `(1) provide such agreements, assurances, and information, be in such
 form and be submitted in such manner as the Secretary shall prescribe
 through notice in the Federal Register, including a description of how the
 proposed public information campaign will target the population at risk,
 including pregnant women;
 `(2) include a complete description of the plan of the application for
 the development of a public information campaign;
 `(3) identify the specific audiences that will be educated, including
 communities and groups with the highest prevalence of domestic violence;
 `(4) identify the media to be used in the campaign and the geographic
 distribution of the campaign;
 `(5) describe plans to test market a development plan with a relevant
 population group and in a relevant geographic area and give assurance
 that effectiveness criteria will be implemented prior to the completion
 of the final plan that will include an evaluation component to measure
 the overall effectiveness of the campaign;
 `(6) describe the kind, amount, distribution, and timing of informational
 messages and such other information as the Secretary may require, with
 assurances that media organizations and other groups with which such
 messages are placed will not lower the current frequency of public service
 announcements; and
 `(7) contain such other information as the Secretary may require.
 `(d) A grant, contract, or agreement made or entered into under this
 section shall be used for the development of a public information campaign
 that may include public service announcements, paid educational messages
 for print media, public transit advertising, electronic broadcast media,
 and any other mode of conveying information that the Secretary determines
 to be appropriate.
 `(e) The criteria for awarding grants shall ensure that an applicant--
 `(1) will conduct activities that educate communities and groups at
 greatest risk;
 `(2) has a record of high quality campaigns of a comparable type; and
 `(3) has a record of high quality campaigns that educate the population
 groups identified as most at risk.'.
SEC. 265. STATE COMMISSIONS ON DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
 Section 303(a)(2) of the Family Violence Prevention and Services Act
 (42 U.S.C. 10402(a)(2)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of subparagraph (F);
 (2) by redesignating subparagraph (G) as subparagraph (H); and
 (3) by inserting after subparagraph (F) the following new subparagraph:
 `(G) provides assurances that, not later than 1 year after receipt of
 funds, the State shall have established a Commission on Domestic Violence,
 which will include as members representatives of antidomestic violence
 organizations and whose expenses will be paid out of funds other than
 those dedicated to providing services in domestic violence cases, to
 examine issues including--
 `(i) the use of mandatory arrest of accused offenders;
 `(ii) the adoption of `no-drop' prosecution policies;
 `(iii) the use of mandatory requirements for presentencing investigations;
 `(iv) the length of time taken to prosecute cases or reach plea agreements;
 `(v) the use of plea agreements;
 `(vi) the testifying by victims at post-conviction sentencing and release
 hearings;
 `(vii) the consistency of sentencing practices;
 `(viii) restitution of victims;
 `(ix) the reporting practices of and significance to be accorded to prior
 convictions (both felonies and misdemeanors); and
 `(x) such other matters as the Commission believes merit investigation.
SEC. 266. INDIAN TRIBES.
 Section 303(b)(1) of the Family Violence Prevention and Services Act (42
 U.S.C. 10402(b)(1)) is amended by striking `is authorized' and inserting
 `shall make no less than $1,000,000 available for'.
SEC. 267. FUNDING LIMITATIONS.
 Section 303(c) of the Family Violence Prevention and Services Act (42
 U.S.C. 10402(c)) is amended by striking `, and' and all that follows through
 `fiscal years'.
SEC. 268. GRANTS TO ENTITIES OTHER THAN STATES; LOCAL SHARE.
 The first sentence of section 303(f) of the Family Violence Prevention
 and Services Act (42 U.S.C. 10402(f)) is amended to read as follows:
 `No demonstration grant may be made under this section to an entity other
 than a State unless the entity provides 50 percent of the funding of the
 program or project funded by the grant.'.
SEC. 269. SHELTER AND RELATED ASSISTANCE; RURAL AREAS.
 Section 303(g) of the Family Violence Prevention and Services Act (42
 U.S.C. 10402(g)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(g)(1) The Secretary shall ensure that, of the funds distributed under
 subsection (a) or (b)--
 `(A) not less than 60 percent of the funds shall be distributed to entities
 for the purpose of providing shelter and related assistance to victims of
 family violence and their dependents, such as--
 `(i) food, shelter, medical services, and counseling with respect to family
 violence, including counseling by peers individually or in groups;
 `(ii) transportation, legal assistance, referrals, and technical assistance
 with respect to obtaining financial assistance under Federal and State
 programs;
 `(iii) comprehensive counseling about parenting, preventive health
 (including nutrition, exercise, and prevention of substance abuse),
 educational services, employment training, social skills (including
 communication skills), home management, and assertiveness training; and
 `(iv) day care services for children who are victims of family violence
 or the dependents of such victims; and
 `(B) not less than 20 percent of the funds (which may include funds
 distributed under subparagraph (A)) shall be distributed to entities in
 rural areas.
 `(2) As used in this subsection, the term `rural area' means a territory
 of a State that is not within the outer boundary of any city or town that
 has a population of 20,000 or more, based on the latest decennial census
 of the United States.'.
SEC. 270. LAW ENFORCEMENT TRAINING AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS.
 Section 311(b) of the Family Violence Protection and Services Act (42
 U.S.C. 10410(b)) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new subparagraph:
 `(C) Training grants may be made under this section only to private nonprofit
 organizations that have experience in providing training and technical
 assistance to law enforcement personnel on a national or regional basis.'.
SEC. 271. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 Section 310 of the Family Violence Prevention and Services Act (42
 U.S.C. 10409) is amended to read as follows:
`AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS
 `SEC. 310. (a) There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this
 title, $60,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1992, 1993, and 1994.
 `(b) Of the sums appropriated under subsection (a) for any fiscal year,
 not less than 85 percent shall be used by the Secretary for making grants
 under section 303.
 `(c) Of the sums authorized to be appropriated under subsection (a) for
 any fiscal year, not more than 3 percent shall be used by the Secretary
 for making grants under section 314.'.
SEC. 272. REPORT ON RECORDKEEPING.
 Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this subtitle, the
 Attorney General shall complete a study of, and shall submit to Congress
 a report and recommendations on, problems of recordkeeping of criminal
 complaints involving domestic violence. The study and report shall examine--
 (1) the efforts that have been made by the Department of Justice, including
 the Federal Bureau of Investigation, to collect statistics on domestic
 violence; and
 (2) the feasibility of requiring that the relationship between an offender
 and victim be reported in Federal records of crimes of aggravated assault,
 rape, and other violent crimes.
TITLE III--EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES
Subtitle A--Glass Ceiling Commission
SEC. 301. SHORT TITLE.
 This subtitle may be cited as the `Glass Ceiling Act of 1991'.
SEC. 302. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
 (a) FINDINGS- Congress finds that--
 (1) despite a dramatically growing presence in the workplace, women and
 minorities remain underrepresented in executive management and senior
 decisionmaking positions in business;
 (2) artificial barriers exist to the advancement of women and minorities
 in the workplace;
 (3) United States corporations are increasingly relying on women and
 minorities to meet employment requirements and are increasingly aware of
 the advantages derived from a diverse work force;
 (4) the `Glass Ceiling Initiative' recently undertaken by the Department
 of Labor has been instrumental in raising public awareness of--
 (A) the underrepresentation of women and minorities at the executive
 management and senior decisionmaking levels in the United States work
 force; and
 (B) the desirability of eliminating artificial barriers to the advancement
 of women and minorities to such levels;
 (5) the establishment of a commission to examine issues raised by the
 Glass Ceiling Initiative would help--
 (A) focus greater attention on the importance of eliminating artificial
 barriers to the advancement of women and minorities to executive management
 and senior decisionmaking positions in business; and
 (B) promote work force diversity;
 (6) a comprehensive study that includes analysis of the manner in which
 executive management and senior decisionmaking positions are filled,
 the developmental and skill-enhancing practices used to foster the
 necessary qualifications for advancement, and the compensation programs
 and reward structures utilized in the corporate sector would assist in
 the establishment of practices and policies promoting opportunities for,
 and eliminating artificial barriers to, the advancement of women and
 minorities to executive management and senior decisionmaking positions;
 (7) a national award recognizing employers whose practices and policies
 promote opportunities for, and eliminate artificial barriers to, the
 advancement of women and minorities will foster the advancement of women
 and minorities into higher level positions by--
 (A) helping to encourage United States companies to modify practices and
 policies to promote opportunities for, and eliminate artificial barriers
 to, the upward mobility of women and minorities; and
 (B) providing specific guidance for other United States employers that
 wish to learn how to revise practices and policies to improve the access
 and employment opportunities of women and minorities; and
 (8) employment quotas based on race, sex, national origin, religious belief,
 or disability--
 (A) are antithetical to the historical commitment of the Nation to the
 principle of equality of opportunity; and
 (B) do not serve any legitimate business or social purpose.
 (b) PURPOSE- The purpose of this subtitle is to establish--
 (1) a Glass Ceiling Commission to study--
 (A) the manner in which business fills executive management and senior
 decisionmaking positions;
 (B) the developmental and skill-enhancing practices used to foster the
 necessary qualifications for advancement into such positions; and
 (C) the compensation programs and reward structures currently utilized in
 the workplace; and
 (2) an annual award for excellence in promoting a more diverse skilled
 work force at the executive management and senior decisionmaking levels
 in business.
SEC. 303. ESTABLISHMENT OF GLASS CEILING COMMISSION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- There is established a Glass Ceiling Commission (referred
 to in this subtitle as the `Commission'), to conduct a study and prepare
 recommendations concerning--
 (1) eliminating artificial barriers to the advancement of women and
 minorities; and
 (2) increasing the opportunities and developmental experiences of women
 and minorities to foster advancement of women and minorities to executive
 management and senior decisionmaking positions in business.
 (b) MEMBERSHIP-
 (1) COMPOSITION- The Commission shall be composed of 17 members--
 (A) five individuals appointed by the President;
 (B) three individuals appointed jointly by the Speaker of the House of
 Representatives and the Majority Leader of the Senate;
 (C) one individual appointed by the Majority Leader of the House of
 Representatives;
 (D) one individual appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of
 Representatives;
 (E) one individual appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate;
 (F) one individual appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate;
 (G) two Members of the House of Representatives appointed jointly by the
 Majority Leader and the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives;
 (H) two Members of the Senate appointed jointly by the Majority Leader
 and the Minority Leader of the Senate; and
 (I) the Secretary of Labor.
 (2) CONSIDERATIONS- In making appointments under subparagraphs (A) and (B)
 of paragraph (1), the appointing authority shall consider the background
 of the individuals, including whether the individuals--
 (A) are members of organizations representing women and minorities, and
 other related interest groups;
 (B) hold executive management or senior decisionmaking positions in
 corporations or other business entities; and
 (C) possess academic expertise or other recognized ability regarding
 employment and discrimination issues.
 (c) CHAIRPERSON- The Secretary of Labor shall serve as the Chairperson of
 the Commission.
 (d) TERM OF OFFICE- Members shall be appointed for the life of the
 Commission.
 (e) VACANCIES- Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the Commission
 shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the
 position being vacated. The vacancy shall not affect the power of the
 remaining members to execute the duties of the Commission.
 (f) MEETINGS-
 (1) MEETINGS PRIOR TO COMPLETION OF REPORT- The Commission shall meet not
 fewer than five times in connection with and pending the completion of the
 report described in section 304(b). The Commission shall hold additional
 meetings if the Chairperson or a majority of the members of the Commission
 request the additional meetings in writing.
 (2) MEETINGS AFTER COMPLETION OF REPORT- The Commission shall meet once each
 year after the completion of the report described in section 304(b). The
 Commission shall hold additional meetings if the Chairperson or a majority
 of the members of the Commission request the additional meetings in writing.
 (g) QUORUM- A majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for
 the transaction of business.
 (h) COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES-
 (1) COMPENSATION- Each member of the Commission who is not an employee of
 the Federal Government shall receive compensation at the daily equivalent
 of the rate specified for GS-18 of the General Schedule under section 5332
 of title 5, United States Code, for each day the member is engaged in the
 performance of duties for the Commission, including attendance at meetings
 and conferences of the Commission, and travel to conduct the duties of
 the Commission.
 (2) TRAVEL EXPENSES- Each member of the Commission shall receive travel
 expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by section
 5703 of title 5, United States Code, for persons employed intermittently in
 the Federal service, for each day the member is engaged in the performance
 of duties away from the home or regular place of business of the member.
 (3) EMPLOYMENT STATUS- A member of the Commission, who is not otherwise an
 employee of the Federal Government, shall not be deemed to be an employee
 of the Federal Government except for the purposes of--
 (A) the tort claims provisions of chapter 171 of title 28, United States
 Code, and
 (B) subchapter I of chapter 81 of title 5, United States Code, relating
 to compensation for work injuries.
SEC. 304. RESEARCH ON ADVANCEMENT OF WOMEN AND MINORITIES TO EXECUTIVE
MANAGEMENT AND SENIOR DECISIONMAKING POSITIONS IN BUSINESS.
 (a) ADVANCEMENT STUDY- The Commission shall conduct a study of opportunities
 for, and artificial barriers to, the advancement of women and minorities
 to executive management and senior decisionmaking positions in business. In
 conducting the study, the Commission shall--
 (1) examine the preparedness of women and minorities to advance to executive
 management and senior decisionmaking positions in business;
 (2) examine the opportunities for women and minorities to advance to
 executive management and senior decisionmaking positions in business;
 (3) conduct basic research into the practices, policies, and manner in
 which executive management and senior decisionmaking positions in business
 are filled;
 (4) conduct comparative research of businesses and industries in which women
 and minorities are promoted to executive management and senior decisionmaking
 positions, and businesses and industries in which women and minorities
 are not promoted to executive management and senior decisionmaking positions;
 (5) compile a synthesis of available research on programs and practices
 that have successfully led to the advancement of women and minorities
 to executive management and senior decisionmaking positions in business,
 including training programs, rotational assignments, developmental programs,
 reward programs, employee benefit structures, and family leave policies; and
 (6) examine any other issues and information relating to the advancement
 of women and minorities to executive management and senior decisionmaking
 positions in business.
 (b) REPORT- Not later than 15 months after the date of the enactment of
 this subtitle, the Commission shall prepare and submit to the President
 and the appropriate committees of Congress a written report containing--
 (1) the findings and conclusions of the Commission resulting from the
 study conducted under subsection (a); and
 (2) recommendations based on the findings and conclusions described
 in paragraph (1) relating to the promotion of opportunities for, and
 elimination of artificial barriers to, the advancement of women and
 minorities to executive management and senior decisionmaking positions in
 business, including recommendations for--
 (A) policies and practices to fill vacancies at the executive management
 and senior decisionmaking levels;
 (B) developmental practices and procedures to ensure that women and
 minorities have access to opportunities to gain the exposure, skills, and
 expertise necessary to assume executive management and senior decisionmaking
 positions; and
 (C) compensation programs and reward structures utilized to reward and
 retain key employees.
 (c) ADDITIONAL STUDY- The Commission may conduct such additional study of
 the advancement of women and minorities to executive management and senior
 decisionmaking positions in business as a majority of the members of the
 Commission determines to be necessary.
SEC. 305. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NATIONAL AWARD FOR DIVERSITY AND EXCELLENCE
IN AMERICAN EXECUTIVE MANAGEMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- There is established the National Award for Diversity and
 Excellence in American Executive Management, which shall be evidenced by a
 medal bearing the inscription `National Award for Diversity and Excellence
 in American Executive Management'. The medal shall be of such design and
 materials, and bear such additional inscriptions, as the Commission may
 prescribe.
 (b) CRITERIA FOR QUALIFICATION- To qualify to receive an award under this
 section a business shall--
 (1) submit a written application to the Commission, at such time, in such
 manner, and containing such information as the Commission may require,
 including at a minimum information that demonstrates that the business has
 made substantial effort to promote the opportunities and developmental
 experiences of women and minorities to foster advancement to executive
 management and senior decisionmaking positions within the business,
 including the elimination of artificial barriers to the advancement of
 women and minorities, and deserves special recognition as a consequence; and
 (2) meet such additional requirements and specifications as the Commission
 determines to be appropriate.
 (c) MAKING AND PRESENTATION OF AWARD-
 (1) AWARD- After receiving recommendations from the Commission, the
 President or the designated representative of the President shall annually
 present the award described in subsection (a) to businesses that meet the
 qualifications described in subsection (b).
 (2) PRESENTATION- The President or the designated representative of the
 President shall present the award with such ceremonies as the President
 or the designated representative of the President may determine to be
 appropriate.
 (3) PUBLICITY- A business that receives an award under this section may
 publicize the receipt of the award and use the award in its advertising,
 if the business agrees to help other United States businesses improve with
 respect to the promotion of opportunities and developmental experiences
 of women and minorities to foster the advancement of women and minorities
 to executive management and senior decisionmaking positions.
SEC. 306. POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Commission is authorized to--
 (1) hold such hearings and sit and act at such times;
 (2) take such testimony;
 (3) have such printing and binding done;
 (4) enter into such contracts and other arrangements;
 (5) make such expenditures; and
 (6) take such other actions;
as the Commission may determine to be necessary to carry out the duties of
the Commission.
 (b) OATHS- Any member of the Commission may administer oaths or affirmations
 to witnesses appearing before the Commission.
 (c) OBTAINING INFORMATION FROM FEDERAL AGENCIES- The Commission may secure
 directly from any Federal agency such information as the Commission may
 require to carry out its duties.
 (d) VOLUNTARY SERVICE- Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, United
 States Code, the Chairperson of the Commission may accept for the Commission
 voluntary services provided by a member of the Commission.
 (e) GIFTS AND DONATIONS- The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts
 or donations of property in order to carry out the duties of the Commission.
 (f) USE OF MAIL- The Commission may use the United States mails in the
 same manner and under the same conditions as Federal agencies.
SEC. 307. CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION.
 (a) Individual Business Information-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), and notwithstanding
 section 552 of title 5, United States Code, in carrying out the duties of
 the Commission, including the duties described in sections 304 and 305,
 the Commission shall maintain the confidentiality of all information
 that concerns--
 (A) the employment practices and procedures of individual businesses; or
 (B) individual employees of the businesses.
 (2) CONSENT- The content of any information described in paragraph (1) may
 be disclosed with the prior written consent of the business or employee,
 as the case may be, with respect to which the information is maintained.
 (b) AGGREGATE INFORMATION- In carrying out the duties of the Commission,
 the Commission may disclose--
 (1) information about the aggregate employment practices or procedures of
 a class or group of businesses; and
 (2) information about the aggregate characteristics of employees of the
 businesses, and related aggregate information about the employees.
SEC. 308. STAFF AND CONSULTANTS.
 (a) STAFF-
 (1) APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION- The Commission may appoint and determine
 the compensation of such staff as the Commission determines to be necessary
 to carry out the duties of the Commission.
 (2) LIMITATIONS- The rate of compensation for each staff member shall
 not exceed the daily equivalent of the rate specified for GS-18 of the
 General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code for
 each day the staff member is engaged in the performance of duties for
 the Commission. The Commission may otherwise appoint and determine the
 compensation of staff without regard to the provisions of title 5, United
 States Code, that govern appointments in the competitive service, and the
 provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United
 States Code, that relate to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
 (b) EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS- The Chairperson of the Commission may obtain
 such temporary and intermittent services of experts and consultants and
 compensate the experts and consultants in accordance with section 3109(b)
 of title 5, United States Code, as the Commission determines to be necessary
 to carry out the duties of the Commission.
 (c) DETAIL OF FEDERAL EMPLOYEES- On the request of the Chairperson of
 the Commission, the head of any Federal agency shall detail, without
 reimbursement, any of the personnel of the agency to the Commission to
 assist the Commission in carrying out its duties. Any detail shall not
 interrupt or otherwise affect the civil service status or privileges of
 the Federal employee.
 (d) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE- On the request of the Chairperson of the
 Commission, the head of a Federal agency shall provide such technical
 assistance to the Commission as the Commission determines to be necessary
 to carry out its duties.
SEC. 309. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There are authorized to be appropriated to the Commission such sums as
 may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this subtitle. The sums
 shall remain available until expended, without fiscal year limitation.
SEC. 310. TERMINATION.
 (a) COMMISSION- Notwithstanding section 15 of the Federal Advisory Committee
 Act (5 U.S.C. App.), the Commission shall terminate 4 years after the date
 of the enactment of this subtitle.
 (b) AWARD- The authority to make awards under section 305 shall terminate
 4 years after the date of the enactment of this subtitle.
Subtitle B--Opportunities in Apprenticeship
SEC. 321. SHORT TITLE.
 This subtitle may be cited as the `Opportunities in Apprenticeship Act
 of 1991'.
SEC. 322. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
 (a) FINDINGS- Congress finds that--
 (1) there is a history of underrepresentation of women and minorities in
 apprenticeship programs;
 (2) artificial barriers exist to the participation of women and minorities
 in apprenticeship programs;
 (3) United States business is increasingly relying on women and minorities
 to meet employment requirements and is increasingly aware of the advantages
 derived from a diverse work force;
 (4) the `Skilled Trades Initiative' recently undertaken by the Department of
 Labor has been instrumental in raising public awareness of the problems of
 underrepresentation and barriers to participation in apprenticeship programs;
 (5) expansion of outreach and education activities and preapprenticeship
 training would increase the participation of women and minorities in
 apprenticeship programs;
 (6) a comprehensive study of the barriers to the participation and retention
 of women and minorities in apprenticeship programs would assist in the
 development of recommendations for eliminating such barriers and improving
 overall participation; and
 (7) employment or participation quotas based on race, sex, national origin,
 religious belief, or disability--
 (A) are antithetical to the historical commitment of the Nation to the
 principle of equality of opportunity; and
 (B) do not serve any legitimate business or social purpose.
 (b) PURPOSE- The purpose of this subtitle is to establish programs that
 will expand the opportunities for women and minorities in registered
 apprenticeship programs by--
 (1) providing outreach, education, and technical assistance to make women
 and minorities aware of, and encourage their participation in, registered
 apprenticeship programs;
 (2) providing information, skills development, and preapprenticeship training
 to women and minorities to enable them to enter registered apprenticeship
 programs; and
 (3) conducting a comprehensive study to examine the barriers to the
 participation of women and minorities in registered apprenticeship programs
 and to develop recommendations for eliminating such barriers.
SEC. 323. OUTREACH AND EDUCATION PROGRAM.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of Labor (referred to in this subtitle as
 the `Secretary') shall establish in the Department of Labor an outreach
 and education program designed to expand the opportunities for women and
 minorities in apprenticeship programs registered with the Department of
 Labor pursuant to the National Apprenticeship Act (referred to in this
 subtitle as `registered apprenticeship programs'). The program shall
 include the activities described in this section.
 (b) Information-
 (1) DEVELOPMENT- The Secretary shall develop and disseminate information
 regarding opportunities for women and minorities in registered apprenticeship
 programs, which may include information on--
 (A) the nature and advantages of apprenticeship;
 (B) requirements for admission to apprenticeship;
 (C) sources of apprenticeship applications; and
 (D) existing programs and organizations assisting in the preparation of
 women and minorities for apprenticeable occupations.
 (2) DISSEMINATION- The Secretary shall disseminate information developed
 in accordance with paragraph (1) to educational institutions, employers,
 employer associations, unions, State apprenticeship councils, sponsors of
 apprenticeship programs, organizations representing and assisting women
 and minorities, and other appropriate organizations, institutions, groups,
 and individuals.
 (c) MODEL PROGRAMS- The Secretary shall identify and develop model
 preapprenticeship and apprenticeship programs that promote training
 and employment opportunities for women and minorities, and disseminate
 information relating to the programs.
 (d) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE- The Secretary shall provide appropriate technical
 assistance to the organizations, institutions, groups, and individuals
 described in subsection (b)(2) to promote outreach to, and the recruitment
 of, women and minorities for registered apprenticeship programs. The
 technical assistance may include--
 (1) participation in annual workshops conducted for the purpose of
 familiarizing school, employment service, and other appropriate personnel
 with the apprenticeship system and current opportunities in the system;
 (2) cooperation with local school boards and vocational education systems to
 develop programs for preparing students to meet the standards and criteria
 required to qualify for entry into apprenticeship programs; and
 (3) organization of and participation in conferences and seminars involving
 groups representing and assisting women and minorities to inform the groups
 about the apprenticeship system and available apprenticeship opportunities.
 (e) OUTREACH GRANTS-
 (1) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary may award grants to eligible organizations
 to pay the Federal share of conducting outreach and recruitment activities
 designed to increase the participation of women and minorities in registered
 apprenticeship programs.
 (2) USE OF FUNDS- An eligible organization shall use funds provided under
 this subsection to conduct outreach and recruitment activities designed
 to increase the participation of women and minorities in registered
 apprenticeship programs. The activities may include--
 (A) dissemination of information to make women and minorities aware of,
 and encourage participation in, registered apprenticeship programs;
 (B) preparation of women and minorities for apprenticeship selection
 procedures, including tutoring for tests and coaching for job interviews; and
 (C) outreach combined with skills development and preparatory trade training
 to enable women and minorities to become eligible for apprenticeship
 selection.
 (3) APPLICATION- To be eligible for a grant under this subsection, an
 organization shall submit to the Secretary an application for assistance at
 such time, in such manner, and containing or accompanied by such information
 as the Secretary may reasonably require.
 (4) ELIGIBILITY- Organizations eligible to receive funds under this
 subsection shall include educational institutions, employers, employer
 associations, unions, State apprenticeship councils, sponsors of registered
 apprenticeship programs, and organizations representing and assisting
 women and minorities.
 (5) Payment of federal share-
 (A) FEDERAL SHARE- The Federal share of the cost of conducting outreach
 and recruitment activities under this subsection shall not exceed 75 percent.
 (B) OTHER SOURCES- The portion of the costs of the activities conducted
 under this subsection that is not paid by the grant may be paid from any
 other Federal or non-Federal sources.
SEC. 324. PREAPPRENTICESHIP TRAINING GRANT PROGRAM.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary may establish in the Department of Labor
 a program of grants to sponsors of registered apprenticeship programs to
 pay the Federal share of providing preapprenticeship training to women
 and minorities.
 (b) USE OF FUNDS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Sponsors of registered apprenticeship programs shall use
 funds provided under this section--
 (A) to conduct preapprenticeship training programs for women and minorities,
 as described in paragraph (2); and
 (B) to provide supportive services, such as child care and transportation,
 to women and minorities necessary to enable them to participate in
 preapprenticeship training.
 (2) PREAPPRENTICESHIP TRAINING PROGRAM- A preapprenticeship training
 program shall include an organized training plan in which candidates for
 apprenticeship are provided with intensified training activities for the
 purpose of placement into a registered apprenticeship program on completion
 or soon after completion of the preapprenticeship training.
 (3) TRAINING- Training under the program described in paragraph (2)
 may include--
 (A) dissemination of information to the participant relating to the content
 of a trade;
 (B) development of the manipulative skills of a participant relating to
 a trade;
 (C) development of the skills of a participant in using materials, tools,
 and equipment relating to a trade; and
 (D) technical instruction in a trade.
 (c) APPLICATION- To be eligible to receive a grant under this section, a
 sponsor of a registered apprenticeship program requesting assistance shall
 submit an application for assistance to the Secretary at such time, in such
 manner and containing or accompanied by such information as the Secretary
 may reasonably require. At a minimum, the application shall include--
 (1) a description of the need for the assistance;
 (2) a description of the preapprenticeship training program to be conducted,
 including a description of any supportive services to be provided;
 (3) assurances that there are or will be suitable and appropriate positions
 available in the apprenticeship program of the sponsor on completion of
 the preapprenticeship training; and
 (4) commitments that all reasonable efforts shall be made to place
 participants in the apprenticeship program of the sponsor on completion
 of training.
 (d) Payment of Federal Share-
 (1) FEDERAL SHARE- The Federal share of the cost of providing
 preapprenticeship training under this section shall not exceed 75 percent.
 (2) OTHER SOURCES- The portion of the costs of the activities conducted
 under this subsection that is not paid by the grant may be paid from any
 other Federal or non-Federal sources.
SEC. 325. STUDY OF PARTICIPATION OF WOMEN AND MINORITIES IN APPRENTICESHIP.
 (a) STUDY- The Secretary shall conduct a study of the participation of
 women and minorities in registered apprenticeship programs. The study
 shall examine--
 (1) the barriers to the participation of women and minorities in
 registered apprenticeship programs, including whether the lack of adequate
 preapprenticeship training and supportive services constitutes a significant
 barrier to participation, and methods for eliminating the barriers;
 (2) techniques by which women and minorities have been recruited into
 registered apprenticeship programs and methods for improving recruitment;
 (3) the retention rates for women and minorities in registered apprenticeship
 programs and methods for increasing the rates;
 (4) the extent to which women and minorities are employed following
 the completion of registered apprenticeship programs, the nature of the
 employment, the extent to which the employment is retained, and methods
 for enhancing employment;
 (5) model apprenticeship programs for women and minorities and methods
 for incorporating and expanding the programs into other registered
 apprenticeship programs;
 (6) the effectiveness of the preapprenticeship grant training program
 established in section 324; and
 (7) other relevant issues affecting the participation of women and minorities
 in registered apprenticeship programs.
 (b) REPORT- The Secretary shall submit a report containing the study
 described in subsection (a) and such recommendations as the Secretary
 determines to be appropriate to the appropriate committees of Congress
 not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 326. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 (a) AUTHORIZATION FOR OUTREACH PROGRAM AND STUDY- There are authorized
 to be appropriated to carry out section 323 (other than subsection (e))
 and section 325, $2,000,000 for fiscal year 1992, and such sums as may be
 necessary for each subsequent fiscal year.
 (b) AUTHORIZATION FOR OUTREACH GRANTS- There are authorized to be
 appropriated to carry out section 323(e), $8,000,000 for fiscal year 1992,
 and such sums as may be necessary for each subsequent fiscal year.
 (c) AUTHORIZATION FOR PREAPPRENTICESHIP GRANTS- There are authorized to be
 appropriated to carry out section 324, $15,000,000 for fiscal year 1992,
 and such sums as may be necessary for each subsequent fiscal year.
 (d) RESERVATION- The Secretary may reserve not more than 5 percent of the
 funds appropriated in accordance with subsections (a), (b) and (c) in each
 fiscal year to carry out the enforcement of nondiscrimination and affirmative
 action requirements relating to registered apprenticeship programs, including
 the training of Department of Labor personnel for the enforcement purposes.
Subtitle C--Opportunities for Alternative Work Arrangements
SEC. 331. FINDINGS.
 Congress finds that--
 (1) since 1982, Federal agencies have had authority under subpart II of
 chapter 61 of title 5, United States Code, to establish alternative work
 schedules to assist Federal employees who are trying to balance work and
 family responsibilities;
 (2) one form of alternative work schedule allows Federal employees
 considerable leeway in setting arrival and departure times at work;
 (3) under these flexible schedules, employees must be present during a fixed
 `core time' and must cooperatively work out arrangements with supervisors
 and coworkers to ensure that office operations run smoothly;
 (4) another form of alternative work schedule enables Federal employees to
 work more than 8 hours in a day and thus complete their 80-hour biweekly
 work requirement in fewer than 10 workdays;
 (5) using flexible scheduling, agencies may authorize a variety of work
 arrangements to assist employees with family responsibilities;
 (6) agencies that use alternative work schedules permit parents--
 (A) to begin work earlier in order to be home when children return from
 school in the afternoon; or
 (B) to work additional hours per day, and fewer days per week in order to
 be home with children an additional number of days;
 (7) the Office of Personnel Management encourages Federal agencies to
 consider using the flexible schedule programs as valuable tools to help
 employees meet dependent care needs and enhance employee morale and
 productivity;
 (8) the Office of Personnel Management provides technical assistance and
 training in the use of alternative work scheduling;
 (9) the Office of Personnel Management has recently promoted job sharing
 for Federal employees;
 (10) job sharing is a form of part-time employment in which two part-time
 employees voluntarily share the duties and responsibilities of one
 full-time position;
 (11) under job sharing, each employee is considered to be an individual
 part-time employee for the purposes of appointment, pay, classification,
 leave, benefits, and other personnel considerations;
 (12) a variety of different arrangements can be used under job sharing,
 including those in which--
 (A) one job sharer works mornings and the other afternoons;
 (B) job sharers alternate days or alternate weeks; or
 (C) job sharers overlap schedules to provide extra coverage at peak times
 or to allow time for meetings;
 (13) the Office of Personnel Management has recently--
 (A) issued guidance to Federal agencies encouraging the agencies to establish
 additional job-sharing positions and to inform Federal employees of the
 option to work less than full-time;
 (B) published a booklet entitled `Job Sharing for Federal Employees'
 that gives detailed information on setting up a job sharing arrangement
 and making the arrangement work effectively; and
 (C) established `The OPM Connection,' a pilot program currently operating
 in Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, and Washington, DC., that--
 (i) matches Federal employees who want to work part-time with Federal
 agencies trying to fill part-time and shared jobs; and
 (ii) helps current Federal employees find other employees interested in
 job sharing; and
 (14) job sharing can be especially beneficial for employees who have child
 care responsibilities because of the flexible nature of the arrangement.
SEC. 332. SENSE OF THE CONGRESS.
 It is the sense of the Congress that--
 (1) the Office of Personnel Management has made commendable efforts to
 develop alternative work arrangements through flexible scheduling and job
 sharing; and
 (2) the Office of Personnel Management should continue efforts to develop
 and expand alternative work arrangements to assist Federal employees with
 family responsibilities and to serve as an example for State and local
 governments and private sector employers and employees.