S 865 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 865
To amend the Sherman Act regarding retail competition.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
April 19 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. METZENBAUM (for himself, Mr. RUDMAN, Mr. SIMON, Mr. WILSON, Mr. BRADLEY,
Mr. SASSER, Mr. CRANSTON, Mr. BOSCHWITZ, Mr. GORTON, Mr. EXON, Mr. LAUTENBERG,
Mr. KERRY, Mr. PELL, Mr. KENNEDY, Mr. LEVIN, Mr. MOYNIHAN, Mr. BINGAMAN,
Mr. ADAMS, Mr. LIEBERMAN, and Mr. DODD) introduced the following bill;
which was read twice and referred to the Committee on the Judiciary
A BILL
To amend the Sherman Act regarding retail competition.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act may be cited as
 `The Consumer Protection Against Price-Fixing Act of 1989'.
 SEC. 2. The Congress finds that--
 (1) consumer welfare is greatly enhanced by an ability to purchase goods
 and services at lower prices as a result of vigorous price competition;
 (2) vertical price restraints generally have an adverse impact on competition
 that results in higher consumer prices;
 (3) recent court decisions have so narrowly construed the laws against
 vertical price restraints that consumer welfare has been put in jeopardy; and
 (4) it is necessary to enact legislation that protects the interests of
 consumers in vigorous price competition while recognizing the needs of
 manufacturers and others to maintain reasonable service, quality, and
 safety standards.
 SEC. 3. The Sherman Act is amended by redesignating section 8 and any
 references to section 8 as section 9 and by inserting between section 7
 and section 9, as herein redesignated, the following new section:
 `SEC. 8. (a)(1)(A) In any civil action based on section 1 or 3 of this Act,
 including an action brought by the United States or by a State attorney
 general, or by the Federal Trade Commission under section 5 of the Federal
 Trade Commission Act, which alleges a contract, combination or conspiracy
 to set, change, or maintain prices, if pursuant to the Federal Rules of
 Civil Procedure the court finds that there is sufficient evidence, direct
 or circumstantial, from which a trier of fact could reasonably conclude
 that a person who sells a good or service to the claimant for resale
 entered into a contract, combination, or conspiracy with a competitor of
 such claimant to curtail or eliminate price competition by such claimant
 in the resale of such good or service, then the court shall permit the
 trier of fact to consider whether such person and such competitor engaged
 in concerted action to set, change, or maintain prices for such good or
 service in violation of such section.
 `(B) For purposes of paragraph (1), the court shall find the existence of
 `sufficient evidence' that a person who sells a good or service entered
 into a contract, combination, or conspiracy if the claimant presents
 sufficient evidence that such person--
 `(i) received from a competitor of the claimant an express or implied
 request or demand, including a threat to discontinue an existing business
 arrangement, that the seller take steps to curtail or eliminate price
 competition by the claimant in the resale of such good or service, and
 `(ii) because of such request, demand, or threat terminated the claimant
 as buyer of such good or service for resale or refused to supply to the
 claimant some or all of such goods or services requested by the claimant:
 Provided, That a termination or refusal to supply is made `because of such
 request, demand, or threat' only if such request, demand or threat is the
 major contributing cause of such termination or refusal to supply.
 `(2) The court shall not permit the trier of fact to consider whether such
 person and such competitor engaged in concerted action to set, change,
 or maintain prices for such good or service in violation of such section
 if the court determines that the trier of fact could only find that such
 person and such competitor engaged in concerted action by making inferences
 which are implausible.
 `(b) In any civil action based on section 1 or 3 of this Act, including
 an action brought by the Federal Trade Commission under section 5 of the
 Federal Trade Commission Act, which alleges a contract, combination, or
 conspiracy to set, change or maintain prices, the fact that the seller
 of a good or service and the purchaser of a good or service entered into
 an agreement to set, change, or maintain the resale price of a good or
 service shall be sufficient to constitute a violation of such section,
 except that this section shall not apply when the agreement to set, change,
 or maintain the resale price of a good or service is an agreement to set,
 change, or maintain the maximum resale price of a good or service. An
 agreement between the seller of a good or service and the purchaser of a
 good or service to terminate another purchaser as a dealer or to refuse to
 supply such other purchaser because of that purchaser's pricing policies
 shall constitute a violation of this section, whether or not a specific
 price or price level is agreed upon.'.
 SEC. 4. Nothing in this Act shall be construed to change the requirement
 of the Sherman Act that a violation of section 1 or 3 of that Act may only
 be found upon a determination that the defendant entered into an illegal
 contract, combination, or conspiracy.
 SEC. 5. Nothing in this Act shall affect the application of the rule
 of reason standard to vertical location clauses or vertical territorial
 restraints under the antitrust laws.