[Congressional Bills 110th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]
[H.R. 7264 Introduced in House (IH)]

110th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 H. R. 7264

 To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide for economic 
 stabilization, capital utilization, and enterprise reform, and for 
 other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 October 3, 2008

Mr. King of Iowa (for himself, Mrs. Bachmann, Mr. Linder, Mr. Gingrey, 
Mr. Broun of Georgia, Ms. Foxx, Mr. Rohrabacher, Mr. Poe, Mr. Sali, and 
 Mr. Gohmert) introduced the following bill; which was referred to the 
 Committee on Ways and Means, and in addition to the Committee on 
 Financial Services, for a period to be subsequently determined by the 
 Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall 
 within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide for economic 
 stabilization, capital utilization, and enterprise reform, and for 
 other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE, ETC.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Reliable Economic 
Stabilization, Capital Utilization, and Enterprise Reform Act of 
2008''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title, etc.
 TITLE I--INCENTIVES FOR ECONOMIC STABILIZATION AND CAPITAL UTILIZATION

Sec. 101. Reduction in capital gain rate for sales and exchanges for 
 certain troubled assets.
Sec. 102. 5-year carryback of losses.
Sec. 103. Incentives to reinvest foreign earnings in United States.
Sec. 104. Gain or loss from sale or exchange of certain preferred 
 stock.
Sec. 105. Repeal of Community Reinvestment Act.
Sec. 106. Net worth certificate program.
 TITLE II--GOVERNMENT-SPONSORED ENTERPRISES FREE MARKET REFORM

Sec. 201. Short title.
Sec. 202. Definitions.
Sec. 203. Termination of current conservatorship.
Sec. 204. Limitation of enterprise authority upon emergence from 
 conservatorship.
Sec. 205. Requirement to periodically renew charter until wind down and 
 dissolution.
Sec. 206. Required wind down of operations and dissolution of 
 enterprise.

 TITLE I--INCENTIVES FOR ECONOMIC STABILIZATION AND CAPITAL UTILIZATION

SEC. 101. REDUCTION IN CAPITAL GAIN RATE FOR SALES AND EXCHANGES FOR 
 CERTAIN TROUBLED ASSETS.

 (a) In General.--Part I of subchapter P of chapter 1 of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to treatment of capital gains) 
is amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 1203. GAIN ON TROUBLED ASSETS.

 ``(a) In General.--Gross income shall not include the applicable 
percentage of any gain from the sale or exchange of a troubled asset 
held for more than 1 year.
 ``(b) Applicable Percentage.--For purposes of subsection (a), the 
applicable percentage shall be determined in accordance with the 
following table:

 ``In the case of sales and exchanges-- The applicable
After: Before: percentage is:
Date of enactment of this section....... End of 2-year period beginning on 100 percent
 such date..........................
End of such 2-year period............... End of 4-year period beginning on 67 percent
 such date..........................
End of such 4-year period............... End of 6-year period beginning on 33 percent
 such date..........................
End of such 6-year period............... .................................... 0 percent.

 ``(c) Troubled Assets.--The term `troubled assets' means 
residential or commercial mortgages and any securities, obligations, or 
other instruments that are based on or related to such mortgages, that 
in each case was originated or issued on or before March 14, 2008, the 
purchase of which the Secretary determines promotes financial market 
stability and which are acquired after the date of enactment of this 
section and before January 1, 2010.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for part I of 
subchapter P of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end 
the following new item:

``Sec. 1203. Gain on troubled assets.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to sales and exchanges after the date of the enactment of this 
Act.

SEC. 102. 5-YEAR CARRYBACK OF LOSSES.

 (a) In General.--Subparagraph (H) of section 172(b)(1) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended to read as follows:
 ``(H) 5-year carryback of certain losses.--
 ``(i) Taxable years ending during 2001 and 
 2002.--In the case of a net operating loss for 
 any taxable year ending during 2001 or 2002, 
 subparagraph (A)(i) shall be applied by 
 substituting `5' for `2' and subparagraph (F) 
 shall not apply.
 ``(ii) Taxable years ending during 2007, 
 2008, and 2009.--In the case of a net operating 
 loss for any taxable year ending during 2007, 
 2008, or 2009--
 ``(I) subparagraph (A)(i) shall be 
 applied by substituting `5' for `2',
 ``(II) subparagraph (E)(ii) shall 
 be applied by substituting `4' for `2', 
 and
 ``(III) subparagraph (F) shall not 
 apply.''.
 (b) Temporary Suspension of 90 Percent Limit on Certain NOL 
Carrybacks and Carryovers.--
 (1) In general.--Subclause (I) of section 56(d)(1)(A)(ii) 
 of such Code is amended--
 (A) by inserting ``and 2007, 2008, or 2009'' after 
 ``2001 or 2002'', and
 (B) by inserting ``and 2007, 2008, and 2009'' after 
 ``2001 and 2002''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Subclause (I) of section 
 56(d)(1)(A)(i) of such Code is amended by inserting ``amount of 
 such'' before ``deduction described in clause (ii)(I)''.
 (c) Anti-Abuse Rules.--The Secretary of the Treasury or the 
Secretary's designee shall prescribe such rules as are necessary to 
prevent the abuse of the purposes of the amendments made by this 
section, including antistuffing rules, antichurning rules (including 
rules relating to sale-leasebacks), and rules similar to the rules 
under section 1091 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 relating to 
losses from wash sales.
 (d) Effective Dates.--
 (1) Subsection (a).--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B), the amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply 
 to net operating losses arising in taxable years ending 
 in 2007, 2008, or 2009.
 (B) Election.--In the case of any taxpayer with a 
 net operating loss for a taxable year ending during 
 2007 or 2008--
 (i) any election made under section 
 172(b)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
 may not withstanding such section) be revoked 
 before October 15, 2009, and
 (ii) any election made under section 172(j) 
 of such Code shall (notwithstanding such 
 section) be treated as timely made if made 
 before October 15, 2009.
 (2) Subsection (b).--The amendments made by subsection (b) 
 shall apply to taxable years ending after December 31, 2006.

SEC. 103. INCENTIVES TO REINVEST FOREIGN EARNINGS IN UNITED STATES.

 (a) In General.--Section 965 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 965. DEDUCTION FOR DIVIDENDS RECEIVED.

 ``(a) Deduction.--
 ``(1) In general.--In the case of a corporation which is a 
 United States shareholder and for which the election under this 
 section is in effect for the taxable year, there shall be 
 allowed as a deduction an amount equal to the applicable 
 percentage of cash dividends which are received during such 
 taxable year by such shareholder from controlled foreign 
 corporations.
 ``(2) Applicable percentage.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (1)--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided by 
 subparagraph (B), the term `applicable percentage' 
 means 85 percent.
 ``(B) Distressed debt.--In the case of dividends 
 received with respect to which the requirements of 
 subsection (b)(4)(B) are met, such term means 100 
 percent.
 ``(3) Dividends paid indirectly from controlled foreign 
 corporations.--If, within the taxable year for which the 
 election under this section is in effect, a United States 
 shareholder receives a cash distribution from a controlled 
 foreign corporation which is excluded from gross income under 
 section 959(a), such distribution shall be treated for purposes 
 of this section as a cash dividend to the extent of any amount 
 included in income by such United States shareholder under 
 section 951(a)(1)(A) as a result of any cash dividend during 
 such taxable year to--
 ``(A) such controlled foreign corporation from 
 another controlled foreign corporation that is in a 
 chain of ownership described in section 958(a), or
 ``(B) any other controlled foreign corporation in 
 such chain of ownership, but only to the extent of cash 
 distributions described in section 959(b) which are 
 made during such taxable year to the controlled foreign 
 corporation from which such United States shareholder 
 received such distribution.
 ``(b) Limitations.--
 ``(1) In general.--The amount of dividends taken into 
 account under subsection (a) shall not exceed the greater of--
 ``(A) $500,000,000,
 ``(B) the amount shown on the applicable financial 
 statement as earnings permanently reinvested outside 
 the United States, or
 ``(C) in the case of an applicable financial 
 statement which fails to show a specific amount of 
 earnings permanently reinvested outside the United 
 States and which shows a specific amount of tax 
 liability attributable to such earnings, the amount 
 equal to the amount of such liability divided by 0.35.
 The amounts described in subparagraphs (B) and (C) shall be 
 treated as being zero if there is no such statement or such 
 statement fails to show a specific amount of such earnings or 
 liability, as the case may be.
 ``(2) Dividends must be extraordinary.--The amount of 
 dividends taken into account under subsection (a) shall not 
 exceed the excess (if any) of--
 ``(A) the cash dividends received during the 
 taxable year by such shareholder from controlled 
 foreign corporations, over
 ``(B) the sum of--
 ``(i) the dividends received during the 
 base period year by such shareholder from 
 controlled foreign corporations,
 ``(ii) the amounts includible in such 
 shareholder's gross income for the base period 
 year under section 951(a)(1)(B) with respect to 
 controlled foreign corporations, and
 ``(iii) the amounts that would have been 
 included for the base period year but for 
 section 959(a) with respect to controlled 
 foreign corporations.
 The amount taken into account under clause (iii) for 
 the base period year shall not include any amount which 
 is not includible in gross income by reason of an 
 amount described in clause (ii) with respect to a prior 
 taxable year. Amounts described in subparagraph (B) for 
 the base period year shall be such amounts as shown on 
 the most recent return filed for such year; except that 
 amended returns filed after June 30, 2007, shall not be 
 taken into account.
 ``(3) Reduction of benefit if increase in related party 
 indebtedness.--The amount of dividends which would (but for 
 this paragraph) be taken into account under subsection (a) 
 shall be reduced by the excess (if any) of--
 ``(A) the amount of indebtedness of the controlled 
 foreign corporation to any related person (as defined 
 in section 954(d)(3)) as of the close of the taxable 
 year for which the election under this section is in 
 effect, over
 ``(B) the amount of indebtedness of the controlled 
 foreign corporation to any related person (as so 
 defined) as of the close of September 26, 2008.
 All controlled foreign corporations with respect to which the 
 taxpayer is a United States shareholder shall be treated as 1 
 controlled foreign corporation for purposes of this paragraph. 
 The Secretary may prescribe such regulations as may be 
 necessary or appropriate to prevent the avoidance of the 
 purposes of this paragraph, including regulations which provide 
 that cash dividends shall not be taken into account under 
 subsection (a) to the extent such dividends are attributable to 
 the direct or indirect transfer (including through the use of 
 intervening entities or capital contributions) of cash or other 
 property from a related person (as so defined) to a controlled 
 foreign corporation.
 ``(4) Requirements.--
 ``(A) Requirement to invest in united states.--
 Except as provided by subparagraph (B), subsection (a) 
 shall not apply to any dividend received by a United 
 States shareholder unless the amount of the dividend is 
 invested in the United States pursuant to a domestic 
 reinvestment plan which--
 ``(i) is approved by the taxpayer's 
 president, chief executive officer, or 
 comparable official before the payment of such 
 dividend and subsequently approved by the 
 taxpayer's board of directors, management 
 committee, executive committee, or similar 
 body, and
 ``(ii) provides for the reinvestment of 
 such dividend in the United States (other than 
 as payment for executive compensation), 
 including as a source for the funding of worker 
 hiring and training, infrastructure, research 
 and development, capital investments, or the 
 financial stabilization of the corporation for 
 the purposes of job retention or creation.
 ``(B) Distressed debt.--The requirements of this 
 subparagraph are met if amounts repatriated are 
 invested in distressed debt (as defined by the 
 Secretary) for at least one year.
 ``(c) Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) Applicable financial statement.--The term `applicable 
 financial statement' means--
 ``(A) with respect to a United States shareholder 
 which is required to file a financial statement with 
 the Securities and Exchange Commission (or which is 
 included in such a statement so filed by another 
 person), the most recent audited annual financial 
 statement (including the notes which form an integral 
 part of such statement) of such shareholder (or which 
 includes such shareholder)--
 ``(i) which was so filed on or before June 
 30, 2007, and
 ``(ii) which was certified on or before 
 June 30, 2007, as being prepared in accordance 
 with generally accepted accounting principles, 
 and
 ``(B) with respect to any other United States 
 shareholder, the most recent audited financial 
 statement (including the notes which form an integral 
 part of such statement) of such shareholder (or which 
 includes such shareholder)--
 ``(i) which was certified on or before June 
 30, 2007, as being prepared in accordance with 
 generally accepted accounting principles, and
 ``(ii) which is used for the purposes of a 
 statement or report--
 ``(I) to creditors,
 ``(II) to shareholders, or
 ``(III) for any other substantial 
 nontax purpose.
 ``(2) Base period year.--
 ``(A) In general.--The base period year is the 
 first taxable year ending in 2007.
 ``(B) Mergers, acquisitions, etc..--
 ``(i) In general.--Rules similar to the 
 rules of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section 
 41(f)(3) shall apply for purposes of this 
 paragraph.
 ``(ii) Spin-offs, etc.--If there is a 
 distribution to which section 355 (or so much 
 of section 356 as relates to section 355) 
 applies during the base period year and the 
 controlled corporation (within the meaning of 
 section 355) is a United States shareholder--
 ``(I) the controlled corporation 
 shall be treated as being in existence 
 during the period that the distributing 
 corporation (within the meaning of 
 section 355) is in existence, and
 ``(II) for purposes of applying 
 subsection (b)(2) to the controlled 
 corporation and the distributing 
 corporation, amounts described in 
 subsection (b)(2)(B) which are received 
 or includible by the distributing 
 corporation or controlled corporation 
 (as the case may be) before the 
 distribution referred to in subclause 
 (I) from a controlled foreign 
 corporation shall be allocated between 
 such corporations in proportion to 
 their respective interests as United 
 States shareholders of such controlled 
 foreign corporation immediately after 
 such distribution.
 Subclause (II) shall not apply if neither the 
 controlled corporation nor the distributing 
 corporation is a United States shareholder of 
 such controlled foreign corporation immediately 
 after such distribution.
 ``(3) Dividend.--The term `dividend' shall not include 
 amounts includible in gross income as a dividend under section 
 78, 367, or 1248. In the case of a liquidation under section 
 332 to which section 367(b) applies, the preceding sentence 
 shall not apply to the extent the United States shareholder 
 actually receives cash as part of the liquidation.
 ``(4) Coordination with dividends received deduction.--No 
 deduction shall be allowed under section 243 or 245 for any 
 dividend for which a deduction is allowed under this section.
 ``(5) Controlled groups.--
 ``(A) In general.--All United States shareholders 
 which are members of an affiliated group filing a 
 consolidated return under section 1501 shall be treated 
 as one United States shareholder.
 ``(B) Application of $500,000,000 limit.--All 
 corporations which are treated as a single employer 
 under section 52(a) shall be limited to one 
 $500,000,000 amount in subsection (b)(1)(A), and such 
 amount shall be divided among such corporations under 
 regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
 ``(C) Permanently reinvested earnings.--If a 
 financial statement is an applicable financial 
 statement for more than 1 United States shareholder, 
 the amount applicable under subparagraph (B) or (C) of 
 subsection (b)(1) shall be divided among such 
 shareholders under regulations prescribed by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(d) Denial of Foreign Tax Credit; Denial of Certain Expenses.--
 ``(1) Foreign tax credit.--No credit shall be allowed under 
 section 901 for any taxes paid or accrued (or treated as paid 
 or accrued) with respect to the deductible portion of--
 ``(A) any dividend, or
 ``(B) any amount described in subsection (a)(2) 
 which is included in income under section 951(a)(1)(A).
 No deduction shall be allowed under this chapter for any tax 
 for which credit is not allowable by reason of the preceding 
 sentence.
 ``(2) Expenses.--No deduction shall be allowed for expenses 
 properly allocated and apportioned to the deductible portion 
 described in paragraph (1).
 ``(3) Deductible portion.--For purposes of paragraph (1), 
 unless the taxpayer otherwise specifies, the deductible portion 
 of any dividend or other amount is the amount which bears the 
 same ratio to the amount of such dividend or other amount as 
 the amount allowed as a deduction under subsection (a) for the 
 taxable year bears to the amount described in subsection 
 (b)(2)(A) for such year.
 ``(4) Coordination with section 78.--Section 78 shall not 
 apply to any tax which is not allowable as a credit under 
 section 901 by reason of this subsection.
 ``(e) Increase in Tax on Included Amounts Not Reduced by Credits, 
etc.--
 ``(1) In general.--Any tax under this chapter by reason of 
 nondeductible CFC dividends shall not be treated as tax imposed 
 by this chapter for purposes of determining--
 ``(A) the amount of any credit allowable under this 
 chapter, or
 ``(B) the amount of the tax imposed by section 55.
 Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to the credit under section 53 
 or to the credit under section 27(a) with respect to taxes 
 which are imposed by foreign countries and possessions of the 
 United States and are attributable to such dividends.
 ``(2) Limitation on reduction in taxable income, etc.--
 ``(A) In general.--The taxable income of any United 
 States shareholder for any taxable year shall in no 
 event be less than the amount of nondeductible CFC 
 dividends received during such year.
 ``(B) Coordination with section 172.--The 
 nondeductible CFC dividends for any taxable year shall 
 not be taken into account--
 ``(i) in determining under section 172 the 
 amount of any net operating loss for such 
 taxable year, and
 ``(ii) in determining taxable income for 
 such taxable year for purposes of the 2nd 
 sentence of section 172(b)(2).
 ``(3) Nondeductible cfc dividends.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term `nondeductible CFC dividends' means the 
 excess of the amount of dividends taken into account under 
 subsection (a) over the deduction allowed under subsection (a) 
 for such dividends.
 ``(f) Election.--The taxpayer may elect to apply this section to--
 ``(1) the taxpayer's last taxable year which begins before 
 the date of the enactment of this section, or
 ``(2) the taxpayer's first taxable year which begins during 
 the 1-year period beginning on such date.
Such election may be made for a taxable year only if made before the 
due date (including extensions) for filing the return of tax for such 
taxable year.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The item in the table of sections for 
subpart F of part III of subchapter N of chapter 1 of such Code 
relating to section 965 is amended to read as follows:

``Sec. 965. Deduction for dividends received.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years ending on or after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 104. GAIN OR LOSS FROM SALE OR EXCHANGE OF CERTAIN PREFERRED 
 STOCK.

 (a) In General.--For purposes of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 
gain or loss from the sale or exchange of any applicable preferred 
stock by any applicable financial institution shall be treated as 
ordinary income or loss.
 (b) Applicable Preferred Stock.--For purposes of this section, the 
term ``applicable preferred stock'' means any stock--
 (1) which is preferred stock in--
 (A) the Federal National Mortgage Association, 
 established pursuant to the Federal National Mortgage 
 Association Charter Act (12 U.S.C. 1716 et seq.), or
 (B) the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, 
 established pursuant to the Federal Home Loan Mortgage 
 Corporation Act (12 U.S.C. 1451 et seq.), and
 (2) which--
 (A) was held by the applicable financial 
 institution on September 6, 2008, or
 (B) was sold or exchanged by the applicable 
 financial institution on or after January 1, 2008, and 
 before September 7, 2008.
 (c) Applicable Financial Institution.--For purposes of this 
section:
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 term ``applicable financial institution'' means--
 (A) a financial institution referred to in section 
 582(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, or
 (B) a depository institution holding company (as 
 defined in section 3(w)(1) of the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(w)(1))).
 (2) Special rules for certain sales.--In the case of--
 (A) a sale or exchange described in subsection 
 (b)(2)(B), an entity shall be treated as an applicable 
 financial institution only if it was an entity 
 described in subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1) 
 at the time of the sale or exchange, and
 (B) a sale or exchange after September 6, 2008, of 
 preferred stock described in subsection (b)(2)(A), an 
 entity shall be treated as an applicable financial 
 institution only if it was an entity described in 
 subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1) at all times 
 during the period beginning on September 6, 2008, and 
 ending on the date of the sale or exchange of the 
 preferred stock.
 (d) Special Rule for Certain Property Not Held on September 6, 
2008.--The Secretary of the Treasury or the Secretary's delegate may 
extend the application of this section to all or a portion of the gain 
or loss from a sale or exchange in any case where--
 (1) an applicable financial institution sells or exchanges 
 applicable preferred stock after September 6, 2008, which the 
 applicable financial institution did not hold on such date, but 
 the basis of which in the hands of the applicable financial 
 institution at the time of the sale or exchange is the same as 
 the basis in the hands of the person which held such stock on 
 such date, or
 (2) the applicable financial institution is a partner in a 
 partnership which--
 (A) held such stock on September 6, 2008, and later 
 sold or exchanged such stock, or
 (B) sold or exchanged such stock during the period 
 described in subsection (b)(2)(B).
 (e) Regulatory Authority.--The Secretary of the Treasury or the 
Secretary's delegate may prescribe such guidance, rules, or regulations 
as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.
 (f) Effective Date.--This section shall apply to sales or exchanges 
occurring after December 31, 2007, in taxable years ending after such 
date.

SEC. 105. REPEAL OF COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT ACT.

 The Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 (12 U.S.C. 2901 et seq.) is 
hereby repealed.

SEC. 106. NET WORTH CERTIFICATE PROGRAM.

 (a) Establishment; Purposes.--
 (1) Establishment.--As soon as possible after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Board of Directors of the 
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (in this section referred 
 to as the ``Corporation'') shall establish a net worth 
 certificate program under this section to provide capital to 
 insured depository institutions (as such term is defined in 
 section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813) 
 to assist such institutions to resolve solvency problems.
 (2) Purposes.--The purposes of the net worth certificate 
 program established under this section shall be--
 (A) to improve the capital position of troubled 
 insured depository institutions with real estate 
 holdings;
 (B) to provide such insured depository institutions 
 the ability to sell and restructure assets; and
 (C) to assist such institutions in their recovery 
 without use of taxpayer funds.
 (b) Principles.--The net worth program established under this 
section shall--
 (1) be based upon the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance 
 Corporation net worth program established under title II of the 
 Garn-St Germain Depository Institutions Act of 1982 (Public Law 
 97-320; 96 Stat. 1489);
 (2) be made available only for troubled financial 
 depository institutions that the Corporation determines could 
 be financially viable if provided solvency assistance under the 
 program;
 (3) provide for the Corporation to purchase capital in 
 troubled insured depository institutions in the form of 
 subordinated debentures or net worth certificates in such 
 institutions;
 (4) provide that insured depository institutions 
 participating in the program shall agree to such regulations 
 and terms of the program as the Corporation shall provide, 
 which shall include strict oversight and supervision, including 
 limitations on the compensation of senior executive officers of 
 such institutions and terms for removal of officers for poor 
 management;
 (5) provide that the Corporation shall fund net worth 
 certificates under the program by issuance of Corporation 
 senior notes and obligations to participating insured 
 depository institutions;
 (6) provide that the interest rate on net worth 
 certificates issued under the program and the senior notes and 
 obligations issued under the program by the Corporation shall 
 be identical;
 (7) not involve any subsidy, appropriation of funds, or 
 other cash outlay or use of taxpayer funds; and
 (8) provide that asset sale transactions under the program 
 be held in the private market.
 (c) Regulations.--The Board of Directors of the Corporation shall 
issue any regulations necessary to carry out the net worth certificate 
program under this section.

 TITLE II--GOVERNMENT-SPONSORED ENTERPRISES FREE MARKET REFORM

SEC. 201. SHORT TITLE.

 This title may be cited as the ``Government-Sponsored Enterprises 
Free Market Reform Act of 2008''.

SEC. 202. DEFINITIONS.

 For purposes of this title, the following definitions shall apply:
 (1) Charter.--The term ``charter'' means--
 (A) with respect to the Federal National Mortgage 
 Association, the Federal National Mortgage Association 
 Charter Act (12 U.S.C. 1716 et seq.); and
 (B) with respect to the Federal Home Loan Mortgage 
 Corporation, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation 
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1451 et seq.).
 (2) Director.--The term ``Director'' means the Director of 
 the Federal Housing Finance Agency
 (3) Enterprise.--The term ``enterprise'' means--
 (A) the Federal National Mortgage Association; and
 (B) the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
 (4) Guarantee.--The term ``guarantee'' means, with respect 
 to an enterprise, the credit support of the enterprise that is 
 provided by the Federal Government through its charter as a 
 government-sponsored enterprise.

SEC. 203. TERMINATION OF CURRENT CONSERVATORSHIP.

 (a) In General.--Upon the expiration of the period referred to in 
subsection (b), the Director of the Federal Housing Finance Agency 
shall determine, with respect to each enterprise, if the enterprise is 
financially viable at that time and--
 (1) if the Director determines that the enterprise is 
 financially viable, immediately take all actions necessary to 
 terminate the conservatorship for each of the enterprises; or
 (2) if the Director determines that the enterprise is not 
 financially viable, immediately appoint the Federal Housing 
 Finance Agency as receiver under section 1367 of the Federal 
 Housing Enterprises Financial Safety and Soundness Act of 1992 
 and carry out such receivership under the authority of such 
 section.
 (b) Timing.--The period referred to in this subsection is, with 
respect to an enterprise--
 (1) except as provided in paragraph (2), the 24-month 
 beginning upon the date of the enactment of this Act; or
 (2) if the Director determines before the expiration of the 
 period referred to in paragraph (1) that the financial markets 
 would be adversely affected without the extension of such 
 period under this paragraph with respect to that enterprise, 
 the 30-month period beginning upon the date of the enactment of 
 this Act.
 (c) Financial Viability.--The Director may not determine that an 
enterprise is financially viable for purposes of subsection (a) if the 
Director determines that any of the conditions for receivership set 
forth in paragraph (3) or (4) of section 1367(a) of the Federal Housing 
Enterprises Financial Safety and Soundness Act of 1992 (12 U.S.C. 
4617(a)) exists at the time with respect to the enterprise.

SEC. 204. LIMITATION OF ENTERPRISE AUTHORITY UPON EMERGENCE FROM 
 CONSERVATORSHIP.

 (a) Revised Authority.--Upon the expiration of the period referred 
to in section 203(b), if the Director makes the determination under 
section 203(a)(1), the following provisions shall take effect:
 (1) Portfolio limitations.--Subtitle B of title XIII of the 
 Housing and Community Development Act of 1992 (12 U.S.C. 4611 
 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
 section:

``SEC. 1369E. RESTRICTION ON MORTGAGE ASSETS OF ENTERPRISES.

 ``(a) Restriction.--No enterprise shall own, as of any applicable 
date in this subsection or thereafter, mortgage assets in excess of--
 ``(1) upon the expiration of the period referred to in 
 section 203(b) of the Government-Sponsored Enterprises Free 
 Market Reform Act of 2008, $850,000,000,000; or
 ``(2) on December 31 of each year thereafter, 80.0 percent 
 of the aggregate amount of mortgage assets of the enterprise as 
 of December 31 of the immediately preceding calendar year;
except that in no event shall an enterprise be required under this 
section to own less than $250,000,000,000 in mortgage assets.
 ``(b) Definition of Mortgage Assets.--For purposes of this section, 
the term `mortgage assets' means, with respect to an enterprise, assets 
of such enterprise consisting of mortgages, mortgage loans, mortgage-
related securities, participation certificates, mortgage-backed 
commercial paper, obligations of real estate mortgage investment 
conduits and similar assets, in each case to the extent such assets 
would appear on the balance sheet of such enterprise in accordance with 
generally accepted accounting principles in effect in the United States 
as of September 7, 2008 (as set forth in the opinions and 
pronouncements of the Accounting Principles Board and the American 
Institute of Certified Public Accountants and statements and 
pronouncements of the Financial Accounting Standards Board from time to 
time; and without giving any effect to any change that may be made 
after September 7, 2008, in respect of Statement of Financial 
Accounting Standards No. 140 or any similar accounting standard).''.
 (2) Increase in minimum capital requirement.--Section 1362 
 of the Federal Housing Enterprises Financial Safety and 
 Soundness Act of 1992 (12 U.S.C. 4612), as amended by section 
 1111 of the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 (Public 
 Law 110-289), is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a), by striking ``For purposes 
 of this subtitle, the minimum capital level for each 
 enterprise shall be'' and inserting ``The minimum 
 capital level established under subsection (g) for each 
 enterprise may not be lower than'';
 (B) in subsection (c)--
 (i) by striking ``subsections (a) and'' and 
 inserting ``subsection'';
 (ii) by striking ``regulated entities'' the 
 first place such term appears and inserting 
 ``Federal Home Loan Banks'';
 (iii) by striking ``for the enterprises,'';
 (iv) by striking ``, or for both the 
 enterprises and the banks,'';
 (v) by striking ``the level specified in 
 subsection (a) for the enterprises or''; and
 (vi) by striking ``the regulated entities 
 operate'' and inserting ``such banks operate'';
 (C) in subsection (d)(1)--
 (i) by striking ``subsections (a) and'' and 
 inserting ``subsection''; and
 (ii) by striking ``regulated entity'' each 
 place such term appears and inserting ``Federal 
 home loan bank'';
 (D) in subsection (e), by striking ``regulated 
 entity'' each place such term appears and inserting 
 ``Federal home loan bank'';
 (E) in subsection (f)--
 (i) by striking ``the amount of core 
 capital maintained by the enterprises,''; and
 (ii) by striking ``regulated entities'' and 
 inserting ``banks''; and
 (F) by adding at the end the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(g) Establishment of Revised Minimum Capital Levels.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Director shall cause the enterprises 
 to achieve and maintain adequate capital by establishing 
 minimum levels of capital for the enterprises,which may include 
 any prudential standards necessary to ensure long-term 
 institutional viability and competitive equity in the market, 
 and by using such other methods as the Director deems 
 appropriate.
 ``(2) Authority.--The Director shall have the authority to 
 establish such minimum level of capital for an enterprise in 
 excess of the level specified under subsection (a) as the 
 Director, in the Director's discretion, deems to be necessary 
 or appropriate in light of the particular circumstances of the 
 enterprise.
 ``(h) Failure To Maintain Revised Minimum Capital Levels.--
 ``(1) Unsafe and unsound practice or condition.--Failure of 
 a enterprise to maintain capital at or above its minimum level 
 as established pursuant to subsection (c) of this section may 
 be deemed by the Director, in his discretion, to constitute an 
 unsafe and unsound practice or condition within the meaning of 
 this title.
 ``(2) Directive to achieve capital level.--
 ``(A) Authority.--In addition to, or in lieu of, 
 any other action authorized by law, including paragraph 
 (1), the Director may issue a directive to an 
 enterprise that fails to maintain capital at or above 
 its required level as established pursuant to 
 subsection (c) of this section.
 ``(B) Plan.--Such directive may require the 
 enterprise to submit and adhere to a plan acceptable to 
 the Director describing the means and timing by which 
 the enterprise shall achieve its required capital 
 level.
 ``(C) Enforcement.--Any such directive issued 
 pursuant to this paragraph, including plans submitted 
 pursuant thereto, shall be enforceable under the 
 provisions of subtitle C of this title to the same 
 extent as an effective and outstanding order issued 
 pursuant to subtitle C of this title which has become 
 final.
 ``(3) Adherence to plan.--
 ``(A) Consideration.--The Director may consider 
 such enterprise's progress in adhering to any plan 
 required under this subsection whenever such enterprise 
 seeks the requisite approval of the Director for any 
 proposal which would divert earnings, diminish capital, 
 or otherwise impede such enterprise's progress in 
 achieving its minimum capital level.
 ``(B) Denial.--The Director may deny such approval 
 where it determines that such proposal would adversely 
 affect the ability of the enterprise to comply with 
 such plan.''.
 (3) Repeal of increases to conforming loan limits.--
 (A) Repeal of temporary increase in economic 
 stimulus act.--Section 201 of the Economic Stimulus Act 
 of 2008 (Public Law 110-185) is hereby repealed.
 (B) Repeal of general limit and permanent high-cost 
 area increase.--Paragraph (2) of section 302(b) of the 
 Federal National Mortgage Association Charter Act (12 
 U.S.C. 1717(b)(2)) and paragraph (2) of section 305(a) 
 of the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation Act (12 
 U.S.C. 1454(a)(2)) are each amended to read as such 
 sections were in effect immediately before the 
 enactment of the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 
 2008 (Public Law 110-289).
 (C) Repeal of new housing price index.--Section 
 1322 of the Federal Housing Enterprises Financial 
 Safety and Soundness Act of 1992, as added by section 
 1124(d) of the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 
 2008 (Public Law 110-289), is hereby repealed.
 (D) Repeal.--Section 1124 of the Housing and 
 Economic Recovery Act of 2008 (Public Law 110-289) is 
 hereby repealed.
 (E) Establishment of conforming loan limit.--For 
 the year in which the expiration of the period referred 
 to in section 203(b) of this section occurs, the 
 limitations governing the maximum original principal 
 obligation of conventional mortgages that may be 
 purchased by the Federal National Mortgage Association 
 and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, 
 referred to in section 302(b)(2) of the Federal 
 National Mortgage Association Charter Act (12 U.S.C. 
 1717(b)(2)) and section 305(a)(2) of the Federal Home 
 Loan Mortgage Corporation Act (12 U.S.C. 1454(a)(2)), 
 respectively, shall be considered to be--
 (i) $417,000 for a mortgage secured by a 
 single-family residence,
 (ii) $533,850 for a mortgage secured by a 
 2-family residence,
 (iii) $645,300 for a mortgage secured by a 
 3-family residence, and
 (iv) $801,950 for a mortgage secured by a 
 4-family residence,
 and such limits shall be adjusted effective each 
 January 1 thereafter in accordance with such sections 
 302(b)(2) and 305(a)(2).
 (F) Prohibition of purchase of mortgages exceeding 
 median area home price.--
 (i) Fannie mae.--Section 302(b)(2) of the 
 Federal National Mortgage Association Charter 
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1717(b)(2)) is amended by adding 
 at the end the following new sentence: 
 ``Notwithstanding any other provision of this 
 title, the corporation may not purchase any 
 mortgage for a property having a principal 
 obligation that exceeds the median home price, 
 for properties of the same size, for the area 
 in which such property subject to the mortgage 
 is located.''.
 (ii) Freddie mac.--Section 305(a)(2) of the 
 Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation Act (12 
 U.S.C. 1454(a)(2)) is amended by adding at the 
 end the following new sentence: 
 ``Notwithstanding any other provision of this 
 title, the Corporation may not purchase any 
 mortgage for a property having a principal 
 obligation that exceeds the median home price, 
 for properties of the same size, for the area 
 in which such property subject to the mortgage 
 is located.''.
 (4) Requirement to pay state and local taxes.--
 (A) Fannie mae.--Paragraph (2) of section 309(c) of 
 the Federal National Mortgage Association Charter Act 
 (12 U.S.C. 1723a(c)(2)) is amended--
 (i) by striking ``shall be exempt from'' 
 and inserting ``shall be subject to''; and
 (ii) by striking ``except that any'' and 
 inserting ``and any''.
 (B) Freddie mac.--Section 303(e) of the Federal 
 Home Loan Mortgage Corporation Act (12 U.S.C. 1452(e)) 
 is amended--
 (i) by striking ``shall be exempt from'' 
 and inserting ``shall be subject to''; and
 (ii) by striking ``except that any'' and 
 inserting ``and any''.
 (5) Repeals relating to registration of securities.--
 (A) Fannie mae.--
 (i) Mortgage-backed securities.--Section 
 304(d) of the Federal National Mortgage 
 Association Charter Act (12 U.S.C. 1719(d)) is 
 amended by striking the fourth sentence.
 (ii) Subordinate obligations.--Section 
 304(e) of the Federal National Mortgage 
 Association Charter Act (12 U.S.C. 1719(e)) is 
 amended by striking the fourth sentence.
 (B) Freddie mac.--Section 306 of the Federal Home 
 Loan Mortgage Corporation Act (12 U.S.C. 1455) is 
 amended by striking subsection (g).
 (6) Recoupment of costs for federal guarantee.--
 (A) Assessments.--The Director of the Federal 
 Housing Finance Agency shall establish and collect from 
 each enterprise assessments in the amount determined 
 under subparagraph (B). In determining the method and 
 timing for making such assessments, the Director shall 
 take into consideration the determinations and 
 conclusions of the study under subsection (b) of this 
 section.
 (B) Determination of costs of guarantee.--
 Assessments under subparagraph (A) with respect to an 
 enterprise shall be in such amount as the Director 
 determines necessary to recoup to the Federal 
 Government the full value of the benefit the enterprise 
 receives from the guarantee provided by the Federal 
 Government for the obligations and financial viability 
 of the enterprise, based upon the dollar value of such 
 benefit in the market to such enterprise when not 
 operating under conservatorship or receivership. To 
 determine such amount, the Director shall establish a 
 risk-based pricing mechanism as the Director considers 
 appropriate, taking into consideration the 
 determinations and conclusions of the study under 
 subsection (b) of this section.
 (C) Treatment of recouped amounts.--The Director 
 shall cover into the general fund of the Treasury any 
 amounts received from assessments made under this 
 paragraph.
 (b) GAO Study Regarding Recoupment of Costs for Federal Government 
Guarantee.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct 
a study to determine a risk-based pricing mechanism to accurately 
determine the value of the benefit the enterprises receive from the 
guarantee provided by the Federal Government for the obligations and 
financial viability of the enterprises. Such study shall establish a 
dollar value of such benefit in the market to each enterprise when not 
operating under conservatorship or receivership, shall analyze various 
methods of the Federal Government assessing a charge for such value 
received (including methods involving an annual fee or a fee for each 
mortgage purchased or securitized), and shall make a recommendation of 
the best such method for assessing such charge. Not later than 12 
months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller 
General shall submit to the Congress a report setting forth the 
determinations and conclusions of such study.

SEC. 205. REQUIREMENT TO PERIODICALLY RENEW CHARTER UNTIL WIND DOWN AND 
 DISSOLUTION.

 (a) Required Renewal; Wind Down and Dissolution Upon Non-Renewal.--
Upon the expiration of the 3-year period that begins upon the 
expiration of the period referred to in section 203(b), unless the 
charter of an enterprise is renewed pursuant to subsection (b) of this 
section, section 206 (relating to wind down of operations and 
dissolution of enterprise) shall apply to the enterprise.
 (b) Renewal Procedure.--
 (1) Application; timing.--The Director shall provide for 
 each enterprise to apply to the Director, before the expiration 
 of the 3-year period under subsection (a), for renewal of the 
 charter of the enterprise.
 (2) Standard.--The Director shall approve the application 
 of an enterprise for the renewal of the charter of the 
 enterprise if--
 (A) the application includes a certification by the 
 enterprise that the enterprise is financially sound and 
 is complying with all provisions of, and amendments 
 made by, section 204 of this title applicable to such 
 enterprise; and
 (B) the Director verifies that the certification 
 made pursuant to subparagraph (A) is accurate.
 (c) Option To Reapply.--Nothing in this section may be construed to 
require an enterprise to apply under this section for renewal of the 
charter of the enterprise.

SEC. 206. REQUIRED WIND DOWN OF OPERATIONS AND DISSOLUTION OF 
 ENTERPRISE.

 (a) Applicability.--This section shall apply to an enterprise--
 (1) upon the expiration of the 3-year period referred to in 
 such section 205(a), to the extent provided in such section; 
 and
 (2) if this section has not previously applied to the 
 enterprise, upon the expiration of the 6-year period that 
 begins upon the expiration of the period referred to in section 
 203(b).
 (b) Wind Down.--Upon the applicability of this section to an 
enterprise, the Director and the Secretary of the Treasury shall 
jointly take such action, and may prescribe such regulations and 
procedures, as may be necessary to wind down the operations of an 
enterprise as an entity chartered by the United States Government over 
the duration of the 10-year period beginning upon the applicability of 
this section to the enterprise (pursuant to subsection (a)) in an 
orderly manner consistent with this Act and the ongoing obligations of 
the enterprise.
 (c) Division of Assets and Liabilities; Authority To Establish 
Holding Corporation and Dissolution Trust Fund.--The action and 
procedures required under subsection (b)--
 (1) shall include the establishment and execution of plans 
 to provide for an equitable division and distribution of assets 
 and liabilities of the enterprise, including any liability of 
 the enterprise to the United States Government or a Federal 
 reserve bank that may continue after the end of the period 
 described in subsection (b); and
 (2) may provide for establishment of--
 (A) a holding corporation organized under the laws 
 of any State of the United States or the District of 
 Columbia for the purposes of the reorganization and 
 restructuring of the enterprise; and
 (B) one or more trusts to which to transfer--
 (i) remaining debt obligations of the 
 enterprise, for the benefit of holders of such 
 remaining obligations; or
 (ii) remaining mortgages held for the 
 purpose of backing mortgage-backed securities, 
 for the benefit of holders of such remaining 
 securities.
 (d) Repeal of Charter.--Effective upon the expiration of the 10-
year period referred to in subsection (b) for an enterprise, the 
charter for the enterprise is repealed, except that the provisions of 
such charter in effect immediately before such repeal shall continue to 
apply with respect to the rights and obligations of any holders of 
outstanding debt obligations and mortgage-backed securities of the 
enterprise.
 <all>