HR 4566 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 4566
To amend title XVIII of the Social Security Act to require the arbitration
of medical malpractice claims brought by medicare beneficiaries.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
April 19, 1990
Mrs. JOHNSON of Connecticut introduced the following bill; which was referred
jointly to the Committees on Ways and Means and Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend title XVIII of the Social Security Act to require the arbitration
of medical malpractice claims brought by medicare beneficiaries.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Medicare Malpractice Dispute Resolution Act
 of 1990'.
SEC. 2. REQUIRING BINDING ARBITRATION FOR MALPRACTICE CLAIMS BROUGHT BY
MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Part C of title XVIII of the Social Security Act is amended
 by adding at the end the following new section:
`BINDING ARBITRATION FOR MALPRACTICE CLAIMS BROUGHT BY MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES
 `SEC. 1893. (a) CLAIMS SUBJECT TO BINDING ARBITRATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each individual covered by an insurance program established
 by this title and each provider of services or other person providing
 a service to such individual for which payment may be made under this
 title shall be deemed to have entered into an agreement to arbitrate
 any malpractice claim arising in connection with such service under a
 certified malpractice arbitration system (as described in subsection (c)
 or subsection (d)) in the State in which such service is provided.
 `(2) PRIVATE SETTLEMENT OF CLAIMS NOT PRECLUDED- Nothing in this section
 shall preclude any individual covered by an insurance program established
 by this title and a provider of services or other person providing a
 service to such individual from entering into a private settlement of any
 malpractice claim described in paragraph (1) before the panel arbitrating
 the claim under the malpractice arbitration system renders its decision
 with respect to the claim.
 `(b) Administration of Malpractice Arbitration Systems-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT OF STATE MEDICAL SERVICES DISPUTE RESOLUTION ORGANIZATION-
 Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3), the Secretary shall enter
 into a contract with each State under which the State shall, using funds
 appropriated from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal
 Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund (in amounts determined by the
 Secretary), establish and operate a Medical Services Dispute Resolution
 Organization by not later than January 1, 1991, to administer a certified
 malpractice arbitration system (as described in subsection (c)) through
 the appointment and operation of arbitration panels in accordance with
 the provisions of such subsection.
 `(2) AGREEMENT WITH INDEPENDENT ENTITY FOR NONCONTRACTING STATES- In
 the case of a State with which the Secretary is unable to enter into a
 contract under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall enter into a contract
 with an appropriate nonprofit or public entity under which such entity
 shall serve as the MSDRO for the State and the Secretary shall provide
 such entity with funds to cover the reasonable expenses incurred by the
 entity in operating the program with respect to individuals covered by an
 insurance program established by this title.
 `(3) WAIVER FOR ALTERNATIVE PROGRAMS- In the case of a malpractice
 arbitration system that is certified under subsection (d), the contract
 entered into under paragraph (1) or paragraph (2) may provide that the
 alternative program shall serve as the State's MSDRO and that the Secretary
 shall provide the State or the entity with funds to cover the reasonable
 expenses incurred by the State or the entity in operating the program
 with respect to individuals covered by an insurance program established
 by this title.
 `(c) MALPRACTICE ARBITRATION SYSTEM DESCRIBED- Except as provided in
 subsection (d), a certified malpractice arbitration system is a system
 under which malpractice claims are arbitrated in the following manner:
 `(1) DISPUTES TO BE HEARD BY ARBITRATION PANELS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- With respect to each malpractice claim arbitrated under
 the system, the existence of malpractice and the type and amount of relief
 to be provided to the injured party shall be determined by an arbitration
 panel appointed by the MSDRO administering the system and consisting of--
 `(i) 1 member selected by the parties filing the claim or by the MSDRO
 administering the system if such parties are unable to select a member;
 `(ii) 1 member selected by the parties against whom the claim is filed or
 by the MSDRO administering the system if such parties are unable to select
 a member; and
 `(iii) 1 member selected jointly by the members selected pursuant to clauses
 (i) and (ii) or by the MSDRO administering the system if the members are
 unable to agree upon a member to be jointly selected.
 `(B) CONFLICTS OF INTEREST- No individual may serve on an arbitration
 panel with respect to a particular claim if such individual has a direct
 relationship with the parties involved or a direct interest in the claim.
 `(2) STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- No malpractice claim may be arbitrated under the system
 unless notice of the claim has been filed with the MSDRO administering the
 system within the time provided for filing the claim under the law of the
 State in which the system operates.
 `(B) 2-YEAR MAXIMUM- Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), no claim may be
 arbitrated after the expiration of a 2-year limitations period beginning on
 the date the injured party is first made aware of, or reasonably should have
 been aware of, the existence of the injury resulting from such malpractice,
 except that--
 `(i) in the case of a birth-related injury, such limitations period shall
 begin on the date the party reaches 6 years of age, and
 `(ii) in the case of a party adjudged incompetent at the time of the injury,
 no claim may be arbitrated after the expiration of a 5-year limitations
 period that begins on the date the party's guardian is first made aware
 of, or reasonably should have been aware of, the existence of the injury
 resulting from the malpractice.
 `(3) JOINDER OF OTHER PARTIES- Upon the request of any participating party,
 the arbitration panel appointed to arbitrate a malpractice claim under
 the system may require a party who is not deemed to have entered into an
 agreement under subsection (a) to participate in the arbitration and be
 bound to the panel's decision.
 `(4) TIMING FOR DISCOVERY AND HEARING-
 `(A) DISCOVERY- Each panel appointed to arbitrate a malpractice claim
 under paragraph (1) shall provide for the beginning of discovery with
 respect to the claim not later than 20 days after the panel is appointed,
 and shall conclude discovery not later than 6 months after the date such
 discovery begins.
 `(B) HEARING AND DECISION- Each arbitration panel appointed to arbitrate
 a malpractice claim shall render a decision on the claim not later than 90
 days after discovery is concluded, except that the panel may have not more
 than 30 additional days to render its decision if all parties participating
 in the arbitration agree that such additional time is necessary because
 of unusual circumstances, and the panel shall transmit its decision in
 writing not later than 30 days after the completion of the final hearing
 conducted with respect to the claim.
 `(5) POWERS OF PANEL-
 `(A) HEARING; OATHS- An arbitration panel appointed under paragraph (1)
 may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such
 testimony, and receive such evidence, as it considers appropriate, and
 may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it,
 except that all hearings held by the panel shall be open to the public
 unless all participating parties agree otherwise.
 `(B) SUBPOENA POWER-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- The arbitration panel may issue subpoenas requiring the
 attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of any evidence
 that relates to any claim under investigation by the panel.
 `(ii) REFUSAL TO OBEY- If a person issued a subpoena under clause (i)
 refuses to obey such subpoena or is guilty of contumacy, the United States
 district court for the judicial district within which the panel sits may,
 upon application by the panel, order such person to appear before the
 panel to produce evidence or to give testimony relating to the claim under
 investigation, and any failure to obey such order may be punished by the
 court as a contempt thereof.
 `(iii) SERVICE- The subpoenas of the panel shall be served in the manner
 provided for subpoenas issued by a United States district court under the
 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
 `(6) REQUIREMENTS FOR DECISIONS-
 `(A) CONSIDERATION OF EVIDENCE- Each panel appointed to arbitrate a
 claim under the system shall base its decision solely upon the evidence
 presented during the discovery process and hearings before the panel,
 and shall determine questions of fault separately from questions regarding
 the amount and type of damages.
 `(B) MAJORITY REQUIRED FOR REACHING DECISION- No decision of the panel,
 including a decision regarding the type of relief provided and the amount of
 damages awarded, shall be valid unless agreed to by a majority of the panel.
 `(C) PARTY'S NEGLIGENCE NOT A BAR TO AWARD OF DAMAGES- The arbitration
 panel may not automatically bar the party filing the malpractice claim
 from recovering damages upon a determination that the party was negligent,
 but shall instead proportionately reduce any damages awarded to the party
 by the degree the party was at fault.
 `(7) RESPONSIBILITIES FOR COSTS- Each party participating in the arbitration
 of a malpractice claim under the system shall be responsible for the
 party's costs of participation, including the costs of expert witnesses,
 and the panel appointed to arbitrate the claim may assess a share of the
 opposing party's costs of participation against a party if the panel finds
 that the party acted in bad faith in filing the claim or during the course
 of the arbitration.
 `(8) AWARDING OF DAMAGES-
 `(A) LIMITATION ON AMOUNT- A panel appointed to arbitrate a claim under
 the system may not award damages with respect to the claim to any party
 in an amount that exceeds the lesser of--
 `(i) the amount of any limitations on damages applicable under the law of
 the State in which the system operates, or
 `(ii) in the case of noneconomic damages, $250,000.
 `(B) REDUCTIONS FOR AMOUNTS COLLECTED FROM COLLATERAL SOURCE- The panel
 shall reduce the amount of any damages awarded to any party with respect to
 the claim by the amount of any damages received by the party with respect
 to the claim from any collateral source.
 `(C) PERIODIC PAYMENTS FOR LARGE AMOUNTS- Any damages awarded by the panel
 in excess of $100,000 shall be paid in periodic installments in accordance
 with a schedule determined by the panel.
 `(9) LIMITATION ON ATTORNEY'S FEES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- No individual may enter into any contingency fee arrangement
 with an attorney or agent under which the amount received by such attorney
 or agent for providing services relating to any malpractice claim arbitrated
 under the system exceeds the lesser of--
 `(i) the amount of any limitations on attorney's fees applicable under
 the law of the State in which the system operates; or
 `(ii) an amount equal to the sum of--
 `(I) 25 percent of the first $100,000 awarded to the individual,
 `(II) 15 percent of the next $200,000 awarded to the individual, and
 `(III) 10 percent of any additional money awarded to the individual.
 `(B) EFFECT ON AGREEMENTS- If an individual enters into an arrangement with
 an attorney or agent in violation of subparagraph (A), such arrangement
 shall remain enforceable except where inconsistent with the provisions of
 such subparagraph.
 `(10) EFFECT OF DECISIONS RES JUDICATA- The decision of a panel arbitrating a
 claim under the system shall be res judicata as to any claim relating to the
 malpractice brought by any of the parties participating in the arbitration.
 `(11) APPEALS TO STATE COURT-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- A party participating in the arbitration of a malpractice
 claim under the system may file an appeal with the court of appropriate
 jurisdiction of the State administering the system (as determined under
 State law) to vacate the decision of the panel if such party files a motion
 to appeal not later than 60 days after the panel renders its decision.
 `(B) STANDARD OF REVIEW- A court reviewing the decision of a panel
 arbitrating a claim under the system may not vacate the panel's decision
 unless it determines that--
 `(i) the decision was reached by corruption, fraud, or undue means;
 `(ii) members of the panel engaged in misconduct by which the rights of
 any party were prejudiced; or
 `(iii) there was an evident material miscalculation of figures or an
 evident material mistake in the description of any person, thing, or
 property referred to in the panel's decision.
 `(C) RE-ARBITRATION OF CLAIMS- If a court vacates the decision of a panel
 arbitrating a claim under the system, the claim shall be arbitrated by a
 new panel appointed by the MSDRO administering the system not later than
 60 days after the court issues its decision.
 `(d) CERTIFICATION OF ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION SYSTEMS- If the
 Secretary determines that a dispute resolution program established by and
 operating in a State, or (in the case of contract entered into between
 the Secretary and a nonprofit or public entity under subsection (b)(2))
 a dispute resolution program established and operated by a nonprofit
 or public entity, provides for the fair and efficient resolution of
 malpractice claims at least as well as the system described in subsection
 (c), such program shall be considered a certified malpractice arbitration
 system for purposes of this section.
 `(e) ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON ARBITRATION-
 `(1) APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS- Not later than 30 days after the date of the
 enactment of this section, the Secretary shall appoint an advisory committee
 to assist in developing procedures for arbitration panels in the conduct
 of activities under this section and in regulating the activities of MSDROs.
 `(2) COMPOSITION- The advisory committee shall consist of 12 members
 and shall include experts in the areas of tort law, alternative dispute
 resolution, medicine, and health insurance.
 `(3) REPORTS- The advisory committee shall submit to the Secretary an annual
 report analyzing the effectiveness of the program established under this
 section and such interim reports as the Secretary may request.
 `(f) DEFINITIONS- In this section:
 `(1) MALPRACTICE CLAIM- The term `malpractice claim'--
 `(A) means any claim relating to the provision of (or the failure to provide)
 health care services based on (i) negligence or gross negligence, (ii)
 strict or absolute liability in tort, (iii) breach of express or implied
 warranty or contract, (iv) failure to discharge a duty to warn or instruct
 to obtain consent, or (v) any other theory that is the basis for an award
 of damages for personal injury, but
 `(B) does not include any claim (i) in the nature of a wrongful death action
 (in the case of an action for losses accruing to survivors after the death
 of an injured individual and resulting from the death of the individual),
 or (ii) for an injury caused by an action (or failure to act) for the
 purpose of causing injury or with knowledge that injury is substantially
 certain to follow.
 `(2) MSDRO- The term `MSDRO' means a medical services dispute resolution
 organization with which the Secretary has in effect an agreement under
 subsection (c).'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on January 1, 1991.
SEC. 3. NOTICE TO MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1804 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395b-2)
 is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (2),
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3) and inserting `,
 and', and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph:
 `(4) a clear explanation of the binding arbitration system established
 under section 1893 for the resolution of malpractice disputes.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply
 to notices distributed for years beginning with the first year in which
 section 1893 of the Social Security Act is in effect.