HR 3277 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3277
To improve Federal laws relating to the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System, and
for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
September 14, 1989
Mr. MILLER of California (for himself and Mr. DURBIN) introduced the following
bill; which was referred jointly to the Committees on Interior and Insular
Affairs, Merchant Marine and Fisheries, and Public Works and Transportation
A BILL
To improve Federal laws relating to the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System, and
for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Trans-Alaska Pipeline System Reform Act
 of 1989'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) in 1973, the Congress enacted the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System
 Authorization Act based on the assurances that the oil industry would
 operate safely under harsh Alaskan conditions;
 (2) the Alyeska Pipeline Service Company, as holder of the trans-Alaska
 pipeline right-of-way granted by the Secretary of the Interior, bears
 responsibility for the safe and environmentally sound transportation of
 oil produced on the north slope of Alaska;
 (3) on March 24, 1989, the largest oil spill in United States history
 occurred when the tanker Exxon Valdez ran aground in Prince William Sound,
 spilling 11,000,000 gallons of crude oil in the surrounding waters;
 (4) the Alyeska Pipeline Service Company and Exxon Company, U.S.A., failed
 to have adequate oil spill response material, equipment, and personnel at
 the scene, failed to respond quickly to the spill, and failed to contain
 adequately the oil spill or mitigate its impact;
 (5) the Exxon Valdez oil spill is causing widespread and significant
 adverse impact to the marine environment and to fish, birds, marine mammals,
 and other wildlife in some of the most remote and beautiful areas of the
 United States;
 (6) the Exxon Valdez oil spill has damaged valuable public lands and
 resources, including Kenai Fiords National Park, Katmai National Park and
 Preserve, Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge, Kodiak National Wildlife
 Refuge, Chugach National Forest, and lands owned by the State of Alaska;
 (7) the Exxon Valdez oil spill has disrupted communities in southcentral
 Alaska, affected subsistence users, caused harm to property owned by Alaska
 Native corporations, severely damaged commercial fisheries, and reduced
 tourism in Alaska;
 (8) the Exxon Valdez oil spill cleanup and damages may cost several billion
 dollars and it is unclear whether all parties will be fully compensated
 for their losses;
 (9) the Exxon Valdez oil spill demonstrates that there is a need to
 reexamine the entire operation of the trans-Alaska pipeline system,
 including the current system for transporting oil from the terminal at
 the Port of Valdez, Alaska, to destination ports; and
 (10) legislation is necessary to minimize the risks of another significant
 spill of oil transported by the trans-Alaska pipeline.
SEC. 3. REFERENCES TO TRANS-ALASKA PIPELINE AUTHORIZATION ACT.
 Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or
 repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section
 or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a
 section or other provision of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act
 (43 U.S.C. 1651-1655).
TITLE I--TRANS-ALASKA PIPELINE SYSTEM FUND AND LIABILITY
SEC. 101. LIABILITY WITHIN THE STATE OF ALASKA AND CLEAN UP EFFORTS.
 (a) CAUSE OF ACCIDENT- Section 204(a)(1) of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline
 Authorization Act (43 U.S.C. 1653(a)(1)) is amended by striking out `caused
 by' in the first sentence and inserting in lieu thereof `caused solely by'.
 (b) REMOVAL OF LIMITATION- Section 204(a) of the Act (43 U.S.C. 1653(a))
 is amended--
 (1) by striking out paragraph (2); and
 (2) by redesignating paragraphs (3), (4), and (5) as paragraphs (2),
 (3), and (4), respectively.
 (c) CLEAN-UP EFFORTS- Section 204(b) of the Act (43 U.S.C. 1653(b))
 is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence--
 (A) by inserting after `any area' the following: `in the State of Alaska';
 (B) by inserting after `any activities' the following: `related to the
 trans-Alaska pipeline system, including operation of the terminal,'; and
 (C) by inserting after `other Federal' the following: `or State'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new sentence: `Removal with respect
 to any discharge or incident shall be considered completed when so determined
 by the Secretary of the Interior and the Governor of Alaska.'.
SEC. 102. CLAIMS AGAINST TRANS-ALASKA PIPELINE LIABILITY FUND.
 (a) TERMINATION OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS- Section 204(c) of the Act (43
 U.S.C. 1653(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(13) The provisions of this subsection shall apply only with respect to
 incidents occurring before the date of the enactment of the Trans-Alaska
 Pipeline System Reform Act of 1989, and no amount may be collected under
 paragraph (5) after such date.'.
 (b) DAMAGES- (1) For any claims against the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Liability
 Fund established by section 204(c)(4) of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline
 Authorization Act, the term `damages' shall include, but not be limited
 to, the loss of taxes, revenues, fees, royalties, rents, or other revenues
 incurred by a political subdivision of a State due to injury, destruction,
 or loss of real property, personal property, or natural resources, or
 diminished economic activity due to the discharge.
 (2) Paragraph (1) shall take effect as of January 1, 1989.
TITLE II--TRANS-ALASKA PIPELINE SYSTEM TRUST FUND
SEC. 201. ESTABLISHMENT OF TRUST FUND.
 The Act is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`TRANS-ALASKA PIPELINE SYSTEM TRUST FUND
 `SEC. 207. (a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is hereby established the Trans-Alaska
 Pipeline System Trust Fund (hereinafter referred to as the `TAPS Trust
 Fund') to be administered as a separate account in the Treasury of the
 United States.
 `(b) FEES- (1)(A) There is hereby imposed a fee of five cents per barrel on
 oil transported through the trans-Alaska pipeline. Subject to subparagraph
 (B), the operator of the pipeline shall collect the fee from the owner of
 the oil at the time it is loaded on the vessel.
 `(B) Subparagraph (A) shall be effective as of the date of enactment of
 the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System Reform Act of 1989 and the Secretary of
 Interior shall provide for the collection of fees for the period beginning
 on such date and ending on the date of the enactment of this Act.
 `(2) The collections under paragraph (1) shall be delivered to the Secretary
 of the Interior for deposit into the TAPS Trust Fund.
 `(3) Amounts in the TAPS Trust Fund may be used only for the purposes
 specified in subsection (c), and amounts not needed for such purposes
 shall be invested prudently in income-producing securities approved by the
 Secretary of the Interior. Income from such securities shall be deposited
 into the TAPS Trust Fund.
 `(c) USE OF THE FUND- Subject to approval in appropriation Acts, amounts
 in the TAPS Trust Fund shall be used for the following purposes directly
 related to safe and environmentally sound operation of the trans-Alaska
 pipeline system:
 `(1) Improving the Coast Guard's oil pollution prevention and response
 capabilities (including personnel, facilities, equipment, and maintenance
 costs) at the Port of Valdez and Prince William Sound, Alaska, and at ports
 in the United States receiving significant quantities of Alaskan oil,
 including at least Puget Sound, Washington, the San Francisco Bay Area,
 California, Los Angeles and Long Beach, California.
 `(2) Upgrading vessel traffic control systems for the Port of Valdez and
 Prince William Sound, Alaska, and at ports in the United States receiving
 significant quantities of Alaskan oil, including at least Puget Sound,
 Washington, the San Francisco Bay Area, California, Los Angeles and Long
 Beach, California, and the Santa Barbara Channel off the California coast.
 `(3) Funding the reasonable and necessary costs incurred by the Federal
 Government and the State of Alaska for agency personnel to monitor and
 enforce compliance with applicable safety, health, and environmental
 standards.
 `(4) Funding the Presidential Task Force, the audit of the trans-Alaska
 pipeline system, and the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Terminal Environmental
 Advisory Council as provided for in section 208.
 `(5) Funding the Alaska Oil Spill Recovery Institute as provided for in
 section 209.
 `(6) Administering the Fund.
 `(d) AUDIT- The Comptroller General of the United States, and any of
 the Comptroller's duly authorized representatives, shall have access,
 for purposes of an annual audit and examination, to any books, documents,
 papers, and records that are pertinent to the funds deposited into and
 expended from the TAPS Trust Fund.'.
TITLE III--IMPROVEMENT OF THE TRANS-ALASKA PIPELINE SYSTEM
SEC. 301. PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE.
 The Act is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE; ADVISORY COUNCIL
 `SEC. 208. (a) ESTABLISHMENT OF TASK FORCE- (1) There is hereby established
 a Presidential Task Force on the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System (hereinafter
 referred to as the `Task Force') composed of the following nine members
 appointed by the President:
 `(A) One member appointed to serve as cochairman of the Task Force.
 `(B) One member nominated by the Governor of Alaska who will serve as
 cochairman of the Task Force.
 `(C) Three members, one of whom shall be nominated by the Secretary of
 the Interior, one by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
 Agency, and one by the Secretary of Transportation, and all of whom shall
 be Federal employees.
 `(D) Three members, one of whom shall be nominated by the Commissioner
 of Fish and Game, one by the Commissioner of Environmental Conservation,
 and one by the Commissioner of Natural Resources of the State of Alaska,
 and all of whom shall be State employees.
 `(E) One member nominated by the National Academy of Engineering.
 `(2)(A) Except as provided in subparagraphs (B) and (C), members shall be
 appointed for terms of three years.
 `(B) Of the members first appointed--
 `(i) three shall be appointed for a term of three years;
 `(ii) three shall be appointed for a term of four years; and
 `(iii) three shall be appointed for a term of five years.
 `(C) Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration
 of the term for which his or her predecessor was appointed shall be
 appointed only for the remainder of such term. A member may serve after
 the expiration of his or her term until a successor has taken office.
 `(3) Members shall, to the extent approved in appropriation Acts, receive
 the daily equivalent of the minimum annual rate of basic pay in effect for
 grade GS-15 of the General Schedule for each day (including travel time)
 during which they are engaged in the actual performance of duties vested
 in the Commission, except that members who are State, Federal, or other
 governmental employees shall receive no compensation under this paragraph
 in addition to the salaries they receive as such employees.
 `(4) The cochairmen of the Task Force shall appoint a Director to carry
 out administrative duties. The Director may hire such staff and incur such
 expenses on behalf of the Task Force as are authorized by the Task Force
 and for which funds are available.
 `(5) Employees of the Task Force shall not, by reason of such employment,
 be considered to be employees of the Federal Government for any purpose.
 `(b) DUTIES OF TASK FORCE- (1) The Congress finds that, in light of the
 Exxon Valdez oil spill and the resulting lack of public confidence in the oil
 industry's ability to operate the trans-Alaska pipeline system in a safe and
 environmentally sound manner, it is necessary to carry out a comprehensive
 audit and review of the system for transporting oil produced in Alaska.
 `(2) The Task Force, therefore, shall conduct a comprehensive audit
 and review of operations of the trans-Alaska pipeline system, make
 recommendations to the President and the Congress, and function as a
 permanent forum for improved oversight and enforcement of safety and
 environmental laws related to the trans-Alaska pipeline system.
 `(3) The scope of the audit shall include matters related to operations
 of the trans-Alaska pipeline, the terminal at the Port of Valdez, Alaska,
 and tanker traffic in Prince William Sound.
 `(4) As part of such audit, the Task Force shall conduct a comprehensive
 review of the trans-Alaska pipeline system in order to specifically advise
 the President and the Congress concerning--
 `(A) whether the holder of the Federal and State right-of-way is, and has
 been, operating in full compliance with applicable agreements and laws;
 `(B) the operational and structural soundness of the pipeline, terminal,
 and related facilities;
 `(C) necessary improvements for the pipeline, terminal, and related
 facilities in terms of operational safety, public health, and environmental
 protection;
 `(D) necessary improvements in the oil spill response capabilities and
 contingency plans for the pipeline, terminal, related facilities, and
 Prince William Sound;
 `(E) necessary improvements in security for the pipeline, terminal, and
 related facilities; and
 `(F) necessary improvements in the vessel traffic control system for the
 Port of Valdez and Prince William Sound.
 `(5)(A) The Task Force shall retain at least one independent consulting
 firm with technical expertise in engineering, transportation safety,
 the environment, and other applicable areas to assist the Task Force in
 carrying out this subsection. Such firm shall have extensive experience
 in carrying out audits of the nature to be carried out by the Task Force.
 `(B) Contracts with any such firm shall be entered into on a nationally
 competitive basis, and the Task Force shall not select any firm with respect
 to which there may be a conflict of interest in assisting the Task Force
 in carrying out its audit and review.
 `(6) The Task Force shall provide an opportunity for public comment on
 its activities and shall consult on a regular basis with the Trans-Alaska
 Pipeline Terminal Environmental Advisory Council established pursuant to
 subsection (c).
 `(7) The Task Force shall transmit (and make available to the public), no
 later than January 31, 1991, a report to the President and the Congress
 of its findings, conclusions, and recommendations made as a result of
 carrying out such audit.
 `(8) The President shall, within six months after receiving the Task Force's
 report, transmit a report to the Congress containing comments on whether--
 `(A) the Alyeska Pipeline Service Company or its successor is, and has
 been, operating in full compliance with the right-of-way permits granted
 for the trans-Alaska pipeline;
 `(B) the President intends to direct the Secretary of the Interior to
 exercise authority pursuant to section 203(e) of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline
 Authorization Act to amend or modify the Federal right-of-way agreement; and
 `(C) the President intends to take other measures to implement the Task
 Force's findings and recommendations.
 `(9) The Task Force shall prepare an annual report on its activities and
 submit such report to the President and the Congress.
 `(10) The Comptroller General of the United States, and any of his or her
 duly authorized representatives, shall have access, for purposes of audit and
 examination, to any books, documents, papers, and records of the Task Force
 that are pertinent to the funds received and expended by the Task Force.
 `(11) Amounts in the TAPS Trust Fund established under section 207 shall
 be available, as approved in appropriation Acts and without fiscal year
 limitation, to carry out the requirements of this subsection.
 `(12) The Task Force shall continue until terminated by law.
 `(c) ADVISORY COUNCIL- (1) There is hereby established a Trans-Alaska
 Pipeline Terminal Advisory Council (hereinafter referred to as the
 `Advisory Council').
 `(2) The Governor of Alaska may appoint to the Advisory Council the following
 members from among the residents of the Port of Valdez, of Cordova, or of
 other communities within the Prince William Sound region:
 `(A) one member who shall serve as chairman;
 `(B) two members of the fishing industry;
 `(C) two members of Alaska Native organizations;
 `(D) two members of environmental organizations;
 `(E) two members from local governments; and
 `(F) two members from the tourism industry or other business community.
 `(3)(A) Except as provided in subparagraphs (B) and (C), members shall be
 appointed for terms of two years.
 `(B) Of the members first appointed--
 `(i) six shall be appointed for a term of four years;
 `(ii) three shall be appointed for a term of three years; and
 `(iii) two shall be appointed for a term of two years.
 `(C) Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration
 of the term for which his or her predecessor was appointed shall be
 appointed only for the remainder of such term. A member may serve after
 the expiration of his or her term until a successor has taken office.
 `(D) Members shall receive, to the extent provided in appropriation Acts,
 the daily equivalent of the minimum annual rate of basic pay in effect for
 grade GS-15 of the General Schedule for each day (including travel time)
 during which they are engaged in the actual performance of duties vested
 in the Commission, except that members who are State or Federal employees
 shall receive no compensation under this subparagraph in addition to the
 salaries they receive as such employees.
 `(E) The Chairman of the Advisory Council shall appoint a Director to
 carry out administrative duties. The Director may hire such staff and
 incur such expenses on behalf of the Advisory Council as are authorized
 by the Advisory Council and for which funds are available.
 `(F) Employees of the Advisory Council shall not, by reason of such
 employment, be considered to be employees of the Federal Government for
 any purpose.
 `(4)(A) The Advisory Council shall assist the owner and operator of the
 trans-Alaska pipeline and Federal and State officials in developing policies,
 permits, plans, and regulations relating to the monitoring, operation,
 and maintenance of the terminal and related facilities of the trans-Alaska
 pipeline that may affect safety, public health, and the environment.
 `(B) The Advisory Council shall serve as a forum for the industrial users,
 owners, and operators of the terminal facilities to work cooperatively
 with local residents.
 `(C) As a condition of using or operating the pipeline and terminal
 facilities established with respect to the trans-Alaska right-of-way,
 industrial users, owners, and operators of the terminal facilities shall
 cooperate fully with the Advisory Council through frequent consultation
 and attendance at meetings and by granting access to the Advisory Council
 to all facilities and requested documents and information.
 `(5) The Advisory Council may establish such technical advisory committees
 as it deems necessary.
 `(6) The Advisory Council shall prepare an annual report on its activities
 and submit such report to the Task Force established by subsection (a),
 the Governor of Alaska, the Congress, and the public.
 `(7) The Comptroller General of the United States, and any of his or
 her duly authorized representatives, shall have access, for purposes of
 audit and examination, to any books, documents, papers, and records of the
 Advisory Council that are pertinent to the funds received and expended by
 the Advisory Council.
 `(8) The Advisory Council shall continue until terminated by law.
 `(9) Amounts in the TAPS Trust Fund established under section 207 shall be
 made available, to the extent provided in appropriation Acts but without
 fiscal year limitation, to carry out the purposes of this subsection.'.
TITLE IV--ALASKA OIL SPILL RECOVERY INSTITUTE
SEC. 401. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE ALASKA OIL SPILL RECOVERY INSTITUTE.
 The Act is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`THE ALASKA OIL SPILL RECOVERY INSTITUTE
 `SEC. 209. (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary of the Interior shall provide
 for the establishment of the Alaska Oil Spill Recovery Institute (hereinafter
 referred to as `the Institute') to be administered through the Prince William
 Sound Science and Technology Institute and located in Cordova, Alaska.
 `(b) DUTIES- The Institute shall conduct research and carry out projects
 designed to--
 `(1) identify and develop the best available techniques, equipment, and
 materials for preventing and cleaning up oil spills in the arctic and
 subarctic marine environment; and
 `(2) complement Federal and State damage assessment efforts and determine,
 document, and assess the long-term effects of the Exxon Valdez oil spill
 on the natural resources and the environment of Prince William Sound and
 other impacted areas of Alaska.
 `(c) MEMBERS OF THE BOARD- (1) The policies of the Institute shall be
 determined by a Board of Directors (hereafter referred to as the `Board
 of Directors') composed of--
 `(A) the Commissioner of Fish and Game of the State of Alaska;
 `(B) the Commissioner of Environmental Conservation of the State of Alaska;
 `(C) the Commissioner of Natural Resources of the State of Alaska;
 `(D) the President of the University of Alaska who shall serve as chairman;
 `(E) the Commandant of the United States Coast Guard;
 `(F) the Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
 Administration;
 `(G) the Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service;
 `(H) the Director of the National Park Service;
 `(I) the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency; and
 `(J) three members appointed by the Governor of Alaska who are residents
 of communities in Alaska affected by the Exxon Valdez spill and who are
 knowledgeable about fisheries, the marine environment, wildlife, public
 health, safety or education.
 `(2)(A) Members who are appointed by the Governor of Alaska shall serve
 a term of two years.
 `(B) Of the members first appointed by such Governor--
 `(i) one shall be appointed for a term of four years;
 `(ii) one shall be appointed for a term of three years; and
 `(iii) one shall be appointed for a term of two years.
 `(C)(i) Each member described in subparagraphs (A) through (J) of paragraph
 (1) may appoint a delegate to serve in that member's place.
 `(ii) Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration
 of the term for which his or her predecessor was appointed shall be
 appointed only for the remainder of such term. A member may serve after
 the expiration of his or her term until a successor has taken office.
 `(D) Members shall receive, to the extent provided in appropriation Acts,
 the daily equivalent of the minimum annual rate of basic pay in effect for
 grade GS-15 of the General Schedule for each day (including travel time)
 during which they are engaged in the actual performance of duties vested
 in the Commission, except that members who are State or Federal employees
 shall receive no compensation under this subparagraph in addition to the
 salaries they receive as such employees.
 `(E) The Chairman of the Board of Directors shall appoint a Director to
 carry out administrative duties. The Director may hire such staff and
 incur such expenses on behalf of the Institute as are authorized by the
 Board of Directors and for which funds are available.
 `(F) Employees of the Institute shall not, by reason of such employment,
 be considered to be employees of the Federal Government for any purpose.
 `(3) The policies of the Institute shall include the conduct of the
 research, projects, and studies to be supported, through contracts and
 grants on a nationally competitive basis, by the Institute in accordance
 with the purposes of this section and to the extent of funds available
 for such purposes.
 `(d) COMMITTEE- (1) The Institute shall establish a Scientific and Technical
 Committee composed of specialists in matters related to oil spill containment
 and cleanup technology, arctic and subarctic marine ecology, and the fish
 and wildlife of Prince William Sound and other impacted Alaska areas.
 `(2) The Scientific and Technical Committee shall provide such advice to the
 Board of Directors as the Board shall request, including recommendations
 regarding the conduct and support of research, projects, and studies in
 accordance with the purposes of this section.
 `(e) REPORT- The Institute shall prepare an annual report on its activities
 and submit such report to the Governor of Alaska, the Congress, and
 the public.
 `(f) AUDIT- The Comptroller General of the United States, and any of his
 or her duly authorized representatives, shall have access, for purposes
 of audit and examination, to any books, documents, papers, and records
 of the Institute that are pertinent to the funds received and expended by
 the Institute.
 `(g) TERMINATION- The Institute shall terminate 10 years after the date
 of enactment of this section.
 `(h) FUNDING- Amounts in the TAPS Trust Fund established under section 207
 shall be available, to the extent provided in appropriation Acts and without
 fiscal year limitation, to carry out the requirements of this section.'.
TITLE V--PENALTIES
SEC. 501. AUTHORITY OF THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR TO IMPOSE PENALTIES ON
OUTER CONTINENTAL SHELF FACILITIES.
 Section 24(b) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1350(b))
 is amended--
 (1) by striking out `If any' and inserting in lieu thereof `(1) Except as
 provided in paragraph (2), if any';
 (2) by striking out `$10,000' and inserting in lieu thereof `$20,000';
 (3) by adding at the end of paragraph (1) the following new sentence:
 `The Secretary shall, by regulation at least every three years, adjust
 the penalty specified in this paragraph to reflect any increases in the
 Consumer Price Index (all items, United States city average) as prepared
 by the Department of Labor.'; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(2) If a failure described in paragraph (1) constitutes or constituted
 a threat of serious, irreparable, or immediate harm or damage to life
 (including fish and other aquatic life), property, any mineral deposit,
 or the marine environment, a civil penalty may be assessed without regard
 to the requirement of expiration of a period allowed for corrective action.'.
SEC. 502. TRANS-ALASKA PIPELINE SYSTEM CIVIL PENALTIES.
 The Act is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`CIVIL PENALTIES
 `SEC. 210. (a) PENALTY- The Secretary of the Interior shall assess and
 collect a civil penalty under this section with respect to any discharge
 of oil--
 `(1) in transit from fields or reservoirs supplying oil to the trans-Alaska
 pipeline;
 `(2) during transportation through the trans-Alaska pipeline or handling
 at the terminal facilities; or
 `(3) during transportation on a vessel loaded at the terminal of the
 trans-Alaska pipeline,
that causes damage to, or threatens to damage, natural resources or public
or private property.
 `(b) PERSONS LIABLE- In addition to the person causing or permitting
 the discharge or threat of discharge, the owner or owners of the oil at
 the time the discharge or threat of discharge occurs shall be jointly,
 severally, and strictly liable for the full amount of penalties assessed
 pursuant to this section. Liability under this section shall cease when
 oil has been first brought ashore.
 `(c) AMOUNT- (1) The amount of the civil penalty shall be no less than
 $1,000 per barrel of oil discharged.
 `(2) In determining the amount of civil penalty under this section, the
 Secretary of the Interior shall consider the seriousness of the damages from
 the discharge, the cause of the discharge, any history of prior violations
 of applicable rules and laws, and the degree of success of any efforts by
 the violator to minimize or mitigate the effects of such discharge.
 `(3) Any civil penalty assessed by the Secretary of the Interior pursuant
 to this section shall be in addition to the amount of any fine or penalty
 (whether civil or criminal in nature) for any violation of other Federal
 or State law.
 `(4) Any amount received in payment of a civil penalty under this section
 shall be deposited into the TAPS Trust Fund established by section 207.
 `(d) STATE LAW- (1) Nothing in this section shall be construed or interpreted
 as preempting any State or political subdivision thereof from imposing
 any additional liability or requirements with respect to the discharge,
 or threat of discharge, of oil or other pollution by oil.
 `(2) Nothing in this section shall affect or modify in any way the
 obligations or liabilities of any person under other Federal or State law,
 including common law, with respect to discharges of oil.'.
TITLE VI--PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALASKA NATIVES
SEC. 601. LAND CONVEYANCES.
 The Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (Public Law 96-487)
 is amended by adding the following after section 1437:
 `SEC. 1438. Solely for the purpose of bringing claims that arise from
 the discharge of oil, the Congress confirms that all right, title and
 interest of the United States in and to the lands validly selected but
 not yet conveyed pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act
 (43 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) or this Act, to Alaska Native corporations are
 deemed to have vested in the respective corporations as of March 23, 1989.'.
SEC. 602. IMPACT OF POTENTIAL SPILLS IN THE ARCTIC OCEAN ON ALASKA NATIVES.
 Title III of the Act entitled `An Act to amend section 28 of the Mineral
 Leasing Act of 1920, and to authorize a trans-Alaska oil pipeline, and
 for other purposes.', approved November 16, 1973 (43 U.S.C. 1651 note;
 Public Law 93-153), is amended by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `SEC. 304. (a) The Congress finds that--
 `(1) Canada has discovered commercial quantities of oil and gas in the
 Amalagak region of the Northwest Territory;
 `(2) Canada is exploring alternatives for transporting the oil from the
 Amalagak field to markets in Asia and the Far East;
 `(3) one of the options the Canadian Government is exploring involves
 transshipment of oil from the Amalagak field across the Beaufort Sea to
 tankers which would transport the oil overseas;
 `(4) the tankers would traverse the American Exclusive Economic Zone through
 the Beaufort Sea into the Chuckchi Sea and then through the Bering Straits;
 `(5) the Beaufort and Chuckchi Seas are vital to Alaska's native people,
 providing them with subsistence in the form of walrus, seals, fish,
 and whales;
 `(6) the Secretary of the Interior has conducted outer continental shelf
 lease sales in the Beaufort and Chuckchi Seas and oil and gas exploration
 is ongoing;
 `(7) an oil spill in the Arctic Ocean, if not properly contained and
 cleaned up, could have significant impacts on the indigenous people of
 Alaska's North Slope and on the arctic environment; and
 `(8) there are no international contingency plans involving our two
 governments concerning containment and cleanup of an oil spill in the
 Arctic Ocean.
 `(b)(1) The Secretary of the Interior, in consultation with the Governor
 of Alaska, shall conduct a study of the issues of recovery of damages,
 contingency plans, and coordinated actions in the event of an oil spill
 in the Arctic Ocean.
 `(2) The Secretary of the Interior shall, no later than January 1, 1990,
 transmit a report to the Congress on the findings and conclusions reached
 as result of the study carried out under this subsection.'.
TITLE VII--STATE LAWS AND PROGRAMS
SEC. 701. STATE LAWS AND PROGRAMS.
 (a) STATE LAWS AND PROGRAMS- Nothing in this Act or the amendments made by
 it shall be construed or interpreted as preempting any State, or political
 subdivision thereof, from imposing any additional liability or requirements
 with respect to the discharge of oil or other pollution by oil within such
 State. Nothing in this Act or the amendments made by it shall modify in
 any way the obligations or liabilities of any person under other Federal
 or State law, including common law, with respect to discharges of oil.
 (b) AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH A FUND- Nothing in this Act or the amendments
 made by it or in any other provision of law shall in any way affect the
 authority of any State or political subdivision thereof--
 (1) to establish, or to continue in effect, a fund any purpose of which
 is to pay for costs or damages arising out of, or directly resulting from,
 oil pollution or the substantial threat of oil pollution; or
 (2) to require any person to contribute to such a fund.
 (c) CONSULTATION- The President shall consult with the affected State or
 States on the appropriate removal action to be taken under the amendments
 made by this Act with respect to any discharge of oil. Removal with respect
 to any discharge or incident shall be considered complete when so determined
 by the President and the Governor of the affected State or States.
 (d) ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY- Nothing in this Act or the amendments made by
 it or in any other provision of law shall in any way affect the authority
 of any State or political subdivision thereof to impose, or to determine
 the amount of, any fine or penalty (whether criminal or civil in nature)
 for any violation of law relating to the discharge, or substantial threat
 of a discharge, of oil.