HR 99 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 99
To amend the Clean Air Act.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
January 3, 1989
Mr. SWIFT (for himself, Mr. SYNAR, Mr. SHARP, Mr. ECKART, Mr. TAUZIN,
Mr. SLATTERY, Mr. COOPER, Mr. BRUCE, and Mr. BOUCHER) introduced the following
bill; which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Clean Air Act.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Clean Air Act Amendments of 1989'.
TITLE I--OZONE AND CARBON MONOXIDE NONATTAINMENT AREAS
Subtitle A--General Provisions
Sec. 101. Enhanced monitoring.
Sec. 102. Air quality maintenance.
Sec. 103. SIP revisions.
Sec. 104. Redesignation of areas.
SEC. 101. ENHANCED MONITORING.
 (a) Section 108 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 at the end thereof:
 `(g) ENHANCED MONITORING- In order to obtain more comprehensive and
 representative data on ozone and carbon monoxide air pollution, not later
 than 18 months after the enactment of this subsection, the Administrator
 shall promulgate rules, after notice and public comment, for enhanced
 monitoring of ozone, oxides of nitrogen, volatile organic compounds,
 and carbon monoxide by the States. The rules shall, among other things,
 cover the location and maintenance of monitors. In addition, the rules
 shall require each State implementation plan for an ozone nonattainment
 area classified as Serious or Severe under section 180, or for a carbon
 monoxide nonattainment area classified as Severe under section 186, to
 contain the following provisions:
 `(1) Measures to improve the ambient monitoring of such air pollutants.
 `(2) A requirement that each stationary source in such area which emits, or
 has the potential to emit, 25 tons or more of volatile organic compounds,
 oxides of nitrogen, or carbon monoxide per year shall prepare and submit
 to the State and, upon request, to the Administrator, an annual emission
 monitoring report. The report shall contain a certification that the
 information contained in the report is accurate to the best knowledge of
 the individual certifying the report.
The provisions of section 110(a)(2)(K) shall apply to annual emission
monitoring reports referred to in paragraph (2) of this subsection in the same
manner and to the same extent as such provisions apply to permits referred to
in such provisions, except that in applying such provisions to such reports,
the reasonable costs to the State of carrying out ambient monitoring required
under this subsection and of reviewing the annual emission monitoring reports
shall be substituted for the costs referred to in section 110(a)(2)(K)(ii). The
Administrator shall promulgate regulations under this subsection with respect
to the implementation of plan provisions required pursuant to the preceding
sentence. Such regulations shall specify the maximum and minimum dollars per
ton at which amounts may be collected from each category of stationary source
referred to in paragraph (2) by any State pursuant to such plan provisions.'.
 (b) OBTAINING INFORMATION- Section 114(a)(1) of the Clean Air Act is
 amended to read as follows:
 `(1) the Administrator may, on a one-time, periodic or continuous basis,
 require any person who owns or operates any emission source or who is
 subject to any requirement of this Act (other than a manufacturer subject
 to the provisions of section 206(c) or 208) with respect to a provision of
 title II to (A) establish and maintain such records, (B) make such reports,
 (C) install, use, and maintain such monitoring equipment, audit procedures,
 or methods, (D) sample such emissions (in accordance with such procedures
 or methods, at such locations, at such intervals during such continuous
 periods, and in such manner as the Administrator shall prescribe), and
 (E) provide such other information, as he may reasonably require; and'.
SEC. 102. AIR QUALITY MAINTENANCE.
 Part D of title I of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new section at the end thereof:
`SEC. 179. MAINTENANCE OF AIR QUALITY STANDARDS.
 `(a) REDESIGNATION OF NONATTAINMENT AREAS- Any State in which there
 is located an area which is classified as a nonattainment area for any
 pollutant for which a national ambient air quality standard is applicable
 may request the Administrator to redesignate that area as an area which
 has attained the national primary ambient air quality standard for such air
 pollutant. If the Administrator determines that such area has attained the
 standard concerned, and if he approves the plan revision required under
 subsection (b), he shall redesignate such area as an attainment area for
 that air pollutant. The Administrator shall promptly publish criteria and
 procedures for the consideration of such requests, which shall include
 a reasonable period of time in which the Administrator shall approve or
 disapprove any such request.
 `(b) PLAN REVISION- Each State which submits a request under subsection
 (a) with respect to any air pollutant shall also submit a revision of the
 applicable State implementation plan to provide for the maintenance of
 the national primary ambient air quality standard for such air pollutant
 in the area concerned for at least 10 years after the redesignation. The
 plan shall contain such additional measures, if any, as may be necessary
 to ensure such maintenance.
 `(c) SUBSEQUENT PLAN REVISIONS- 8 years after redesignation of any area
 as an attainment area under subsection (a), the State shall submit to the
 Administrator an additional revision of the applicable State implementation
 plan for maintaining the national primary ambient air quality standard
 for 10 years after the expiration of the 10-year period referred to in
 subsection (b).
 `(d) NONATTAINMENT REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE PENDING PLAN APPROVAL- Until a
 plan revision is approved and an area is redesignated as attainment under
 this section for any area classified under this part as a nonattainment
 area, the requirements of this part shall continue in force and effect
 with respect to such area.
 `(e) CONTINGENCY PROVISIONS- Each plan revision submitted under this section
 shall contain such contingency provisions as the Administrator deems
 necessary to assure that the State will promptly correct any violation
 of the standard which occurs after the redesignation of the area as an
 attainment area under subsection (a). Such provisions shall include a
 requirement that the State will implement all measures with respect to the
 control of the air pollutant concerned which were contained in the State
 implementation plan for the area prior to redesignation of the area as an
 attainment area. The failure of any area redesignated as an attainment
 area under subsection (a) to maintain the national ambient air quality
 standard concerned shall not result in a requirement that the State revise
 its State implementation plan unless the Administrator, in his discretion,
 requires the State to submit a revised State implementation plan.'.
SEC. 103. SIP REVISIONS.
 Section 110(a)(3)(D) of the Clean Air Act is amended to read as follows:
 `(D) SIP REVISIONS-
 `(i) DEADLINE FOR EPA TO ACT ON SIP REVISION- The Administrator shall
 promulgate minimum criteria for the consideration of plan revisions
 submitted under part D. The Administrator need not consider any such
 plan revision which fails to conform to such criteria. Within 12 months
 after its submission, the Administrator shall approve or disapprove,
 in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Act, each State
 implementation plan revision submitted for a nonattainment area if the
 revision meets the minimum criteria for consideration. The Administrator
 shall establish internal procedures for timely action on such plan revisions.
 `(ii) PARTIAL APPROVAL- In the case of any plan revision for a nonattainment
 area, or portion thereof, if the revision meets the minimum criteria
 established under clause (i), the Administrator may approve the plan
 revision in part and disapprove the plan revision in part, but the plan
 revision shall not be treated as meeting the requirements of this Act until
 the Administrator approves the entire plan revision as complying with the
 applicable requirements of this section and part D.
 `(iii) CONDITIONAL APPROVAL- The Administrator may approve a plan revision
 based on a commitment of the State to adopt specific enforceable measures
 by a date certain, but not later than 1 year after the date of approval
 of the plan revision. Any such conditional approval shall be treated as
 a disapproval if the State fails to comply with such commitment.'.
SEC. 104. REDESIGNATION OF AREAS.
 (a) REVISION OF CLASSIFICATIONS- (1) The second sentence of section
 107(d)(5) of the Clean Air Act is amended to read as follows: `Based on
 the list submitted by the State, or at any time on his own motion, the
 Administrator may promulgate by rule a revised classification of areas in
 accordance with this subsection.'
 (b) AREA BOUNDARIES- Section 107(d) of the Clean Air Act is amended by
 adding the following at the end thereof:
 `(6) INCLUSION OF ENTIRE MSA OR CMSA- (A) If a nonattainment area located
 within a Metropolitan Statistical Area or Consolidated Metropolitan
 Statistical Area (as established by the Bureau of the Census) is classified
 under section 180 (relating to classification of ozone nonattainment
 areas) or section 186 (relating to classification of carbon monoxide
 nonattainment areas) as a Serious Area or a Severe Area, the boundaries
 of such area are hereby revised by operation of law to include the entire
 Metropolitan Statistical Area or Consolidated Metropolitan Statistical Area,
 as the case may be. Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, such
 boundary revision shall apply for purposes of any State implementation plan
 revision required to be submitted after the enactment of this paragraph,
 and for purposes of the federally prescribed measures specified in section
 183 or 187.
 `(B) In the case of an area located within a Metropolitan Statistical Area
 or Consolidated Metropolitan Statistical Area (as established by the Bureau
 of the Census) classified under section 180 (relating to classification
 of ozone nonattainment areas) or section 186 (relating to classification
 of carbon monoxide nonattainment areas) as a Moderate Class I or Moderate
 Class II area, the Administrator, may, after consultation with the State,
 modify the boundaries of the area by rule if he determines that such
 modification is necessary to achieve attainment in the nonattainment
 area established prior to such modification. Such boundary revision shall
 apply for purposes of any State implementation plan revision required to
 be submitted by that State after the enactment of this paragraph, but the
 application of Federally prescribed measures specified in section 183 (in the
 case of ozone) or section 187 (in the case of carbon monoxide) shall not be
 based on the revised boundaries prior to the approval of such plan revision.
 `(C) In exercising the authority to modify boundaries under subparagraph
 (B), the Administrator may exempt any nonattainment area classified as
 Moderate Class I from the boundary modification if he determines that the
 existing inventory of air pollutants is adequate for such area and that
 sources elsewhere in the Metropolitan Statistical Area or Consolidated
 Metropolitan Statistical Area in which such area is located do not contribute
 significantly to the failure of the area to attain the applicable national
 primary ambient air quality standard.'.
Subtitle B--Provisions Relating Primarily to Ozone Air Pollution
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Subtitle B--Relating Primarily to Ozone Air Pollution
Sec. 111. Extension of attainment dates for ozone nonattainment areas.
Sec. 112. Improvement of air quality data.
Sec. 113. Ozone SIP revisions.
Sec. 114. Ozone extension areas; federally prescribed measures.
Sec. 115. Sanctions for ozone nonattainment areas.
Sec. 116. Control technology guidance, alternatives, and cost effectiveness.
Sec. 117. Ozone transport control.
Sec. 118. Multi-State ozone nonattainment areas.
SEC. 111. EXTENSION OF ATTAINMENT DATES FOR OZONE NONATTAINMENT AREAS.
 (a) CATEGORIES AND PRIMARY STANDARD ATTAINMENT DATE- Part D of title I of
 the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following new section at the
 end thereof:
`SEC. 180. EXTENSION OF ATTAINMENT DATES FOR OZONE NONATTAINMENT AREAS.
 `(a) CLASSIFICATION AND ATTAINMENT DATES FOR 1987 NONATTAINMENT AREAS-
 Each area which did not attain, by December 31, 1987, the national primary
 ambient air quality standard for ozone is hereby classified under Table 1,
 by operation of law, as a Moderate Area Class I, a Moderate Area Class II,
 a Serious Area or a Severe Area. The classification shall be based on the
 percentage by which the design value for ozone in the area exceeded the
 national primary ambient air quality standard for ozone as of December
 31, 1987. For purposes of such classification the design value shall be
 calculated according to the interpretation methodology set forth in 40
 C.F.R. Part 50. For each area classified under this subsection, in lieu of
 the primary standard attainment date specified in section 172, the primary
 standard attainment date for ozone shall be as provided in Table 1.
`TABLE 1
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 `Area Classification Amount by Which Standard Exceeded
 Primary Standard Attainment Date
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Moderate Area Class I Not more than 15%
 3 years after enactment of this section
 Moderate Area Class II More than 15% but not more than 25% 3 years after
 approval of plan revision*, but not later than 12/31/95
 Serious Area More than 25% but not more than 50% 5 years after
 approval of plan revision*, but not later than 12/31/97
 Severe Area More than 50% 13 years after
 approval of plan revision*, but not later than 12/31/05
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*The plan revision referred to is the State implementation plan revision
required to be submitted under section 182.
For purposes of notifying the State and the public, the Administrator shall
publish in the Federal Register a notice of the classifications made by
this subsection. The notice shall be published not later than 30 days after
the enactment of this section. Such notice shall not be deemed final agency
action for any purpose and shall not be subject to judicial review.
 `(b) SEVERE AREAS-
 `(1) RECLASSIFICATION- Under rules promulgated by the Administrator,
 the Administrator may reclassify as a Severe Area any area originally
 classified under subsection (a) as Moderate or Serious. He may make such
 reclassification only if he determines that the State cannot demonstrate
 that the area will attain the national primary ambient air quality standard
 for ozone area before December 31, 1997. The Administrator may reclassify an
 area under this subsection on his own motion at any time or upon petition
 submitted by the State at the time the State submits a revision of the
 applicable implementation plan in accordance with section 182 for the
 area concerned.
 `(2) ATTAINMENT DATE FOR RECLASSIFIED SEVERE AREAS- At the time the
 Administrator reclassifies an area as Severe under this subsection,
 he shall establish a primary standard attainment date for the area. For
 any such area the primary standard attainment date established under this
 paragraph shall apply in lieu of the otherwise applicable primary standard
 attainment date for ozone. The date established under this paragraph shall
 be the earliest date by which the Administrator determines that the national
 primary ambient air quality standard for ozone can be attained in the area
 through the implementation of (A) all measures required to be contained
 in State implementation plans under this part for Severe Areas, and (B)
 all other measures included in the applicable implementation plan. The
 date shall not be later than December 31, 2001.
 `(c) EXTENSIONS OF ATTAINMENT DATES FOR MODERATE AND SERIOUS AREAS- Upon
 application made by any State, the Administrator may extend for 1 additional
 year the date specified in table 1 of subsection (a) for attainment of the
 national primary ambient air quality standard for ozone in an area in the
 State classified as a Moderate Class II Area or as a Serious Area unless
 either of the following applies:
 `(1) No extension may be issued if the State has not complied with all
 commitments set forth in the applicable implementation plan.
 `(2) No extension may be issued if the area has experienced more than one
 exceedance (as determined by the Administrator) of the national primary
 ambient air quality standard for ozone in the calendar year preceding the
 calendar year for which the extension is to apply.
Not more than 2 extensions may be issued under this subsection for a single
nonattainment area. No extension may be issued under this subsection for
an area which is reclassified under the provisions of section 179A(a)
(relating to failure to attain certain standards)'.
 `(d) RECLASSIFICATION OF AREAS- If, after the enactment of this section,
 the Administrator modifies (1) the national primary ambient air quality
 standard for ozone or (2) the design value methodology used for purposes
 of determining the exceedance of the standard and, as a result of such
 modification, the area is listed as a nonattainment area under section
 107, or if the Administrator lists an area as a nonattainment area under
 section 107 after enactment of this subsection which was not so listed
 before the enactment of this subsection, he shall simultaneously publish a
 reclassification of the area under this subsection. Each such area shall
 be reclassified as a Moderate Area Class I, a Moderate Area Class II,
 a Serious Area or a Severe Area, based on the percentage by which the
 design value for ozone in the area exceeded the national primary ambient
 air quality standard for ozone as of the date of the reclassification. The
 reclassification shall conform to the percentages specified in table 1 of
 subsection (a). If a State, within 90 days after enactment of this section,
 requests the Administrator to classify as a Moderate Area Class I an area of
 the State that was designated nonattainment for ozone under section 107(d)
 upon enactment of this section, but was not classified under subsection
 180(a) into any category listed in such subsection, the Administrator shall,
 within 30 days after receipt of such request, so classify such area and
 publish a notice of such classification. This subsection shall not apply
 to any nonattainment area which is redesignated as an attainment area for
 ozone under section 179 and for which an air quality maintenance plan is
 submitted, notwithstanding any subsequent failure of the area to continue
 to attain the national primary ambient air quality standard for ozone.
 `(e) ATTAINMENT DATE FOR RECLASSIFIED AREAS- At the time of any
 reclassification of an area under subsection (d), the Administrator shall
 establish a primary standard attainment date for the area. For any such
 area the primary standard attainment date established under this subsection
 shall apply in lieu of the otherwise applicable primary standard attainment
 date for ozone. The date established shall be the earliest date by which
 the Administrator determines that the national primary ambient air quality
 standard for ozone can be attained in the area through the implementation
 of (1) all measures required to be contained in State implementation plans
 under this part for areas in the appropriate classification, and (2) all
 other measures included in the applicable implementation plan. The date
 shall not be later than the primary standard attainment date provided in
 the following table:
`TABLE 2
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 `Area Classification* Primary Standard
 Attainment Date
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Moderate Area Class I or Class II or Serious Area 3 years after approval
 of plan revision
 Severe Area 5 years after approval
 of plan revision
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*The classification referred to is the reclassification under subsection (d).'
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- (1) Section 171(1) of the Clean Air Act is
 amended by striking out `in section 172(a)' and inserting `this part'.
 (2) Section 172(a)(2) is amended by adding the following before the period
 at the end thereof: `or such subsequent primary standard attainment date
 as is established under section 180 (in the case of an ozone nonattainment
 area) or section 186 (in the case of a carbon monoxide nonattainment area).'
SEC. 112. IMPROVEMENT OF AIR QUALITY DATA.
 Part D of title I of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new section at the end thereof:
`SEC. 181. IMPROVEMENT OF AIR QUALITY DATA.
 `(a) 1989 EMISSIONS INVENTORIES FOR OZONE NONATTAINMENT AREAS- In the case of
 any nonattainment area classified by operation of law as of the enactment of
 this section as Moderate I, Moderate II, Serious, or Severe for ozone under
 section 180(a), each State in which all or part of the nonattainment area
 is located shall submit to the Administrator an emissions inventory under
 this subsection on or before July 1, 1990. The inventory shall be based on
 actual emissions during the calendar year 1989 of oxides of nitrogen and
 volatile organic compounds from all sources, including area sources, located
 within the areas described in subparagraph (A) or (B) of subsection (d)(1).
 `(b) SUBSEQUENT EMISSIONS INVENTORIES- In the case of any area which
 was not a nonattainment area for ozone before the enactment of this
 section but which is reclassified under section 107(d) or section 180(d)
 (relating to reclassification of areas) after the enactment of this section
 as a nonattainment area for ozone, each State in which all or part of the
 nonattainment area is located shall submit to the Administrator an emissions
 inventory under this subsection on or before the end of the second calendar
 year after the calendar year in which such reclassification is made. The
 inventory shall be based on actual emissions, during the calendar year
 following the calendar year in which such reclassification is made,
 of oxides of nitrogen and volatile organic compounds from all sources,
 including area sources, located within the areas described in subparagraph
 (A) or (B) of subsection (d)(1).
 `(c) GENERAL RULES APPLICABLE TO INVENTORIES- The inventories required under
 this section shall be based on the best available monitoring information
 and on emission factors established by the Administrator. Each State shall
 review, revise, and submit to the Administrator each inventory required
 under this section not less frequently than every 3 years after the original
 inventory is required to be submitted to the Administrator.
 `(d) EMISSIONS STATEMENTS FROM SOURCES- (1) Each State implementation
 plan shall require the owner or operator of each stationary source which
 is located within either--
 `(A) an area in the State which is classified as a nonattainment area for
 ozone, or
 `(B) the Metropolitan Statistical Area or Consolidated Metropolitan
 Statistical Area (as established by the Bureau of the Census) within which
 all or part of any such nonattainment area is located,
to provide the State with a statement, in such form as the State may prescribe
for classes or categories of sources, showing the emissions from that source
during the previous calendar year of oxides of nitrogen and volatile organic
compounds. In the case of the initial inventory for each nonattainment area
in the State classified under section 180(a) by operation of law as of
the enactment of this section, the statement shall be submitted by March
31, 1990. Subsequent statements shall be submitted at least once every 3
years. The State may provide for consolidation of such statements with any
monitoring reports required to be submitted.
 `(2) The State may waive the application of paragraph (1) to any class or
 category of stationary sources which emit less than 25 tons per year of
 volatile organic compounds if the State provides an inventory of emissions
 from such class or category of sources, based on the use of the emission
 factors established by the Administrator or other methods acceptable to
 the Administrator.
 `(3) In the case of any nonattainment area which is classified under
 section 180 as a Moderate I area and which is expanded after the enactment
 of this section to include an entire Metropolitan Statistical Area
 or Consolidated Metropolitan Statistical Area (as provided in section
 107(d)(6)), upon application of the State within which such expanded
 portion of the nonattainment area is located, the Administrator may exempt
 such expanded portion from paragraph (1) if the State makes both of the
 following demonstrations to the satisfaction of the Administrator--
 `(A) A demonstration that the existing State inventory of emissions of
 oxides of nitrogen and volatile organic compounds from sources within such
 nonexpanded portion is adequate for purposes of this part.
 `(B) A demonstration that sources of such air pollutants which are located
 in such expanded portion do not contribute significantly to the violation
 of the national primary ambient air quality standard for ozone in the
 nonattainment area.
 `(e) PHOTOCHEMICAL MODELING- (1) The Administrator shall complete the
 development of a Regional Oxidant Model and an urban scale photochemical
 grid model as promptly as practicable after enactment of this section. The
 Administrator shall undertake a continuing review of the types and
 characteristics of air quality models which may be used for purposes of this
 part and shall identify the relative strengths and weaknesses of such models.
 `(2) Except as provided in paragraph (3), the Administrator may not approve
 any State plan revision submitted after the enactment of this section by
 any State for any area classified as an ozone nonattainment area unless the
 plan revision is based on the use of photochemical grid modeling (or more
 advanced modeling technology which may be required by the Administrator
 in the future) for each of the following:
 `(A) Each area in the State in which there is located a nonattainment
 area for ozone classified under the provisions of section 180 as Serious
 or Severe.
 `(B) Each ozone nonattainment area classified under such provisions as
 Moderate II which is located in part in the State and in part in another
 State (hereafter in this section referred to as `multi-State nonattainment
 area').
 `(3) Photochemical grid modeling shall not be required under paragraph
 (2) for Serious areas referred to in subparagraph (A) of paragraph (2) if--
 `(A) the Administrator determines, at the request of the State, that other
 analytical techniques are substantially as effective as photochemical grid
 modeling, and
 `(B) the State implementation plan provides for the installation of
 reasonably available control technology on all stationary sources of oxides
 of nitrogen.
The preceding sentence shall not apply to any area which is part of a regional
transport area or a multi-State nonattainment area.
 `(f) COSTS OF MODELING AND INVENTORY- In the case of stationary sources
 which emit 25 tons or more per year of oxides of nitrogen or volatile
 organic compounds, or both, during the calendar year for which a statement
 is required under subsection (d), the provisions of section 110(a)(2)(K)
 shall apply to such statement in the same manner and to the same extent as
 such provisions apply to permits referred to in those provisions, except
 that in applying clause (ii) of section 110(a)(2)(K) to such statement,
 the reasonable costs of reviewing statements submitted under subsection
 (d), preparing the emissions inventory required under subsection (a)
 or (b), and the reasonable costs of modeling under subsection (e) shall
 be substituted for the costs referred to in that clause. Solely for the
 purposes of the preceding sentence, any stationary source which emits, or
 has the potential to emit, 25 tons per year or more of volatile organic
 compounds or oxides of nitrogen, or both, shall be deemed to be a major
 stationary source. The Administrator shall promulgate a rule under this
 subsection with respect to the implementation of plan provisions, subject
 to State law, required pursuant to the preceding sentence. Such rule shall
 specify the maximum and minimum dollars per ton at which amounts may be
 collected from each category of source by any State pursuant to such plan
 provisions. Until such rule is promulgated, for purposes of guiding the
 States, the amount shall be equal to $25 for each ton of emissions of
 oxides of nitrogen and $25 for each ton of emissions of volatile organic
 compounds emitted during the calendar year concerned from each stationary
 source required to submit a statement under subsection (d).'.
SEC. 113. SIP REVISIONS FOR OZONE NONATTAINMENT AREAS.
 Part D of title I of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new section at the end thereof:
`SEC. 182. OZONE SIP REVISIONS.
 `(a) SUBMISSION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), within one year
 after the date required for submission of the emissions inventory under
 section 181(a), each State in which there is located a nonattainment area
 classified under table 1 of section 180(a) (relating to classification of
 ozone nonattainment areas) shall submit to the Administrator a revision
 of the State implementation plan which complies with this part, or, if
 no plan has previously been submitted and approved for the area, a State
 implementation plan which complies with this part.
 `(2) EXCEPTION FOR MODERATE CLASS I AREAS- In the case of any area
 classified under section 180 as a Moderate Class I Area, the date required
 for submission of the plan revision required under this section shall
 be the date 4 years after the date of enactment of this section. No plan
 revision shall be required under this subsection for an the area if the
 national primary ambient air quality standard for ozone is attained in
 the area within 3 years after the enactment of this section.
 `(b) PROVISIONS TO BE INCLUDED IN SIP REVISIONS- Each revision of a State
 implementation plan required to be submitted under this section for an
 ozone nonattainment area shall contain such measures as may be necessary
 to attain the national primary ambient air quality standard for ozone in
 the area as expeditiously as practicable, but not later than the primary
 standard attainment date established under section 180 and to maintain
 such standard thereafter, including each of the following--
 `(1) EXISTING REQUIREMENTS- Each revision shall comply with all requirements
 of this part, other than attainment dates, applicable to the area before
 the enactment of this section.
 `(2) FEDERALLY PRESCRIBED MEASURES- The plan revision shall provide for
 the implementation of all Federally prescribed control measures applicable
 to the area under section 183.
 `(3) DEMONSTRATION OF ATTAINMENT- In the case of a Moderate or Serious
 Area, the plan revision shall contain a demonstration, based on air
 quality modeling, that the area will attain the national primary ambient
 air quality standard for ozone as expeditiously as practicable, but not
 later than the primary standard attainment date applicable under section 180.
 `(4) ENFORCEABLE INTERIM MEASURES AND COMMITMENTS- The plan revision
 shall contain such enforceable schedules or timetables of compliance,
 including specific annual tonnage reductions in the emissions of volatile
 organic compounds and oxides of nitrogen as may be necessary to establish
 that reasonable further progress will be achieved. Such annual reduction
 shall be approximately equal in each year unless the State establishes
 good cause for a variation. This paragraph shall not apply in the case of
 oxides of nitrogen for those sources for which the Administrator determines
 that net air quality benefits are greater in the absence of reductions of
 oxides of nitrogen from the sources concerned.
 `(5) NEW SOURCE REVIEW- The plan revision shall contain a demonstration that
 the new source review requirements contained in the plan are consistent
 with the new source review requirements of this part, based on guidelines
 issued by the Administrator under subsection (d).
 `(6) CONTINGENCY PROVISIONS- The plan revision shall provide for the
 implementation of specific measures to be undertaken if the area fails (A)
 to meet any interim schedule or timetable, including an interim tonnage
 reduction, under paragraph (4) or (B) to attain the national primary
 ambient air quality standard for ozone by the primary standard attainment
 date applicable under section 180. Such measures shall be included in
 the plan revision as contingency measures to take effect without further
 action by the State or the Administrator upon a failure by the State to
 meet the interim requirement or attainment deadline in the area concerned.
 `(c) ADDITIONAL SIP REVISIONS- Each State required to revise a State
 implementation plan under this section for a Serious or Severe Area shall
 also submit an additional revision of such plan every 5 years after the
 plan revision under this section is approved until the national primary
 ambient air quality standard for ozone is attained in such area. Prior to
 submitting any such plan revision the State shall assess the effectiveness
 of the measures contained in the existing plan and report its findings
 to the Administrator as part of the revision. Such subsequent revisions
 shall include any additional measures which may be required to reflect
 information obtained from the most recent State inventory of emissions
 updated as provided in section 181 and such assessment.
 `(d) GUIDELINES FOR NEW SOURCE REVIEW- Promptly following enactment of
 this section, and from time to time thereafter, the Administrator shall
 publish guidelines regarding the new source review provisions required to be
 included in State implementation plans under this part. The guidelines shall
 be designed to reduce inconsistencies among States in the implementation
 of new source review requirements contained in State plans under this
 part and to insure that all State new source review programs comply with
 the requirements of this part. The Administrator shall periodically audit
 State implementation of these requirements. In addition, prior to January
 1, 1990 and from time to time thereafter, the Administrator shall identify,
 and notify States of, features of State plans relating to new source review
 which do not conform to the guidelines and provide technical support to
 States to assist States in insuring that State implementation of new source
 review requirements conform to such guidelines. The notification provided
 to States under this subsection shall be published in the Federal Register.
 `(e) VOLATILE ORGANIC COMPOUND EMISSIONS FROM VESSELS- No State shall include
 in any plan revision submitted under this section measures to control
 emissions of volatile organic compounds from the loading or unloading of
 marine tank vessels until the Secretary of Transportation has promulgated
 regulations governing the safe recovery and control of such emissions,
 or until June 1, 1991, whichever is earlier. If any State includes any such
 measures in any plan revision submitted under this section, the Administrator
 shall only approve such measures if, after consultation with the Secretary
 of Transportation, the Administrator determines that such measures include
 appropriate provision for the safe recovery and control of such emissions.'.
SEC. 114. FEDERALLY PRESCRIBED MEASURES FOR OZONE NONATTAINMENT AREAS.
 Part D of title I of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new section at the end thereof which shall be effective 45 days after
 enactment of this Act:
`SEC. 183. FEDERALLY PRESCRIBED MEASURES FOR OZONE NONATTAINMENT AREAS.
 `(a) MODERATE CLASS I AREAS- In addition to any other measures in effect
 in each area classified under section 180 as a Moderate Class I Area,
 the following measures shall also apply in each area so classified:
 `(1) OFFSETS- No permit may be issued under plan provisions in effect
 pursuant to section 172(b)(6) for any major stationary source to be
 constructed or modified in the area if the source emits, or has the
 potential to emit, oxides of nitrogen or volatile organic compounds unless
 the ratio of total emission reductions for each of such air pollutants to
 total increased emissions of such air pollutant (as required under section
 173(1)(A)) is at least 1.2 to 1. A stationary source may comply with the
 requirements of section 173(1)(A) for such air pollutants by obtaining
 enforceable emission reductions of such air pollutants from other sources
 in the same nonattainment area, other than emission reductions otherwise
 required by law. Such reductions may include, but shall not be limited to,
 reductions obtained through mobile source controls, transportation controls
 or controls on area sources. This paragraph shall not apply in the case
 of oxides of nitrogen from those sources for which the Administrator
 determines that net air quality benefits are greater in the absence of
 such reductions of oxides of nitrogen from the sources concerned.
 `(2) MODIFICATIONS OF EXISTING SOURCES- Beginning in the emission inventory
 base year, increased emissions of oxides of nitrogen or volatile organic
 compounds resulting from any physical change in, or change in the method
 of operation of, a stationary source located in the area shall not be
 considered de minimis for purposes of determining the applicability of the
 permit requirement established by section 172(b)(6) and this subsection
 unless the increase in net emissions of such air pollutant from such source
 does not exceed 25 tons when aggregated with all other net increases in
 emissions from the source over any period of 5 consecutive calendar years
 which includes the calendar year in which such increase occurred.
 `(b) MODERATE CLASS II AREAS- In addition to any other measures in effect
 in each area classified under section 180 as a Moderate Class II Area,
 the following measures shall also apply in each area so classified:
 `(1) OFFSETS- (A) No permit may be issued under plan provisions in effect
 pursuant to section 172(b)(6) for the construction or modification of a
 stationary source in the area if the source emits, or has the potential to
 emit, the amount specified in the following table of oxides of nitrogen or
 volatile organic compounds unless the ratio of total emission reductions
 for each of such air pollutants to total increased emissions of such air
 pollutant (as required under section 173(1)(A)) is at least equal to the
 ratio specified in the following table:
----------------------------------------------------------
 `Size of Source Offset Ratio
----------------------------------------------------------
 At least 50 but not more than 100 tons per year 1.2 to 1
 More than 100 tons per year 1.5 to 1
----------------------------------------------------------
 `(B) A stationary source may comply with the requirements of section
 173(1)(A) for such air pollutants by obtaining enforceable emission
 reductions of such air pollutants from other sources in the same
 nonattainment area, other than emission reductions otherwise required by
 law. Such reductions may include, but shall not be limited to, reductions
 obtained through mobile source controls, transportation controls or controls
 on area sources.
 `(C) This paragraph shall not apply in the case of oxides of nitrogen
 from those sources for which the Administrator determines that net air
 quality benefits are greater in the absence of such reductions of oxides
 of nitrogen from the sources concerned.
 `(2) MODIFICATIONS OF EXISTING SOURCES- Beginning in the emission inventory
 base year, increased emissions of oxides of nitrogen or volatile organic
 compounds resulting from any physical change in, or change in the method
 of operation of, a stationary source located in the area shall not be
 considered de minimis for purposes of determining the applicability of the
 permit requirement established by section 172(b)(6) and this subsection
 unless the increase in net emissions of such air pollutant from such source
 does not exceed 25 tons when aggregated with all other net increases in
 emissions from the source over any period of 5 consecutive calendar years
 which includes the calendar year in which such increase occurred.
 `(3) RACT FOR ALL EXISTING SOURCES OF VOC- The State in which the
 nonattainment area is located shall immediately commence such actions
 as are necessary to apply reasonably available control technology to the
 control of volatile organic compounds emitted by all stationary sources
 in all classes or categories in such area.
 `(4) CTGS FOR VOC CONTROL- No State shall be treated as complying with
 paragraph (3) if--
 `(A) the measure applying reasonably available control technology applies
 to stationary sources which directly emit or have the potential to emit 50
 tons (including fugitive emissions, as determined by the Administrator by
 rule) or more, or such lower threshold as the Administrator may establish,
 of volatile organic compounds; and
 `(B) the Administrator has issued a control technique guideline (CTG) under
 section 108 for emissions of volatile organic compounds from sources in
 that class or category unless the emission controls for such air pollutant
 used by the source conform to such CTG.
 `(5) I AND M- (A) Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the State
 shall immediately commence such actions as may be necessary to adopt and
 implement an inspection and maintenance program to reduce in-use emissions
 from motor vehicles which were subject to emission standards under section
 202 at the time of manufacture and which are registered in the nonattainment
 area concerned. The program shall comply with the guidance published by
 the Administrator under section 108 with respect to the adequacy of motor
 vehicle inspection and maintenance programs (other than enhanced motor
 vehicle inspection and maintenance programs). Any such program in effect
 on the effective date of this paragraph for such area shall immediately
 be reviewed and modified by the State to conform to the requirement of
 the previous sentence.
 `(B) In the case of an area classified as Moderate Class II which is expanded
 after the enactment of this paragraph to include an entire MSA or CMSA
 under section 107(d)(6) of this Act, the program shall not apply to motor
 vehicles which are registered in the expanded portion of the nonattainment
 area if the State adopts and includes in its revised implementation plan
 alternative control measures which the Administrator approves as equally
 effective in controlling emissions of oxides of nitrogen and volatile
 organic compounds from motor vehicles.
 `(C) If a Moderate Class I Area has been reclassified under section 180 as
 a Moderate Class II Area by reason of its failure to attain the national
 ambient air quality standard for ozone, in lieu of implementing a new
 motor vehicle inspection and maintenance program the State may adopt and
 implement alternative control measures which the Administrator approves
 as equally effective, within 3 years after the enactment of this section,
 in controlling in-use emissions of oxides of nitrogen and volatile organic
 compounds from motor vehicles. If such measures are disapproved, subparagraph
 (A) shall apply.
 `(c) SERIOUS AREAS- In addition to any other measures in effect in each
 area classified under section 180 as a Serious Area, the following measures
 shall also apply in each area so classified:
 `(1) OFFSETS- (A) No permit may be issued under plan provisions in effect
 pursuant to section 172(b)(6) for the construction or modification of a
 stationary source in the area if the source emits, or has the potential to
 emit, 50 tons per year or more of oxides of nitrogen or volatile organic
 compounds unless the ratio of total emission reductions for each of such
 air pollutants to total increased emissions of such air pollutant (as
 required under section 173(1)(A)) is at least equal to 1.5 to 1.
 `(B) A stationary source may comply with the requirements of section
 173(1)(A) for such air pollutants by obtaining enforceable emission
 reductions of such air pollutants from other sources in the same
 nonattainment area, other than emission reductions otherwise required by
 law. Such reductions may include, but shall not be limited to, reductions
 obtained through mobile source controls, transportation controls or controls
 on area sources.
 `(C) This paragraph shall not apply in the case of oxides of nitrogen
 from those sources for which the Administrator determines that net air
 quality benefits are greater in the absence of such reductions of oxides
 of nitrogen from the sources concerned.
 `(2) MODIFICATIONS OF EXISTING SOURCES- (A) Beginning in the emission
 inventory base year, increased emissions of oxides of nitrogen or volatile
 organic compounds resulting from any physical change in, or change in the
 method of operation of, a stationary source located in the area shall not
 be considered de minimis for purposes of determining the applicability of
 the permit requirement established by section 172(b)(6) unless the increase
 in net emissions of such air pollutant from such source does not exceed
 25 tons when aggregated with all other net increases in emissions from the
 source over any period of 5 consecutive calendar years which includes the
 calendar year in which such increase occurred.
 `(B) In the case of any stationary source of oxides of nitrogen or volatile
 organic compounds located in the area, whenever increased emissions of any
 of such air pollutant (other than a de minimis increase) result from any
 physical change in, or change in the method of operation of, any emissions
 unit within the source, such increase shall be considered a modification
 of the source for purposes of the permit requirement established by section
 172(b)(6) unless the increase is offset by a greater reduction in emissions
 of the air pollutant concerned from the source. For such purposes, the ratio
 of emission reductions to increased emissions shall be at least 1.5 to 1.
 `(3) RACT FOR ALL EXISTING SOURCES OF VOC AND NOX- The State in which the
 nonattainment area is located shall immediately commence such actions as are
 necessary to apply reasonably available control technology to the control of
 volatile organic compounds and oxides of nitrogen emitted by all stationary
 sources in all classes or categories in such area. The preceding sentence
 shall not apply in the case of oxides of nitrogen from those sources for
 which the Administrator determines that net air quality benefits are greater
 in the absence of the application of reasonably available control technology
 to control emissions of oxides of nitrogen from the sources concerned.
 `(4) CTGS FOR VOC CONTROL- No State shall be treated as complying with
 paragraph (3) if--
 `(A) the measure applying reasonably available control technology applies
 to stationary sources which directly emit or have the potential to emit 50
 tons (including fugitive emissions, as determined by the Administrator by
 rule) or more, or such lower threshold as the Administrator may establish,
 of volatile organic compounds; and
 `(B) the Administrator has issued a control technique guideline (CTG) under
 section 108 for emissions of volatile organic compounds from sources in
 that class or category unless the emission controls for such air pollutant
 used by the source conform to such CTG.
 `(5) ENHANCED I AND M- The State shall immediately commence such actions
 as may be necessary to adopt and implement an enhanced inspection and
 maintenance program to reduce in-use emissions from motor vehicles which were
 subject to emission standards under section 202 at the time of manufacture
 and which are registered in the nonattainment area concerned. The program
 shall comply with the guidance published by the Administrator under section
 108 with respect to the adequacy of enhanced motor vehicle inspection and
 maintenance programs.
 `(6) STAGE II VAPOR RECOVERY- (A) The State shall immediately commence such
 actions as may be necessary to require all persons transferring gasoline
 to a motor vehicle fuel tank from a gasoline dispensing system to use a
 fill nozzle designed to (i) prevent discharge of hydrocarbon vapors into
 the ambient air, (ii) direct vapor displaced from the automotive fuel tank
 to a system where organic compounds in the displaced vapor are recovered,
 and (iii) prevent vehicle fuel tank overflows or spillage on fill nozzle
 disconnect.
 `(B) Except as otherwise provided in section 202(a)(6), subparagraph (A)
 shall apply only to facilities which sell more than 10,000 gallons of
 gasoline per month (50,000 gallons per month in the case of an independent
 small business marketer of gasoline as defined in section 325).
 `(7) ENHANCED MONITORING AND ENFORCEMENT- Immediately following the
 promulgation of rules by the Administrator relating to enhanced monitoring,
 the State shall commence such actions as may be necessary to adopt and
 implement a program based on such rules, to improve monitoring for ambient
 concentrations of ozone, oxides of nitrogen and volatile organic compounds
 and to improve monitoring of emissions of oxides of nitrogen and volatile
 organic compounds. Immediately following the publication of guidelines by
 the Administrator relating to improved enforcement, the State shall commence
 such actions as may be necessary to adopt and implement a program based
 on such guidance, to improve enforcement of State requirements applicable
 to sources of oxides of nitrogen and volatile organic compounds.
 `(8) ANNUAL OPERATING PERMITS- The State shall immediately take such steps
 as are necessary to establish a program requiring each stationary source
 which emits, or has the potential to emit, 25 tons per year or more of
 oxides of nitrogen or volatile organic compounds to obtain and comply
 with a permit from the State which shall specify emission limitations for
 each of such air pollutants. Each permit shall require, at a minimum,
 the use of reasonably available control technology in accordance with
 paragraph (3). The permit may be for a period of not more than 5 years. The
 permittee shall annually provide written certification to the State of full
 compliance with the permit. The requirements established in such permit
 shall be treated as a requirement of the applicable implementation plan,
 and shall be subject to sections 113, 114, 120, 304, 306 and 307 in the same
 manner as are other emissions standards and emission limitations under this
 Act. The State program shall provide that control technology information
 from such permits will be promptly submitted to the Administrator for
 purposes of making such information available through the RACT/BACT/LAER
 clearinghouse to other States and to the general public.
 `(9) ALTERNATIVE FUELS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Immediately following the publication of guidance by the
 Administrator, the State shall commence such actions as may be necessary
 to adopt and implement a program based on such guidance, to increase the
 percentage of motor vehicles registered in the nonattainment area which
 have low emissions of oxides of nitrogen or volatile organic compounds, or
 both (including, but not limited to, electric vehicles, vehicles capable of
 using natural gas, methanol, ethanol, neat fuels, or a fuel which results
 in comparably low emissions of oxides of nitrogen or volatile organic
 compounds, or both, and vehicles with a dual fuel capability).
 `(B) EXCEPTION- Subparagraph (A) shall not apply if the State adopts and
 implements, within the period required under paragraph (A), a transportation
 control program which the Administrator determines will achieve at least
 equivalent reductions in emissions of oxides of nitrogen and volatile
 organic compounds.
 `(C) FLEETS- The State shall immediately commence the development of a
 program that provides that, in the case of each State or local government or
 other person (other than a Federal agency) operating a fleet of 15 or more
 passenger cars or light duty trucks, or both, for governmental, commercial,
 institutional, or other similar purposes, which will be primarily operating
 in the area and which have, or could reasonably be expected to establish,
 a central refueling station available to them, a percentage of motor
 vehicles purchased or leased by that person for use after 1993 in such
 fleet shall be electric vehicles or vehicles capable of using methanol,
 ethanol, neat fuels, natural gas, dual energy, dual natural gas, or a fuel
 which results in comparably low emissions of oxides of nitrogen or volatile
 organic compounds, or both. The percentage shall be equal to or greater
 than 30 percent of the number of new vehicles purchased or leased in 1994,
 equal to or greater than 50 percent of the number of new vehicles purchased
 or leased in 1995 and 1996, and equal to or greater than 90 percent of
 the number of new vehicles purchased or leased after 1996. The State in
 the development of the program should work with fleet operators, vehicle
 manufacturers, and converters, fuel distributors, and others, to delineate
 the vehicles to be covered, taking into consideration range, specialty
 uses, fuel availability, vehicle manufacturing and conversion capability,
 safety, resale values and other relevant factors. Such person may also meet
 the percentage requirements of this subparagraph through the conversion of
 existing vehicles, in accordance with this Act and applicable safety laws,
 to use such alternative fuels. Upon petition of the State, the Administrator
 may reduce any percentage specified in this subparagraph or waive the
 requirements of this subparagraph entirely for any year if the State shows
 good cause for such reduction or waiver based on the unavailability of
 alternative fuel or the unavailability of the needed vehicles and commits
 to the adoption of a specific program which the Administrator determines
 will be equally as effective in reducing emissions of oxides of nitrogen
 and volatile organic compounds. This subparagraph shall not apply to buses
 or to emergency vehicles as defined by the Administrator. For purposes of
 this subparagraph, the terms `passenger car' and `light duty truck' have
 the same meaning as set forth in regulations promulgated before enactment
 of this subparagraph by the Administrator under this Act.
 `(D) FLEETS OF BUSES- In the case of each State or local government or
 other person (other than a Federal agency) operating a fleet of 10 or more
 buses in the area, all new or used buses ordered by that person after 1989
 for purchase or lease which will be primarily operating in such area and
 which have a central refueling station available to them, shall be electric
 buses or buses capable of using methanol, ethanol, neat fuels, natural gas,
 or a fuel which results in comparably low emissions of oxides of nitrogen
 or volatile organic compounds, or both.
 `(d) SEVERE AREAS- In addition to any other measures in effect in each
 area classified under section 180 as a Severe Area, the following measures
 shall also apply in each area so classified:
 `(1) CERTAIN MEASURES REQUIRED FOR SERIOUS AREAS- The measures referred
 to in paragraphs (1) through (9) of subsection (c) shall also apply to
 areas classified as Severe, except as follows:
 `(A) Paragraph (1) of subsection (c) (relating to offsets) shall apply to
 each stationary source which emits, or has the potential to emit, 25 tons
 per year or more of oxides of nitrogen or volatile organic compounds.
 `(B) Subparagraph (B) of subsection (c)(9) (relating to the exception from
 the alternative fuels requirement) shall not apply.
 `(2) TRANSPORTATION CONTROLS- Immediately following the publication of
 guidance by the Administrator, the State shall commence such actions as
 may be necessary to adopt and implement transportation control measures
 based on such guidance.
 `(3) PERCENT REDUCTIONS IN EMISSIONS- (A) Each stationary source in the
 area which is not in compliance with emission limitations reflecting the
 lowest achievable emission rate and which emits, or has the potential to
 emit, 25 tons or more of volatile organic compounds shall reduce the total
 tonnage of annual emissions of that air pollutant. The reduction shall be
 at least 9 percent in each 3-calendar year period after the later of (i)
 1989 or (ii) the calendar year immediately after the area is reclassified
 as Severe under section 180(c). The percent reduction shall be measured
 from the tonnage of emissions of that air pollutant during the later
 of 1989 or the calendar year preceding the year in which the area is
 reclassified. Such emission reductions shall be in addition to emission
 reductions otherwise required by law.
 `(B) A stationary source may comply with the requirements of this paragraph
 by obtaining enforceable actual emission reductions of such air pollutants
 from other sources in the same area, other than emission reductions otherwise
 required by law. Such reductions may include, but shall not be limited to,
 reductions obtained through mobile source controls, transportation controls
 or controls on area sources.
 `(C) If any source subject to subparagraph (A) fails to obtain (in whole
 or in part) the emission reductions specified under subparagraph (A) of
 this paragraph, the owner or operator of the stationary source shall pay
 a civil penalty to the State in accordance with reasonable procedures to
 be established by the State. The funds derived from such penalty shall be
 used by the State only for programs in an applicable implementation plan
 related to ozone air quality. The penalty shall be $2,000 for each ton
 of volatile organic compounds emitted per year. No such penalty shall be
 compromised, remitted, or mitigated.
 `(e) ENFORCEMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Effective on the date of the enactment of this section,
 and until a revision of the applicable implementation plan is approved for
 an area to which this section applies, the requirements of this section
 shall be deemed, for purposes of sections 113 and 304, to be requirements in
 effect pursuant to an order issued by the Administrator under section 113(a).
 `(2) LIMITED USE OF CERTAIN SANCTIONS- Whenever the Administrator determines
 that any State or any other person has failed or refused to comply in whole
 or in part with the requirements of this section, the Administrator may
 take any of the following actions with respect to the State, with respect
 to the nonattainment area concerned or any portion thereof, with respect
 to any source or class or category of sources, or with respect to sources
 located in any portion of the nonattainment area concerned:
 `(A) Prohibit the construction or modification of any stationary source
 which emits, or has the potential to emit, more than 50 tons of volatile
 organic compounds or oxides of nitrogen.
 `(B) Prohibit any public water system regulated under title XIV of the
 Public Health Service Act from providing drinking water service to any
 person to which such service was not provided prior to the Administrator's
 determination under this paragraph that such a failure or refusal has
 occurred.
 `(C) Apply the prohibition contained in section 176(b)(1) (relating to
 air quality grants).
 `(D) Request the Secretary of Transportation to disapprove any project and
 refuse to award any grant under title 23 of the United States Code, other
 than for mass transit, or transportation improvement projects accepted
 by the Administrator for air quality improvement or maintenance, or to
 correct an existing safety hazard. The Secretary shall comply with any
 request from the Administrator under this subparagraph.
 `(E) Assess and collect a noncompliance penalty under section 176(j)
 against the owner or operator of any such stationary source or stationary
 sources which emits more than 25 tons of volatile organic compounds per
 year. Any sanction imposed under this paragraph shall cease to apply at
 such time as the Administrator deems appropriate.'.
SEC. 115. SANCTIONS FOR OZONE NONATTAINMENT AREAS; FAILURE TO ATTAIN SANCTIONS.
 (a) SANCTIONS- Section 176 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding `;
 sanctions' at the end of the section heading and by adding the following
 at the end thereof:
 `(e) CONSTRUCTION BAN FOR OZONE NONATTAINMENT AREAS- The Administrator shall
 issue an order under section 113(a)(5) applicable to an area classified
 under section 180 (relating to ozone nonattainment areas) if he finds that:
 `(1) The State has failed to submit the inventory within the period required
 under section 181.
 `(2) The State has failed to submit a revision of the State implementation
 plan (which meets the minimum criteria for consideration established by
 the Administrator under section 110(a)(3)(D)) for the nonattainment area
 concerned within the period required under section 182.
Solely for purposes of this subsection, any stationary source which emits,
or has the potential to emit, more than 50 tons of volatile organic
compounds, or oxides of nitrogen, or both, shall be considered a major
stationary source. Section 110(a)(2)(I) shall not apply in the case of any
area classified under section 180 (relating to ozone nonattainment areas).
 `(f) NEW DRINKING WATER HOOKUPS IN OZONE NONATTAINMENT AREAS- (1) Except as
 provided in paragraph (2), the Administrator shall, by rule, prohibit any
 public water system subject to regulation under title XIV of the Public
 Health Service Act (the Safe Drinking Water Act) from providing drinking
 water service in any area classified under section 180 to any customer
 in that area not receiving drinking water from that system prior to the
 imposition of such prohibition if he finds that--
 `(A) the State has failed to implement any measure set forth in the
 applicable implementation plan, or
 `(B) the State has failed to achieve any annual interim reduction in
 emissions which is specified in a State implementation plan revision
 submitted under section 182.
The Administrator may, by rule, prohibit any such public water system from
providing drinking water service to any customer in any such area not
receiving drinking water from that system prior to the Administrator's
imposition of such prohibition if he finds that the State has failed to
submit the inventory within the period required under section 181 or the
State has failed to submit a revision of the State implementation plan for
the nonattainment area concerned within the period required under section
182. No prohibition under this subsection shall apply in the case of any
drinking water customer located in any building or structure the construction
of which commenced before the imposition of such prohibition.
 `(2) The Administrator may not prohibit any public water system from
 providing drinking water service under paragraph (1) to any customer
 requiring such service in order to correct an existing public health hazard.
 `(g) SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR CERTAIN AREAS- The Secretary shall, under
 subsection (a), disapprove any project and refuse to award any grant in any
 State in which there is any area classified under section 180 (relating to
 ozone nonattainment areas) if the State has failed to implement any provision
 of the applicable implementation plan for such area. The Administrator shall
 notify the Secretary of each such failure. In addition, the Secretary shall
 disapprove any such project or refuse to award any such grant in any such
 area if the Administrator notifies the Secretary that the State has failed
 to submit the inventory under section 181 within the period required under
 section 181, has failed to submit a revision of the State implementation
 plan for such area within the period required under section 182, or has
 failed to achieve any annual interim reduction in emissions specified
 in such implementation plan. The Administrator may, in his discretion,
 notify the Secretary of any such failure.
 `(h) AIR QUALITY GRANTS FOR OZONE NONATTAINMENT AREAS- Subsection (b)
 of this section shall not apply to any plan provision applicable to an
 area classified under section 180 (relating to ozone nonattainment areas),
 but in the case of any such area, the Administrator may, in his discretion,
 apply such prohibition if he determines that--
 `(1) the State has failed to implement any provision of a revised applicable
 implementation plan for such area, or
 `(2) the State has failed to achieve any annual interim tonnage reduction
 in emissions which is specified in a State implementation plan revision
 submitted under section 182.
 `(i) CIVIL PENALTY FOR OZONE NONATTAINMENT AREAS- If a plan revision
 for a nonattainment area submitted under section 182 (relating to ozone
 nonattainment areas) has been disapproved in whole or in part and no
 subsequent revision submitted to the Administrator has been approved
 within 4 years after the enactment of this section, the Administrator
 shall assess by order and collect a civil penalty under this subsection
 against the owner or operator of each stationary source which emits more
 than 25 tons of volatile organic compounds per year and which is located
 within any area classified under section 180. Such penalty shall be equal
 to $2,000 for each ton of volatile organic compounds emitted annually by
 such source. Such penalties shall be assessed under section 307(h) of this
 Act. All funds collected shall be deposited in the miscellaneous receipts
 of the Treasury. Such penalty shall be assessed annually against all such
 sources by the Administrator during the period in which the circumstances
 that gave rise to the penalty continue to exist. The Attorney General shall
 collect any such penalty assessed by the Administrator in the applicable
 Federal district court which has jurisdiction for such purpose.
 `(j) APPLICATION OF CERTAIN SANCTIONS IN OZONE NONATTAINMENT AREAS- (1)
 The Administrator may, in his discretion, waive either the prohibition
 referred to in subsection (f) or the prohibition referred to in subsection
 (g), but not both of such prohibitions, whenever such prohibitions are
 applicable by reason of the failure of a State to implement any provision
 of a revised applicable implementation plan for such area other than any
 annual interim reduction in emissions specified in such plan.
 `(2) The Administrator may, in his discretion, waive either the prohibition
 referred to in subsection (f) or the prohibition referred to in subsection
 (g), or both of such prohibitions, whenever such prohibitions are
 applicable by reason of the failure of a State to implement any annual
 interim reduction in emissions specified in such plan.
 `(k) TERMINATION OF SANCTIONS- The requirements of an order and the
 prohibitions issued under subsections (e) and (h), shall cease to apply
 whenever the Administrator, on his own motion or on the motion of the
 applicable State, determines that the circumstances which gave rise to
 such order or prohibition no longer exist.'.
 (b) FAILURE TO ATTAIN STANDARD- Part D of title I of the Clean Air Act is
 amended by adding the following new section at the end thereof:
`SEC. 179A. FAILURE TO ATTAIN CERTAIN STANDARDS.
 `(a) RECLASSIFICATION OF OZONE NONATTAINMENT AREAS- (1) If the national
 ambient air quality standard for ozone is not met by the applicable primary
 standard attainment date in an area classified under section 180 as Moderate
 I, Moderate II, or Serious, the Administrator shall, within 30 days after
 such date, reclassify the area under section 180(c). A Moderate I Area
 shall be reclassified as a Moderate II Area, a Moderate II Area shall be
 reclassified as a Serious Area, and a Serious Area shall be reclassified
 as a Severe Area. Whenever any such area is reclassified, the State shall
 submit a plan revision for that region. The revision shall comply with
 the requirements of this part applicable to the area as reclassified. The
 plan revision shall be submitted within 12 months after the date of the
 reclassification.
 `(2) If the national ambient air quality standard for ozone is not met by
 the applicable primary standard attainment date in an area classified as
 Severe under section 180, the State shall, not later than 12 months after
 the attainment date applicable to the area as originally classified, submit
 a plan revision for that area. The revision shall require and contain each
 of the following--
 `(A) A requirement that no permit may be issued under plan provisions
 in effect pursuant to section 172(b)(6) for a stationary source to be
 constructed or modified in the area if the source emits, or has the potential
 to emit, 25 tons per year or more of oxides of nitrogen or volatile organic
 compounds, or both, unless the ratio of emission reductions of each of
 such air pollutants to increased emissions of the air pollutant concerned
 (as required under section 173(1)(A)) is at least equal to 2.0 to 1.
 `(B) A requirement that a stationary source may comply with the requirements
 of section 173(1)(A) for such air pollutants by obtaining enforceable
 emission reductions of such air pollutants from other sources in the same
 nonattainment area, not limited to other stationary sources.
 `(C) A requirement that increased emissions of oxides of nitrogen or
 volatile organic compounds resulting from any physical change in, or
 change in the method of operation of, a stationary source located in the
 area shall not be considered de minimis for purposes of determining the
 applicability of the permit requirement established by section 172(b)(6)
 unless the increased emissions do not exceed 25 tons when aggregated with
 all other increases and decreases in emissions of that pollutant from the
 source over any period of 5 consecutive calendar years which includes the
 calendar year in which such increase occurred.
The Administrator shall approve or disapprove such plan revision within six
months of the primary standard attainment date applicable to such area if
such standard has not been met in the area by such date, and shall reclassify
the area, under section 180(c), as a Severe area.'.
SEC. 116. CONTROL TECHNOLOGY GUIDANCE, ALTERNATIVES, AND COST EFFECTIVENESS.
 (a) CONTROL TECHNOLOGY GUIDANCE; ALTERNATIVES; AND COST EFFECTIVENESS-
 Section 108(b) of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following at
 the end thereof:
 `(3) EXISTING AND NEW CTGS-
 `(A) Within 36 months after the enactment of this paragraph, and periodically
 thereafter, the Administrator shall review and, if necessary, update
 control technology guidelines issued before the enactment of this paragraph.
 `(B) Within 24 months after the enactment of this paragraph, the
 Administrator shall issue control technology guidelines for 11 categories of
 stationary sources for which such guidelines have not previously been issued.
 `(C) In issuing the guidelines the Administrator shall give priority
 to those categories which the Administrator considers to make the most
 significant contribution to the formation of ozone air pollution in ozone
 nonattainment areas, including hazardous waste treatment, storage, and
 disposal facilities which are permitted under subtitle C of the Solid Waste
 Disposal Act. The Administrator shall periodically thereafter review and,
 if necessary, revise such guidelines.
 `(4) ALTERNATIVE CONTROL TECHNIQUES- Within 3 years after the enactment of
 this paragraph, the Administrator shall issue technical documents which
 identify alternative controls for all categories of stationary sources
 of volatile organic compounds and oxides of nitrogen which emit, or have
 the potential to emit 25 tons per year or more of such air pollutant. The
 Administrator shall revise and update such documents as he determines
 necessary.
 `(5) GUIDANCE FOR EVALUATING COST-EFFECTIVENESS- Within 1 year after the
 enactment of this paragraph, the Administrator shall provide guidance to the
 States to be used in evaluating the relative cost-effectiveness of various
 options for the control emissions from existing stationary sources of air
 pollutants which contribute to nonattainment of the national ambient air
 quality standards for ozone or carbon monoxide, or both.'.
 (b) CONSULTATION WITH OTHER AGENCIES- Section 108 of the Clean Air Act is
 amended by adding the following at the end thereof:
 `(h) CONSULTATION WITH OTHER AGENCIES- In promulgating any control technology
 guidance or documents identifying alternative controls under this section
 which affect any process, practice, or activity, the Administrator shall
 consult with any other Federal agency which regulates, in order to protect
 public health, safety, or the environment, any aspect of such process,
 practice, or activity. The Administrator shall also continue to provide
 for public participation.'.
SEC. 117. OZONE TRANSPORT CONTROL.
 (a) INTERSTATE REGIONS- Part D of title I of the Clean Air Act is amended
 by adding the following new section at the end thereof:
`SEC. 184. INTERSTATE TRANSPORT OF OZONE AIR POLLUTION.
 `(a) OZONE TRANSPORT REGIONS- Whenever the Administrator determines that the
 interstate transport of air pollutants from one or more States contributes
 significantly to concentrations of ozone, volatile organic compounds or
 oxides of nitrogen in one or more other States, he shall establish an ozone
 transport region including such States. The Administrator shall establish
 an ozone transport region for two or more States whenever, upon petition
 of any State, the Administrator determines that such State has established
 that there is reason to believe that sources in the other State (or States)
 contribute significantly to concentrations of ozone in the petitioning
 State. As a matter of law, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New
 York, Pennsylvania, Delaware, New Jersey, Maryland, and the Consolidated
 Metropolitan Statistical Area (as established by the Bureau of the Census)
 which includes the District of Columbia shall be considered a single ozone
 transport region.
 `(b) OZONE TRANSPORT COMMISSIONS- The Administrator shall establish an
 ozone transport commission for each ozone transport region established
 in accordance with subsection (a). Each ozone transport commission shall
 be comprised of one member from each State in the region, appointed by the
 Administrator in consultation with the Governor of the State. The commission
 for any such region may request the Administrator to issue an order, together
 with the basis for the request, requiring States in any portion of the region
 to conduct an inventory of emissions of volatile organic compounds and oxides
 of nitrogen. The request shall be provided to the affected State or States,
 and they shall be provided an opportunity to respond. The Administrator
 shall issue such an order whenever he receives such a request unless he
 determines, and states his reasons, that such order is not necessary. The
 order shall be enforceable under the Act in the same manner and to the
 same extent as an order issued by the Administrator under section 113(a).
 `(c) PLAN PROVISIONS FOR STATES IN OZONE TRANSPORT REGIONS- The ozone
 transport commission for each ozone transport region shall identify, based
 on photochemical grid modeling or other modeling techniques required by
 the Administrator under section 181 (relating to improvement of air quality
 data for ozone), the sources of air pollution within the area which should
 be required to apply reasonably available control technology in order
 to reduce ozone pollution elsewhere in the region and make appropriate
 recommendations to the Administrator. If the Administrator, after notice
 and public comment, approves any such recommendation, the State in which
 any such source is located shall, not later than one year thereafter, submit
 to the Administrator a revision of the State implementation plan to require
 the sources concerned to apply reasonably available control technology.'.
 (b) AMENDMENTS TO SECTION 126- Section 126 of the Clean Air Act is amended
 by adding the following at the end thereof:
 `(d) SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO INTERSTATE OZONE TRANSPORT- Any
 State may petition the Administrator to make a finding that, based on a
 demonstration by the State and any other relevant information, emissions of
 oxides of nitrogen or volatile organic compounds (or both) from any source
 or group of sources in another State or States interfere with attainment
 or maintenance of the national primary ambient air quality standard by the
 petitioning State. The Administrator shall make a finding whether or not
 such emissions have such effect within 60 days after the date on which the
 petition is submitted. If the Administrator finds that emissions from any
 or all of such sources have such an effect, the Administrator shall issue
 an order requiring the sources to promptly install reasonably available
 control technology to control such emissions. For purposes of sections 113,
 114, 116, 120, 304, 306, and 307, an order issued under this subsection
 shall be treated as a requirement of an applicable implementation plan.'.
SEC. 118. MULTI-STATE OZONE NONATTAINMENT AREAS.
 Part D of title I of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new section at the end thereof:
`SEC. 185. MULTI-STATE OZONE NONATTAINMENT AREAS.
 `(a) COORDINATION AMONG STATES- Each State in which there is located a
 portion of a single ozone nonattainment area which covers more than one
 State (`multi-State nonattainment area') shall--
 `(1) take all reasonable steps to coordinate, substantively and procedurally,
 the revisions and implementation of State implementation plans applicable
 to the nonattainment area concerned; and
 `(2) use photochemical grid modeling or other modeling techniques required
 by the Administrator under section 181(b) (relating to improvement of
 air quality data) for use in such areas to demonstrate attainment of the
 national ambient air quality standard for ozone.
The Administrator may not approve any revision of a State implementation
plan submitted under this part for a State in which part of a multi-State
nonattainment area is located if the plan revision for that State fails to
comply with the requirements of this subsection and section 181(b).
 `(b) FAILURE TO ATTAIN STANDARD- If any multi-State nonattainment area
 fails to attain the national ambient air quality standard for ozone within
 the required period, any State in which a portion of such area is located
 may petition the Administrator to make one or both of the following findings:
 `(1) A finding that the standard would have been attained in such area, but
 for the failure of one or more other States in which other portions of the
 area are located to implement provisions of the applicable implementation
 plan.
 `(2) A finding that sources in the State submitting such petition are
 not significant contributors to the violation of the national ambient air
 quality standard concerned.
If the Administrator makes one or both of such findings, the provisions
of section 179A(a) shall not apply, by reason of the failure to attain such
standard, in the portion of the nonattainment area within the State submitting
such petition.
 `(c) FAILURE TO DEMONSTRATE ATTAINMENT- If any State in which there is
 located a portion of a multi-State nonattainment area fails to provide a
 demonstration of attainment of the national ambient air quality standard for
 ozone in that portion within the required period, the State may petition the
 Administrator to make a finding that the State would have been able to make
 such demonstration but for the failure of one or more other States in which
 other portions of the area are located to commit to the implementation of all
 measures required under section 183 (relating to Federally required measures
 for ozone nonattainment areas) and all measures required under section 182
 (relating to ozone SIP revisions). If the Administrator makes such finding,
 the provisions of section 176 (relating to sanctions) shall not apply,
 by reason of the failure to make such demonstration, in the portion of
 the nonattainment area within the State submitting such petition.'.
Subtitle C--Provisions Relating Primarily to Carbon Monoxide Air Pollution
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Sec. 121. Extension of attainment dates for carbon monoxide nonattainment
areas.
Sec. 122. Multi-State CO nonattainment areas.
Sec. 123. SIP revisions for carbon monoxide nonattainment areas.
Sec. 124. Federally prescribed measures for carbon monoxide nonattainment
areas.
Sec. 125. Sanctions.
SEC. 121. EXTENSION OF ATTAINMENT DATES FOR CARBON MONOXIDE NONATTAINMENT
AREAS.
 Part D of title I of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new section at the end thereof:
`SEC. 186. EXTENSION OF ATTAINMENT DATES FOR CARBON MONOXIDE NONATTAINMENT
AREAS.
 `(a) CLASSIFICATION AND ATTAINMENT DATES- Each area which did not attain,
 by December 31, 1987, the national primary ambient air quality standard for
 carbon monoxide is hereby classified under Table 3, by operation of law,
 as a Moderate Area Class I or a Moderate Area Class II. The classification
 shall be based on the percentage by which the design value for carbon
 monoxide in the area exceeded the national primary ambient air quality
 standard for carbon monoxide as of December 31, 1987. For purposes of such
 classification, the design value shall be calculated by a methodology
 consistent with the interpretation of the standard set forth in 40 CFR
 Part 50. For each area classified under this subsection, in lieu of the
 primary standard attainment date specified in section 172, the primary
 standard attainment date for carbon monoxide shall be as provided in Table 3.
`TABLE 3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 `Area Classification Amount by Which Standard Exceeded
 Primary Standard Attainment Date
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Moderate Area Class I Not more than 10%
 3 years after enactment of this section
 Moderate Area Class II More than 10% 5 years after
 approval of plan revision*, but not later than 12/31/95
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*The plan revision referred to is the State implementation plan revision
required to be submitted under section 188.
For purposes of notifying the State and the public, the Administrator shall
publish in the Federal Register a notice of the classifications made by
this subsection. The notice shall be published not later than 30 days after
the enactment of this section. Such notice shall not be deemed final agency
action for any purpose and shall not be subject to judicial review.
 `(b) SEVERE AREAS-
 `(1) RECLASSIFICATION- Under criteria published by the Administrator,
 the Administrator may reclassify as a Severe Area any area originally
 classified under subsection (a) as a Moderate II area which exceeds the
 standard for carbon monoxide by 25 percent or more. He may make such
 reclassification only if he determines that the State cannot demonstrate
 that the area will attain the national primary ambient air quality standard
 for carbon monoxide in the area before December 31, 1995. The Administrator
 may reclassify an area under this subsection on his own motion at any time
 or upon petition submitted by the State at the time the State submits a
 revision of the applicable implementation plan in accordance with section
 188 for the area concerned.
 `(2) ATTAINMENT DATE FOR SEVERE AREAS- At the time the Administrator
 classifies an area as Severe under this subsection, he shall establish
 a primary standard attainment date for the area. For any such area the
 primary standard attainment date established under this paragraph shall
 apply in lieu of the otherwise applicable primary standard attainment date
 for carbon monoxide. The date established under this paragraph shall be
 the earliest date by which the Administrator determines that the national
 primary ambient air quality standard for carbon monoxide can be attained
 in the area through the implementation of (A) all measures required to be
 contained in State implementation plans under this part for Severe Areas and
 (B) all other measures included in the applicable implementation plan. The
 date shall not be later than December 31, 2001.
 `(c) EXTENSIONS OF ATTAINMENT DATES FOR MODERATE II AREAS- Upon application
 made by any State, the Administrator may extend for 1 additional year
 the date specified in table 3 of subsection (a) for attainment of the
 national primary ambient air quality standard for carbon monoxide in an
 area in the State classified as a Moderate Class II Area unless either of
 the following applies:
 `(1) No extension may be issued if the State has not complied with all
 commitments set forth in the applicable implementation plan.
 `(2) No extension may be issued if the area has experienced more than one
 exceedance (as determined by the Administrator) of the national primary
 ambient air quality standard for carbon monoxide in the calendar year
 preceding the calendar year for which the extension is to apply.
Not more than 1 extension may be issued under this subsection for a single
nonattainment area. No extension may be issued under this subsection for
an area which is reclassified as a Moderate II Area under section 179A(b)
(relating to reclassification for failure to attain carbon monoxide standard).
 `(d) RECLASSIFICATION OF AREAS- If, after the enactment of this section,
 the Administrator modifies (1) the national primary ambient air quality
 standard for carbon monoxide or (2) the design value methodology used for
 purposes of determining the exceedance of the standard, and as a result of
 such modification the area is listed as a nonattainment area under section
 107, or if the Administrator lists an area as a nonattainment area for carbon
 monoxide under section 107 after enactment of this subsection which was not
 so listed before the enactment of this subsection, he shall simultaneously
 publish a reclassification of the area under this section. Each such area
 shall be reclassified as a Moderate Area Class I or a Moderate Area Class
 II, based on the percentage by which the design value for carbon monoxide
 in the area exceeded the national primary ambient air quality standard as
 of the date of the reclassification. The reclassification shall conform to
 the percentages specified in table 3 of subsection (a). If a State, within
 90 days after enactment of this section, requests the Administrator to
 classify as a Moderate Area Class I an area of the State that was designated
 nonattainment for carbon monoxide under section 107(d) upon enactment of this
 section, but was not classified under subsection 186(a) into any category
 listed in such subsection, the Administrator shall, within 30 days after
 receipt of such request, so classify such area and publish a notice of
 such classification. This subsection shall not apply to any nonattainment
 area which is redesignated as an attainment area under section 179 for
 carbon monoxide and for which an air quality maintenance plan is submitted,
 notwithstanding any subsequent failure of the area to continue to attain
 the national primary ambient air quality standard for carbon monoxide.
 `(e) ATTAINMENT DATE FOR RECLASSIFIED AREAS- At the time of any
 reclassification of an area under subsection (e), the Administrator
 shall establish a primary standard attainment date for the area. For
 any such area the primary standard attainment date established under this
 subsection shall apply in lieu of the otherwise applicable primary standard
 attainment date for carbon monoxide. Such primary standard attainment
 date shall be the earliest date by which the Administrator determines
 that the national primary ambient air quality standard can be attained
 in the area through the implementation of (1) all measures required to
 be contained in State implementation plans under this part for areas in
 the appropriate classification, and (2) all other measures included in
 the applicable implementation plan. The date shall not be later than the
 primary standard attainment dates provided in the following table:
`TABLE 4
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 `Area Classification* Primary Standard Attainment Date
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Moderate Area Class I or Class II 3 years after approval of the plan revision
 Severe Area 5 years after approval of the plan revision
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*The classification referred to is the reclassification under subsection (e).'
SEC. 122. MULTI-STATE CO NONATTAINMENT AREAS.
 Part D of title I of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new section at the end thereof:
`SEC. 187. MULTI-STATE CO NONATTAINMENT AREAS.
 `(a) COORDINATION AMONG STATES- Each State in which there is located a
 portion of a single nonattainment area for carbon monoxide which covers more
 than one State (`multi-State nonattainment area') shall take all reasonable
 steps to coordinate, substantively and procedurally, the revisions and
 implementation of State implementation plans applicable to the nonattainment
 area concerned. The Administrator may not approve any revision of a State
 implementation plan submitted under this part for a State in which part
 of a multi-State nonattainment area is located if the plan revision for
 that State fails to comply with the requirements of this subsection.
 `(b) FAILURE TO ATTAIN STANDARD- If any multi-State nonattainment area
 fails to attain the national ambient air quality standard for carbon
 monoxide within the period required under this part, any State in which
 a portion of such area is located may petition the Administrator to make
 one or both of the following findings:
 `(1) A finding that the standard would have been attained in such area, but
 for the failure of one or more other States in which other portions of the
 area are located to implement provisions of the applicable implementation
 plan.
 `(2) A finding that sources in the State submitting such petition are
 not significant contributors to the violation of the national ambient air
 quality standard concerned.
If the Administrator makes one or both of such findings, the provisions of
section 179A(b) shall not apply in the portion of the nonattainment area
within the State submitting such petition by reason of the failure to attain
such standard.
 `(c) FAILURE TO DEMONSTRATE ATTAINMENT- If any State in which there is
 located a portion of a multi-State nonattainment area fails to provide a
 demonstration of attainment of the national ambient air quality standard
 for carbon monoxide in that portion within the period required under this
 part the State may petition the Administrator to make a finding that the
 State would have been able to make such demonstration but for the failure
 of one or more other States in which other portions of the area are located
 to commit to the implementation of all measures required under section 189
 (relating to federally required measures for carbon monoxide nonattainment
 areas) and all measures required under section 188 (relating to carbon
 monoxide SIP revisions). If the Administrator makes such finding, in the
 portion of the nonattainment area within the State submitting such petition,
 no sanction shall be imposed under section 176 or under any other provision
 of this Act, by reason of the failure to make such demonstration.'.
SEC. 123. SIP REVISIONS FOR CARBON MONOXIDE NONATTAINMENT AREAS.
 Part D of title I of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new section at the end thereof:
`SEC. 188. SIP REVISIONS FOR CARBON MONOXIDE NONATTAINMENT AREAS.
 `(a) SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF SIP REVISIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), within one year
 after the enactment of this section each State in which there is located
 a nonattainment area classified in table 3 of section 185(a) (relating
 to extensions of attainment date for carbon monoxide nonattainment areas)
 shall submit to the Administrator a revision of the State implementation
 plan, or, if no plan has previously been submitted and approved for the
 area, a State implementation plan which complies with this part.
 `(2) EXCEPTION FOR MODERATE CLASS I AREAS- In the case of any area classified
 under table 3 of section 186 as a Moderate Class I Area, the date required
 for submission of the plan revision required under this section shall
 be the date 4 years after the date of enactment of this section, but
 no plan revision shall be required under this subsection for an area if
 the national primary ambient air quality standard for carbon monoxide is
 attained in the area within 3 years after the enactment of this section.
 `(3) RECLASSIFIED AREAS- If the Administrator reclassifies an area on his own
 motion under any other provision of section 185 or under section 107(d)(5),
 the State shall submit a revision of the applicable implementation plan
 which complies with this part for the area before such deadline as the
 Administrator shall establish. The deadline shall not be later than 12
 months after the date of such reclassification.
 `(b) PROVISIONS TO BE INCLUDED IN SIP REVISIONS- Each revision of a State
 implementation plan required to be submitted under this section for a
 nonattainment area shall contain such measures as may be necessary to attain
 the national primary ambient air quality standard for carbon monoxide in
 the area by the deadline applicable under section 183 and to maintain such
 standard thereafter. Such measures shall include each of the following--
 `(1) EXISTING REQUIREMENTS- Each revision shall comply with all requirements
 of this part, other than attainment dates, applicable to the area before
 the enactment of this section.
 `(2) FEDERALLY PRESCRIBED MEASURES- The plan revision shall provide for
 the implementation of all federally prescribed control measures applicable
 to the area under section 189.
 `(3) DEMONSTRATION OF ATTAINMENT- In the case of a Moderate Area, the plan
 revision shall contain a demonstration, based on air quality modeling,
 that the area will attain the national primary ambient air quality standard
 for ozone as expeditiously as practicable, but not later than the primary
 standard attainment date applicable under section 186.
 `(4) ENFORCEABLE INTERIM MEASURES AND COMMITMENTS- The plan revision shall
 contain such enforceable schedules or timetables of compliance, including
 specific annual tonnage reductions in the emissions of carbon monoxide,
 as may be necessary to establish that reasonable further progress will
 be achieved in the nonattainment area concerned. Such annual reduction
 shall be approximately equal in each year unless the State establishes
 good cause for a variation.
 `(5) VEHICLE MILES TRAVELED- The plan revision shall contain a forecast of
 vehicle miles traveled in the nonattainment area concerned for each year
 prior to the year in which the plan projects the national ambient air quality
 standard for carbon monoxide to be attained in the area. The forecast shall
 be based on guidance which shall be published by the Administrator within 6
 months after the enactment of this section. The plan revision shall provide
 for annual updates of the forecasts to be submitted to the Administrator
 together with annual reports regarding the extent to which such forecasts
 proved to be accurate. Such annual reports shall contain estimates of
 actual vehicle miles traveled in each year for which a forecast was required.
 `(6) CONTINGENCY PROVISIONS- The plan revision shall provide for the
 implementation of specific measures to be undertaken if any estimate of
 vehicle miles traveled in the area which is submitted in an annual report
 under paragraph (5) exceeds the number predicted in the most recent prior
 forecast or if the area fails to attain the national primary ambient air
 quality standard for carbon monoxide by the primary standard attainment
 date applicable under section 183. Such measures shall be included in
 the plan revision as contingency measures to take effect without further
 action by the State or the Administrator if the prior forecast has been
 exceeded by an updated forecast or if the national standard is not attained
 by such deadline.'.
SEC. 124. FEDERALLY PRESCRIBED MEASURES FOR CARBON MONOXIDE NONATTAINMENT
AREAS.
 Part D of title I of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new section at the end thereof which shall be effective 45 days after
 enactment of this Act:
`SEC. 189. FEDERALLY PRESCRIBED MEASURES FOR CARBON MONOXIDE NONATTAINMENT
AREAS.
 `(a) MODERATE CLASS II AREAS- In addition to any other measures in effect
 in each area classified under section 185 as a Moderate Class II Area,
 each State shall immediately commence such actions as may be necessary to
 adopt and implement a motor vehicle inspection and maintenance program
 to reduce in-use emissions from motor vehicles which were subject to
 emission standards under section 202 at the time of manufacture and which
 are registered in the nonattainment area concerned. Any such program
 in effect on the effective date of this section shall immediately be
 reviewed and modified by the State to conform to the requirements of the
 previous sentence. The program shall comply with the guidance published
 by the Administrator under section 108 with respect to the adequacy of
 motor vehicle inspection and maintenance programs (other than enhanced
 motor vehicle inspection and maintenance programs). In the case of an area
 classified as Moderate Class II which is expanded after the enactment of
 this paragraph under section 107(d)(6) of this Act to include an entire MSA
 or CMSA, the program shall not apply to motor vehicles which are registered
 in the expanded portion of the nonattainment area if the State adopts and
 includes in its revised implementation plan alternative control measures
 which the Administrator approves as equally effective in controlling
 emissions of oxides of carbon monoxide, including transportation control
 measures or the use of alternative fuels, or both.
 `(b) SEVERE AREAS- In addition to any other measures in effect in each
 area classified under section 185 as a Severe Area, the following measures
 shall also apply in each area so classified:
 `(1) ENHANCED I AND M- The State shall immediately commence such actions
 as may be necessary to adopt and implement an enhanced motor vehicle
 inspection and maintenance program to reduce in-use emissions from motor
 vehicles which were subject to emission standards under section 202 at the
 time of manufacture and which are registered in the nonattainment area
 concerned. The program shall comply with the guidance published by the
 Administrator under section 108 with respect to the adequacy of enhanced
 motor vehicle inspection and maintenance programs.
 `(2) ALTERNATIVE FUELS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Immediately following the publication of guidance by the
 Administrator, the State shall commence such actions as may be necessary
 to adopt and implement a program based on such guidance, to increase
 the percentage of motor vehicles registered in the nonattainment area
 which have low emissions of carbon monoxide (including, but not limited
 to, electric vehicles, vehicles capable of using natural gas, methanol,
 ethanol, neat fuels, blends, or another fuel which results in comparably
 low emissions of carbon monoxide) and vehicles with a dual fuel capability.
 `(B) FLEETS- The State shall immediately commence the development of a
 program that provides that, in the case of each State or local government
 or other person (other than a Federal agency) operating a fleet of 15
 or more passenger cars or light duty trucks, or both, for governmental,
 commercial, institutional, or other similar purposes, which will be
 primarily operating in the area and which have, or could reasonably be
 expected to establish, a central refueling station available to them, a
 percentage of motor vehicles purchased or leased by that person for use
 after 1993 in such fleet shall be electric vehicles or vehicles capable
 of using methanol, ethanol, neat fuels, blends, natural gas, dual energy,
 dual natural gas, or another fuel which results in comparably low emissions
 of carbon monoxide. The percentage shall be equal to or greater than 30
 percent of the number of new vehicles purchased or leased in 1994, equal
 to or greater than 50 percent of the number of new vehicles purchased
 or leased in 1995 and 1996, and equal to or greater than 90 percent
 of the number of new vehicles ordered for use after 1996. The State
 in the development of the program should work with fleet operators,
 vehicle manufacturers and converters, fuel distributors, and others, to
 delineate the vehicles to be covered, taking into consideration range,
 specialty uses, fuel availability, vehicle manufacturing and conversion
 capability, safety, resale values and other relevant factors. Such person
 may also meet the percentage requirements of this subparagraph through the
 conversion of existing vehicles, in accordance with this Act and applicable
 safety laws, to use such alternative fuels. Upon petition of the State,
 the Administrator may reduce any percentage specified in this subparagraph
 for any year if the State shows good cause for such reduction or waiver
 based on the unavailability of alternative fuel or the unavailability
 of the needed vehicles and commits to the adoption of a specific program
 which the Administrator determines will be equally as effective in reducing
 emissions of carbon monoxide. This subparagraph shall not apply to buses
 or to emergency vehicles as defined by the Administrator. For purposes of
 this subparagraph, the terms `passenger car' and `light duty truck' have
 the same meaning as set forth in regulations promulgated before enactment
 of this subparagraph by the Administrator under this Act.
 `(C) FLEETS OF BUSES- In the case of each State or local government or other
 person (other than a Federal agency) operating a fleet of 10 or more buses
 in the area, all new or used buses ordered by that person after 1989 for
 purchase or lease which will be primarily operating in such area and which
 have, or could reasonably be expected to establish, a central refueling
 station available to them, shall be electric buses or buses capable of
 using methanol, ethanol, neat fuels, blends, natural gas, dual fuel,
 or a fuel which results in comparably low emissions of carbon monoxide.
 `(3) TRANSPORTATION CONTROLS- Immediately following the publication of
 guidance by the Administrator under section 108 relating to transportation
 controls, the State shall commence such actions as may be necessary to
 adopt and implement transportation control measures based on such guidance.
 `(4) ENHANCED MONITORING AND ENFORCEMENT- Immediately following the
 promulgation of rules by the Administrator under section 108 relating
 to enhanced monitoring, the State shall commence such actions as may be
 necessary to adopt and implement a program based on such rules, to improve
 the monitoring of carbon monoxide emissions and ambient levels of carbon
 monoxide, including the location and maintenance of monitors. Immediately
 following the publication of guidelines by the Administrator relating
 to improved enforcement, the State shall commence such actions as may be
 necessary to adopt and implement a program based on such guidance, to improve
 enforcement of State requirements applicable to sources of carbon monoxide.
 `(c) ENFORCEMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Effective on the date of the enactment of this section,
 and until a revision of the applicable implementation plan is approved for
 an area to which this section applies, the requirements of this section
 shall be deemed, for purposes of sections 113 and 304, to be requirements in
 effect pursuant to an order issued by the Administrator under section 113(a).
 `(2) LIMITED USE OF CERTAIN SANCTIONS- Whenever the Administrator determines
 that any State or any other person has failed or refused to comply in whole
 or in part with the requirements of this section, the Administrator may
 take any of the following actions with respect to the State, with respect
 to the nonattainment area concerned or any portion thereof, with respect
 to any source or class or category of sources, or with respect to sources
 located in any portion of the nonattainment area concerned:
 `(A) Prohibit any public water system regulated under title XIV of the
 Public Health Service Act from providing drinking water service to any
 person to which such service was not provided prior to the Administrator's
 determination under this paragraph that such a failure or refusal has
 occurred.
 `(B) Apply the prohibition contained in section 176(b)(1) (relating to
 air quality grants).
 `(C) Request the Secretary of Transportation to disapprove any project and
 refuse to award any grant under title 23 of the United States Code, other
 than for mass transit, or transportation improvement projects accepted by
 the Administrator for air quality improvement or maintenance, or to correct
 an existing safety hazard. The Secretary shall comply with any request
 from the Administrator under this subparagraph. The Administrator may
 terminate any sanction applicable under this subsection when he determines
 it appropriate to do so.'.
SEC. 125. SANCTIONS FOR CARBON MONOXIDE NONATTAINMENT AREAS; FAILURE TO
ATTAIN STANDARD.
 (a) SANCTIONS- Section 176 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the
 following at the end thereof:
 `(l) NEW DRINKING WATER HOOKUPS IN CARBON MONOXIDE NONATTAINMENT AREAS-
 (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the Administrator shall, by rule,
 prohibit any public water system subject to regulation under title XIV of
 the Public Health Service Act (the Safe Drinking Water Act) from providing
 drinking water service in any area classified under section 186 to any
 customer not receiving service from that system prior to the imposition
 of such prohibition if he finds that--
 `(A) the State has failed to implement any measure set forth in the
 applicable implementation plan for the area, or
 `(B) the State has failed to achieve any annual interim reduction in
 emissions which is specified in a State implementation plan revision
 submitted under section 188.
If the State fails to submit the estimate of vehicle miles travelled within
the period required under section 188(b)(5), or if the State fails to submit a
revision of the State implementation plan revision for the nonattainment area
concerned within the period required under section 188, or if the revision
is disapproved by the Administrator and no subsequent revision is approved
within 3 years after the enactment of this Act, the Administrator may, by
rule, prohibit any such public water system from providing drinking water
service to any customer in any such area not receiving drinking water from
that system prior to the Administrator's imposition of such prohibition. No
prohibition under this subsection shall apply in the case of any drinking
water customer located in any building or structure the construction of
which commenced before the imposition of such prohibition.
 `(2) The Administrator may not prohibit any public water system from
 providing drinking water service under paragraph (1) to any customer
 requiring such service in order to correct an existing public health hazard.
 `(m) SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR CERTAIN AREAS- The Secretary shall, under
 subsection (a), disapprove any project and refuse to award any grant in
 any State in which there is any area classified under section 186 (relating
 to extension of attainment date for carbon monoxide nonattainment areas) if--
 `(1) the State has failed to implement any provision of the applicable
 implementation plan for such area,
 `(2) the State has failed to achieve any annual interim reduction in
 emissions specified in a State implementation plan revision submitted
 under section 188,
 `(3) the State has failed to submit the estimate of vehicle miles travelled
 within the period required under section 188(b)(5), or
 `(4) the State has failed to submit a revision of the State implementation
 plan revision for the nonattainment area concerned within the period required
 under section 186, or if the revision is disapproved by the Administrator
 and no subsequent revision is approved within 3 years after the enactment
 of this sentence.
The Administrator shall notify the Secretary of each such failure.
 `(n) AIR QUALITY GRANTS FOR STATES WITH CARBON MONOXIDE NONATTAINMENT
 AREAS- Subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to any plan
 provision applicable to an area classified under section 188 (relating to
 carbon monoxide nonattainment areas), but in the case of any such area,
 the Administrator may, in his discretion, apply such prohibition, if he
 determines that (A) the State has failed to implement any provision of
 a revised applicable implementation plan for such area or (B) the State
 has failed to achieve any annual interim tonnage reduction in emission
 which is specified in a State implementation plan revision submitted under
 section 188.
 `(o) APPLICATION OF CERTAIN SANCTIONS FOR CARBON MONOXIDE NONATTAINMENT
 AREAS- (1) The Administrator may, in his discretion, waive either the
 prohibition referred to in subsection (l) or the prohibition referred
 to in subsection (m), but not both of such prohibitions, whenever such
 prohibitions are applicable by reason of the failure of a State to implement
 any provision of a revised applicable implementation plan for such area,
 other than a failure to meet any annual interim reduction in emissions
 specified in such plan.
 `(2) The Administrator may, in his discretion, waive either the prohibition
 referred to in subsection (l) or the prohibition referred to in subsection
 (m), or both of such prohibitions, whenever such prohibitions are applicable
 by reason of the failure of a State to meet any annual interim reduction
 in emissions specified in such plan.
 `(p) TERMINATION OF SANCTIONS- The requirements of an order, and the
 prohibitions, issued under subsections (l) and (m) shall cease to apply
 whenever the Administrator, on his own motion or on the motion of the
 applicable State, determines that the circumstances which gave rise to
 such order or prohibition no longer exist.'.
 (b) FAILURE TO ATTAIN STANDARD- Section 179A of the Clean Air Act is
 amended by adding the following at the end thereof:
 `(b) RECLASSIFICATION OF CARBON MONOXIDE NONATTAINMENT AREAS- (1) If the
 national ambient air quality standard for carbon monoxide is not met by
 the applicable attainment date in an area classified as Moderate I or
 Moderate II under section 180, the Administrator shall reclassify the
 area under section 186(e). A Moderate I Area shall be reclassified as a
 Moderate II Area and a Moderate II Area shall be reclassified as a Severe
 Area. Whenever any such area is reclassified, the State shall submit a plan
 revision for that area. The revision shall comply with the requirements
 of this part applicable to the area as reclassified. The plan revision
 shall be submitted within 12 months after the date of the reclassification.
 `(2) In the case of an area classified as Severe in which the national
 ambient air quality standard for carbon monoxide is not met by the
 applicable attainment date, a plan revision shall be submitted within 12
 months after the applicable attainment date and such revision shall require,
 for each year which begins one year or more after the year in which such
 applicable attainment date occurred, reductions of 3 percent per year in
 the emissions of carbon monoxide within the area.'.
TITLE II--PROVISIONS RELATING TO MOBILE SOURCES
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Sec. 201. Emissions of hydrocarbons and oxides of nitrogen from motor vehicles.
Sec. 202. Vehicle testing and certification.
Sec. 203. Maintaining emission standards during vehicle use.
Sec. 204. Emission standards for nonroad engines.
Sec. 205. Vapor recovery during refueling of light-duty vehicles.
Sec. 206. Standards for fuel volatility.
Sec. 207. Leaded gasoline.
Sec. 208. Desulfurization of diesel fuel.
Sec. 209. Alternative fuels.
Sec. 210. Transportation control measures.
SEC. 201. EMISSIONS OF HYDROCARBONS AND OXIDES OF NITROGEN FROM MOTOR VEHICLES.
 Section 202 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following at
 the end thereof:
 `(h) EMISSIONS OF NMHC AND NOX FROM PASSENGER CARS AND LIGHT DUTY TRUCKS-
 Effective with respect to the model years specified in table 1, the
 regulations under subsection (a) applicable to emissions of nonmethane
 hydrocarbons and oxides of nitrogen from the gasoline fueled motor vehicles
 and motor vehicle engines specified in table 1 shall contain standards which
 provide that emissions may not exceed the levels specified in the table:
`TABLE 1
EMISSIONS OF NMHC AND NOx FROM PASSENGER VEHICLES AND TRUCKS
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Vehicle or engine type Pollutant
 Model Years Standard
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Passenger cars NMHC
 1993 and after 0.25 gpm
 Passenger cars NOx
 1993 and after 0.70 gpm
 Light duty trucks NMHC
 1993 and after 0.50 gpm
 Light duty trucks with loaded vehicle weight of less than 3,750 lbs NOx
 1993 and after 0.80 gpm
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For each manufacturer, the standards established under this subsection for
passenger cars and light duty trucks shall be met by at least 30 percent
of such vehicles manufactured in the model year 1993, 60 percent in the
model year 1994, 90 percent in the model year 1995, and 100 percent in the
model year 1996 and thereafter. The passenger cars which are not subject to
such standards in model years 1993, 1994, and 1995 shall be subject to the
standards applicable to passenger cars in model year 1992. For purposes of
this subsection, the terms `passenger car' and `light duty truck' have the
same meaning as set forth in regulations promulgated before enactment of
this subsection by the Administrator under this title.'.
SEC. 202. VEHICLE TESTING AND CERTIFICATION.
 (a) CERTIFICATION AT COLD TEMPERATURES.--Section 206(a) of the Clean Air
 Act (relating to certification) is amended by adding the following new
 paragraph at the end thereof:
 `(4) CERTIFICATION AT COLD TEMPERATURES- In the case of passenger cars and
 light-duty trucks manufactured in model year 1993 and thereafter, the test
 required under paragraph (a)(1) of this subsection shall include by rule
 a test designed for testing emissions of carbon monoxide conducted at 40
 degrees Fahrenheit. Such test shall provide that, commencing after model
 year 1992, such vehicles shall achieve an emissions rate which is 50 percent
 of the average actual emissions of carbon monoxide at such temperature
 from such vehicles manufactured during model years 1981 through 1985, as
 estimated by the Administrator. The Administrator may waive the application
 of the preceding sentence to any specific model of light-duty trucks for any
 model year if he determines that it is not technologically feasible for such
 light-duty trucks to meet the standard at such temperature, in such model
 year. Such test shall also provide that, commencing after model year 1997,
 such vehicles shall achieve the applicable standard for emissions of carbon
 monoxide when tested under this subsection at 40 degrees Fahrenheit; except
 that the Administrator may waive this requirement for any specified model
 of such vehicle for any model year if the Administrator determines that
 it is not technologically feasible for such vehicle to meet the standard
 at such temperature in such model year. For purposes of this paragraph,
 the terms `passenger car' and `light duty truck' have the same meaning as
 set forth in regulations promulgated before enactment of this paragraph
 by the Administrator under this title.'.
 (b) IDLE TEST- Section 206(a) of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding
 the following new paragraph at the end thereof:
 `(5) IDLE TEST- Not later than 18 months after the enactment of this
 paragraph, the Administrator shall promulgate regulations adding an idle test
 and idle test mode to the Federal Test Procedure for light-duty vehicles
 and engines as in effect on such date of enactment. Such modified test
 procedure shall be used for the certification of light-duty vehicles and
 engines manufactured during or after model year 1993.'.
SEC. 203. MAINTAINING EMISSION STANDARDS DURING VEHICLE USE.
 (a) IN-USE COMPLIANCE WITH HYDROCARBON AND OXIDES OF NITROGEN STANDARDS-
 Section 207(c) of the Clean Air Act (relating to in-use testing) is amended
 by adding the following at the end thereof:
 `(4) USE OF 1992 STANDARDS- Except as the Administrator may otherwise
 provide by rule pursuant to subsection (j)(4), for any class or category of
 vehicles or engines referred to in table 1 of section 202(h) manufactured
 after model year 1992 and before model year 1998, the Administrator shall
 continue to apply standards applicable to such class or category of new
 vehicles or engines for model year 1992 in lieu of the standards specified
 in such table for purposes of making in use determinations of conformity
 or nonconformity with the standards referred to in section 202(h) under
 paragraph (1).'.
 (b) EPA STUDY OF FEASIBILITY OF MEETING STANDARDS IN-USE- Section 207 of
 the Clean Air Act (relating to in-use compliance) is amended by adding
 the following at the end thereof:
 `(i) EPA STUDY OF FEASIBILITY OF MEETING STANDARDS IN-USE- By January 1,
 1992 the Administrator shall complete and publish the results of a study
 regarding the practicality of applying standards specified in table 1 of
 section 202(h) to new vehicles specified in such table when in actual use
 during their useful life. The study shall include, at a minimum, each of
 the following:
 `(1) A finding with respect to the effect of fuel quality and composition
 on the technical feasibility of meeting such standards when in actual use,
 including a determination to what extent fuel quality improvements would
 facilitate the ability of such vehicles to meet such standards when in
 actual use, and the lead time needed to provide for such improvements.
 `(2) A finding regarding the extent to which motor vehicle inspection and
 maintenance programs help to assure that operating motor vehicles meet
 applicable standards in actual use for their useful life, including a
 finding of whether or not a nationwide program of motor vehicle inspection
 and maintenance would be an effective measure.
 `(3) A finding regarding the role of motor vehicle maintenance by the
 vehicle owner in assuring that vehicles meet applicable standards when in
 actual use for their useful life.
 `(4) A finding regarding the technical feasibility of vehicles meeting
 such standards for their useful life (taking into consideration normal
 rates of deterioration, fuel economy, fuel quality, safety, leadtime,
 durability, vehicle performance, and other relevant factors) when tested
 under subsection (c) with improvements in fuel quality, inspection and
 maintenance programs, and improved maintenance by vehicle owners.
Before commencing the study under this subsection the Administrator shall,
after consultation with the Office of Technology Assessment and other
interested persons, promptly publish a proposed design for the study and
provide an opportunity for public comment on the proposed design.'.
 (c) EPA RULE ON IN-USE COMPLIANCE- Section 207 of the Clean Air Act (relating
 to in-use compliance) is amended by adding the following at the end thereof:
 `(j) EPA RULE ON IN-USE COMPLIANCE- Based on the study conducted under
 subsection (i), the Administrator may, not later than 2 years after the
 completion of such study, promulgate one or more rules under this subsection
 for one or more of the following purposes:
 `(1) If the Administrator determines that improvements in fuel quality
 or composition would substantially facilitate the ability of light-duty
 vehicles to comply with the standards specified in table 1 of section 202(h)
 when in actual use during their useful life, he shall promulgate a rule
 that requires the appropriate fuel quality or composition improvements.
 `(2) If the Administrator determines that improved motor vehicle inspection
 and maintenance programs could be more effective in assuring that motor
 vehicles comply with such standards when in actual use during their useful
 life, he shall promulgate a rule requiring that improved motor vehicle
 inspection and maintenance programs be included in all applicable State
 implementation plans for ozone nonattainment areas or a rule requiring annual
 nationwide inspection and maintenance programs to be applied by each State.
 `(3) The Administrator may amend the rules promulgated under subsection
 (b)(2)(A) to provide for increased vehicle maintenance by the motor vehicle
 owner as a condition of the manufacturer's warranty under subsection (b)(2).
 `(4) Based on his findings regarding the technical feasibility of any
 class or category of properly maintained vehicles or engines referred to in
 table 1 of section 202(h) conforming to the applicable standard specified
 in that table when in actual use during the vehicle's useful life, he
 may determine and establish by rule the lowest level of emissions of the
 pollutant concerned that is technically feasible to be met in actual use
 and the earliest date after model year 1992 on which such vehicles can
 conform to such level when in actual use and utilize that level and that
 date for purposes of making determinations of nonconformity under subsection
 (c). The level shall not be less stringent than the standard applicable
 to the class or category of vehicles concerned which are manufactured in
 model year 1992.'.
 (d) MOTOR VEHICLE INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE- Section 108(f) of the Clean
 Air Act is amended by adding the following at the end thereof:
 `(3) MOTOR VEHICLE INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE- (A) Within 9 months after
 the enactment of this paragraph the Administrator shall review, revise,
 and republish the guidance for the States under paragraph (1)(A)(i) for
 motor vehicle inspection and maintenance programs, and for enhanced motor
 vehicle inspection and maintenance programs, to be adopted and implemented
 by States under part D to reduce emissions of volatile organic compounds,
 oxides of nitrogen, and carbon monoxide in ozone and carbon monoxide
 nonattainment areas for which State implementation plan revisions are
 required under part D. The guidance shall, at a minimum, cover the frequency
 of inspections, vehicles inspected, waiver criteria, audits, components
 covered, and effective implementation and enforcement and shall provide the
 States with continued reasonable flexibility to fashion effective and fair
 programs. The guidance shall provide for the rejection of vehicles where
 there is evidence of tampering or misfueling until corrections are made.
 `(B) Not later than 24 months after the enactment of this paragraph, the
 Administrator shall determine whether or not a nationwide program of motor
 vehicle inspection and maintenance for heavy-duty trucks and buses would be
 an effective measure for the control of ozone or carbon monoxide or both. If
 the Administrator determines that such a program would be effective for
 such purposes, he shall make a recommendation to the President that a rule
 be promulgated by the appropriate Federal agency not later than 48 months
 after the enactment of this paragraph requiring annual nationwide inspection
 and maintenance of heavy-duty trucks and buses on interstate highways.'.
 (e) TAMPERING WITH VEHICLE EMISSION CONTROLS- (1) Section 203(a)(3) of
 the Clean Air Act is amended to read as follows:
 `(3)(A) for any person to remove or render inoperative any device or
 element of design installed on or in a motor vehicle or motor vehicle
 engine in compliance with regulations under this title prior to its sale
 and delivery to the ultimate purchaser, or for any person knowingly to
 remove or render inoperative any such device or element of design after
 such sale and delivery to the ultimate purchaser; or
 `(B) for any person to manufacture or sell, or offer to sell, any part
 or component intended for use with, or as part of, any motor vehicle or
 motor vehicle engine, where a principal effect of such part or component is
 to bypass, defeat, or render inoperative any device or element of design
 installed on or in a motor vehicle or motor vehicle engine in compliance
 with regulations under this title, and where such person knows or should
 know that such part or component is being offered for sale for such use
 or put to such use; or'.
 (2) Section 205 of the Clean Air Act is amended as follows:
 (A) Insert `or' after `manufacturer', strike `, or other person' after
 `dealer', insert `other person who violates paragraph (3)(A) or any' before
 `person who violates paragraph (3)(B)', and in the third sentence insert
 `(A)' after `(3)'.
 (B) Insert `Any such violation with respect to paragraph (3)(B) of such
 section shall constitute a separate offense with respect to each part or
 component.' at the end thereof.
 (3) Section 203(a) of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following at
 the end thereof: `The conversion of a vehicle from gasoline only to natural
 gas only or natural gas and gasoline shall not be considered a violation
 of this paragraph provided that the conversion complies with standards
 which shall be issued by the Administrator not later than October 31, 1989.'.
 (f) USE OF INFORMATION FROM STATE PROGRAMS- Section 207(c) of the Clean
 Air Act is amended by adding the following new paragraph at the end thereof:
 `(5) USE OF INFORMATION FROM STATE PROGRAMS- In making determinations
 of nonconformity under this subsection, the Administrator may take into
 account information collected under any State vehicle emission control
 inspection and maintenance program. The Administrator may require State
 implementation plan revisions submitted under part D to assure that such
 information, in aggregated form, will be provided to the Administrator.'.
 (g) HIGH ALTITUDE TESTING- Section 215 of the Clean Air Act is amended by
 adding the following at the end thereof:
 `(e) HIGH ALTITUDE TESTING- The Administrator shall promptly establish at
 least one testing center (in addition to the testing centers existing on
 the date of enactment of this paragraph) located at a site that represents
 high altitude conditions, to ascertain in a reasonable manner whether,
 when in actual use throughout their useful life (as determined under section
 202(d)), each class or category of vehicle and engines to which regulations
 under section 202 apply conforms to the emissions standards established by
 such regulations. For purposes of this paragraph, the term `high altitude
 conditions' refers to high altitude as defined in Environmental Protection
 Agency regulations in effect as of the enactment of this paragraph.'.
SEC. 204. EMISSION STANDARDS FOR NONROAD ENGINES.
 (a) STANDARDS FOR NONROAD ENGINES- Section 213 of the Clean Air Act is
 amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 213. STANDARDS FOR NON-ROAD ENGINES.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS- Not later than January 1, 1991, and from
 time to time thereafter, the Administrator shall promulgate standards
 under this section for emissions of carbon monoxide, oxides of nitrogen,
 and volatile organic compounds from new internal combustion engines or
 motor vehicles which are not regulated under section 202, section 212,
 or part B of this title and which are significant contributors, in the
 Administrator's judgment, to ozone or carbon monoxide concentrations in
 more than one area which has failed to attain the national ambient air
 quality standards for ozone or carbon monoxide.
 `(b) LEVEL OF CONTROL- Standards under this section shall require the
 greatest degree of emission reduction achievable through the application
 of technology which the Administrator determines will be available for
 the engines and vehicles to which such standards apply, giving appropriate
 consideration to the cost of applying such technology within the period of
 time available to manufacturers and to noise, energy, and safety factors
 associated with the application of such technology. Such regulations should
 apply to the engines' useful life.
 `(c) EFFECTIVE DATE- Standards under this section shall take effect at
 the earliest possible date considering the lead-time necessary to permit
 the development and application of the requisite technology, giving
 appropriate consideration to the cost of compliance within such period,
 safety, environmental factors, and similar factors.
 `(d) ENFORCEMENT- The Administrator shall promulgate such rules as may be
 necessary to enforce standards in effect under this section. Any person
 who violates any such rule shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more
 than $25,000 for each such violation.'.
 (b) REVIEW OF AIRCRAFT EMISSION STANDARDS- Not later than 24 months after
 the enactment of this section, the Administrator shall conduct a review of
 the standards for emissions of air pollutants from aircraft established
 under section 231 of the Clean Air Act and publish the results. If the
 Administrator, based on that review, determines that any such standards
 should be revised, he shall promptly revise the standard concerned in the
 manner prescribed in section 231.
SEC. 205. VAPOR RECOVERY DURING REFUELING.
 Section 202(a)(6) of the Clean Air Act is amended by inserting `(A)' after
 `(6)' and by adding the following at the end thereof:
 `(B) Not later than 12 months after the enactment of this subparagraph, the
 Administrator shall publish a final finding under subparagraph (A). If the
 Administrator makes a finding under subparagraph (A) that it is feasible
 and desirable to employ such technology, he shall, in accordance with
 such subparagraph, simultaneously promulgate standards requiring the use
 of onboard hydrocarbon control technology.
 `(C) If the standards under this paragraph do not require the installation of
 onboard hydrocarbon technology in all light-duty motor vehicles and engines,
 the Administrator shall promulgate regulations under part D of title I
 within 12 months after the enactment of this subparagraph requiring that
 each State in which there is located a nonattainment area for ozone in any
 classification (including Moderate Class I, Moderate Class II, Serious,
 or Severe) revise the State implementation plan to require all persons
 transferring gasoline to a motor vehicle fuel tank from a gasoline dispensing
 system in such a nonattainment area to use a fill nozzle designed to (i)
 prevent discharge of hydrocarbon vapors into the ambient air, (ii) direct
 vapor displaced from the automotive fuel tank to a system where organic
 compounds in the displaced vapor are recovered, and (ii) prevent vehicle
 fuel tank overflows or spillage on fill nozzle disconnect. Nothing in this
 subparagraph shall be construed to affect or delay the implementation of
 any such controls under part D of title I in any nonattainment area in
 which such controls are required under other provisions of this Act.
 `(D) If the Administrator promulgates regulations requiring vapor recovery
 controls under subparagraph (C) he shall, at the same time, also promulgate
 regulations under this title requiring each manufacturer of light-duty
 motor vehicles to pay a fee to the Administrator for each light duty motor
 vehicle manufactured in the first 3 model years after such regulations
 are promulgated. No new light-duty motor vehicle may be certified under
 section 206 in any such model year unless the manufacturer agrees to
 pay such fee. The fee shall be established in the amount determined by
 the Administrator to be necessary to fund the full cost of installation
 of the equipment necessary to comply with subparagraph (C). Subject
 to appropriations but, notwithstanding any other provision of law,
 the full amount of revenues derived from such fee shall be retained by
 the Administrator and expended for purposes of funding such costs. The
 Administrator may not provide funding under this subparagraph in excess
 of a total of $100,000 to any single person engaged in the business of
 selling motor vehicle fuel at retail with respect to all facilities owned
 or operated by such person.'.
SEC. 206. STANDARDS FOR FUEL VOLATILITY.
 Section 211 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following new
 subsection at the end thereof:
 `(i) FUEL VOLATILITY- (1) Not later than 12 months after the enactment
 of this subsection, the Administrator shall promulgate regulations to
 reduce evaporative emissions from gasoline by establishing standards for
 gasoline volatility.
 `(2) If regulations are not promulgated under paragraph (1), effective
 beginning with the first day of March in the first calendar year which
 commences 12 months or more after the enactment of this subsection, no person
 may sell, offer for sale, or distribute gasoline in interstate commerce
 during the period May 15 to September 15 of any year unless the Reid Vapor
 Pressure of such gasoline does not exceed 9.0 pounds per square inch (psi).
 `(3) In any area which is a Class C area (as defined by the American Society
 for Testing and Materials) in lieu of the May 15 to September 15 period
 specified in paragraph (2) the period shall be June 15 to September 15.
 `(4) The Administrator shall require that gasoline used in vehicle
 certification under section 206 shall have the same volatility as the
 average volatility of gasoline in common use.
 `(5) In establishing standards for fuel volatility under this subsection
 the Administrator shall permit a 1.0 pound per square inch (psi) tolerance
 level for gasoline containing at least 10 percent ethanol. A manufacturer
 or processor of gasoline containing at least 10 percent ethanol shall
 be deemed to be in full compliance with such standards if he provides
 a certification (based on testing) or other evidence acceptable to the
 Administrator that (A) the gasoline portion of the blend complies with
 the gasoline volatility standards under this subsection, (B) the ethanol
 portion of the blend does not exceed its waiver conditions under subsection
 (f)(4), and (C) no additional alcohol or other additive has been added to
 increase the Reid Vapor Pressure the ethanol portion of the blend.'.
SEC. 207. LEADED GASOLINE.
 Section 211 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following new
 subsection at the end thereof:
 `(j) PROHIBITION ON LEADED GASOLINE FOR HIGHWAY USE- Effective January
 1, 1991, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale,
 or introduce into commerce, for use as fuel in any motor vehicle (as
 defined in section 216(2)) any gasoline which contains lead or lead
 additives. The Administrator may extend the January 1, 1991, deadline for
 up to 2 years if the Administrator determines that the unavailability of
 gasoline containing lead or lead additives for such vehicles will reduce
 the availability of such gasoline for farm vehicles and that alternatives
 to gasoline containing lead or lead additives are unavailable for use in
 gasoline powered farm vehicles.'.
SEC. 208. DESULFURIZATION OF DIESEL FUEL.
 Section 211 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following new
 subsection at the end thereof:
 `(k) DESULFURIZATION OF DIESEL FUEL- Not later than 3 months after the
 enactment of this section, the Administrator shall propose a rule under
 this section requiring a reduction in the sulfur content of motor vehicle
 diesel fuel. The Administrator shall promulgate a final rule not later
 than 9 months after the enactment of this subsection.'.
SEC. 209. ALTERNATIVE FUELS.
 (a) EPA GUIDANCE; FLEETS OF HEAVY DUTY VEHICLES- Section 108 of the Clean
 Air Act is amended by adding the following new subsection at the end thereof:
 `(h) ALTERNATIVE FUELS-
 `(1) EPA GUIDANCE- For purposes of assisting States in which there are
 located areas designated under part D as nonattainment areas for ozone or
 carbon monoxide or both, the Administrator shall publish information to
 guide States on the use of vehicles which have low emissions of oxides of
 nitrogen, volatile organic compounds or carbon monoxide, or any combination
 thereof (including electric vehicles, vehicles capable of using natural
 gas, methanol, ethanol, neat fuels, blends, or other fuels which have
 low emissions of such air pollutants, and vehicles with a dual fuel
 capability). Such guidance shall identify measures that can be taken to
 encourage or require the use of alternative fuels or electric vehicles,
 the estimated costs of such measures, the projected emission reductions
 which shall be treated as attributable to such measures included in any
 revision of the State implementation plan, and other relevant issues. The
 guidance under this subsection shall be published within 9 months after
 the enactment of this subsection, and shall be revised as necessary,
 to incorporate improved technologies. The Administrator, in preparing
 such guidance, shall consult with other Federal agencies, including the
 Secretary of Transportation and the Administrator of General Services,
 and other interested persons.
 `(2) FLEETS OF HEAVY DUTY VEHICLES- The Administrator shall determine
 whether and to what extent the provisions of section 183(c)(9)(C),
 section 189(b)(2)(B), and section 306(f) can reasonably be applied to
 fleets of any class or category of gasoline powered or diesel powered
 heavy duty vehicles and engines. If he determines that such provision
 can reasonably be applied to any fleets of any such class or category of
 vehicles and engines, he may promulgate a rule requiring States to apply
 the provisions of section 183(c)(9)(C) or section 189(b)(2)(B) to such
 fleets, he may apply the provisions of section 307(f) to such fleets,
 or he may take any combination of the foregoing actions.'.
 (b) NATURAL GAS STORAGE CYLINDERS- The Secretary of Transportation shall,
 not later than 2 years after enactment of this Act, promulgate standards
 applicable to on-board natural gas storage cylinders, including testing
 and retesting of such cylinders. The standards shall address factors such
 as durability, strength, corrosion, and pressure.
 (c) FEDERAL AGENCY FLEETS- Section 306 of the Clean Air Act is amended by
 adding the following at the end thereof:
 `(f) FEDERAL MOTOR VEHICLES OTHER THAN BUSES-
 `(1) REQUIRED USE IN NONATTAINMENT AREAS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- With respect to any fleet of 15 or more passenger cars
 and light-duty trucks owned or leased for more than 60 days by the United
 States for operation in an area listed under section 107 as a nonattainment
 area for ozone or carbon monoxide, or both--
 `(i) 30 percent of the vehicles obtained during 1994 for use in such fleet
 shall be alternative fuel vehicles;
 `(ii) 50 percent of the vehicles obtained during 1995 and 1996 for use in
 such fleet shall be alternative fuel vehicles; and
 `(iii) 90 percent of the vehicles obtained after 1996 for use in such
 fleet shall be alternative fuel vehicles.
 `(B) REQUIRED OPERATION- The Administrator of the General Services
 Administration and the Secretary of Defense, with the concurrence of the
 Secretary of Energy shall, before October 1, 1993, issue regulations to
 ensure that a vehicle acquired pursuant to subparagraph (A)--
 `(i) shall be supplied with alcohol, natural gas, or electricity, as
 appropriate, in its primary area of operation, using commercially available
 fueling facilities to the maximum extent practicable; and
 `(ii) shall be operated exclusively on such fuel except when operated so
 as to make it impracticable to obtain such fuel.
 `(C) CONSIDERATIONS- (i) Funds appropriated for carrying out this subsection
 shall be applied on a priority basis, for expenditure first in areas of
 the United States which the Administrator determines have the most severe
 air pollution problems.
 `(ii) A Federal officer or agent responsible for deciding which types of
 alternative fuel vehicles to acquire in order to comply with subparagraph
 (A) shall consider as a factor in such decision which types of vehicles
 yield the greatest reduction in pollutants emitted per dollar spent.
 `(D) CONSULTATION- A Federal officer or agent responsible for deciding
 which types of alternative fuel vehicles to acquire in order to comply with
 subparagraph (A) shall, on an expedited and informal basis, consult with
 the Environmental Protection Agency and with the lead State or local agency
 charged with air quality planning for the area in which the vehicles will
 be operated. The purpose of such consultation shall be to obtain relevant
 information--
 `(i) with respect to considerations under subparagraph (C)(ii); and
 `(ii) to facilitate the coordination of this subsection with other
 Federal, State, and local programs, such as any plans by a State to
 install alternative fuel pumps near a location where vehicles acquired
 under subparagraph (A) will be operated.
 `(E) AVAILABILITY TO THE PUBLIC- At Federal facilities where vehicles
 acquired under subparagraph (A) are supplied with alcohol or natural gas,
 such fuel shall be offered for sale to the public for use in other vehicles,
 unless--
 `(i) such fuel is commercially available for vehicles in the vicinity of
 such Federal facilities;
 `(ii) security considerations prevent the offering for sale of such fuel
 at such facility; or
 `(iii) the area served by the facility comes into full compliance with
 the national ambient air quality standards for ozone and carbon monoxide.
 `(F) COST OF VEHICLES TO FEDERAL AGENCY- (i) Funds appropriated under
 this subsection for the acquisition of vehicles under subparagraph (A)
 shall be applicable only--
 `(I) to the portion of the cost of vehicles acquired under subparagraph
 (A) which exceeds the cost of comparable conventional fueled vehicles;
 `(II) to the portion of the costs of fuel storage and dispensing equipment
 attributable to such vehicles which exceeds the costs for such purposes
 required for conventional fuel vehicles; and
 `(III) to the portion of the costs of operating and maintaining such
 vehicles which exceeds the costs for such purposes required for comparable
 conventional fueled vehicles.
 `(ii) The Secretary of Energy shall ensure that the cost to any Federal
 agency receiving a vehicle under subparagraph (A) shall not exceed the
 cost to such agency of a comparable conventional fueled vehicle taking
 into account the useful life of the vehicle and the fuel and maintenance
 cost savings to be derived from the alternative fuel.
 `(G) EXEMPTION- The incremental cost of vehicles acquired under subparagraph
 (A) over the cost of comparable conventional fueled vehicles shall not
 be applied to any calculation with respect to a limitation under law
 on the maximum cost of individual vehicles which may be acquired by the
 United States.
 `(H) FLEET AVERAGE FUEL ECONOMY- In any calculation of the average fuel
 economy of the fleet of passenger automobiles acquired in a fiscal year
 by the United States, vehicles acquired under subparagraph (A) shall be
 measured in terms of miles per BTU or per kilowatt hour, as appropriate.
 `(I) STUDIES- Vehicles acquired under subparagraph (A) may be included
 in any Federal Government study of the environmental effects or military
 applications of vehicles operated on natural gas, alcohol fuels, or
 electricity.
 `(2) OPERATION OF OTHER FEDERAL VEHICLES- A gasoline powered vehicle
 operated in an area designated under this Act as a severe area for carbon
 monoxide which is not a dual energy vehicle or a natural gas dual energy
 vehicle shall, after March 31, 1989, be supplied with fuel which blends
 oxygenates with gasoline at its primary fueling facility. Such vehicle
 shall be operated exclusively on such fuel except when operated--
 `(A) so as to make it impracticable to obtain such fuel; or
 `(B) in an area during any month in which such area is a nonattainment
 area for ozone under this Act, unless the Administrator determines that
 the use of blended fuel in those months would improve air quality.
 `(3) EXEMPTIONS- The requirements of paragraph (1)(A) shall not apply
 to vehicles--
 `(A) being operated as an experiment in the use of alternative fuels other
 than alcohol, natural gas, or electricity; or
 `(B) with respect to which the Secretary of Defense has claimed an exemption
 based on national security considerations.
 `(4) AIR QUALITY AND HEALTH STUDY-
 `(A) COMPREHENSIVE ANALYSIS- The Administrator, in cooperation with the
 Department of Energy National Laboratories, shall prepare a comprehensive
 analysis with respect to the air pollutant emission, air quality impact,
 and human health risks, including toxicity to consumers at self-service fuel
 pumps, associated with the storage, distribution, and use of significant
 amounts of alcohols or natural gas as transportation fuels as compared to
 diesel and gasoline fuels. The Administrator shall include an analysis of
 the usefulness of alcohols, natural gas, and electricity as substitute
 transportation fuels to assist areas of the United States in attaining
 national ambient air quality standards prescribed under section 109.
 `(B) REPORT- The Administrator shall, before October 1, 1991, submit a
 report to the Congress detailing the results of the comprehensive analysis
 prepared under subparagraph (A).
 `(C) FUNDING- There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out the
 purposes of this paragraph $975,000 for the fiscal year ending September
 30, 1990.
 `(5) DEFINITIONS AND CRITERIA-
 `(A) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this subsection--
 `(i) the term `acquired' means purchased or leased for a period of 60 days
 or more;
 `(ii) the term `alcohol' means a mixture containing 85 percent or more
 methanol, ethanol, or other alcohols by volume;
 `(iii) the term `alternative fuel vehicle' means a dual energy vehicle,
 a natural gas dual energy vehicle, a dedicated alcohol vehicle, a dedicated
 natural gas vehicle, or an electric vehicle;
 `(iv) the term `dedicated alcohol vehicle' means a vehicle designed to
 operate exclusively on alcohol;
 `(v) the term `dedicated natural gas vehicle' means a vehicle designed to
 operate exclusively on natural gas;
 `(vi) the term `dual energy vehicle' means a vehicle which--
 `(I) is capable of operating on alcohol and on conventional fuel;
 `(II) provides equal or superior energy efficiency, as calculated during
 fuel economy testing for the Federal Government, while operating on alcohol
 as it does while operating on conventional fuel; and
 `(III) meets the criteria set forth in subparagraph (B);
 `(vii) the term `electric vehicle' means any vehicle capable of operating
 exclusively on energy derived from a source of electricity, including
 batteries capable of being charged by electric current, solar energy,
 and any other source of electricity;
 `(viii) the term `natural gas dual energy vehicle' means a vehicle which--
 `(I) is capable of operating on natural gas and on conventional fuel;
 `(II) provides equal or superior energy efficiency, as calculated during
 fuel economy testing by the Federal Government, while operating on natural
 gas as it does while operating on conventional fuel; and
 `(III) meets the criteria set forth in subparagraph (B);
 `(ix) the terms `passenger car' and `light duty truck' have the same
 meaning as set forth in regulations promulgated before enactment of this
 subsection by the Administrator under this Act; and
 `(x) the term `vicinity' means an area the Secretary of Energy determines
 to be the area a commercial supplier of alcohol or natural gas fuels would
 reasonably expect to serve.
 `(B) CRITERIA FOR VEHICLES- No vehicle shall be considered an alternative
 fuel vehicle under this paragraph unless the vehicle meets each of the
 following criteria:
 `(i) The emission rates for air pollutants, designated by the Administrator,
 emitted from such vehicle are less than those for comparable vehicles
 which do not use such alternate fuels.
 `(ii) The vehicle emits formaldahyde at a level no greater than that which
 the Administrator determines to be appropriate for the protection of the
 public health.
 `(6) FUNDING- There are authorized to be appropriated for the fiscal
 year ending September 30, 1993, $5,000,000; for the fiscal year ending
 September 30, 1994, $5,000,000; for the fiscal year ending September 30,
 1995, $7,000,000; and for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1996,
 $10,000,000, to carry out the purposes of this subsection except for the
 study under paragraph (4). The authority of the Secretary to obligate
 amounts authorized under this subsection shall be effective for any fiscal
 year only to the extent provided in advance by appropriation Acts.
 `(g) FEDERAL BUS FLEETS- For each Federal agency operating a fleet of
 10 or more buses (A) based in, or primarily operating in, an area which
 is listed under section 107 as a nonattainment area for ozone or carbon
 monoxide and (B) which have a central refueling station available to them,
 the President shall issue an order requiring that all buses ordered by
 that agency after 1989 for purchase for use in such fleet be electric buses
 or buses using methanol, ethanol, neat fuels, natural gas, or a fuel with
 comparably low emissions of oxides or nitrogen, volatile organic chemicals,
 or carbon monoxide.'.
SEC. 210. TRANSPORTATION CONTROL MEASURES.
 Section 108(f) of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new paragraph at the end thereof:
 `(4) TRANSPORTATION CONTROL MEASURES- For purposes of assisting States in
 which there are located areas designated as nonattainment areas for ozone or
 carbon monoxide or both, the Administrator shall publish, after notice and
 public comment, information to guide States on the use of transportation
 control measures. Such guidance shall identify transportation control
 measures that can be taken, the estimated costs of such measures, and the
 projected emission reductions which shall be treated as attributable to
 such measures included in any revision of the State implementation plan.'.
TITLE III--OTHER PROVISIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Sec. 301. Movable stationary sources.
Sec. 302. Control of VOC emissions from certain sources.
Sec. 303. Enforcement.
Sec. 304. Emission factors.
Sec. 305. Studies.
Sec. 306. RACT/BACT/LAER clearinghouse.
Sec. 307. Conforming amendments.
SEC. 301. MOVABLE STATIONARY SOURCES.
 Section 302 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following at
 the end thereof:
 `(q) STATIONARY SOURCE- The term `stationary source' includes, but is
 not limited to, any source of an air pollutant to the extent that it is
 capable of being moved from one location to another if the source emits
 pollutants from equipment or processes other than the means of propulsion
 used to move the source.'.
SEC. 302. CONTROL OF VOC EMISSIONS FROM CERTAIN SOURCES.
 Title III of the Clean Air Act is amended by redesignating sections 326
 and 327 as 327 and 328 respectively and by adding the following new section
 after section 325:
`SEC. 326. CONTROL OF EMISSIONS FROM CERTAIN SOURCES.
 `(a) STUDY AND REPORT-
 `(1) STUDY- The Administrator shall conduct a study of the emissions of
 volatile organic compounds into the ambient air from various substances,
 products, practices, processes, or activities (or any combination thereof)
 in order to--
 `(A) determine their potential to contribute to ozone levels which violate
 the national ambient air quality standard for ozone, or otherwise endanger
 public health or welfare; and
 `(B) determine criteria for selecting substances, products, practices,
 processes, or activities, or classes or categories of substances, products,
 practices, processes, or activities which shall be subject to control
 under this section.
The study shall be completed and a report submitted to Congress not later
than 18 months after enactment of this section.
 `(2) CONSIDERATION OF CERTAIN FACTORS- In determining the criteria under
 subparagraph (1)(B) of this subsection, the Administrator shall take into
 consideration--
 `(A) the uses, benefits and commercial demand of such substances, products,
 practices, processes, or activities;
 `(B) the health or safety functions (if any) served by such substances,
 products, practices, processes, or activities;
 `(C) those substances, products, practices, processes, or activities,
 which emit highly reactive volatile organic compounds into the ambient air;
 `(D) those substances, products, practices, processes, or activities,
 which are subject to the most cost-effective controls; and
 `(E) the availability of alternatives (if any) to such substances,
 products, practices, processes, or activities which are of comparable costs,
 considering health, safety, and environmental impacts.
 `(b) AUTHORITY TO REQUIRE EMISSION REDUCTIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Upon submission of the final report referred to in
 subsection (a), and from time to time thereafter, the Administrator may
 propose regulations for the control of any substance, product, practice,
 process, or activity (or any combination thereof) which in his judgment
 emit volatile organic compounds into the ambient air that may reasonably
 be anticipated to contribute to ozone levels that violate the national
 ambient air quality standard for ozone, or otherwise endanger public
 health or welfare. Such regulations shall take into account the technical
 feasibility, the costs of achieving such control, the leadtime required
 for such control, and competition. Such regulations may exempt health
 use products for which the Administrator determines there is no suitable
 substitute. In order to carry out this section, the Administrator may, by
 regulation, control or prohibit any activity (including the manufacture or
 introduction into commerce, offering for sale, or sale of any substance or
 product) which results in emission of volatile organic compounds into the
 ambient air. Not later than one year after proposal of regulations under
 this section, the Administrator shall promulgate such regulations. From
 time to time, and under the same procedures, the Administrator may revise
 any of the regulations promulgated under this subsection.
 `(2) USE OF CTGS- For any substance, product, practice, process, or activity
 (or any combination thereof), the Administrator may issue control technology
 guidance under section 108 in lieu of regulations required under paragraph
 (1) if he determines that such guidance will be substantially as effective
 as regulations in reducing emissions of volatile organic compounds which
 contribute to ozone levels in areas which violate the national ambient
 air quality standard for ozone.
 `(c) SPECIFIC REDUCTIONS FOR CERTAIN SUBSTANCES AND PROCESSES- The
 regulations and control technology guidance referred to in subsection
 (b) shall include measures to reduce the emissions of volatile organic
 compounds into the ambient air from commercial and consumer solvents,
 architectural coatings, and traffic coatings. Such regulations shall be
 proposed at the time the final report referred to in subsection (a) is
 submitted. The regulations and control technology guidance referred to in
 this subsection shall, at a minimum, be adequate to reduce within 5 years
 after the promulgation, aggregate emissions of volatile organic compounds
 into the ambient air from such substances and products to 75 percent of
 the aggregate level of such emissions estimated during the calendar year
 1988 and to 50 percent of such level within 10 years. The Administrator
 shall utilize the criteria established under subsection (a)(1)(B) of this
 section in selecting classes or categories of products or activities which
 are to reduce emissions pursuant to regulations or control technology
 guidance issued under this section. If reductions in emissions meeting
 the percentage reduction requirements of this subsection would require
 the adoption of measures more stringent than the best available control
 measures, the Administrator may require the adoption of such measures
 as he determines would reduce emissions to such level as may be achieved
 through the adoption of best available control measures.
 `(d) AEROSPACE COATINGS- The regulations and control technology guidance
 referred to in subsection (b) shall include the issuance of control
 technology guidance to reduce the aggregate emissions of volatile
 organic compounds into the ambient air from aerospace coatings. Such
 control technology guidance shall, at a minimum, be adequate to reduce
 aggregate emissions of volatile organic compounds into the ambient air
 from the application of such coatings to such level as the Administrator
 determines may be achieved through the adoption of best available
 control measures. Such control technology guidance shall provide for such
 reductions in such increments and on such schedules as the Administrator
 determines to be reasonable, but in no event later than 10 years after the
 final issuance of such control technology guidance. In developing control
 technology guidance under this subsection, the Administrator shall consult
 with the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Transportation, and the
 Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration with
 regard to the establishment of specifications for such coatings.'.
SEC. 303. ENFORCEMENT.
 (a) STATE ENFORCEMENT- Section 108 of the Clean Air Act is amended by
 adding the following at the end thereof:
 `(j) IMPROVED ENFORCEMENT- Not later than 1 year after the enactment of
 this subsection, the Administrator shall publish guidelines for improved
 enforcement of requirements applicable to the control of oxides of nitrogen,
 volatile organic compounds, and carbon monoxide. The guidelines shall
 require that State plan revisions submitted after the enactment of this
 subsection for ozone nonattainment areas classified as serious or severe
 under section 180 and carbon monoxide nonatainment areas classified as Severe
 under section 186 contain a requirement that sources required to maintain
 annual emission monitoring reports maintain the annual emission monitoring
 reports for at least 7 years and provide such reports to the State and
 to the Administrator upon request. Any source which fails to maintain or
 provide reports in accordance with the requirements described in paragraph
 (1) shall be subject to a civil penalty under section 113(b)(2). Each plan
 revision submitted under this part after the enactment of this subsection
 shall provide for unannounced on-site inspections of sources subject to
 requirements of such plan.'.
 (b) CIVIL PENALTY NOTICE- The second sentence of section 113(a)(1) of
 the Clean Air Act is amended to read as follows: `At any time after the
 expiration of 30 days after the date on which such notice of the violation
 is issued, the Administrator may issue an order requiring such person to
 comply with the requirements of such plan or he may bring a civil action
 in accordance with subsection (b) without regard to the period of the
 violation.'.
 (c) ENFORCEMENT OF CERTAIN FEDERAL STANDARDS- (1) Section 113(a)(3),
 (b)(3) and (c)(1)(C) of the Clean Air Act are each amended by inserting
 `or (h)' after `111(e)' and by inserting `or (e)' after `112(c)'.
 (2) Section 113 of the Clean Air Act is amended as follows:
 (A) Insert the following before `112(c)' in subsections (a)(3) and (b)(3):
 `the terms of a waiver or compliance extension order under section 111(j), or
 of a waiver under section 112(c)(1)(B), or of a requirement of section 326,'.
 (B) Insert the following before `section 112(c)' in subsection (c)(1)(C):
 `the terms of a waiver or compliance extension order under section 111(j), or
 of a waiver under section 112(c)(1)(B), or of a requirement of section 326,'.
 (3) Before the period at the end of section 113(a)(3), (b)(3) and (c)(1)(C)
 of the Clean Air Act insert: `, whether or not any air pollutant has been
 emitted in violation of any of such provisions'.
 (4) Section 302(k) of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking the period
 at the end thereof and inserting: `, or, in the case of section 111(h)
 or 112(e), any design, equipment, work practice or operational standard
 authorized by such section.'.
 (5) Section 112(c)(1)(B) of the Clean Air Act is amended by striking `air
 pollutant to which such standard applies may be emitted from any stationary
 source in violation of such standard' and insert in lieu thereof `emission
 standard applicable to any stationary source may be violated'.
 (d) ADMINISTRATIVE ASSESSMENT OF PENALTIES- Section 307 of the Clean Air
 Act is amended by adding the following new subsection at the end thereof:
 `(h) ASSESSMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES- The Administrator may commence
 an administrative penalty action to assess and recover any penalty prescribed
 in section 113(b), section 176(i), section 205(a), or section 211(d).'.
 (e) ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS- Section 113(a)(4) of the Clean Air Act is amended
 by adding the following at the end thereof: `An order issued under this
 subsection shall require such person to comply with the requirements of such
 plan as expeditiously as practicable, but in no event longer than one year
 after the date the order was issued, and shall be nonrenewable. No order
 issued under this subsection shall prevent the State or the Administrator
 from imposing any penalties nor otherwise affect or limit the State or the
 Administrator's authority to enforce, nor affect any person's obligations
 to comply with, any section of this Act or a term or condition of any
 permit issued pursuant to the Act or of an applicable implementation plan.'.
 (f) ENFORCEMENT OF APPROVED SIPS- Section 110(d) of the Clean Air Act is
 amended by adding the following at the end thereof: `Such term includes
 any portion of an implementation plan which has been submitted by a
 State and approved by the Administrator. The existing provisions of an
 applicable implementation plan (and each permit in effect under such plan)
 shall remain in full force and effect, and may be enforced under this Act,
 until such time as a revision thereof is submitted to the Administrator
 and approved under this Act or a plan is promulgated by the Administrator
 under subsection (c).'.
 (g) SUBPOENAS- Section 307(a)(1) of the Clean Air Act is amended by inserting
 `, section 114,' after `202(b)(4)'.
 (h) ENFORCEMENT OF SECTION 211- Section 211(d) of the Clean Air Act is
 amended to read as follows:
 `(d)(1) CIVIL PENALTIES- Any person who violates subsection a, (f), or (j)
 or the regulations prescribed under subsection (c), (i) or (k), or who fails
 to furnish any information or conduct any tests required by the Administrator
 under subsection (b) shall be liable to the United States for a civil penalty
 of not more than $25,000 for each and every day of each such violation. Any
 such violation with respect to a regulation prescribed under subsection (c),
 (i) or (k) which establishes a regulatory standard based upon a multi-day
 averaging period shall constitute a separate day of violation with respect
 to each day in the averaging period. Such civil penalties shall be assessed
 in accordance with the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of section 205.
 `(2) INJUNCTIVE AUTHORITY- The district courts of the United States shall
 have jurisdiction to restrain violations of subsections (a), (f), and (j)
 and of the regulations prescribed under subsections (c), (i), and (k), or
 award other appropriate relief, and to compel the furnishing of information
 and the conduct of tests required by the Administrator under subsection
 (b). Actions to restrain such violations and compel such actions shall
 be brought by and in the name of the United States. In any such action,
 subpoenas for witnesses who are required to attend a district court in
 any district may run into any other district.'.
 (i) CRIMINAL VIOLATIONS- Section 113(c) of the Clean Air Act is amended
 as follows:
 (1) In paragraph (1) strike out `one year' and insert `3 years', strike
 out `two' and insert `6', strike out `$50,000' and insert `$100,000',
 and strike out `$25,000' and insert `$50,000'.
 (2) Amend subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) to read as follows:
 `(A) violates any requirement of an applicable implementation plan,
 including a plan promulgated by the Administrator under section 110(c), or'.
 (3) Amend paragraph (2) as follows:
 (A) Insert `, or omits material information from or knowingly destroys,
 alters, conceals or fails to maintain or file any notice,' after `or
 certification'.
 (B) Insert `or used for purposes of compliance under this Act (whether
 with respect to the requirements of the Administrator or a state), or who
 knowingly fails to notify or report as required' after `maintained'.
 (C) Insert `or any regulations promulgated thereunder,' before `or who
 falsifies'.
 (D) Strike `or' after `tampers with,', and insert `or fails to install'
 after `inaccurate'.
 (E) Insert `or any regulations promulgated thereunder' before `; shall
 upon conviction'.
 (F) Strike out `$10,000, or by imprisonment for not more than six months'
 and insert in lieu thereof `$50,000, or by imprisonment for not more than
 3 years'.
 (G) Add the following at the end thereof: `If the conviction is for a
 violation committed after the first conviction of such person under this
 paragraph, the maximum punishment shall be doubled with respect to both
 the fine and imprisonment.'.
 (j) KNOWING ENDANGERMENT- Section 113(e) of the Clean Air Act is amended
 to read as follows:
 `(e) KNOWING ENDANGERMENT- Any person who knowingly emits any air
 pollutant in violation of any requirement of this Act, or any regulation
 or order under this Act, of any applicable implementation plan under this
 Act, or who violates any design, equipment, work practice standard or
 operational standard authorized by this chapter, or who fails to respond
 to an information request or to provide notice or who provides false
 information who knows at the time that he thereby places another person in
 imminent danger of death or serious bodily injury, shall, upon conviction,
 be subject to a fine of not more than $250,000 or imprisonment for not
 more than 15 years, or both. A defendant that is an organization shall,
 upon conviction of violating this subsection, be subject to a fine of
 not more than $1,000,000. If a conviction of a person is for a violation
 committed after a first conviction of such person under this paragraph,
 the maximum punishment shall be doubled with respect to both fine and
 imprisonment. The provisions of section 3008(f) of the Solid Waste Disposal
 Act shall apply for purposes of this subsection in the same manner as such
 provisions apply for purposes of section 3008(e) of that Act.'.
 (k) FEDERAL CONTRACTORS- Section 306(a) of the Clean Air Act is amended
 by striking out `113(c)(1)' and inserting `113(c)'.
SEC. 304. EMISSION FACTORS.
 Part A of title I of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following
 new section at the end thereof:
`SEC. 129. EMISSION FACTORS.
 `Within 6 months after enactment of this section, and at least every 3
 years thereafter, the Administrator shall review and, if necessary, revise,
 the methods (`emission factors') used for purposes of this Act to determine
 the quantity of emissions of carbon monoxide, volatile organic compounds,
 and oxides of nitrogen from sources of such air pollutants (including
 area sources and mobile sources). In addition, the Administrator shall
 establish emission factors for sources for which no such methods have
 previously been established by the Administrator. The Administrator shall
 permit any person to demonstrate improved emissions estimating techniques,
 and following approval of such techniques, the Administrator shall authorize
 the use of such techniques. Any such technique may be approved only after
 appropriate public participation. Until the Administrator has completed the
 revision required by this subsection, nothing in this subsection shall be
 construed to affect the validity of emission factors established by the
 Administrator before the enactment of this section.'.
SEC. 305. STUDIES.
 (a) OZONE DESIGN VALUE- The Administrator of the Environmental Protection
 Agency shall conduct a study of whether the methodology in use by the
 Environmental Protection Agency as of the enactment of this Act for
 establishing a design value for ozone provides a reasonable indicator of the
 ozone air quality of ozone nonattainment areas. The study shall be completed
 and a report submitted to Congress not later than 3 years after the enactment
 of this Act. The results of the study should be subject to peer review.
 (b) OXIDES OF NITROGEN- The Administrator of the Environmental Protection
 Agency, in conjunction with the National Academy of Sciences, shall conduct
 a study on the role of nitrogen oxide emission reductions in reductions
 of ozone levels at different peak ozone concentrations and VOC to NOx
 ratios. The study should be completed and a report submitted to Congress
 within 2 years after the enactment of this section.
 (c) MOBILE SOURCE ENGINE RESEARCH- The Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency shall jointly fund, with the motor vehicle manufacturing
 industry, research into new engine designs which are more fuel efficient
 and less polluting, and into alternative fuels.
SEC. 306. RACT/BACT/LAER CLEARINGHOUSE.
 Section 108 of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following at
 the end thereof:
 `(k) RACT/BACT/LAER CLEARINGHOUSE- The Administrator shall make information
 regarding emission control technology available to the States and to
 the general public through a central database. Such information shall
 include all control technology information received pursuant to State plan
 provisions requiring permits for sources, including operating permits for
 existing sources.'.
SEC. 307. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
 (a) TRANSPORTATION CONTROLS- Paragraph (2) and paragraph (5) of section
 110(c) of the Clean Air Act are repealed.
 (b) PLANNING PROCEDURES- Subsection (a) of section 174 of the Clean Air
 Act is amended as follows:
 (1) Strike out `enactment of' and all that follows down through `1979' in the
 first sentence and insert `initial designation of an area as a nonattainment
 area and the inclusion of the area on a revised list under section 107(d)'.
 (2) Strike out `six months after the enactment of the Clean Air Act
 Amendments of 1977' and insert `the period required under this subsection'.
 (3) Add the following at the end: `The provisions of this subsection shall
 also apply to each nonattainment area for which the State proposes to
 request redesignation under section 107(d) and in the case of any such
 area, the procedures provided for in this subsection shall be applied
 before the plan revision providing for the maintenance of the national
 ambient air quality standard is submitted for such area.'.
 (c) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- Section 327 of the Clean Air Act
 (relating to appropriations) is amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 327. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 `There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act such sums
 as may be necessary.'.