S 1100 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1100
To provide greater certainty in the availability and cost of liability
insurance, to eliminate the abuses of the tort system, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
June 1 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. MCCONNELL introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on the Judiciary
A BILL
To provide greater certainty in the availability and cost of liability
insurance, to eliminate the abuses of the tort system, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act may be cited as the
 `Lawsuit Reform Act of 1989'.
FINDINGS AND PURPOSE
 SEC. 2. (a) The Congress finds and declares that--
 (1) there are serious flaws in the civil justice system under which tort
 claims are filed and resolved, including spiraling costs, unpredictability,
 impediments to United States competitiveness and inefficient use of the
 civil justice system;
 (2) the cost of litigation has risen at a dramatic rate over the past
 25 years and threatens to continue to rise at a similar rate for the
 foreseeable future;
 (3) the rising cost of litigation has a direct and undesirable effect
 on interstate commerce and international competitiveness, and decreases
 availability of products and services in commerce;
 (4) maintaining a competitive position in markets with excessive tort
 recovery costs has become unaffordable for many United States companies;
 (5) when United States employers face high tort recovery risks, foreign
 competitors, which do not bear the burden of such exorbitant costs on the
 bulk of their sales, gain a distinct price advantage in the marketplace;
 (6) the rising cost of litigation and the lack of predictability of the
 outcome of suits has greatly contributed to uncertainty in the availability
 and affordability of insurance;
 (7) there is a need for reasonable limits on the potential exposure of
 individuals and businesses to liability for damages resulting from the
 sale and use of products, the provision of services, or the ownership and
 use of property, all of which contribute to the net output of the Nation's
 economy, to the American consumer, and to the general welfare; and
 (8) because of the interstate nature of the commerce, no single State
 can act to address flaws in the civil justice system without threatening
 to inflict disparate and potentially discriminatory burdens, thereby
 diminishing the general welfare of the Nation and of the several States.
 (b) It is the purpose of this Act to establish uniform rules of tort law,
 to promote American competitiveness, to encourage alternate means of dispute
 resolution, to provide fair and reasonable compensation for accident or
 injury, and to promote the free flow of commerce and the availability and
 affordability of liability insurance.
APPLICABILITY
 SEC. 3. (a) Except as provided in subsection (b), (c), or (d), the provisions
 of this Act shall apply to any civil action against any person, in any State
 or Federal court, based on any cause of action, including, but not limited
 to, negligence, strict or product liability, breach of implied warranty,
 or professional malpractice, in which damages are sought for physical
 injury or for physical or mental pain or suffering or for property damage
 or for economic loss.
 (b) This Act shall not apply to--
 (1) a civil action for loss or damage to a product itself or for commercial
 loss that would otherwise be governed by the Uniform Commercial Code or
 by State commercial law; or
 (2) a civil action for intentionally committed battery, assault, false
 imprisonment, trespass, or conversion.
 (c) The provisions of this Act shall preempt and supersede Federal or
 State law only to the extent such law is inconsistent with this Act. Any
 issue arising under the provisions of this Act that is not governed by the
 provisions of this Act shall be governed by applicable State or Federal law.
 (d) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to--
 (1) waive or affect any defense of sovereign immunity asserted by any
 State under any provision of law;
 (2) waive or affect any defense of sovereign immunity asserted by the
 United States;
 (3) supercede any Federal law, except the Federal Employees Compensation
 Act and the Longshoremen's and Harborworkers' Compensation Act;
 (4) affect the applicability of any provision of chapter 97 of Act 28,
 United States Code, known as the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976;
 (5) preempt State choice-of-law rules with respect to claims brought by
 a foreign nation or a citizen of a foreign nation; or
 (6) affect the right of any court to transfer venue or to apply the law of
 a foreign nation or to dismiss a claim of a foreign nation or of a citizen
 of a foreign nation on the ground of inconvenient forum.
 (e)(1) Subject to the limitations of paragraph (3), and except as provided
 in paragraph (2), in any action brought pursuant to the provisions of this
 Act, the court shall provide for an award of costs and reasonable attorneys'
 fees to be paid to the prevailing party by the other parties to such action.
 (2) The provisions of paragraph (1) shall not apply in any case in which
 the losing party was qualified for assistance by the Legal Services
 Corporation, in the State in which such party resides, pursuant to the
 limits and guidelines set forth in part 1611 of title 45 of the Code of
 Federal Regulations.
 (3) The amount of attorney fees ordered to be paid to the prevailing party
 shall be limited to either--
 (A) a percentage of the prevailing party's costs and fees equal to the
 percentage of any damage award such losing party had agreed to pay as
 a contingency fee to his attorney if he prevailed, if the attorney for
 such losing party was to receive compensation based on a percentage of
 the recovery; or
 (B) an amount which does not exceed the amount of attorneys' fees such party
 is paying his own attorney in such matter, if the attorney for such losing
 party was not receiving compensation based on a percentage of the recovery.
JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY
 SEC. 4. (a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, joint and
 several liability may not be applied to any civil liability action subject
 to this Act. A person found liable for damages in any such action may be
 found liable, if at all, only for those damages directly attributable to
 the person's pro rata share of fault or responsibility for the injury,
 and may not be found liable for damages attributable to the pro rata share
 of fault or responsibility of any other person (without regard to whether
 that person is a party to the action) for the injury, including any person
 bringing the action.
 (b) This section shall not apply as between persons acting in concert
 where the concerted action proximately caused the injury for which one
 or more persons are found liable for damages. As used in this section,
 `concerted action' or `acting in concert' means the participation in joint
 conduct by two or more persons who agreed to jointly participate in such
 conduct with actual knowledge of the wrongfulness of the conduct.
DRUGS AND ALCOHOL LIABILITY STANDARDS
 SEC. 5. (a) In any civil action subject to this Act, it shall be a complete
 defense to such action that the claimant was intoxicated or under the
 influence of intoxicating alcohol or any drug and as a result of the
 intoxication or influence of the alcohol or drug the claimant was more
 than 50 percent responsible for causing the accident or other event which
 resulted in such claimant's physical or mental injury or pain or suffering
 or property damage.
 (b) For purposes of this section, the determination of whether a person
 was under the influence of intoxicating alcohol or any drug shall be made
 pursuant to applicable State law.
 (c) As used in this section, the term `drug' means any non-over-the-counter
 drug which has not been prescribed by a physician for use by the claimant.
ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION
 SEC. 6. (a) Because the traditional litigation process is not always suited
 to the timely, efficient, and inexpensive resolution of civil actions,
 it is the policy of the United States to encourage the creation and use of
 alternative dispute resolution techniques, and to promote the expeditious
 resolution of such actions.
 (b) In any action in which the provisions of this Act apply, each attorney
 who has made an appearance in the case and who represents one or more of
 the parties to the action shall, with respect to each party separately
 represented, advise the party of the existence and availability of
 alternative dispute resolution options, including extrajudicial proceedings
 such as minitrials, third-party mediation, court supervised arbitration,
 and summary jury trial proceedings.
 (c) Each such attorney shall, simultaneous with the filing of a complaint
 or a responsive pleading, file notice with the court certifying that the
 attorney has so advised his client or clients, and indicating whether such
 client will agree to one or more of the alternative dispute resolution
 techniques.
 (d) If all parties to an action agree to proceed with one or more
 alternative dispute resolution proceedings, the court shall issue an
 appropriate order governing the conduct of such proceedings. The issuance
 of an order governing such further proceedings shall constitute a waiver,
 by each party subject to the order, of the right to proceed further in court.
WORKERS' COMPENSATION
 SEC. 7. (a) In any product liability action subject to this Act in which
 damages are sought for harm for which the person injured is or would have
 been entitled to receive compensation under any State or Federal workers'
 compensation law--
 (1) the action shall, on application of the claimant made at claimant's
 sole discretion, be stayed until such time as the full amount payable
 as workers' compensation benefits has been finally determined under such
 workers' compensation law, and
 (2) any damages awarded shall, where the employer or the workers'
 compensation insurance carrier of the employer does not have a lien against
 the claimant's recovery in a separate action be reduced by the sum of the
 amount paid as workers' compensation benefits to which the employee is or
 would be entitled for such harm.
The determination of workers' compensation benefits by the trier of fact in
an action subject to this Act shall have no binding effect on and shall not
be used as evidence in any other proceeding.
 (b)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), unless a party to any action
 under this Act has expressly agreed to indemnify or hold an employer
 harmless for harm to an employee, neither the employer nor the workers'
 compensation insurance carrier of the employer shall have a right of
 subrogation, contribution, or implied indemnity against such party or a
 lien against the claimant's recovery from the party if the harm is one
 for which an action may be brought pursuant to this Act.
 (2)(A) Except in jurisdictions which allocate payment of workers'
 compensation benefits among all responsible employers, if the claimant's
 injury arose as a result of exposure to workplace conditions with multiple
 employers, paragraph (1) shall not apply if the employer or the workers'
 compensation insurer of the employer establishes, and the trier of fact
 determines, that the claimant's harm was not in any way caused by the
 fault of any of such employers or coemployees.
 (B) In all other circumstances, paragraph (1) shall not apply if the
 employer or the workers' compensation insurer of the employer establishes,
 and the trier of fact determines, that the claimant's harm was not in any
 way caused by the fault of the claimant's employer or coemployee.
 (c)(1) Except as provided in subsection (d), in any action subject to this
 Act in which damages are sought for harm for which the person injured is or
 would have been entitled to receive compensation under any State or Federal
 workers' compensation law, no third party claim tortfeasor may maintain
 any action for implied indemnity or contribution against the employer, any
 coemployee, or the exclusive representative of the person who was injured.
 (2) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to affect any provision of a
 State or Federal workers' compensation law which prohibits a person who
 is or would have been entitled to receive compensation under any such law,
 or any other person whose claim is or would have been derivative from such
 a claim, from recovering for harm in any action other than a workers'
 compensation claim against a present or former employer or workers'
 compensation insurer of the employer, any coemployee, or the exclusive
 representative of the person who was injured. Any action other than such
 a workers' compensation claim shall be prohibited, except that nothing
 in this Act shall be construed to affect any State or Federal workers'
 compensation law which permits recovery based on a claim of an intentional
 tort by the employer or coemployee, where the claimant's harm was caused
 by such an intentional tort.
 (d) Subsection (c) shall not apply and applicable State law shall control
 if the employer or the workers' compensation insurer of the employer, in
 an action subject to this Act, asserts or attempts to assert, because of
 subsection (b), a right of subrogation, contribution, or implied indemnity
 against a third party or a lien against the claimant's recovery from
 such party.
STATUTORY LIABILITY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
 SEC. 8. Section 1979 of the Revised Statutes (42 U.S.C. 1983) is amended by--
 (1) inserting `(a)' before `Every person who'; and
 (2) adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(b) For purposes of this section, the term--
 `(1) `local government' means a county, parish, municipality, city, town,
 village, or any other unit of local government; and
 `(2) `official policy' means a statute, ordinance, regulation, or rule
 established by a local government, or a recurrent custom or practice which
 is known of and consented to by the governing body of a local government.
 `(c) A person other than a natural person may not bring an action or suit
 under this section, except that an association, corporation, or other
 entity whose primary purpose is to protect the constitutional rights of
 natural persons may bring an action or suit under this section on behalf
 of one or more of its members and other natural persons similarly situated
 to protect any such right. A person may not bring an action or suit under
 this section to assert a commercial, business, or property interest unless
 such action or suit involves a claim of discrimination on the basis of race,
 sex, national origin, or religion, or a violation of procedural due process.
 `(d)(1) A court may not award monetary damages under this section against
 a local government for any action which was not directly attributable to
 an official policy of such government.
 `(2) A court may not award monetary damages under this section against a
 local government or an officer, employee, or agent thereof for any action
 taken in good faith.
 `(3) A court may not award punitive or exemplary damages under this section
 against a local government.'.
DEFINITIONS
 SEC. 9. (a) As used in this Act, the term--
 (1) `claimant' means any person who brings a civil action pursuant to this
 Act, and any person on whose behalf such an action is brought, and, if such
 an action is brought through or on behalf of an estate, the term includes
 the claimant's decedent, or, if it is brought through or on behalf of a
 minor or incompetent, the term includes the claimant's parent or guardian;
 (2) `commercial loss' means economic injury, whether direct, incidental,
 or consequential, including property damage and damage to the product itself;
 (3) `harm' means any harm recognized under the law of the State in which
 the civil action is maintained, other than loss or damage caused to a
 product itself, or commercial loss that would otherwise be governed by
 the Uniform Commercial Code or by State commercial law;
 (4) `product liability action' means a civil action brought against a
 manufacturer or product seller, on any theory, for harm;
 (5) `person' means any individual, corporation, company, association,
 firm, partnership, society, joint stock company, or any other entity
 (including any governmental entity); and
 (6) `State' means any State of the United States, the District of Columbia,
 the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa,
 the Northern Mariana Islands, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands,
 and any other territory or possession of the United States, or any political
 subdivision thereof.
EFFECTIVE DATE
 SEC. 10. (a) This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall be effective
 on the date of enactment, and shall apply to all civil actions filed on
 or after such date, including any civil action in which the harm or the
 conduct complained of occurred before such effective date.
 (b) If any provision of this Act would shorten the period during which
 a person would otherwise be exposed to liability, the plaintiff may,
 notwithstanding the otherwise applicable time period, bring any civil action
 pursuant to this Act within 1 year after the effective date of this Act.
SEVERABILITY
 SEC. 11. If any provision of this Act or the application of any such
 provision to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder
 of this Act and the application of any provision to any other person or
 circumstance shall not be affected thereby.