102d CONGRESS
1st Session
H. R. 5
AN ACT
To amend the National Labor Relations Act and the Railway Labor Act to
prevent discrimination based on participation in labor disputes.
HR 5 EH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 5
AN ACT
To amend the National Labor Relations Act and the Railway Labor Act to
prevent discrimination based on participation in labor disputes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. PREVENTION OF DISCRIMINATION DURING AND AT THE CONCLUSION OF
LABOR DISPUTES.
 Section 8(a) of the National Labor Relations Act (29 U.S.C. 158(a))
 is amended--
 (1) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (5) and inserting `;
 or', and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(6) to promise, to threaten, or to take other action--
 `(i) to hire a permanent replacement for an employee who--
 `(A) at the commencement of a labor dispute was an employee of the employer
 in a bargaining unit in which a labor organization--
 `(I) was the certified or recognized exclusive representative, or
 `(II) at least 30 days prior to the commencement of the dispute had filed a
 petition pursuant to section 9(c)(1) on the basis of written authorizations
 by a majority of the unit employees, and the Board has not completed the
 representation proceeding; and
 `(B) in connection with that dispute has engaged in concerted activities
 for the purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection
 through that labor organization; or
 `(ii) to withhold or deny any other employment right or privilege to an
 employee, who meets the criteria of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of clause
 (i) and who is working for or has unconditionally offered to return to
 work for the employer, out of a preference for any other individual that
 is based on the fact that the individual is performing, has performed,
 or has indicated a willingness to perform bargaining unit work for the
 employer during the labor dispute.'.
SEC. 2. PREVENTION OF DISCRIMINATION DURING AND AT THE CONCLUSION OF RAILWAY
LABOR DISPUTES.
 Paragraph Four of section 2 of the Railway Labor Act (45 U.S.C. 152)
 is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(a)' after `Fourth.'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 `(b) No carrier, or officer or agent of the carrier, shall--
 `(1) offer or grant the status of a permanent replacement employee to
 an individual for performing work in a craft or class for the carrier
 during a dispute which involves the craft or class and which is between
 the carrier and the labor organization that is acting as the collective
 bargaining representative involved in the dispute; or
 `(2) offer or grant an individual any other employment preference based
 on the fact that such individual performed work in a craft or class, or
 indicated a willingness to perform such work, during a dispute over an
 individual who--
 `(A) was an employee of the carrier at the commencement of the dispute;
 `(B) in connection with such dispute has exercised the right to join, to
 organize, to assist in organizing, or to bargain collectively through the
 labor organization that is acting as the collective bargaining representative
 involved in the dispute; and
 `(C) is working for, or has unconditionally offered to return to work for,
 the carrier.'.
Passed the House of Representatives July 17, 1991.
Attest:
Clerk.