102d CONGRESS
1st Session
H. R. 2929
AN ACT
To designate certain lands in the California Desert as wilderness, to
establish the Death Valley and Joshua Tree National Parks and the Mojave
National Monument, and for other purposes.
HR 2929 EH1S
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2929
AN ACT
To designate certain lands in the California Desert as wilderness, to
establish the Death Valley and Joshua Tree National Parks and the Mojave
National Monument, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act may be cited as the
 `California Desert Protection Act of 1991'.
FINDINGS AND POLICY
 SEC. 2. (a) The Congress finds and declares that--
 (1) the federally owned desert lands of Southern California constitute a
 public wildland resource of extraordinary and inestimable value for this
 and future generations;
 (2) these desert wildlands display unique scenic, historical, archeological,
 environmental, ecological, wildlife, cultural, scientific, educational,
 and recreational values used and enjoyed by millions of Americans for
 hiking and camping, scientific study and scenic appreciation;
 (3) the public land resources of the California desert now face and are
 increasingly threatened by adverse pressures which would impair, dilute,
 and destroy their public and natural values;
 (4) the California desert, embracing wilderness lands, units of the National
 Park System, other Federal lands, State parks and other State lands, and
 private lands, constitutes a cohesive unit posing unique and difficult
 resource protection and management challenges;
 (5) through designation of national monuments by Presidential proclamation,
 through enactment of general public land statutes (including section 601
 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976, 90 Stat. 2743, 43
 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) and through interim administrative actions, the Federal
 Government has begun the process of appropriately providing for protection of
 the significant resources of the public lands in the California desert; and
 (6) statutory land unit designations are needed to afford the full protection
 which the resources and public land values of the California desert merit.
 (b) In order to secure for the American people of this and future generations
 an enduring heritage of wilderness, national parks, and public land values
 in the California desert, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the
 Congress that--
 (1) appropriate public lands in the California desert shall be included
 within the National Park System and the National Wilderness Preservation
 System, in order to--
 (A) preserve unrivaled scenic, geologic, and wildlife values associated
 with these unique natural landscapes;
 (B) perpetuate in their natural state significant and diverse ecosystems
 of the California desert;
 (C) protect and preserve historical and cultural values of the California
 desert associated with ancient Indian cultures, patterns of western
 exploration and settlement, and sites exemplifying the mining, ranching
 and railroading history of the Old West;
 (D) provide opportunities for compatible outdoor public recreation,
 protect and interpret ecological and geological features and historic,
 paleontological, and archeological sites, maintain wilderness resource
 values, and promote public understanding and appreciation of the California
 desert; and
 (E) retain and enhance opportunities for scientific research in undisturbed
 ecosystems.
TITLE I--WILDERNESS ADDITIONS
FINDINGS
 SEC. 101. The Congress finds and declares that--
 (1) wilderness is a distinguishing characteristic of the public lands in
 the California desert, one which affords an unrivaled opportunity for
 experiencing vast areas of the Old West essentially unaltered by man's
 activities, and which merits preservation for the benefit of present and
 future generations;
 (2) the wilderness values of desert lands are increasingly threatened by
 and especially vulnerable to impairment, alteration, and destruction by
 activities and intrusions associated with incompatible use and development;
 and
 (3) preservation of desert wilderness necessarily requires the highest
 forms of protective designation and management.
DESIGNATION OF WILDERNESS
 SEC. 102. In furtherance of the purpose of the Wilderness Act (78 Stat. 890,
 16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.), and sections 601 and 603 of the Federal Land
 Policy and Management Act of 1976 (90 Stat. 2743, 43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.),
 the following lands in the State of California, as generally depicted on
 maps, referenced herein, dated February 1986 (except as otherwise dated),
 are hereby designated as wilderness, and therefore, as components of the
 National Wilderness Preservation System:
 (1) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately seventy-four thousand eight
 hundred and ninety acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Argus
 Range Wilderness--Proposed 1', dated May 1991, and two maps entitled `Argus
 Range Wilderness--Proposed 2' and `Argus Range Wilderness--Proposed 3',
 dated January 1989, and which shall be known as the Argus Range Wilderness.
 (2) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately ten thousand three hundred
 and eighty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Bigelow Cholla
 Garden Wilderness--Proposed', dated October 1991, and which shall be known
 as the Bigelow Cholla Garden Wilderness.
 (3) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, and within the San Bernardino National Forest, which
 comprise approximately thirty-nine thousand two hundred acres, as generally
 depicted on a map entitled `Bighorn Mountain Wilderness--Proposed', dated
 September 1991, and which shall be known as the Bighorn Mountain Wilderness.
 (4) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area and the Yuma
 District, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately
 forty-seven thousand five hundred and seventy acres, as generally depicted
 on a map entitled `Big Maria Mountains Wilderness--Proposed', and which
 shall be known as the Big Maria Mountains Wilderness.
 (5) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise thirteen thousand nine hundred
 and forty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Black Mountain
 Wilderness--Proposed', and which shall be known as the Black Mountain
 Wilderness.
 (6) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately nine thousand
 five hundred and twenty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled
 `Bright Star Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991, and which shall be
 known as the Bright Star Wilderness.
 (7) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately sixty-eight
 thousand five hundred and fifteen acres, as generally depicted on two
 maps entitled `Bristol Mountains Wilderness--Proposed 1', and `Bristol
 Mountains Wilderness--Proposed 2', dated September 1991, and which shall
 be known as Bristol Mountains Wilderness.
 (8) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately forty-two thousand six
 hundred and forty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Cadiz
 Dunes Wilderness--Proposed', and which shall be known as the Cadiz Dunes
 Wilderness.
 (9) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately eighty-five thousand
 nine hundred and seventy acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled
 `Cady Mountains Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991, and which shall be
 known as the Cady Mountains Wilderness.
 (10) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area and Eastern
 San Diego County, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise
 approximately fifteen thousand seven hundred acres, as generally depicted
 on a map entitled `Carrizo Gorge Wilderness--Proposed', and which shall
 be known as the Carrizo Gorge Wilderness.
 (11) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area and Yuma
 District, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately
 sixty-four thousand six hundred and forty acres, as generally depicted on
 a map entitled `Chemehuevi Mountains Wilderness--Proposed', dated October
 1991, and which shall be known as the Chemehuevi Mountains Wilderness.
 (12) Certain lands in the Bakersfield District, of the Bureau of
 Land Management, which comprise approximately thirteen thousand seven
 hundred acres, as generally depicted on two maps entitled `Chimney Peak
 Wilderness--Proposed 1' and `Chimney Peak Wilderness--Proposed 2', dated
 May 1991, and which shall be known as the Chimney Peak Wilderness.
 (13) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately one hundred fifty-eight
 thousand nine hundred and fifty acres, as generally depicted on two maps
 entitled `Chuckwalla Mountains Wilderness--Proposed 1' and `Chuckwalla
 Mountains Wilderness--Proposed 2', dated January 1989, and which shall be
 known as the Chuckwalla Mountains Wilderness.
 (14) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise thirty-four thousand three
 hundred and eighty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Cleghorn
 Lakes Wilderness--Proposed', dated September 1991, and which shall be
 known as the Cleghorn Lakes Wilderness. The Secretary may, pursuant to
 an application filed by the Department of Defense, grant a right-of-way
 for, and authorize construction of, a road within the area depicted as
 `non-wilderness road corridor' on such map.
 (15) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately forty thousand acres, as
 generally depicted on a map entitled `Clipper Mountain Wilderness--Proposed',
 dated May 1991, and which shall be known as Clipper Mountain Wilderness.
 (16) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately fifty thousand
 five hundred and twenty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled
 `Coso Range Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991, and which shall be
 known as Coso Range Wilderness.
 (17) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately eighteen thousand six
 hundred acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Coyote Mountains
 Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991, and which shall be known as Coyote
 Mountains Wilderness.
 (18) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately eight thousand
 six hundred acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Darwin Falls
 Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991, and which shall be known as Darwin
 Falls Wilderness.
 (19) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area and the Yuma
 District, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately
 forty-eight thousand eight hundred and fifty acres, as generally depicted
 on a map entitled `Dead Mountains Wilderness--Proposed', dated October 1991,
 and which shall be known as Dead Mountains Wilderness.
 (20) Certain lands in the Bakersfield District, of the Bureau of Land
 Management, which comprise approximately thirty-six thousand three hundred
 acres, as generally depicted on two maps entitled `Domeland Wilderness
 Additions--Proposed 1' and `Domeland Wilderness Additions--Proposed 2', and
 which are hereby incorporated in, and which shall be deemed to be a part
 of, the Domeland Wilderness as designated by Public Laws 93-632 and 98-425.
 (21) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately sixteen thousand one
 hundred acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `El Paso Mountains
 Wilderness--Proposed', and which shall be known as the El Paso Mountains
 Wilderness.
 (22) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately twenty-six thousand
 three hundred acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Fish Creek
 Mountains Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991, and which shall be known
 as Fish Creek Mountains Wilderness.
 (23) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately twenty-eight thousand one
 hundred and ten acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Funeral
 Mountains Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991, and which shall be known
 as Funeral Mountains Wilderness.
 (24) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately thirty-seven thousand
 seven hundred acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Golden Valley
 Wilderness--Proposed', and which shall be known as Golden Valley Wilderness.
 (25) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately thirty-one thousand
 seven hundred and twenty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled
 `Grass Valley Wilderness--Proposed', and which shall be known as the Grass
 Valley Wilderness.
 (26) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately eight thousand
 eight hundred acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Great Falls
 Basin Wilderness--Proposed', and which shall be known as the Great Falls
 Basin Wilderness.
 (27) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately twenty-two thousand two
 hundred and forty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Hollow
 Hills Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991, and which shall be known as
 the Hollow Hills Wilderness.
 (28) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately twenty-six thousand four
 hundred and sixty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Ibex
 Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991, and which shall be known as the
 Ibex Wilderness.
 (29) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately thirty-five thousand
 and fifteen acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Indian Pass
 Wilderness--Proposed', dated October 1991, and which shall be known as
 the Indian Pass Wilderness.
 (30) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area and the
 Bakersfield District, of the Bureau of Land Management, and within the Inyo
 National Forest, which comprise approximately two hundred five thousand and
 twenty acres, as generally depicted on three maps entitled `Inyo Mountains
 Wilderness--Proposed', numbered in the title one through three, and dated
 May 1991, and which shall be known as the Inyo Mountains Wilderness.
 (31) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately thirty-four thousand
 five hundred and fifty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled
 `Jacumba Wilderness--Proposed', dated October 1991, and which shall be
 known as the Jacumba Wilderness.
 (32) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately one hundred and
 twenty-nine thousand five hundred and eighty acres, as generally depicted
 on a map entitled `Kelso Dunes Wilderness--Proposed 1', dated October 1991,
 a map entitled `Kelso Dunes Wilderness--Proposed 2', dated May 1991, and
 a map entitled `Kelso Dunes Wilderness--Proposed 3', dated September 1991,
 and which shall be known as the Kelso Dunes Wilderness.
 (33) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of
 the Bureau of Land Management, and the Sequoia National Forest, which
 comprise approximately eighty-eight thousand two hundred and ninety acres,
 as generally depicted on a map entitled `Kiavah Wilderness--Proposed 1',
 dated February 1986, and a map entitled `Kiavah Wilderness--Proposed 2',
 dated May 1991, and which shall be known as the Kiavah Wilderness.
 (34) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately two hundred forty-nine
 thousand and three hundred and sixty-eight acres, as generally depicted on
 two maps entitled `Kingston Range Wilderness--Proposed 2', dated October
 1991, and `Kingston Range Wilderness--Proposed 4', dated January 1989, and
 two maps entitled `Kingston Range Wilderness--Proposed 1' and `Kingston
 Range Wilderness--Proposed 3', dated May 1991, and which shall be known
 as the Kingston Range Wilderness.
 (35) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately forty-six thousand
 four hundred and sixty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled
 `Little Chuckwalla Mountains Wilderness--Proposed', dated October 1991,
 and which shall be known as the Little Chuckwalla Mountains Wilderness.
 (36) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area and the Yuma
 District, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately
 thirty-six thousand four hundred and forty acres, as generally depicted on
 a map entitled `Little Picacho Wilderness--Proposed', dated October 1991,
 and which shall be known as the Little Picacho Wilderness.
 (37) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately thirty-two thousand three
 hundred and sixty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Malpais
 Mesa Wilderness--Proposed', dated September 1991, and which shall be known
 as the Malpais Mesa Wilderness.
 (38) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately sixteen thousand
 one hundred and five acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Manly
 Peak Wilderness--Proposed', dated October 1991, and which shall be known
 as the Manly Peak Wilderness.
 (39) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately twenty-four thousand two
 hundred and eighty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Mecca
 Hills Wilderness--Proposed', dated October 1991, and which shall be known
 as the Mecca Hills Wilderness.
 (40) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately forty-seven thousand
 three hundred and thirty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled
 `Mesquite Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991, and which shall be known
 as the Mesquite Wilderness.
 (41) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately twenty-two thousand nine
 hundred acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Newberry Mountains
 Wilderness--Proposed', and which shall be known as the Newberry Mountains
 Wilderness.
 (42) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately one hundred ten thousand
 eight hundred and eighty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled
 `Nopah Range Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991, and which shall be
 known as the Nopah Range Wilderness.
 (43) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately thirty-two thousand two
 hundred and forty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `North
 Algodones Dunes Wilderness--Proposed', dated October 1991, and which shall
 be known as the North Algodones Dunes Wilderness.
 (44) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately twenty-five thousand five
 hundred and forty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `North
 Mesquite Mountains Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991, and which shall
 be known as the North Mesquite Mountains Wilderness.
 (45) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately one hundred forty-six
 thousand and seventy acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Old
 Woman Mountains Wilderness--Proposed 1', dated May 1991 and a map entitled
 `Old Woman Mountains Wilderness--Proposed 2', dated October 1991, and
 which shall be known as the Old Woman Mountains Wilderness.
 (46) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately fifty-seven thousand five
 hundred acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Orocopia Mountains
 Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991, and which shall be known as the
 Orocopia Mountains Wilderness.
 (47) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area and the
 Bakersfield District, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise
 approximately seventy-four thousand six hundred and forty acres, as generally
 depicted on a map entitled `Owens Peak Wilderness--Proposed 1', dated
 February 1986, and two maps entitled `Owens Peak Wilderness--Proposed 2'
 and `Owens Peak Wilderness--Proposed 3', dated May 1991, and which shall
 be known as the Owens Peak Wilderness.
 (48) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately seventy-four
 thousand eight hundred acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled
 `Pahrump Valley Wilderness--Proposed', and which shall be known as the
 Pahrump Valley Wilderness.
 (49) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately two hundred
 fourteen thousand one hundred and forty-nine acres, as generally depicted
 on a map entitled `Palen/McCoy Wilderness--Proposed 1', dated May 1991,
 and a map entitled `Palen/McCoy Wilderness--Proposed 2', dated February
 1986, and which shall be known as the Palen/McCoy Wilderness.
 (50) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately thirty-two thousand
 three hundred and twenty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled
 `Palo Verde Mountains Wilderness--Proposed', dated January 1987, and which
 shall be known as the Palo Verde Mountains Wilderness.
 (51) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately seven thousand
 seven hundred acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Picacho
 Peak Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991, and which shall be known as
 the Picacho Peak Wilderness.
 (52) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately seventy-two thousand six
 hundred acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Piper Mountain
 Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991, and which shall be known as the
 Piper Mountain Wilderness.
 (53) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately thirty-seven
 thousand eight hundred acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled
 `Piute Mountains Wilderness--Proposed', dated October 1991, and which
 shall be known as Piute Mountains Wilderness.
 (54) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately seventy-eight
 thousand eight hundred and sixty-eight acres, as generally depicted on a
 map entitled `Resting Spring Range Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991,
 and which shall be known as the Resting Spring Range Wilderness.
 (55) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately forty thousand
 eight hundred and twenty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled
 `Rice Valley Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991, and which shall be
 known as the Rice Valley Wilderness.
 (56) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area and the Yuma
 District, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately
 twenty-two thousand three hundred eighty acres, as generally depicted on
 a map entitled `Riverside Mountains Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991,
 and which shall be known as the Riverside Mountains Wilderness.
 (57) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately twenty-seven
 thousand seven hundred acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled
 `Rodman Mountains Wilderness--Proposed', dated January 1989, and which
 shall be known as the Rodman Mountains Wilderness.
 (58) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area and the
 Bakersfield District, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise
 approximately fifty-one thousand nine hundred acres, as generally depicted
 on two maps entitled `Sacatar Trail Wilderness--Proposed 1' and `Sacatar
 Trail Wilderness--Proposed 2', dated May 1991, and which shall be known
 as the Sacatar Trail Wilderness.
 (59) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately one thousand eight
 hundred acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Saddle Peak Hills
 Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991, and which shall be known as the
 Saddle Peak Hills Wilderness.
 (60) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately thirty-three thousand
 five hundred acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `San Gorgonio
 Wilderness Additions--Proposed', and which are hereby incorporated in,
 and which shall be deemed to be a part of, the San Gorgonio Wilderness as
 designated by Public Laws 88-577 and 98-425.
 (61) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately fifty-three thousand
 two hundred and forty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled
 `Santa Rosa Wilderness Additions--Proposed', dated May 1991, and which
 are hereby incorporated in, and which shall be deemed to be a part of,
 the Santa Rosa Wilderness designated by Public Law 98-425.
 (62) Certain lands in the California Desert District, of the Bureau of
 Land Management, which comprise approximately thirty-five thousand four
 hundred acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Sawtooth Mountains
 Wilderness--Proposed', and which shall be known as the Sawtooth Mountains
 Wilderness.
 (63) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately one hundred
 seventy-four thousand eight hundred acres, as generally depicted on two
 maps entitled `Sheephole Valley Wilderness--Proposed 1', dated October
 1991, and `Sheephole Valley Wilderness--Proposed 2', dated February 1986,
 and which shall be known as the Sheephole Valley Wilderness.
 (64) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately forty-four thousand
 four hundred and ten acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Slate
 Range Wilderness--Proposed', dated October 1991, and which shall be known
 as the Slate Range Wilderness.
 (65) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately sixty-one thousand six
 hundred and thirty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `South
 Algodones Dunes Wilderness--Proposed', dated January 1989, and which shall
 be known as the South Algodones Dunes Wilderness.
 (66) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately sixteen thousand
 seven hundred and eighty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled
 `South Nopah Range Wilderness--Proposed', and which shall be known as the
 South Nopah Range Wilderness.
 (67) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately seven thousand
 and fifty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Stateline
 Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991, and which shall be known as the
 Stateline Wilderness.
 (68) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately eighty-one thousand
 six hundred acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Stepladder
 Mountains Wilderness--Proposed', and which shall be known as the Stepladder
 Mountains Wilderness.
 (69) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately twenty-nine
 thousand one hundred and eighty acres, as generally depicted on a map
 entitled `Surprise Canyon Wilderness--Proposed', dated September 1991,
 and which shall be known as the Surprise Canyon Wilderness.
 (70) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the
 Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately seventeen thousand
 eight hundred and twenty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled
 `Sylvania Mountains Wilderness--Proposed', and which shall be known as
 the Sylvania Mountains Wilderness.
 (71) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately thirty-three thousand
 seven hundred and twenty acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled
 `Trilobite Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991, and which shall be known
 as the Trilobite Wilderness.
 (72) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, which comprise approximately one hundred forty-four
 thousand five hundred acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled
 `Turtle Mountains Wilderness--Proposed 1', dated February 1986 and a map
 entitled `Turtle Mountains Wilderness--Proposed 2', dated May 1991, and
 which shall be known as the Turtle Mountains Wilderness.
 (73) Certain lands in the California Desert Conservation Area and the Yuma
 District, of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately
 seventy-five thousand three hundred acres, as generally depicted on a
 map entitled `Whipple Mountains Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991,
 and which shall be known as the Whipple Mountains Wilderness.
ADMINISTRATION OF WILDERNESS AREAS
 SEC. 103. Subject to valid existing rights, each wilderness area designated
 under section 102 shall be administered by the appropriate Secretary in
 accordance with the provisions of the Wilderness Act, except that any
 reference in such provisions to the effective date of the Wilderness Act
 shall be deemed to be a reference to the effective date of this title
 and any reference to the Secretary of Agriculture shall be deemed to be a
 reference to the Secretary who has administrative jurisdiction over the area.
GRAZING
 SEC. 104. Within the wilderness areas designated under section 102, the
 grazing of livestock, where established prior to the enactment of this Act,
 shall be permitted to continue subject to such reasonable regulations,
 policies, and practices as the Secretary deems necessary, as long as such
 regulations, policies, and practices fully conform with and implement
 the intent of Congress regarding grazing in such areas as such intent
 is expressed in the Wilderness Act and section 108 of Public Law 96-560
 (16 U.S.C. 133 note).
BUFFER ZONES
 SEC. 105. The Congress does not intend for the designation of wilderness
 areas in section 102 of this Act to lead to the creation of protective
 perimeters or buffer zones around any such wilderness area. The fact that
 nonwilderness activities or uses can be seen or heard from areas within
 a wilderness shall not, of itself, preclude such activities or uses up to
 the boundary of the wilderness area.
MINING CLAIM VALIDITY REVIEW
 SEC. 106. The Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture
 shall not approve any plan of operation prior to determining the validity
 of the unpatented mining claims, mill sites, and tunnel sites affected by
 such plan within any wilderness area designated under section 102.
FILING OF MAPS AND DESCRIPTIONS
 SEC. 107. As soon as practicable after enactment of section 102, a map and a
 legal description on each wilderness area designated under this title shall
 be filed by the Secretary concerned with the Committee on Energy and Natural
 Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs
 of the House of Representatives, and each such map and description shall
 have the same force and effect as if included in this title, except that
 the Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors in each such
 legal description and map. Each such map and legal description shall be
 on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Director
 of the Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior, or the Chief
 of the Forest Service, Department of Agriculture, as is appropriate.
WILDERNESS REVIEW
 SEC. 108. (a) The Congress hereby finds and directs that lands in the
 California Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, not
 designated as wilderness or wilderness study areas by this Act except for
 those areas provided for in subsection (b), have been adequately studied
 for wilderness designation pursuant to section 603 of the Federal Land
 Policy and Management Act of 1976 (90 Stat. 2743, 43 U.S.C. 1701 et
 seq.), and are no longer subject to the requirement of section 603(c)
 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 pertaining to the
 management of wilderness study areas in a manner that does not impair the
 suitability of such areas for preservation as wilderness.
 (b) Subject to valid existing rights, the Federal lands identified on
 maps as `Avawatz Mountains Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991; `South
 Avawatz Wilderness--Proposed', dated May 1991; and two maps entitled `Soda
 Mountains Wilderness--Proposed 1', dated May 1991, and `Soda Mountains
 Wilderness--Proposed 2', dated January 1989, are hereby withdrawn from
 disposition under the public lands laws and from entry or appropriation
 under the mining laws of the United States, from the operation of the
 mineral leasing laws of the United States, and from operation of the
 Geothermal Steam Act of 1970.
DESIGNATION OF WILDERNESS STUDY AREA
 SEC. 109. In furtherance of the provisions of the Wilderness Act, certain
 lands in the California Desert Conservation Area of the Bureau of Land
 Management which comprise eleven thousand two hundred acres as generally
 depicted on a map entitled `White Mountains Wilderness Study Area--Proposed',
 dated May 1991, are hereby designated the White Mountains Wilderness Study
 Area and shall be administered by the Secretary in accordance with the
 provisions of section 603(c) of the Federal Land Policy and Management
 Act of 1976.
SUITABILITY REPORT
 SEC. 110. The Secretary is required, ten years after the date of enactment
 of this Act, to report to Congress on current and planned exploration,
 development or mining activities on, and suitability for future wilderness
 designation of, the lands as generally depicted on maps entitled `Surprise
 Canyon Wilderness--Proposed', `Middle Park Canyon Wilderness--Proposed', and
 `Death Valley National Park Boundary and Wilderness 15', dated September 1991
 and a map entitled `Manly Peak Wilderness--Proposed', dated October 1991.
WILDERNESS DESIGNATION AND MANAGEMENT IN THE NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE SYSTEM
 SEC. 111. (a) In furtherance of the purposes of the Wilderness Act,
 the following lands are hereby designated as wilderness and therefore,
 as components of the National Wilderness Preservation System:
 (1) Certain lands in the Havasu National Wildlife Refuge, California, which
 comprise approximately three thousand one hundred and ninety-five acres,
 as generally depicted on a map entitled `Havasu Wilderness--Proposed',
 and dated October 1991, and which shall be known as the Havasu Wilderness.
 (2) Certain lands in the Imperial National Wildlife Refuge, California, which
 comprise approximately five thousand eight hundred and thirty-six acres, as
 generally depicted on two maps entitled `Imperial Refuge Wilderness--Proposed
 1' and `Imperial Refuge Wilderness--Proposed 2', and dated October 1991,
 and which shall be known as the Imperial Refuge Wilderness.
 (b) Subject to valid existing rights, the wilderness areas designated
 under this section shall be administered by the Secretary in accordance
 with the provisions of the Wilderness Act governing areas designated by
 that Act as wilderness, except that any reference in such provisions to
 the effective date of the Wilderness Act (or any similar reference) shall
 be deemed to be a reference to the date of enactment of this Act.
 (c) As soon as practicable after enactment of this section, the Secretary
 shall file a map and a legal description of each wilderness area designated
 under this section with the Committees on Energy and Natural Resources and
 Environment and Public Works of the Senate and Interior and Insular Affairs
 and Merchant Marine and Fisheries of the House of Representatives. Such map
 and description shall have the same force and effect as if included in this
 Act, except that correction of clerical and typographical errors in such
 legal description and map may be made. Such map and legal description shall
 be on file and available for public inspection in the Office of the Director,
 United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior.
TITLE II--DEATH VALLEY NATIONAL PARK
FINDINGS
 SEC. 201. The Congress hereby finds that--
 (1) proclamations by Presidents Herbert Hoover in 1933 and Franklin Roosevelt
 in 1937 established and expanded the Death Valley National Monument for the
 preservation of the unusual features of scenic, scientific, and educational
 interest therein contained;
 (2) Death Valley National Monument is today recognized as a major unit of
 the National Park System, having extraordinary values enjoyed by millions
 of visitors;
 (3) the Monument boundaries established in the 1930's exclude and thereby
 expose to incompatible development and inconsistent management, contiguous
 Federal lands of essential and superlative natural, ecological, geological,
 archeological, paleontological, cultural, historical and wilderness values;
 (4) Death Valley National Monument should be substantially enlarged by
 the addition of all contiguous Federal lands of national park caliber and
 afforded full recognition and statutory protection as a national park; and
 (5) the wilderness within Death Valley should receive maximum statutory
 protection by designation pursuant to the Wilderness Act.
ESTABLISHMENT OF DEATH VALLEY NATIONAL PARK
 SEC. 202. There is hereby established the Death Valley National Park,
 as generally depicted on 23 maps entitled `Death Valley National Park
 Boundary and Wilderness--Proposed', numbered in the title one through
 twenty-three, and dated September 1991 or prior, which shall be on file
 and available for public inspection in the offices of the Superintendent of
 the Park and the Director of the National Park Service, Department of the
 Interior. The Death Valley National Monument is hereby abolished as such,
 the lands and interests therein are hereby incorporated within and made
 part of the new Death Valley National Park, and any funds available for
 purposes of the monument shall be available for purposes of the park.
TRANSFER AND ADMINISTRATION OF LANDS
 SEC. 203. Upon enactment of this title, the Secretary shall transfer the
 lands under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land Management depicted on
 the maps described in section 202 of this title, without consideration, to
 the administrative jurisdiction of the Director of the National Park Service
 for administration as part of the National Park System. The boundaries of
 the public lands and the national parks shall be adjusted accordingly. The
 Secretary shall administer the areas added to the National Park System by
 this title in accordance with the provisions of law generally applicable
 to units of the National Park System, including the Act entitled `An Act
 to establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes', approved
 August 25, 1916 (39 Stat. 535; 16 U.S.C. 1-4).
MAPS AND LEGAL DESCRIPTION
 SEC. 204. Within six months after the enactment of this title, the Secretary
 shall file maps and a legal description of the park designated under this
 title with the Energy and Natural Resources Committee of the Senate and the
 Interior and Insular Affairs Committee of the House of Representatives. Such
 maps and legal description shall have the same force and effect as if
 included in this title, except that the Secretary may correct clerical and
 typographical errors in such legal description and in the maps referred to in
 section 202. The maps and legal description shall be on file and available
 for public inspection in the offices of the Superintendent of the Park
 and the Director of the National Park Service, Department of the Interior.
DISPOSITION UNDER MINING LAWS
 SEC. 205. Subject to valid existing rights, the Federal lands and interests
 therein added to the National Park System by this title are withdrawn from
 disposition under the public land laws and from entry or appropriation
 under the mining laws of the United States, from the operation of the
 mineral leasing laws of the United States, and from operation of the
 Geothermal Steam Act of 1970.
STUDY AS TO VALIDITY OF MINING CLAIMS
 SEC. 206. The Secretary shall not approve any plan of operation prior
 to determining the validity of the unpatented mining claims, mill sites,
 and tunnel sites affected by such plan within the additions to the park
 and shall submit to Congress recommendations as to whether any valid
 or patented claims should be acquired by the United States, including
 the estimated acquisition costs of such claims, and a discussion of the
 environmental consequences of the extraction of minerals from these lands.
GRAZING
 SEC. 207. The privilege of grazing domestic livestock on lands within
 the park may continue to be exercised at no more than the current level,
 subject to applicable laws and National Park Service regulations, by
 those persons holding permits for such grazing on July 1, 1991. Upon the
 expiration of such permits the Secretary, acting through the Director of
 the National Park Service, may issue to such persons new permits for such
 grazing, subject to applicable laws and National Park Service regulations,
 but all grazing of such livestock on such lands shall cease on July
 1, 2016. Further, if such a permittee informs the Secretary that such
 permittee is willing to convey to the United States any base property with
 respect to which the permit was issued and to which such permittee holds
 title, the Secretary shall make the acquisition of such base property a
 priority as compared with the acquisition of other lands within the park,
 provided agreement can be reached concerning the terms and conditions of
 such acquisition. Any such base property which is located outside the park
 and acquired as a priority pursuant to this section shall be managed by
 the Federal agency responsible for the majority of the adjacent lands in
 accordance with the laws applicable to such adjacent lands.
TITLE III--JOSHUA TREE NATIONAL PARK
FINDINGS
 SEC. 301. The Congress hereby finds that--
 (1) a proclamation by President Franklin Roosevelt in 1936 established
 Joshua Tree National Monument to protect various objects of historical
 and scientific interest;
 (2) Joshua Tree National Monument today is recognized as a major unit of
 the National Park System, having extraordinary values enjoyed by millions
 of visitors;
 (3) the Monument boundaries as modified in 1950 and 1961 exclude and
 thereby expose to incompatible development and inconsistent management,
 contiguous Federal lands of essential and superlative natural, ecological,
 archeological, paleontological, cultural, historical and wilderness values;
 (4) Joshua Tree National Monument should be enlarged by the addition
 of contiguous Federal lands of national park caliber, and afforded full
 recognition and statutory protection as a national park; and
 (5) the nondesignated wilderness within Joshua Tree should receive statutory
 protection by designation pursuant to the Wilderness Act.
ESTABLISHMENT OF JOSHUA TREE NATIONAL PARK
 SEC. 302. There is hereby established the Joshua Tree National Park,
 as generally depicted on a map entitled `Joshua Tree National Park
 Boundary--Proposed', dated May 1991, and four maps entitled `Joshua Tree
 National Park Boundary and Wilderness', numbered in the title one through
 four, and dated October 1991 or prior, which shall be on file and available
 for public inspection in the offices of the Superintendent of the Park and
 the Director of the National Park Service, Department of the Interior. The
 Joshua Tree National Monument is hereby abolished as such, the lands and
 interests therein are hereby incorporated within and made part of the new
 Joshua Tree National Park, and any funds available for purposes of the
 monument shall be available for purposes of the park.
TRANSFER AND ADMINISTRATION OF LANDS
 SEC. 303. Upon enactment of this title, the Secretary shall transfer the
 lands under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land Management depicted on
 the maps described in section 302 of this title, without consideration, to
 the administrative jurisdiction of the Director of the National Park Service
 for administration as part of the National Park System. The boundaries of
 the public lands and the national parks shall be adjusted accordingly. The
 Secretary shall administer the areas added to the National Park System by
 this title in accordance with the provisions of law generally applicable
 to units of the National Park System, including the Act entitled `An Act
 to establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes', approved
 August 25, 1916 (39 Stat. 535; 16 U.S.C. 1-4).
MAPS AND LEGAL DESCRIPTION
 SEC. 304. Within six months after the enactment of this title, the
 Secretary shall file maps and legal description of the park designated
 by this title with the Energy and Natural Resources Committee of the
 Senate and the Interior and Insular Affairs Committee of the House of
 Representatives. Such maps and legal description shall have the same force
 and effect as if included in this title, except that the Secretary may
 correct clerical and typographical errors in such legal description and
 in the maps referred to in section 302. The maps and legal description
 shall be on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the
 Superintendent of the Park and the Director of the National Park Service,
 Department of the Interior.
DISPOSITION UNDER MINING LAWS
 SEC. 305. Subject to valid existing rights, Federal lands and interests
 therein added to the National Park System by this title are withdrawn from
 disposition under the public lands laws and from entry or appropriation
 under the mining laws of the United States, from the operation of the
 mineral leasing laws of the United States, and from the operation of the
 Geothermal Steam Act of 1970.
UTILITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY
 SEC. 306. Nothing in this title shall have the effect of terminating any
 validly issued right-of-way or customary operation maintenance, repair,
 and replacement activities in such right-of-way, issued, granted, or
 permitted to the Metropolitan Water District pursuant to the Boulder Canyon
 Project Act (43 U.S.C. 617-619b), which is located on lands included in
 the Joshua Tree National Park, but outside lands designated as wilderness
 under section 501(2). Such activities shall be conducted in a manner
 which will minimize the impact on park resources. Nothing in this title
 shall have the effect of terminating the fee title to lands or customary
 operation, maintenance, repair, and replacement activities on or under
 such lands granted to the Metropolitan Water District pursuant to the Act
 of June 18, 1932 (47 Stat. 324), which are located on lands included in
 the Joshua Tree National Park, but outside lands designated as wilderness
 under section 501(2). Such activities shall be conducted in a manner which
 will minimize the impact on park resources. The Secretary shall prepare
 within 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, in consultation
 with the Metropolitan Water District, plans for emergency access by the
 Metropolitan Water District to its lands and rights-of-way.
STUDY AS TO VALIDITY OF MINING CLAIMS
 SEC. 307. The Secretary shall not approve any plan of operation prior
 to determining the validity of the unpatented mining claims, mill sites,
 and tunnel sites affected by such plan within the park and shall submit to
 Congress recommendations as to whether any valid or patented claims should
 be acquired by the United States, including the estimated acquisition costs
 of such claims, and a discussion of the environmental consequences of the
 extraction of minerals from these lands.
TITLE IV--MOJAVE NATIONAL MONUMENT
FINDINGS
 SEC. 401. The Congress hereby finds that--
 (1) Death Valley and Joshua Tree National Parks, as established by this
 Act, protect unique and superlative desert resources, but do not embrace
 the particular ecosystems and transitional desert type found in the Mojave
 Desert area lying between them on public lands now afforded only impermanent
 administrative designation as a national scenic area;
 (2) the Mojave Desert area possesses outstanding natural, cultural,
 historical, and recreational values meriting statutory designation and
 recognition as a unit of the National Park System;
 (3) the Mojave Desert area should be afforded full recognition and statutory
 protection as a national park;
 (4) the wilderness within the Mojave Desert should receive maximum statutory
 protection by designation pursuant to the Wilderness Act; and
 (5) the Mojave Desert area provides an outstanding opportunity to develop
 services, programs, accommodations and facilities to ensure the use
 and enjoyment of the area by individuals with disabilities, consistent
 with section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Public Law 101-336,
 the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12101), and other
 appropriate laws and regulations.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE MOJAVE NATIONAL MONUMENT
 SEC. 402. (a) There is hereby established the Mojave National Monument,
 comprising approximately one million four hundred and ninety-one thousand
 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Mojave National Park
 Boundary--Proposed', dated May 1991, and ten maps entitled `Mojave National
 Park Boundary and Wilderness--Proposed', numbered in the title one through
 ten, and dated September 1991 or prior, which shall be on file and available
 for inspection in the offices of the Director of the National Park Service,
 Department of the Interior.
 (b) The Secretary shall permit hunting on all lands within the monument in
 accordance with applicable Federal and State law. The Secretary may, after
 consultation with the California Department of Fish and Game, designate
 zones where, and establish periods when, such activities will not be
 permitted for reasons of public safety, administration, fish and wildlife
 habitat, or public use and enjoyment, subject to terms and conditions as
 he deems necessary in furtherance of this Act. Nothing in this Act shall
 be construed as affecting the jurisdiction or responsibilities of the
 State of California with respect to fish and wildlife.
TRANSFER OF LANDS
 SEC. 403. Upon enactment of this title, the Secretary shall transfer the
 lands under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land Management depicted on
 the maps described in section 402 of this title, without consideration,
 to the administrative jurisdiction of the Director of the National Park
 Service. The boundaries of the public lands shall be adjusted accordingly.
MAPS AND LEGAL DESCRIPTION
 SEC. 404. Within six months after the enactment of this title, the
 Secretary shall file maps and a legal description of the monument designated
 under this title with the Energy and Natural Resources Committee of the
 Senate and the Interior and Insular Affairs Committee of the House of
 Representatives. Such maps and legal description shall have the same force
 and effect as if included in this title, except that the Secretary may
 correct clerical and typographical errors in such legal description and
 in the maps referred to in section 402. The maps and legal description
 shall be on file and available for public inspection in the offices of
 the National Park Service, Department of the Interior.
ABOLISHMENT OF SCENIC AREA
 SEC. 405. The East Mojave National Scenic Area, designated on January 13,
 1981 (46 FR 3994), and modified on August 9, 1983 (48 FR 36210), as hereby
 abolished.
ADMINISTRATION OF LANDS
 SEC. 406. The Secretary shall administer the monument in accordance with
 this title and with the provisions of law generally applicable to units of
 the National Park System, including the Act entitled `An Act to establish
 a National Park Service, and for other purposes', approved August 25, 1916
 (39 Stat. 535; 16 U.S.C. 1-4).
DISPOSITION UNDER MINING LAWS
 SEC. 407. Subject to valid existing rights, Federal lands within the
 monument, and interests therein, are withdrawn from disposition under the
 public land laws and from entry or appropriation under the mining laws of
 the United States, from the operation of the mineral leasing laws of the
 United States, and from operation of the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970.
STUDY AS TO VALIDITY OF MINING CLAIMS
 SEC. 408. The Secretary shall not approve any plan of operation prior to
 determining the validity of the unpatented mining claims, mill sites,
 and tunnel sites affected by such plan within the monument and shall
 submit to Congress recommendations as to whether any valid or patented
 claims should be acquired by the United States, including the estimated
 acquisition costs of such claims, and a discussion of the environmental
 consequences of the extraction of minerals from these lands.
REGULATION OF MINING
 SEC. 409. Subject to valid existing rights, all mining claims located
 within the monument shall be subject to such reasonable regulations as the
 Secretary may prescribe to assure that mining will, to the maximum extent
 practicable, be consistent with the protection of the scenic, scientific,
 cultural and other resources of the monument, and any patent which may be
 issued after the date of enactment of this title shall convey title only
 to the minerals together with the right to use the surface of lands for
 mining purposes subject to such reasonable regulations.
GRAZING
 SEC. 410. The privilege of grazing domestic livestock on lands within the
 monument may continue to be exercised at no more than the current level,
 subject to applicable laws and National Park Service regulations, by
 those persons holding permits for such grazing on July 1, 1991. Upon the
 expiration of such permits the Secretary, acting through the Director of
 the National Park Service, may issue to such persons new permits for such
 grazing, subject to applicable laws and National Park Service regulations,
 but all grazing of such livestock on such lands shall cease on July 1,
 2016. Further, if such a permittee informs the Secretary that such permittee
 is willing to convey to the United States any base property with respect to
 which the permit was issued and to which such permittee holds title, the
 Secretary shall make the acquisition of such base property a priority as
 compared with the acquisition of other lands within the monument, provided
 agreement can be reached concerning the terms and conditions of such
 acquisition. Any such base property which is located outside the monument
 and acquired as a priority pursuant to this section shall be managed by
 the Federal agency responsible for the majority of the adjacent lands in
 accordance with the laws applicable to such adjacent lands.
UTILITY RIGHTS OF WAY
 SEC. 411. (a)(1) Nothing in this title shall have the effect of terminating
 any validly issued right-of-way or customary operation, maintenance,
 repair, and replacement activities in such right-of-way, issued, granted, or
 permitted to Southern California Edison Company, which is located on lands
 included in the Mojave National Monument, but outside lands designated as
 wilderness under section 501(3). Such activities shall be conducted in a
 manner which will minimize the impact on monument resources.
 (2) Nothing in this title shall have the effect of prohibiting the upgrading
 of an existing electrical transmission line for the purpose of increasing
 the capacity of such transmission line in the Southern California Edison
 Company validly issued Eldorado-Lugo Transmission Line right-of-way and
 Mojave-Lugo Transmission Line right-of-way, or in a right-of-way if issued,
 granted, or permitted by the Secretary adjacent to the existing Mojave-Lugo
 Transmission Line right-of-way (hereafter in this section referred to
 as `adjacent right-of-way'), including construction of a replacement
 transmission line: Provided, That--
 (A) in the Eldorado-Lugo Transmission Line rights-of-way (hereafter in
 this section referred to as the `Eldorado rights-of-way') at no time shall
 there be more than 3 electrical transmission lines,
 (B) in the Mojave-Lugo Transmission Line right-of-way (hereafter in this
 section referred to as the `Mojave right-of-way') and adjacent right-of-way,
 removal of the existing electrical transmission line and reclamation of
 the site shall be completed no later than three years after the date on
 which construction of the upgraded transmission line begins, after which
 time there may be only one electrical transmission line in the lands
 encompassed by Mojave right-of-way and adjacent right-of-way,
 (C) if there are no more than two electrical transmission lines in the
 Eldorado rights-of-way, two electrical transmission lines in the lands
 encompassed by the Mojave right-of-way and adjacent right-of-way may
 be allowed,
 (D) in the Eldorado rights-of-way and Mojave right-of-way no additional
 land shall be issued, granted, or permitted for such upgrade unless an
 addition would reduce the impacts to monument resources,
 (E) no more than 350 feet of additional land shall be issued, granted,
 or permitted for an adjacent right-of-way to the south of the Mojave
 right-of-way unless a greater addition would reduce the impacts to monument
 resources, and
 (F) such upgrade activities, including helicopter aided construction,
 shall be conducted in a manner which will minimize the impact on monument
 resources.
 (3) The Secretary shall prepare within 180 days after the date of enactment
 of this Act, in consultation with the Southern California Edison Company,
 plans for emergency access by the Southern California Edison Company to
 its rights-of-way.
 (b) Nothing in this title shall have the effect of terminating any validly
 issued right-of-way, or customary operation, maintenance, repair, and
 replacement activities in such right-of-way; prohibiting the upgrading
 of and construction on existing facilities in such right-of-way for the
 purpose of increasing the capacity of the existing pipeline; or prohibiting
 the renewal of such right-of-way; issued, granted, or permitted to the
 Southern California Gas Company, which is located on lands included in the
 Mojave National Monument, but outside lands designated as wilderness under
 section 501(3). Such activities shall be conducted in a manner which will
 minimize the impact on monument resources.
 (c) Nothing in this title shall have the effect of terminating any
 validly issued right-of-way or customary operation, maintenance, repair,
 and replacement activities of existing facilities issued, granted, or
 permitted for communications cables or lines, which are located on lands
 included in the Mojave National Monument, but outside lands designated as
 wilderness under section 501(3). Such activities shall be conducted in a
 manner which will minimize the impact on monument resources.
PREPARATION OF MANAGEMENT PLAN
 SEC. 412. Within three years of the date of enactment of this title, the
 Secretary shall submit to the Energy and Natural Resources Committee of
 the Senate and the Interior and Insular Affairs Committee of the House
 of Representatives a detailed and comprehensive management plan for the
 monument. Such plan shall place emphasis on historical and cultural sites and
 ecological and wilderness values within the boundaries of the monument. Any
 development, including road improvements, proposed by such plan shall
 be strictly limited to that which is essential and appropriate for the
 administration of the monument and shall be designed and located so as to
 maintain its primitive nature of the area and to minimize the impairment
 of monument resources or ecological values. To the extent practicable,
 administrative facilities, employee housing, commercial visitor services,
 accommodations, and other monument-related development shall be located or
 provided for outside of the boundaries of the monument. Such plan shall
 evaluate the feasibility of using the Kelso Depot and existing railroad
 corridor to provide public access to and a facility for special interpretive,
 educational, and scientific programs within the monument. Such plan shall
 specifically address the needs of individuals with disabilities in the
 design of services, programs, accommodations and facilities consistent
 with section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Public Law 101-336,
 the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12101), and other
 appropriate laws and regulations.
GRANITE MOUNTAINS NATURAL RESERVE
 SEC. 413. (a) There is hereby designated the Granite Mountains Natural
 Reserve within the monument comprising approximately 9,000 acres as
 generally depicted on a map entitled `Mojave National Park Boundary and
 Wilderness--Proposed 6', dated May 1991.
 (b) Upon enactment of this title, the Secretary of the Interior shall enter
 into a cooperative management agreement with the University of California
 for the purposes of managing the lands within the Granite Mountains
 Natural Reserve. Such cooperative agreement shall ensure continuation
 of arid lands research and educational activities of the University of
 California, consistent with the provisions of law generally applicable to
 units of the National Park System.
CONSTRUCTION OF VISITOR CENTER
 SEC. 414. The Secretary is authorized to construct a visitor center in
 the monument for the purpose of providing information through appropriate
 displays, printed material, and other interpretive programs, about the
 resources of the monument.
ACQUISITION OF LANDS
 SEC. 415. The Secretary is authorized to acquire all lands and interest
 in lands within the boundary of the monument by donation, purchase, or
 exchange, except that--
 (1) any lands or interests therein within the boundary of the monument
 which are owned by the State of California, or any political subdivision
 thereof, may be acquired only by donation or exchange except for lands
 managed by California State Lands Commission; and
 (2) lands or interests therein within the boundary of the monument which
 are not owned by the State of California or any political subdivision
 thereof may be acquired only with the consent of the owner thereof unless
 the Secretary determines, after written notice to the owner and after
 opportunity for comment, that the property is being developed, or proposed
 to be developed, in a manner which is detrimental to the integrity of the
 monument or which is otherwise incompatible with the purposes of this title.
TITLE V--NATIONAL PARK WILDERNESS
DESIGNATION OF WILDERNESS
 SEC. 501. The following lands are hereby designated as wilderness
 in accordance with the Wilderness Act (78 Stat. 890; 16 U.S.C. 1131
 et seq.) and shall be administered by the Secretary of the Interior in
 accordance with the applicable provisions of the Wilderness Act:
 (1) Death Valley National Park Wilderness, comprising approximately three
 million one hundred eighty-three thousand four hundred and thirty-eight
 acres, as generally depicted on 23 maps entitled `Death Valley National Park
 Boundary and Wilderness', numbered in the title one through twenty-three,
 and dated September 1991 or prior, and three maps entitled `Death Valley
 National Park Wilderness', numbered in the title one through three, and dated
 May 1991 or prior, and which shall be known as the Death Valley Wilderness;
 (2) Joshua Tree National Park Wilderness Additions, comprising approximately
 one hundred thirty-one thousand seven hundred and eighty acres, as generally
 depicted on four maps entitled `Joshua Tree National Park Boundary and
 Wilderness--Proposed', numbered in the title one through four, and dated
 October 1991 or prior, and which are hereby incorporated in, and which
 shall be deemed to be a part of the Joshua Tree Wilderness as designated
 by Public Law 94-567; and
 (3) Mojave National Monument Wilderness, comprising approximately six
 hundred ninety-five thousand fifty-six acres, as generally depicted on ten
 maps entitled `Mojave National Park Boundary and Wilderness--Proposed',
 numbered in the title one through ten, and dated October 1991 or prior,
 and seven maps entitled `Mojave National Park Wilderness--Proposed',
 numbered in the title one through seven, and dated October 1991 or prior,
 and which shall be known as the Mojave Wilderness.
 (4) Upon cessation of all uses prohibited by the Wilderness Act and
 publication by the Secretary in the Federal Register of notice of such
 cessation, potential wilderness, comprising approximately six thousand
 eight hundred and forty acres, as described in `1988 Death Valley National
 Monument Draft General Management Plan Draft Environmental Impact Statement'
 (hereafter in this title referred to as `Draft Plan') and as generally
 depicted on map in the Draft Plan entitled `Wilderness Plan Death Valley
 National Monument', dated January 1988, and which shall be deemed to be a
 part of the Death Valley Wilderness as designated in paragraph (1). Lands
 identified in the Draft Plan as potential wilderness shall be managed by
 the Secretary insofar as practicable as wilderness until such time as said
 lands are designated as wilderness.
FILING OF MAPS AND DESCRIPTIONS
 SEC. 502. Maps and a legal description of the boundaries of the areas
 designated in section 501 of this title shall be on file and available
 for public inspection in the Office of the Director of the National Park
 Service, Department of the Interior, and in the Office of the Superintendent
 of each area designated in section 501. As soon as practicable after this
 title takes effect, maps of the wilderness areas and legal descriptions of
 their boundaries shall be filed with the Committee on Energy and Natural
 Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs of
 the House of Representatives, and such maps and descriptions shall have the
 same force and effect as if included in this title, except that the Secretary
 may correct clerical and typographical errors in such maps and descriptions.
ADMINISTRATION OF WILDERNESS AREAS
 SEC. 503. The areas designated by section 501 of this title as wilderness
 shall be administered by the Secretary in accordance with the applicable
 provisions of the Wilderness Act governing areas designated by that
 title as wilderness, except that any reference in such provision to the
 effective date of the Wilderness Act shall be deemed to be a reference
 to the effective date of this title, and where appropriate, and reference
 to the Secretary of Agriculture shall be deemed to be a reference to the
 Secretary of the Interior.
TITLE VI--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
TRANSFER OF LANDS TO RED ROCK CANYON STATE PARK
 SEC. 601. Upon enactment of this title, the Secretary of the Interior shall
 transfer to the State of California certain lands within the California
 Desert Conservation Area, California, of the Bureau of Land Management,
 comprising approximately twenty thousand five hundred acres, as generally
 depicted on two maps entitled `Red Rock Canyon State Park Additions 1' and
 `Red Rock Canyon State Park Additions 2', dated May 1991, for inclusion in
 the State of California Park System. Should the State of California cease
 to manage these lands as part of the State Park System, ownership of the
 lands shall revert to the Department of the Interior to be managed as part
 of the California Desert Conservation Area to provide maximum protection
 for the area's scenic and scientific values.
DESERT LILY SANCTUARY
 SEC. 602. (a) There is hereby established the Desert Lily Sanctuary
 within the California Desert Conservation Area, California, of the Bureau
 of Land Management, comprising approximately two thousand forty acres,
 as generally depicted on a map entitled `Desert Lily Sanctuary', dated
 February 1986. The Secretary of the Interior shall administer the area to
 provide maximum protection to the desert lily.
 (b) Subject to valid existing rights, Federal lands within the sanctuary,
 and interests therein, are withdrawn from disposition under the public land
 laws and from entry or appropriation under the mining laws of the United
 States, from the operation of the mineral leasing laws of the United States,
 and from operation of the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970.
INDIAN CANYONS NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE
 SEC. 603.
LAND TENURE ADJUSTMENTS
 SEC. 604. In preparing land tenure adjustment decisions with the California
 Desert Conservation Area, of the Bureau of Land Management, the Secretary
 shall give priority to consolidating Federal ownership within the national
 park units and wilderness areas designated by this Act.
LAND DISPOSAL
 SEC. 605. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of
 the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture may not dispose of any lands
 within the boundaries of the wilderness, park, or monument designated under
 this Act or grant a right-of-way in any lands within the boundaries of the
 wilderness designated under this Act. Further, none of the lands within the
 boundaries of the wilderness, park, or monument designated under this Act
 shall be granted to or otherwise made available for use by the Metropolitan
 Water District and any other agencies or persons pursuant to the Boulder
 Canyon Project Act (43 U.S.C. 617-619b) or any similar acts.
MANAGEMENT OF NEWLY ACQUIRED LANDS
 SEC. 606. Any lands within the boundaries of a wilderness area designated
 under this Act which are acquired by the Federal Government, shall become
 part of the wilderness area within which they are located and shall be
 managed in accordance with all the provisions of this Act and other laws
 applicable to such wilderness area.
NATIVE AMERICAN USES
 SEC. 607. In recognition of the past use of the parks, monument, and
 wilderness areas designed under this Act by Indian people for traditional
 cultural and religious purposes, the Secretary shall ensure access to
 such parks, monument, and wilderness areas by Indian people for such
 traditional cultural and religious purposes. In implementing this section,
 the Secretary, upon the request of an Indian tribe or Indian religious
 community, shall temporarily close to the general public use of one or
 more specific portions of park, monument, or wilderness areas in order
 to protect the privacy of traditional cultural and religious activities
 in such areas by Indian people. Such access shall be consistent with the
 purpose and intent of Public Law 95-341 (42 U.S.C. 1996) commonly referred
 to as the `American Indian Religious Freedom Act', and with respect to areas
 designated as wilderness, the Wilderness Act (78 Stat. 890; 16 U.S.C. 1131).
WATER RIGHTS
 SEC. 608. (a) With respect to each wilderness area designated by this Act,
 Congress hereby reserves a quantity of water sufficient to fulfill the
 purposes of this Act. The priority date of such reserved water rights
 shall be the date of enactment of this Act.
 (b) The Secretary of the Interior and all other officers of the United
 States shall take all steps necessary to protect the rights reserved by
 this section, including the filing by the Secretary of a claim for the
 quantification of such rights in any present or future appropriate stream
 adjudication in the courts of the State of California in which the United
 States is or may be joined and which is conducted in accordance with
 section 208 of the Act of July 10, 1952 (66 Stat. 560, 44 U.S.C. 666;
 commonly referred to as the McCarran Amendment).
 (c) Nothing in this Act shall be construed as a relinquishment or reduction
 of any water rights reserved or appropriated by the United States in the
 State of California on or before the date of enactment of this Act.
 (d) The Federal water rights reserved by this Act are specific to the
 wilderness areas located in the State of California designated under this
 Act. Nothing in this Act related to the reserved Federal water rights
 shall be construed as establishing a precedent with regard to any future
 designations, nor shall it constitute an interpretation of any other Act
 or any designation made thereto.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS
 SEC. 609. There are hereby authorized to be appropriated such sums as may
 be necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
STATE SCHOOL LANDS
 SEC. 610. (a) Upon request of the California State Lands Commission
 (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `Commission'), the Secretary
 shall enter into negotiations for an agreement to exchange Federal lands
 or interests therein on the list referred to in subsection (b)(2) for
 California State School Lands (hereinafter in this section referred to as
 `State School Lands') or interests therein which are located within the
 boundaries of one or more of the wilderness areas or park units designated
 by this Act. The Secretary shall negotiate in good faith to reach a land
 exchange agreement consistent with the requirements of section 206 of the
 Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976.
 (b) Within 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary
 shall send to the Commission and to the Committees a list of the following:
 (1) The State School Lands or interests therein (including mineral interests)
 which are located within the boundaries of the wilderness areas or park
 units designated by this Act.
 (2) Lands under the Secretary's jurisdiction to be offered for exchange,
 including in the following priority:
 (A) Lands with mineral interests, including geothermal, which have the
 potential for commercial development but which are not currently under
 mineral lease or producing Federal mineral revenues.
 (B) Federal lands in California managed by the Bureau of Reclamation that the
 Secretary determines are not needed for any Bureau of Reclamation project.
 (C) Any public lands in California that the Secretary, pursuant to the
 Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976, has determined to be
 suitable for disposal through exchange.
 (c)(1) If an agreement under this section is for an exchange involving five
 thousand acres or less of Federal land or interests therein, or Federal lands
 valued at less than $5,000,000, the Secretary may carry out the exchange
 in accordance with the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976.
 (2) If an agreement under this section is for an exchange involving more
 than five thousand acres of Federal land or interests therein, or Federal
 land valued at more than $5,000,000, the agreement shall be submitted to
 the Committees, together with a report containing--
 (A) a complete list and appraisal of the lands or interests in lands
 proposed for exchange; and
 (B) a determination that the State School Lands proposed to be acquired
 by the United States do not contain any hazardous waste, toxic waste,
 or radioactive waste.
 (d) An agreement submitted under subsection (c)(2) shall not take effect
 unless approved by a joint resolution enacted by the Congress.
 (e) If exchanges of all of the State School Lands are not completed by
 October 1, 1996, the Secretary shall adjust the appraised value of any
 remaining inholdings consistent with the provisions of section 206 of the
 Federal Land Management Policy Act of 1976. The Secretary shall establish
 an account in the name of the Commission in the amount of such appraised
 value. Title to the State School Lands shall be transferred to the United
 States at the time such account is credited.
 (f) The Commission may use the credit in its account to bid, as any other
 bidder, for excess or surplus Federal property to be sold in the State
 of California in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations of
 the Federal agency offering such property for sale. The account shall
 be adjusted to reflect successful bids under this section or payments or
 forfeited deposits, penalties, or other costs assessed to the bidder in
 the course of such sales. In the event that the balance in the account
 has not been reduced to zero by October 1, 2000, there are authorized to
 be appropriated to the Secretary for payment to the California State Lands
 Commission funds equivalent to the balance remaining in the account as of
 October 1, 2000.
 (g) As used in this section, the term `Committees' means the Committee
 on Interior and Insular Affairs of the House of Representatives and the
 Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate.
EXCHANGES
 SEC. 611. (a) Upon request of the Catellus Development Corporation
 (hereafter in this section referred to as `Catellus'), the Secretary
 shall enter into negotiations for an agreement or agreements to exchange
 Federal lands or interests therein on the list referred to in subsection
 (b)(2) of this section for lands of Catellus or interests therein which
 are located within the boundaries of one or more of the wilderness areas
 or park units designated by this Act.
 (b) Within six months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary
 shall send to Catellus and to the Committees a list of the following:
 (1) Lands of Catellus or interests therein (including mineral interests)
 which are located within the boundaries of the wilderness areas or park
 units designated by this Act.
 (2) Lands, wherever located, under the Secretary's jurisdiction to be
 offered for exchange, in the following priority:
 (A) Lands, including lands with mineral and geothermal interests, which
 have the potential for commercial development but which are not currently
 under lease or producing Federal revenues.
 (B) Federal lands managed by the Bureau of Reclamation that the Secretary
 determines are not needed for any Bureau of Reclamation project.
 (C) Any public lands that the Secretary, pursuant to the Federal Land
 Policy and Management Act of 1976, has determined to be suitable for
 disposal through exchange.
 (c)(1) If an agreement under this section is for (A) an exchange involving
 lands outside the State of California, (B) more than 5,000 acres of
 Federal land or interests therein in California, or (C) Federal lands in
 any State valued at more than $5,000,000, the Secretary shall provide to
 the Committees a detailed report of such land exchange agreements.
 (2) All land exchange agreements shall be consistent with the Federal Land
 Policy and Management Act of 1976.
 (3) Any report submitted to the Committees under this subsection shall
 include the following:
 (A) A complete list and appraisal of the lands or interests in land proposed
 for exchange.
 (B) A complete list of the lands, if any, to be acquired by the United
 States which contain any hazardous waste, toxic waste, or radioactive
 waste which requires removal or remedial action under Federal or State law,
 together with the estimated costs of any such action.
 (4) An agreement under this subsection shall not take effect unless approved
 by a joint resolution enacted by the Congress.
 (d) The Secretary shall provide the California State Lands Commission
 with a 180-day right of first refusal to exchange for any Federal lands or
 interests therein, located in the State of California, on the list referred
 to in subsection (b)(2). Any lands with respect to which a right of first
 refusal is not noticed within such period or exercised under this subsection
 shall be available to Catellus for exchange in accordance with this section.
 (e) On January 3, 1996, the Secretary shall provide to the Committees a list
 and appraisal consistent with the Federal Land Policy and Management Act
 of 1976 of all Catellus lands eligible for exchange under this section for
 which an exchange has not been completed. With respect to any of such lands
 for which an exchange has not been completed by October 1, 1996 (hereafter in
 this section referred to as `remaining lands'), the Secretary shall establish
 an account in the name of Catellus (hereafter in this section referred to
 as the `exchange account'). Upon the transfer of title by Catellus to all
 or a portion of the remaining lands to the United States, the Secretary
 shall credit the exchange account in the amount of the appraised value of
 the transferred remaining lands at the time of such transfer.
 (f) Catellus may use the credit in the exchange account to bid, as any other
 bidder, for any property real, personal, or mixed, wherever located, owned
 or controlled by the United States, including in a corporate capacity or
 as a receiver, conservator, or similar fiduciary capacity to be sold in
 accordance with the applicable laws and regulations of the Federal agency
 or instrumentality, or any element thereof, offering such property for
 sale. Upon approval by the Secretary in writing, the credits in Catellus's
 exchange account may be transferred or sold in whole or in part by Catellus
 to any other party, thereby vesting such party with all the rights formerly
 held by Catellus. The exchange account shall be adjusted to reflect
 successful bids under this section or payments or forfeited deposits,
 penalties, or other costs assessed to the bidder in the course of such sales.
 (g)(1) The Secretary shall not accept title pursuant to this section to
 any lands unless such title includes all right, title, and interest in
 and to the fee estate.
 (2) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the Secretary may accept title to any
 subsurface estate where the United States holds title to the surface estate.
 (3) This subsection does not apply to easements and rights-of-way for
 utilities or roads.
 (h) In no event shall the Secretary accept title under this section to
 lands which contain any hazardous waste, toxic waste, or radioactive waste
 which requires removal or remedial action under Federal or State law unless
 such remedial action has been completed prior to the transfer.
 (i) For purposes of the section, any appraisal shall be consistent with
 the provisions of section 206 of the Federal Land Policy and Management
 Act of 1976.
 (j) As used in this section, the term `Committees' means the Committee
 on Interior and Insular Affairs of the House of Representatives and the
 Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate.
TITLE VII--DEFINITION
DEFINITION
 SEC. 701. For the purposes of this Act:
 (1) The term `Secretary', unless specifically designated otherwise, means
 the Secretary of the Interior.
 (2) The term `public lands' means any land and interest in land owned
 by the United States and administered by the Secretary of the Interior
 through the Bureau of Land Management.
TITLE VIII--MILITARY LANDS AND OVERFLIGHTS
SEC. 801. SHORT TITLE AND FINDINGS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This title may be cited as the `California Military Lands
 Withdrawal and Overflights Act of 1991'.
 (b) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) the Federal lands within the desert regions of California have provided
 essential opportunities for military training, research, and development
 for the Armed Forces of the United States and allied nations;
 (2) alternative sites for military training and other military activities
 carried out on Federal lands in the California desert area are not readily
 available;
 (3) while changing world conditions have lessened to some extent the
 immediacy of military threats to the national security of the United States
 and its allies, there remains a need for military training, research,
 and development activities of the types that have been carried out on
 Federal lands in the California desert area; and
 (4) continuation of existing military training, research, and development
 activities, under appropriate terms and conditions, is not incompatible
 with the protection and proper management of the natural, environmental,
 cultural, and other resources and values of the Federal lands in the
 California desert area.
SEC. 802. WITHDRAWALS.
 (a) CHINA LAKE- (1) Subject to valid existing rights and except as otherwise
 provided in this title, the Federal lands referred to in paragraph (2),
 and all other areas within the boundary of such lands as depicted on the
 map specified in such paragraph which may become subject to the operation of
 the public land laws, are hereby withdrawn from all forms of appropriation
 under the public land laws (including the mining laws and the mineral leasing
 laws). Such lands are reserved for use by the Secretary of the Navy for--
 (A) use as a research, development, test, and evaluation laboratory;
 (B) use as a range for air warfare weapons and weapon systems;
 (C) use as a high hazard training area for aerial gunnery, rocketry,
 electronic warfare and countermeasures, tactical maneuvering and air
 support; and
 (D) subject to the requirements of section 804(f), other defense-related
 purposes consistent with the purposes specified in this paragraph.
 (2) The lands referred to in paragraph (1) are the Federal lands, located
 within the boundaries of the China Lake Naval Weapons Center, comprising
 approximately 1,100,000 acres in Inyo, Kern, and San Bernardino Counties,
 California, as generally depicted on a map entitled `China Lake Naval
 Weapons Center Withdrawal--Proposed', dated January 1985, and filed in
 accordance with section 803.
 (b) CHOCOLATE MOUNTAIN- (1) Subject to valid existing rights and except
 as otherwise provided in this title, the Federal lands referred to in
 paragraph (2), and all other areas within the boundary of such lands as
 depicted on the map specified in such paragraph which may become subject
 to the operation of the public land laws, are hereby withdrawn from all
 forms of appropriation under the public land laws (including the mining
 laws and the mineral leasing and the geothermal leasing laws). Such lands
 are reserved for use by the Secretary of the Navy for--
 (A) testing and training for aerial bombing, missile firing, tactical
 maneuvering and air support; and
 (B) subject to the provisions of section 804(f), other defense-related
 purposes consistent with the purposes specified in this paragraph.
 (2) The lands referred to in paragraph (1) are the Federal lands comprising
 approximately 226,711 acres in Imperial County, California, as generally
 depicted on a map entitled `Chocolate Mountain Aerial Gunnery Range
 Proposed--Withdrawal' dated November 1991 and filed in accordance with
 section 803.
SEC. 803. MAPS AND LEGAL DESCRIPTIONS.
 (a) PUBLICATION AND FILING REQUIREMENT- As soon as practicable after the
 date of enactment of this title, the Secretary of the Interior shall--
 (1) publish in the Federal Register a notice containing the legal description
 of the lands withdrawn and reserved by this title; and
 (2) file maps and the legal description of the lands withdrawn and reserved
 by this title with the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the
 United States Senate and with the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs
 of the United States House of Representatives.
 (b) TECHNICAL CORRECTIONS- Such maps and legal descriptions shall have
 the same force and effect as if they were included in this title except
 that the Secretary of the Interior may correct clerical and typographical
 errors in such maps and legal descriptions.
 (c) AVAILABILITY FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION- Copies of such maps and legal
 descriptions shall be available for public inspection in the Office of the
 Director of the Bureau of Land Management, Washington, District of Columbia;
 the Office of the Director, California State Office of the Bureau of Land
 Management, Sacramento, California; the office of the commander of the
 Naval Weapons Center, China Lake, California; the office of the commanding
 officer, Marine Corps Air Station, Yuma Arizona; and the Office of the
 Secretary of Defense, Washington, District of Columbia.
 (d) REIMBURSEMENT- The Secretary of Defense shall reimburse the Secretary
 of the Interior for the cost of implementing this section.
SEC. 804. MANAGEMENT OF WITHDRAWN LANDS.
 (a) MANAGEMENT BY THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR- (1) Except as provided
 in subsection (g), during the period of the withdrawal the Secretary of
 the Interior shall manage the lands withdrawn under section 802 pursuant
 to the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1701 et
 seq.) and other applicable law, including this title.
 (2) To the extent consistent with applicable law and Executive orders,
 the lands withdrawn under section 802 may be managed in a manner permitting--
 (A) the continuation of grazing pursuant to applicable law and Executive
 orders where permitted on the date of enactment of this title;
 (B) protection of wildlife and wildlife habitat;
 (C) control of predatory and other animals;
 (D) recreation (but only on lands withdrawn by section 802(a) (relating
 to China Lake));
 (E) the prevention and appropriate suppression of brush and range fires
 resulting from nonmilitary activities; and
 (F) geothermal leasing on the lands withdrawn under section 802(a)
 (relating to China Lake).
 (3)(A) All nonmilitary use of such lands, including the uses described
 in paragraph (2), shall be subject to such conditions and restrictions as
 may be necessary to permit the military use of such lands for the purposes
 specified in or authorized pursuant to this title.
 (B) The Secretary of the Interior may issue any lease, easement,
 right-of-way, or other authorization with respect to the nonmilitary use
 of such lands only with the concurrence of the Secretary of the Navy.
 (b) CLOSURE TO PUBLIC- (1) If the Secretary of the Navy determines that
 military operations, public safety, or national security require the closure
 to public use of any road, trail, or other portion of the lands withdrawn by
 this title, the Secretary may take such action as the Secretary determines
 necessary or desirable to effect and maintain such closure.
 (2) Any such closure shall be limited to the minimum areas and periods
 which the Secretary of the Navy determines are required to carry out
 this subsection.
 (3) Before and during any closure under this subsection, the Secretary of
 the Navy shall--
 (A) keep appropriate warning notices posted; and
 (B) take appropriate steps to notify the public concerning such closures.
 (c) MANAGEMENT PLAN- The Secretary of the Interior (after consultation with
 the Secretary of the Navy) shall develop a plan for the management of each
 area withdrawn under section 802 during the period of such withdrawal. Each
 plan shall--
 (1) be consistent with applicable law;
 (2) be subject to conditions and restrictions specified in subsection (a)(3);
 (3) include such provisions as may be necessary for proper management and
 protection of the resources and values of such area; and
 (4) be developed not later than three years after the date of enactment
 of this title.
 (d) BRUSH AND RANGE FIRES- The Secretary of the Navy shall take necessary
 precautions to prevent and suppress brush and range fires occurring within
 and outside the lands withdrawn under section 802 as a result of military
 activities and may seek assistance from the Bureau of Land Management in
 the suppression of such fires. The memorandum of understanding required
 by subsection (e) shall provide for Bureau of Land Management assistance
 in the suppression of such fires, and for a transfer of funds from the
 Department of the Navy to the Bureau of Land Management as compensation
 for such assistance.
 (e) MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING- (1) The Secretary of the Interior and
 the Secretary of the Navy shall (with respect to each land withdrawal
 under section 802) enter into a memorandum of understanding to implement
 the management plan developed under subsection (c). Any such memorandum
 of understanding shall provide that the Director of the Bureau of Land
 Management shall provide assistance in the suppression of fires resulting
 from the military use of lands withdrawn under section 802 if requested
 by the Secretary of the Navy.
 (2) The duration of any such memorandum shall be the same as the period
 of the withdrawal of the lands under section 802.
 (f) ADDITIONAL MILITARY USES- (1) Lands withdrawn by section 802 may
 be used for defense-related uses other than those specified in such
 section. The Secretary of Defense shall promptly notify the Secretary of
 the Interior in the event that the lands withdrawn by this title will be
 used for defense-related purposes other than those specified in section
 802. Such notification shall indicate the additional use or uses involved,
 the proposed duration of such uses, and the extent to which such additional
 military uses of the withdrawn lands will require that additional or more
 stringent conditions or restrictions be imposed on otherwise-permitted
 nonmilitary uses of the withdrawn land or portions thereof.
 (g) MANAGEMENT OF CHINA LAKE- (1) The Secretary of the Interior may assign
 the management responsibility for the lands withdrawn under section 802(a)
 to the Secretary of the Navy who shall manage such lands, and issue leases,
 easements, rights-of-way, and other authorizations, in accordance with this
 title and cooperative management arrangements between the Secretary of the
 Interior and the Secretary of the Navy. In the case that the Secretary of
 the Interior assigns such management responsibility to the Secretary of
 the Navy before the development of the management plan under subsection
 (c), the Secretary of the Navy (after consultation with the Secretary of
 the Interior) shall develop such management plan.
 (2) The Secretary of the Interior shall be responsible for the issuance of
 any lease, easement, right-of-way, and other authorization with respect to
 any activity which involves both the lands withdrawn under section 802(a)
 and any other lands. Any such authorization shall be issued only with the
 consent of the Secretary of the Navy and, to the extent that such activity
 involves lands withdrawn under section 802(a), shall be subject to such
 conditions as the Secretary of the Navy may prescribe.
 (3) The Secretary of the Navy shall prepare and submit to the Secretary of
 the Interior an annual report on the status of the natural and cultural
 resources and values of the lands withdrawn under section 802(a). The
 Secretary of the Interior shall transmit such report to the Committee
 on Interior and Insular Affairs of the House of Representatives and the
 Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate.
 (4) The Secretary of the Navy shall be responsible for the management of
 wild horses and burros located on the lands withdrawn under section 802(a)
 and may utilize helicopters and motorized vehicles for such purposes. Such
 management shall be in accordance with laws applicable to such management
 on public lands and with an appropriate memorandum of understanding between
 the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of the Navy.
 (5) Neither this title nor any other provision of law shall be construed
 to prohibit the Secretary of the Interior from issuing and administering
 any lease for the development and utilization of geothermal steam and
 associated geothermal resources on the lands withdrawn under section
 802(a) pursuant to the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970 (30 U.S.C. 1001 et
 seq.) and other applicable law, but no such lease shall be issued without
 the concurrence of the Secretary of the Navy.
 (6) This title shall not affect the geothermal exploration and development
 authority of the Secretary of the Navy under section 2689 of title 10,
 United States Code, except that the Secretary of the Navy shall obtain the
 concurrence of the Secretary of the Interior before taking action under
 that section with respect to the lands withdrawn under section 802(a).
SEC. 805. DURATION OF WITHDRAWALS.
 (a) DURATION- The withdrawal and reservation established by this title
 shall terminate 15 years after the date of enactment of this title.
 (b) DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT- No later than 12 years after
 the date of enactment of this title, the Secretary of the Navy shall
 publish a draft environmental impact statement concerning continued
 or renewed withdrawal of any portion of the lands withdrawn by this
 title for which that Secretary intends to seek such continued or renewed
 withdrawal. Such draft environmental impact statement shall be consistent
 with the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969
 (42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.) applicable to such a draft environmental impact
 statement. Prior to the termination date specified in subsection (a), the
 Secretary of the Navy shall hold a public hearing on any draft environmental
 impact statement published pursuant to this subsection. Such hearing shall
 be held in the State of California in order to receive public comments on
 the alternatives and other matters included in such draft environmental
 impact statement.
 (c) EXTENSIONS OR RENEWALS- The withdrawals established by this title may
 not be extended or renewed except by an Act or joint resolution.
SEC. 806. ONGOING DECONTAMINATION.
 (a) PROGRAM- Throughout the duration of the withdrawals made by this title,
 the Secretary of the Navy, to the extent funds are made available, shall
 maintain a program of decontamination of lands withdrawn by this title at
 least at the level of decontamination activities performed on such lands
 in fiscal year 1986.
 (b) REPORTS- At the same time as the President transmits to the Congress the
 President's proposed budget for the first fiscal year beginning after the
 date of enactment of this title and for each subsequent fiscal year, the
 Secretary of the Navy shall transmit to the Committees on Appropriations,
 Armed Services, and Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and to
 the Committees on Appropriations, Armed Services, and Interior and Insular
 Affairs of the House of Representatives a description of the decontamination
 efforts undertaken during the previous fiscal year on such lands and the
 decontamination activities proposed for such lands during the next fiscal
 year including:
 (1) amounts appropriated and obligated or expended for decontamination of
 such lands;
 (2) the methods used to decontaminate such lands;
 (3) amount and types of contaminants removed from such lands;
 (4) estimated types and amounts of residual contamination on such lands; and
 (5) an estimate of the costs for full decontamination of such lands and
 the estimate of the time to complete such decontamination.
SEC. 807. REQUIREMENTS FOR RENEWAL.
 (a) NOTICE AND FILING- (1) No later than three years prior to the termination
 of the withdrawal and reservation established by this title, the Secretary
 of the Navy shall advise the Secretary of the Interior as to whether or
 not the Secretary of the Navy will have a continuing military need for
 any of the lands withdrawn under section 802 after the termination date
 of such withdrawal and reservation.
 (2) If the Secretary of the Navy concludes that there will be a continuing
 military need for any of such lands after the termination date, the
 Secretary shall file an application for extension of the withdrawal and
 reservation of such needed lands in accordance with the regulations and
 procedures of the Department of the Interior applicable to the extension
 of withdrawals of lands for military uses.
 (3) If, during the period of withdrawal and reservation, the Secretary
 of the Navy decides to relinquish all or any of the lands withdrawn and
 reserved by this title, the Secretary shall file a notice of intention to
 relinquish with the Secretary of the Interior.
 (b) CONTAMINATION- (1) Before transmitting a notice of intention to
 relinquish pursuant to subsection (a), the Secretary of Defense, acting
 through the Department of Navy, shall prepare a written determination
 concerning whether and to what extent the lands that are to be relinquished
 are contaminated with explosive, toxic, or other hazardous materials.
 (2) A copy of such determination shall be transmitted with the notice of
 intention to relinquish.
 (3) Copies of both the notice of intention to relinquish and the
 determination concerning the contaminated state of the lands shall be
 published in the Federal Register by the Secretary of the Interior.
 (c) DECONTAMINATION- If any land which is the subject of a notice of
 intention to relinquish pursuant to subsection (a) is contaminated, and the
 Secretary of the Interior, in consultation with the Secretary of the Navy,
 determines that decontamination is practicable and economically feasible
 (taking into consideration the potential future use and value of the land)
 and that upon decontamination, the land could be opened to operation
 of some or all of the public land laws, including the mining laws, the
 Secretary of the Navy shall decontaminate the land to the extent that
 funds are appropriated for such purpose.
 (d) ALTERNATIVES- If the Secretary of the Interior, after consultation with
 the Secretary of the Navy, concludes that decontamination of any land which
 is the subject of a notice of intention to relinquish pursuant to subsection
 (a) is not practicable or economically feasible, or that the land cannot be
 decontaminated sufficiently to be opened to operation of some or all of the
 public land laws, or if Congress does not appropriate a sufficient amount
 of funds for the decontamination of such land, the Secretary of the Interior
 shall not be required to accept the land proposed for relinquishment.
 (e) STATUS OF CONTAMINATED LANDS- If, because of their contaminated state,
 the Secretary of the Interior declines to accept jurisdiction over lands
 withdrawn by this title which have been proposed for relinquishment, or
 if at the expiration of the withdrawal made by this title the Secretary of
 the Interior determines that some of the lands withdrawn by this title are
 contaminated to an extent which prevents opening such contaminated lands
 to operation of the public land laws--
 (1) the Secretary of the Navy shall take appropriate steps to warn the
 public of the contaminated state of such lands and any risks associated
 with entry onto such lands;
 (2) after the expiration of the withdrawal, the Secretary of the Navy
 shall undertake no activities on such lands except in connection with
 decontamination of such lands; and
 (3) the Secretary of the Navy shall report to the Secretary of the Interior
 and to the Congress concerning the status of such lands and all actions
 taken in furtherance of this subsection.
 (f) REVOCATION AUTHORITY- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the
 Secretary of the Interior, upon deciding that it is in the public interest
 to accept jurisdiction over lands proposed for relinquishment pursuant
 to subsection (a), is authorized to revoke the withdrawal and reservation
 established by this title as it applies to such lands. Should the decision be
 made to revoke the withdrawal and reservation, the Secretary of the Interior
 shall publish in the Federal Register an appropriate order which shall--
 (1) terminate the withdrawal and reservation;
 (2) constitute official acceptance of full jurisdiction over the lands by
 the Secretary of the Interior; and
 (3) state the date upon which the lands will be opened to the operation
 of some or all of the public lands laws, including the mining laws.
SEC. 808. DELEGABILITY.
 (a) DEFENSE- The functions of the Secretary of Defense or the Secretary
 of the Navy under this title may be delegated.
 (b) INTERIOR- The functions of the Secretary of the Interior under this
 title may be delegated, except that an order described in section 807(f)
 may be approved and signed only by the Secretary of the Interior, the Under
 Secretary of the Interior, or an Assistant Secretary of the Department of
 the Interior.
SEC. 809. HUNTING, FISHING, AND TRAPPING.
 All hunting, fishing, and trapping on the lands withdrawn by this title
 shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of section 2671 of
 title 10, United States Code.
SEC. 810. IMMUNITY OF UNITED STATES.
 The United States and all departments or agencies thereof shall be held
 harmless and shall not be liable for any injury or damage to persons
 or property suffered in the course of any geothermal leasing or other
 authorized nonmilitary activity conducted on lands described in section
 802 of this title.
SEC. 811. EL CENTRO RANGES.
 The Secretary of the Interior is authorized to permit the Secretary of the
 Navy to use until January 1, 1994, the approximately 44,870 acres of public
 lands in Imperial County, California, known as the East Mesa and West Mesa
 ranges, in accordance with the Memorandum of Understanding dated June 29,
 1987, between the Bureau of Land Management, the Bureau of Reclamation,
 and the Department of the Navy. Such use shall be consistent with such
 Memorandum of Understanding and such additional terms and conditions as
 the Secretary of the Interior may require in order to protect the natural,
 scientific, environmental, cultural, and other resources and values of such
 lands and to minimize the extent to which use of such lands for military
 purposes impedes or restricts use of such or other public lands for other
 purposes. All military uses of such lands shall cease on January 1, 1994,
 unless authorized by subsequent Act of Congress.
SEC. 812. MILITARY OVERFLIGHTS.
 (a) DISCLAIMER- Nothing in this Act shall preclude low-level overflights
 by military aircraft, the designation of new units of special airspace,
 or the use or establishment of military flight training routes over the
 new units of the National Park or National Wilderness Preservation Systems
 (or any additions to existing units of such Systems) designated by this Act.
 (b) MONITORING- The Secretary of the Interior shall monitor the effects
 of aircraft overflights on the resources and values of the units of
 the National Park System and National Wilderness Preservation System
 designated or expanded by this Act, and on visitor enjoyment of such
 units. The Secretary of the Interior shall actively seek the assistance
 of the Secretary of Defense, consistent with national security needs, to
 resolve concerns related to such overflights and to prevent, eliminate,
 or minimize the derogation of resources and values and of visitor enjoyment
 associated with overflight activities.
Passed the House of Representatives November 26, 1991.
Attest:
Clerk
cHR 2929 EH1S----2
cHR 2929 EH1S----3
cHR 2929 EH1S----4
cHR 2929 EH1S----5
cHR 2929 EH1S----6
cHR 2929 EH1S----7