S 2164 IS
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2164
To prevent potential abuses of electronic monitoring in the workplace.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
February 22 (legislative day, JANUARY 23), 1990
Mr. SIMON introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources
A BILL
To prevent potential abuses of electronic monitoring in the workplace.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Privacy for Consumers and Workers Act'.
SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act--
 (1) the term `electronic monitoring' means the collection, storage, analysis,
 and reporting of information concerning an employee's activities by means
 of a computer, electronic observation and supervision, remote telephone
 surveillance, telephone call accounting, or other form of visual, auditory,
 or computer-based surveillance conducted by any transfer of signs, signals,
 writing, images, sounds, data, or intelligence of any nature transmitted
 in whole or in part by a wire, radio, electromagnetic, photoelectronic,
 or photo-optical system;
 (2) the term `employee' means any current or former employee of an employer;
 (3) the term `employer' means any person who employs employees, and includes
 any individual, corporation, partnership, labor organization, unincorporated
 association, or any other legal business, the Federal Government, any State
 (or political subdivision thereof), and any agent of the employer;
 (4) the term `personal data' means any information concerning an employee
 which, because of name, identifying number, mark, or description,
 can be readily associated with a particular individual, and such term
 includes information contained in printouts, forms, or written analyses
 or evaluations;
 (5) the term `prospective employee' means an individual who has applied
 for a position of employment with an employer; and
 (6) the term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Labor.
SEC. 3. NOTICE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each employer who engages in electronic monitoring shall
 provide each affected employee with prior written notice describing
 the following regarding the electronic monitoring directly affecting
 the employee:
 (1) The forms of electronic monitoring to be used.
 (2) The personal data to be collected.
 (3) The frequency of each form of electronic monitoring which will occur.
 (4) The use of personal data collected.
 (5) Interpretation of printouts of statistics or other records of information
 collected through electronic monitoring.
 (6) Existing production standards and work performance expectations.
 (7) Methods for determining production standards and work performance
 expectations based on electronic monitoring statistics.
 (b) NOTICE CONCERNING EXISTING FORMS OF ELECTRONIC MONITORING- (1) Each
 employer shall notify a prospective employee at any personal interview
 or meeting of existing forms of electronic monitoring which may directly
 affect the prospective employee if such employee is hired by the employer.
 (2) Each employer, upon request by a prospective employee, shall provide
 the prospective employee with the written notice described in subsection
 (a) regarding existing forms of electronic monitoring which may directly
 affect the prospective employee if such employee is hired by the employer.
 (3) Each employer who engages in electronic monitoring shall provide the
 affected employee with a signal light, beeping tone, verbal notification, or
 other form of visual or aural notice, at periodic intervals, that indicates
 that electronic monitoring is taking place. If the electronic monitoring
 is conducted on a continuous basis during each of the employee's shift,
 such notice need not be provided at periodic intervals.
 (4) An employer who engages in telephone service observation shall provide
 the affected customer with a signal light, beeping tone, verbal notification,
 or other form of visual or aural notice, at periodic intervals, indicating
 that the telephone service observation is taking place.
 (c) NOTICE TO CURRENTLY AFFECTED EMPLOYEES- Notwithstanding subsection (a),
 an employer who is engaged in electronic monitoring on the effective date
 of this Act shall have 90 days after such date to provide each affected
 employee with the required written notice.
SEC. 4. ACCESS TO RECORDS.
 Each employer shall permit an employee (or the employee's authorized agent)
 to have access to all personal data obtained by electronic monitoring of
 the employee's work.
SEC. 5. PRIVACY PROTECTIONS.
 (a) RELEVANCY REQUIRED- An employer shall not collect personal data on
 an employee through electronic monitoring which is not relevant to the
 employee's work performance.
 (b) DISCLOSURE LIMITED- An employer shall not disclose personal data
 obtained by electronic monitoring to any person or business entity except
 to (or with the prior written consent of) the individual employee to whom
 the data pertains, unless the disclosure would be--
 (1) to officers and employees of the employer who have a legitimate need
 for the information in the performance of their duties;
 (2) to a law enforcement agency in connection with a criminal investigation
 or prosecution; or
 (3) pursuant to the order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
SEC. 6. USE OF OF DATA COLLECTED BY ELECTRONIC MONITORING.
 (a) DATA MAY NOT BE USED AS SOLE BASIS FOR EVALUATION- An employer shall
 not use personal data obtained by electronic monitoring as the exclusive
 basis for individual employee performance evaluation or disciplinary action,
 unless the employee is provided with an opportunity to review the personal
 data within a reasonable time after such data is obtained.
 (b) DATA MAY NOT BE USED AS SOLE BASIS FOR PRODUCTION QUOTAS- An employer
 shall not use personal data or collective data obtained by electronic
 monitoring data as the sole basis for setting production quotas or work
 performance expectations.
 (c) DATA MAY NOT DISCLOSE EMPLOYEE'S EXERCISE OF CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS-
 An employer shall not maintain, collect, use, or disseminate personal data
 obtained by electronic monitoring which describes how an employee exercises
 rights guaranteed by the First Amendment unless such use is expressly
 authorized by statute or by the employee to whom the data relates or unless
 pertinent to and within the scope of, an authorized law enforcement activity.
SEC. 7. ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS.
 (a) CIVIL PENALTIES- (1) Subject to paragraph (2), any employer who
 violates any provision of this Act may be assessed a civil penalty of not
 more than $10,000.
 (2) In determining the amount of any penalty under paragraph (1), the
 Secretary shall take into account the previous record of the person in
 terms of compliance with this Act and the gravity of the violation.
 (3) Any civil penalty assessed under this subsection shall be collected in
 the same manner as is required by subsections (b) through (e) of section
 503 of the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (29
 U.S.C. 1853) with respect to civil penalties assessed under subsection
 (a) of such section.
 (b) INJUNCTIVE ACTIONS BY THE SECRETARY- The Secretary may bring an action
 under this section to restrain violations of this Act. The Solicitor of
 Labor may appear for and represent the Secretary in any litigation brought
 under this Act. In any action brought under this section, the district
 courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction, for cause shown,
 to issue temporary or permanent restraining orders and injunctions to
 require compliance with this Act, including such legal or equitable relief
 incident thereto as may be appropriate, including employment, reinstatement,
 promotion, and the payment of lost wages and benefits.
 (c) PRIVATE CIVIL ACTIONS- (1) An employer who violates this Act shall
 be liable to the employee or prospective employee affected by such
 violation. Such employer shall be liable for such legal or equitable relief
 as may be appropriate, including employment, reinstatement, promotion,
 and the payment of lost wages and benefits.
 (2) An action to recover the liability prescribed in paragraph (1) may be
 maintained against the employer in any Federal or State court of competent
 jurisdiction by an employee or prospective employee for or on behalf of
 such employee, prospective employee, and for other employees or prospective
 employees similarly situated. No such action may be commenced more than
 3 years after the date of the alleged violation.
 (3) The court, in its discretion, may allow the prevailing party (other
 than the United States) reasonable costs, including attorney's fees.
 (d) WAIVER OF RIGHTS PROHIBITED- The rights and procedures provided by
 this Act may not be waived by contract or otherwise, unless such waiver
 is part of a written settlement agreed to and signed by the parties to
 the pending action or complaint under this Act.
SEC. 8. REGULATIONS.
 The Secretary shall, within 6 months after the date of the enactment of this
 Act, issue rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this Act.
SEC. 9. INAPPLICABLE TO MONITORING CONDUCTED BY LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES.
 This Act shall not apply to electronic monitoring administered by
 law enforcement agencies as may otherwise be permitted in criminal
 investigations.