S 2535 IS
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2535
To provide for a comprehensive health care plan for all Americans, and for
other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
April 27 (legislative day, APRIL 18), 1990
Mr. MCCONNELL introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Finance
A BILL
To provide for a comprehensive health care plan for all Americans, and for
other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Comprehensive American Health Care Act'.
TITLE I--HEALTH CARE ACCESS FOR UNINSURED AND MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED INDIVIDUALS
Subtitle A--Tax Credits for Low and Moderate Income Individuals
SEC. 101. CREDIT FOR HEALTH INSURANCE EXPENSES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to refundable personal credits)
 is amended by inserting after section 34 the following new section:
`SEC. 34A. HEALTH INSURANCE EXPENSES.
 `(a) ALLOWANCE OF CREDIT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In the case of an eligible individual, there shall
 be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this subtitle for the
 taxable year an amount equal to the applicable percentage of the qualified
 health insurance expenses paid by such individual during the taxable year.
 `(2) APPLICABLE PERCENTAGE- For purposes of paragraph (1), the term
 `applicable percentage' means 60 percent reduced (but not below zero)
 by 10 percentage points for each $1,000 (or fraction thereof) by which
 the taxpayer's adjusted gross income for the taxable year exceeds the
 applicable dollar amount.
 `(3) APPLICABLE DOLLAR AMOUNT- For purposes of this subsection, the term
 `applicable dollar amount' means--
 `(A) in the case of a taxpayer filing a joint return, $28,000,
 `(B) in the case of any other taxpayer (other than a married individual
 filing a separate return), $18,000, and
 `(C) in the case of a married individual filing a separate return, zero.
For purposes of this subsection, the rule of section 219(g)(4) shall apply.
 `(b) QUALIFIED HEALTH INSURANCE EXPENSES- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The term `qualified health insurance expenses' means amounts
 paid during the taxable year for insurance which constitutes medical care
 (within the meaning of section 213(d)(1)(C)). For purposes of the preceding
 sentence, the rules of section 213(d)(6) shall apply.
 `(2) DOLLAR LIMIT ON QUALIFIED HEALTH INSURANCE EXPENSES- The amount of
 the qualified health insurance expenses paid during any taxable year which
 may be taken into account under subsection (a)(1) shall not exceed $1,200
 ($2,400 in the case of a taxpayer filing a joint return).
 `(3) ELECTION NOT TO TAKE CREDIT- A taxpayer may elect for any taxable
 year to have amounts described in paragraph (1) not treated as qualified
 health insurance expenses.
 `(c) ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL- For purposes of this section, the term `eligible
 individual' means, with respect to any period, an individual who is not
 covered during such period by a health plan maintained by an employer of
 such individual or such individual's spouse.
 `(d) COORDINATION WITH ADVANCE PAYMENTS OF CREDIT-
 `(1) RECAPTURE OF EXCESS ADVANCE PAYMENTS- If any payment is made to the
 individual under section 101(b) of the Comprehensive American Health Care
 Act during any calendar year, then the tax imposed by this chapter for
 the individual's last taxable year beginning in such calendar year shall
 be increased by the aggregate amount of such payments.
 `(2) RECONCILIATION OF PAYMENTS ADVANCED AND CREDIT ALLOWED- Any increase
 in tax under paragraph (1) shall not be treated as tax imposed by this
 chapter for purposes of determining the amount of any credit (other than
 the credit allowed by subsection (a)) allowable under this subpart.
 `(e) SPECIAL RULES- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) MEDICARE-ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS- No expense shall be treated as a
 qualified health insurance expense if it is an amount paid for insurance
 for an individual for any period with respect to which such individual is
 entitled (or, on application without the payment of an additional premium,
 would be entitled to) benefits under part A of title XVIII of the Social
 Security Act.
 `(2) SUBSIDIZED EXPENSES- No expense shall be treated as a qualified health
 insurance expense to the extent--
 `(A) such expense is paid, reimbursed, or subsidized (whether by being
 disregarded for purposes of another program or otherwise) by the Federal
 Government, a State or local government, or any agency or instrumentality
 thereof, and
 `(B) the payment, reimbursement, or subsidy of such expense is not includible
 in the gross income of the recipient.
 `(3) COORDINATION WITH MINIMUM TAX- Rules similar to the rules of subsection
 (h) of section 32 shall apply to any credit to which this section applies.
 `(f) REGULATIONS- The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may
 be necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.'.
 (b) ADVANCE PAYMENTS OF CREDIT FOR SOME INDIVIDUALS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, shall enter into an agreement
 with each State to provide for advance payments of the credit provided by
 section 34A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by this subtitle)
 to eligible individuals in the form of certificates usable for the purchase
 of health insurance. The certificates shall be available at such locations
 as the Secretary determines will ensure the widest distribution.
 (2) ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- An individual shall be eligible for advance payments
 described in paragraph (1) if such individual--
 (i) has income for the taxable year which results in a poverty ratio of
 not more than 1.49, and
 (ii) has filed a certificate with the Secretary of the Treasury described
 in subparagraph (C).
 (B) POVERTY RATIO- For purposes of subparagraph (A)(i), the poverty ratio
 for any individual shall be determined by dividing such individual's family
 income for the taxable year (as determined for purposes of title XIX of
 the Social Security Act) by the income official poverty line for such year
 (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget, and revised annually
 in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
 Act of 1981) applicable to a family of the size involved.
 (C) CERTIFICATE OF ELIGIBILITY- A certificate described in this subparagraph
 is a statement furnished by the individual which--
 (i) certifies that the individual will be eligible to receive the credit
 provided by section 34A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 for the
 taxable year,
 (ii) certifies that the poverty ratio of the individual for such year will
 be not more than 1.49,
 (iii) certifies that the individual does not have another certificate with
 respect to such credit in effect for such year, and
 (iv) estimates the amount of qualified health insurance expenses (as
 defined in section 34A(b) of such Code) for such year.
 (c) PROGRAM TO INCREASE PUBLIC AWARENESS- Not later than the first day of
 the first calendar year following the date of the enactment of this Act,
 the Secretary of the Treasury, or the Secretary's delegate, in consultation
 with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, shall establish a public
 awareness program to inform the public of the availability of the credit
 for health insurance expenses allowed under section 34A of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by this subtitle). Such public awareness
 program shall be designed to assure that individuals who may be eligible
 are informed of the availability of such credit and filing procedures.
 (d) COORDINATION WITH DEDUCTIONS FOR HEALTH INSURANCE EXPENSES-
 (1) SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS- Section 162(l) of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 is amended by redesignating paragraph (6) as paragraph (7)
 and by inserting after paragraph (5) the following new paragraph:
 `(6) COORDINATION WITH HEALTH INSURANCE PREMIUM CREDIT- Paragraph (1)
 shall not apply to any amount taken into account in computing the amount
 of the credit allowed under section 34A.'.
 (2) MEDICAL, DENTAL, ETC., EXPENSES- Subsection (e) of section 213 of such
 Code is amended by inserting `or section 34A' after `section 21'.
 (e) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of
 subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended
 by inserting after the item relating to section 34 the following new item:
`Sec. 34A. Health insurance expenses.'.
 (f) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after Decem- ber 31, 1990.
Subtitle B--Rural Health Initiatives
SEC. 111. ELIMINATION OF SEPARATE AVERAGE STANDARDIZED AMOUNTS FOR HOSPITALS
IN DIFFERENT AREAS.
 Section 1886 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww) is amended by
 adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(j)(1) On or before September 1, 1990, the Secretary and the Prospective
 Payment Assessment Commission established under subsection (e) (in this
 subsection referred to as the `Commission') shall each submit to the Congress
 a report recommending a methodology that provides for the elimination of the
 system of determining separate average standardized amounts for subsection
 (d) hospitals (as defined in subsection (d)(1)(B)) located in large urban,
 other urban, or rural areas under subsection (d)(2)(D). The methodologies
 set forth in such reports shall provide for the complete elimination of the
 average standardized amounts applicable to large urban, other urban, or rural
 area hospitals for discharges occurring on or after January 1, 1991. Such
 methodologies may provide for such changes to any of the adjustments,
 reductions, and special payments otherwise authorized or required by this
 section as the Secretary or the Commission determines to be necessary and
 appropriate to carry out the purposes of this subsection. But in no case
 may the Secretary or the Commission recommend or provide for a methodology
 that will result in total payments under part A of this title to hospitals
 at a level less than such hospitals were receiving on October 1, 1990.
 `(2) Not later than October 1, 1990, the Secretary shall promulgate interim
 final regulations to implement the recommendations of the Secretary under
 paragraph (1) (including any recommended changes in the adjustments,
 reductions, and special payments otherwise authorized or required by
 this section).
 `(3) If the Congress does not enact legislation after the date of the
 enactment of this subsection and before December 1, 1990, with respect to
 the average standardized amounts applicable to large urban, other urban,
 or rural area hospitals, then, notwithstanding any other provision of this
 section, the average standardized amounts for such hospitals for discharges
 occurring on or after January 1, 1991, shall be determined in accordance
 with the interim final regulations promulgated under paragraph (2).
 `(4) On or before July 1, 1991, the Secretary and the Commission shall
 each submit to the Congress a report specifying the manner in which the
 average standardized amounts determined under the regulations and which
 became effective in accordance with paragraph (3) should be adjusted
 appropriately to reflect differences in the operating costs of providing
 inpatient hospital services (as defined in subsection (a)(4)) for different
 categories of subsection (d) hospitals.'.
SEC. 112. SCHOLARSHIP AND LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAM PRIORITIES.
 (a) SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM- Section 338A(d) of the Public Health Service Act
 (42 U.S.C. 254l(d)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking `and' at the end thereof;
 (2) in paragraph (2)(C), by striking the period and inserting a semicolon;
 and
 (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraphs:
 `(3) to individuals who reside in health manpower shortage areas;
 `(4) to disadvantaged individuals and minorities;
 `(5) to individuals who attend or plan to attend health professions schools
 that have records of training graduates who then intend to work in primary
 care fields and with underserved populations;
 `(6) to nurses, nurse midwives, nurse practitioners, and physician assistants
 to increase access to perinatal care; and
 `(7) to physicians who are willing to serve in a Health Manpower Shortage
 Area that has been identified by the Corps as having difficulties in
 attracting physicians.'.
 (b) LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAM- Section 338B(d) of the Public Health Service
 Act (42 U.S.C. 254l-1(d)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking `and' at the end thereof;
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking the period and inserting a semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraphs:
 `(3) to applications from individuals who are legal residents of health
 manpower shortage areas or who, at the time of the submission of the
 application, reside in a health manpower shortage area;
 `(4) to applications from disadvantaged individuals and minorities;
 `(5) to applications from individuals who have demonstrated an interest
 in providing primary care service for the underserved through the
 participation of such individuals in internship and externship programs
 such as the commissioned officer, student training and extern program,
 and other programs;
 `(6) to applications from nurses, nurse midwives, nurse practitioners,
 and physicians assistants to increase access to perinatal care and other
 essential primary care health services; and
 `(7) to applications from physicians in the primary care fields of
 pediatrics, general internal medicine, general practice, and obstetrics
 and gynecology who are willing to serve in a health manpower shortage area
 that has been identified by the Corps as having difficulties in attracting
 such physicians.'.
SEC. 113. NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE CORPS LOAN REPAYMENTS EXCLUDED FROM
GROSS INCOME.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (relating to items specifically excluded from gross income)
 is amended by redesignating section 136 as section 137 and by inserting
 after section 135 the following new section:
`SEC. 136. NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE CORPS LOAN REPAYMENTS.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- Gross income shall not include any qualified loan
 repayment.
 `(b) QUALIFIED LOAN REPAYMENT- For purposes of this section, the term
 `qualified loan repayment' means any payment made on behalf of the taxpayer
 by the National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment Program under section
 338B(g) of the Public Health Service Act.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Paragraph (3) of section 338B(g) of the Public
 Health Service Act is amended by striking `Federal, State, or local'
 and inserting `State or local'.
 (c) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for part III of subchapter
 B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking
 the item relating to section 136 and inserting the following:
`Sec. 136. National Health Service Corps loan repayments.
`Sec. 137. Cross references to other Acts.'.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) shall
 apply to payments made under section 338B(g) of the Public Health Service
 Act after the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 114. DEMONSTRATION PROJECT TO EVALUATE AVAILABILITY OF PRENATAL CARE
SERVICES IN RURAL AREAS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary
 of Health and Human Services (hereinafter referred to as the `Secretary')
 shall from amounts retained by the Secretary under section 502(b)(1)(A)
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 702(b)(1)(A)) as amended by section
 6502 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989, provide for a
 demonstration project evaluating the availability, accessibility, and
 use of prenatal care services by pregnant women residing in rural areas
 (as defined in section 1886(d)(2)(D) of the Social Security Act).
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATES- (1) The Secretary shall conduct the demonstration
 project described in subsection (a) within 18 months of the date of
 enactment of this Act.
 (2) The Secretary shall transmit a summary of the demonstration project
 conducted under subsection (a) to relevant committees of Congress no later
 than 3 months after the date of completion of such project as provided in
 paragraph (1).
SEC. 115. INCREASED FUNDING FOR AREA HEALTH EDUCATION CENTERS.
 Section 781(h)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 295g-1(h)(1))
 is amended by striking `$20,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1990 and
 1991' and inserting `$25,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1990 and 1991'.
SEC. 116. PREVENTIVE HEALTH SERVICES.
 Part A of title XIX of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300w et
 seq.) is amended--
 (1) in section 1901, by adding at the end thereof the following new
 subsection:
 `(c) Of the amounts appropriated for each fiscal year under subsection
 (a), the Secretary shall make available not less than $25,000,000 in each
 such fiscal year to carry out section 1910A.'; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 1910A. PREVENTIVE GRANTS FOR COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENTS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- From amounts made available under section 1901(c), the
 Secretary shall make grants to county health departments to enable such
 departments to provide preventive health services.
 `(b) APPLICATION- To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection (a),
 a county health department shall prepare and submit, to the Secretary,
 an application at such time, in such form, and containing such information
 as the Secretary shall require.
 `(c) USE OF FUNDS- A county health department shall use amounts provided
 through a grant received under this section to--
 `(1) provide immunization services to control the spread of infectious
 diseases;
 `(2) improve maternal and infant health;
 `(3) reduce adolescent pregnancy and improve reproductive health;
 `(4) improve health education and the access of individuals to preventive
 health services; and
 `(5) provide such other services as the Secretary determines appropriate.
 `(d) DEFINITION- Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of
 this section, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations that define
 `county health department' for purposes of this section.'.
SEC. 117. REVIEW OF HOSPITAL REGULATIONS WITH RESPECT TO RURAL HOSPITALS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Within 12 months of the date of enactment of this Act, the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services shall review the requirements in
 regulations developed pursuant to section 1861(e) of the Social Security
 Act to determine which requirements could be made less administratively
 and economically burdensome for hospitals defined in section 1886(d)(1)(B)
 of the Social Security Act that are located in a rural area as defined
 in section 1886(d)(2)(D) of the Social Security Act without diminishing
 the quality of care provided by such hospitals to individuals entitled to
 receive benefits under part A of title XVIII of the Social Security Act. Such
 review shall specifically include standards related to staffing requirements.
 (b) REPORT- The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall report to
 Congress by April 1, 1991, on the results of the review conducted under
 subsection (a), and include recommendations on which regulations if any,
 should be modified with respect to hospitals located outside a metropolitan
 statistical area as described in subsection (a).
Subtitle C--Reauthorization of Federal Vaccine and Immunization Program
SEC. 121. EXTENSION OF PROGRAM OF GRANTS FOR IMMUNIZATIONS.
 Section 317(j)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247B(j)(1))
 is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking `there are authorized' and all that
 follows in the first sentence and inserting the following: `there are
 authorized to be appropriated $185,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, and such
 sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1992 through 1995';
 (2) in subparagraph (B), by striking `after the date' and all that follows
 and inserting the following: `after October 1, 1990, there are authorized
 to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary.'; and
 (3) by striking subparagraph (C).
SEC. 122. SUPPLY OF VACCINES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through
 the Director of the Centers for Disease Control, shall acquire and maintain
 a supply of vaccines sufficient to provide vaccinations throughout a
 6-month period.
 (b) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- For the purpose of carrying out
 subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for
 fiscal year 1991, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal
 years 1992 through 1995.
SEC. 123. EXTENSION OF NATIONAL VACCINE PROGRAM.
 Section 2106 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300aa-6)
 is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by striking `there are authorized' and all
 that follows and inserting the following: `there are authorized to be
 appropriated $4,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, and such sums as may be
 necessary for each of the fiscal years 1992 through 1995.'; and
 (2) in subsection (b), by striking `there are authorized' and all
 that follows and inserting the following: `there are authorized to be
 appropriated $30,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, and such sums as may be
 necessary for each of the fiscal years 1992 through 1995.'.
TITLE II--HEALTH CARE COST CONTROL
Subtitle A--Medical Malpractice Reform
SEC. 201. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
 (a) FINDINGS- Congress finds that--
 (1) there are serious flaws in the civil justice system under which tort
 claims are filed and resolved, including spiraling costs, unpredictability,
 impediments to United States competitiveness and inefficient use of the
 civil justice system;
 (2) the cost of litigation has risen at a dramatic rate over the past
 25 years and threatens to continue to rise at a similar rate for the
 foreseeable future;
 (3) the rising cost of litigation has a direct and undesirable effect on
 interstate commerce and international competitiveness, and decreases the
 availability of products and services in commerce;
 (4) excessive litigation has contributed to health care inflation through
 defensive medical practices and the high cost of medical malpractice
 insurance accounting for an estimated $25,000,000,000 of the health care
 bill of the United States in 1987;
 (5) the medical malpractice crisis has contributed to the diminution of the
 availability of health care across the country, particularly in rural areas;
 (6) the growing shortage of obstetrical care in the United States is
 particularly evident in the Commonwealth of Kentucky where 73 of 120
 counties lack obstetrical care;
 (7) there is a need for reasonable limits on the potential exposure of
 health care providers to liability for damages resulting from the provision
 of medical services, which contributes to the availability of health care,
 the net output of the economy of the United States, to the American consumer,
 and the general welfare; and
 (8) because of the interstate nature of commerce and the pervasive nature
 of the involvement of the Federal Government in the provision of health
 care, no single State can act to address flaws in the civil justice system
 without threatening to inflict disparate and potentially discriminatory
 burdens, thereby diminishing the general welfare of the Nation and of the
 several States.
 (b) PURPOSE- It is the purpose of this subtitle to establish uniform rules of
 medical malpractice law, to encourage alternate means of dispute resolution,
 to provide fair and reasonable compensation for accident or injury, and to
 promote the free flow of commerce and the availability and affordability
 of liability insurance.
SEC. 202. APPLICABILITY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b) or (c), this subtitle
 shall apply to any civil action against any individual based on professional
 medical malpractice, in any State or Federal court, in which damages are
 sought for physical injury or for physical or mental pain or suffering or
 for economic loss.
 (b) PREEMPTION- This subtitle shall preempt and supersede Federal or State
 law only to the extent such law is inconsistent with this subtitle. Any
 issue arising under the provisions of this subtitle that is not governed
 by the provisions of this subtitle shall be governed by applicable State
 or Federal law.
 (c) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this subtitle shall be construed to--
 (1) waive or affect any defense of sovereign immunity asserted by any
 State under any provision of law;
 (2) waive or affect any defense of sovereign immunity asserted by the
 United States;
 (3) supersede any Federal law, except the Federal Employees Compensation
 Act and the Longshoremen's and Harborworkers' Compensation Act;
 (4) affect the applicability of any provision of chapter 97 of title 28,
 United States Code, commonly known as the Foreign Sovereign Immunities
 Act of 1976;
 (5) preempt State choice-of-law rules with respect to claims brought by
 a foreign nation or a citizen of a foreign nation; or
 (6) affect the right of any court to transfer venue or to apply the law of
 a foreign nation or to dismiss a claim of a foreign nation on the ground
 of inconvenient forum.
 (d) ATTORNEY'S FEES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (3), and except as provided in paragraph
 (2), in any action brought pursuant to the provisions of this subtitle,
 the court shall provide for an award of costs and reasonable attorney's
 fees to be paid to the prevailing party by the other parties to such action.
 (2) EXCEPTION- Paragraph (1) shall not apply in any case in which the losing
 party was qualified for assistance by the Legal Services Corporation,
 in the State in which such party resides, pursuant to the limits and
 guidelines described in part 1611 of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations.
 (3) LIMITATION- The amount of attorney fees ordered to be paid to the
 prevailing party under this subsection shall be limited to either--
 (A) a percentage of the prevailing party's costs and fees equal to the
 percentage of any damage award such losing party had agreed to pay as a
 contingency fee to the attorney of such party if such party had prevailed,
 if the attorney for such losing party was to receive compensation based
 on a percentage of the recovery; or
 (B) an amount that does not exceed the amount of attorney's fees such party
 is paying the attorney of such party in such matter, if the attorney for
 such losing party was not receiving compensation based on a percentage of
 the recovery.
SEC. 203. JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b), joint and several
 liability shall not be applied to a civil liability action that is subject
 to this subtitle. A person found liable for damages in any such action may--
 (1) be found liable, if at all, only for those damages directly attributable
 to the pro rata share of fault or responsibility of such person for the
 injury; and
 (2) not be found liable for damages attributable to the pro rata share
 of fault or responsibility of any other person (without regard to whether
 that person is a party to the action) for the injury, including any person
 bringing the action.
 (b) CONCERTED ACTION-
 (1) APPLICATION- This section shall not apply as between persons acting
 in concert where the concerted action proximately caused the injury for
 which one or more persons are found liable for damages.
 (2) DEFINITION- As used in this section, the terms `concerted action'
 and `acting in concert' mean the participation in joint conduct by two or
 more persons who agree to jointly participate in such conduct with actual
 knowledge of the wrongfulness of the conduct.
SEC. 204. ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
 (a) POLICY- Because the traditional litigation process is not always suited
 to the timely, efficient, and inexpensive resolution of civil actions,
 it is the policy of the United States to encourage the creation and use of
 alternative dispute resolution techniques, and to promote the expeditious
 resolution of such actions.
 (b) EXISTENCE OF OPTIONS- In any action to which this subtitle applies,
 each attorney who has made an appearance in the case and who represents
 one or more of the parties to such action shall, with respect to each party
 separately represented, advise the party of the existence and availability of
 alternative dispute resolution options, including extrajudicial proceedings
 such as minitrials, third-party mediation, court supervised arbitration,
 and summary jury trial proceedings.
 (c) CERTIFICATION- Each attorney described in subsection (b) shall, at the
 time of the filing of the complaint or a responsive pleading, file notice
 with the court certifying that the attorney has so advised the client or
 clients of the attorney as required under subsection (b), and indicating
 whether such client will agree to one or more of the alternative dispute
 resolution techniques.
 (d) ORDER GOVERNING FURTHER PROCEEDINGS- If all parties to an action agree
 to proceed with one or more alternative dispute resolution proceedings,
 the court shall issue an appropriate order governing the conduct of such
 proceedings. The issuance of an order governing such further proceedings
 shall constitute a waiver, by each party subject to the order, of the
 right to proceed further in court.
SEC. 205. DEFINITIONS.
 (a) DEFINITIONS- As used in this subtitle:
 (1) CLAIMANT- The term `claimant' means any person who brings a civil action
 under this subtitle, and any person on whose behalf such action is brought,
 and, if such an action is brought through or on behalf of an estate, such
 term includes the decedent of the claimant, or, if it is brought through
 or on behalf of a minor or incompetent, such term includes the parent or
 guardian of the claimant.
 (2) HARM- The term `harm' means any harm recognized under the law of the
 State in which the civil action is maintained.
 (3) STATE- The term `State' means any State of the United States, the
 District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands,
 Guam, American Samoa, the Northern Mariana Islands, the Trust Territory of
 the Pacific Islands, and any other territory or possession of the United
 States, or any political subdivision thereof.
SEC. 206. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- This subtitle shall become effective on the date of
 enactment of this Act, and shall apply to all civil actions filed on
 or after such date, including any civil action in which the harm or the
 conduct complained of occurred before such effective date.
 (b) APPLICABLE TIME PERIOD- If any such provision of this subtitle would
 shorten the period during which a person would otherwise be exposed to
 liability, the plaintiff may, notwithstanding the otherwise applicable
 time period, bring any civil action pursuant to this subtitle not later
 than within 1 year after the effective date of this subtitle.
SEC. 207. SEVERABILITY.
 If any provision of this subtitle or the application of any such provision to
 any person or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional, the remainder of
 this subtitle and the application of the provisions of such to any person
 or circumstance shall not be affected thereby.
Subtitle B--Preventive Health Practices Promotion
SEC. 211. DISTRIBUTION OF INFORMATION ON RECOMMENDED PREVENTIVE HEALTH
PRACTICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1804 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b-2)
 is amended--
 (1) in the heading, by inserting `AND DISTRIBUTION OF PREVENTIVE HEALTH
 INFORMATION' after `MEDICARE BENEFITS';
 (2) by inserting `(a)' after `SEC. 1804.'; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(b)(1) The Secretary shall develop (and, from time to time, shall revise)
 a summary of recommended preventive health care practices for elderly
 individuals entitled to benefits under this title.
 `(2) The Secretary also shall develop a 1-page form that may be used by
 elderly individuals to record information, such as a personal and family
 medical history, that may be useful to physicians in connection with
 furnishing appropriate health care.
 `(3) The summary and form shall be developed in consultation with national
 physician, consumer, and other health-related groups and shall be based on
 recommendations of any appropriate task force or similar group established
 by the Secretary.
 `(4) The Secretary shall provide for the distribution of--
 `(A) the summary developed under paragraph (1), and the form developed
 under paragraph (2), to each individual at the time of the individual's
 first becoming eligible for benefits under part A under section 226(a)
 or section 1818, as part of other materials sent to such an individual at
 such a time, and
 `(B) the summary developed under paragraph (1) to individuals entitled to
 benefits under this title in conjunction with general mailings sent under
 this title to such individuals.'.
 (b) DEVELOPMENT OF SUMMARY AND FORM- The Secretary of Health and Human
 Services shall initially develop the summary and form described in section
 1804(b) of the Social Security Act (as added by subsection (a)) not later
 than April 1, 1991, and shall first provide for the distribution of such
 summaries and forms by not later than October 1, 1991.
TITLE III--LONG-TERM CARE AND SENIOR HEALTH PROMOTION
Subtitle A--Long-Term Care Insurance Promotion
SEC. 301. TREATMENT OF LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE OR PLANS.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Chapter 79 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating
 to definitions) is amended by inserting after section 7702 the following
 new section:
`SEC. 7702A. TREATMENT OF LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE OR PLANS.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- For purposes of this title--
 `(1) a long-term care insurance contract shall be treated as a health
 insurance contract,
 `(2) amounts received under such a contract with respect to qualified
 long-term care services shall be treated as amounts received for personal
 injuries or sickness, and
 `(3) any plan of an employer providing qualified long-term care services
 shall be treated as an accident or health plan.
 `(b) LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE CONTRACT- For purposes of this title, the term
 `long-term care insurance contract' means any insurance contract if--
 `(1) the only insurance protection provided under such contract is coverage
 of qualified long-term care services,
 `(2) such contract does not cover expenses incurred for services or items
 to the extent that such expenses are reimbursable under title XVIII of the
 Social Security Act or would be so reimbursable but for the application
 of a deductible or coinsurance amount,
 `(3) such contract is guaranteed renewable,
 `(4) such contract does not have any surrender value, and
 `(5) all refunds of premiums, and all policyholder dividends or similar
 amounts, under such contract are to be applied as a reduction in future
 premiums or to increase future benefits.
 `(c) QUALIFIED LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The term `qualified long-term care services' means
 necessary diagnostic, preventive, therapeutic, and rehabilitative services,
 and maintenance or personal care services, which--
 `(A) are required by a chronically ill individual in a qualified facility,
 and
 `(B) are provided pursuant to a plan of care prescribed by a physician.
 `(2) CHRONICALLY ILL INDIVIDUAL-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `chronically ill individual' means any individual
 who has been certified by a physician as--
 `(i) being unable to perform (without substantial assistance from another
 individual) at least 2 activities of daily living (as defined in subparagraph
 (B)), or
 `(ii) having a similar level of disability due to cognitive impairment.
 `(B) ACTIVITIES OF DAILY LIVING- For purposes of subparagraph (A), each
 of the following is an activity of daily living:
 `(i) BATHING- The overall complex behavior of getting water and cleansing
 the whole body, including turning on the water for a bath, shower, or
 sponge bath, getting to, in, and out of a tub or shower, and washing and
 drying oneself.
 `(ii) DRESSING- The overall complex behavior of getting clothes from
 closets and drawers and then getting dressed.
 `(iii) TOILETING- The act of going to the toilet room for bowel and bladder
 function, transferring on and off the toilet, cleaning after elimination,
 and arranging clothes.
 `(iv) TRANSFER- The process of getting in and out of bed or in and out of
 a chair or wheelchair.
 `(v) EATING- The process of getting food from a plate or its equivalent
 into the mouth.
 `(3) QUALIFIED FACILITY- The term `qualified facility' means--
 `(A) a nursing, rehabilitative, hospice, or adult day care facility,
 including a hospital, retirement home, nursing home, skilled nursing
 facility, intermediate care facility, or similar institution, licensed
 under State law, or
 `(B) an individual's home if a physician, certifies that without home
 care the individual would have to be cared for in a facility described in
 subparagraph (A), except that such home shall be treated as a qualified
 facility only to the extent the cost of such services is not greater than
 the cost of similar services provided in a facility described in subparagraph
 (A).
 `(4) MAINTENANCE OR PERSONAL CARE SERVICES- The term `maintenance or
 personal care services' means any service the primary purpose of which is
 to provide needed assistance with any of the activities of daily living
 described in paragraph (2)(B).
 `(5) PHYSICIAN- The term `physician' has the meaning given to such term
 by section 213(d)(4).'.
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for chapter 79 of such Code is
 amended by inserting after the item relating to section 7702 the following
 new item:
`Sec. 7702A. Treatment of long-term care insurance or plans.'.
SEC. 302. QUALIFIED LONG-TERM SERVICES TREATED AS MEDICAL CARE.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Paragraph (1) of section 213(d) of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (defining medical care) is amended by striking `or' at the
 end of subparagraph (B), by redesignating subparagraph (C) as subparagraph
 (D), and by inserting after subparagraph (B) the following new subparagraph:
 `(C) for qualified long-term care services (as defined in section 7702A(c)),
 or'.
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT-
 (1) Subparagraph (D) of section 213(d)(1) of such Code (as amended by
 subsection (a)) is amended by striking `subparagraphs (A) and (B)' and
 inserting `subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C)'.
 (2) Paragraph (6) of section 213(d) of such Code is amended--
 (A) by striking `subparagraphs (A) and (B)' and inserting `subparagraphs
 (A), (B), and (C)', and
 (B) by striking `paragraph (1)(C)' in subparagraph (A) and inserting
 `paragraph (1)(D)'.
 (3) Paragraph (7) of section 213(d) of such Code is amended by striking
 `subparagraphs (A) and (B)' and inserting `subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C)'.
SEC. 303. EMPLOYER PAYMENTS FOR LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE NOT TREATED AS
DEFERRED COMPENSATION.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Subparagraph (B) of section 404(b)(2) of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to plans providing certain deferred benefits)
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(B) EXCEPTIONS-
 `(i) WELFARE BENEFIT FUNDS- Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to any benefit
 provided through a welfare benefit fund (as defined in section 419(e)).
 `(ii) PREMIUMS FOR LONG-TERM INSURANCE CONTRACTS-
 `(I) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subclause (II), subparagraph (A)
 shall not apply to any amount paid or incurred for any long-term care
 insurance contract.
 `(II) EXCEPTION- Subclause (I) shall not apply to any amount paid or incurred
 by the taxpayer during any taxable year to the extent such amount exceeds
 the premium which would have been payable under the contract for such year
 under a level premium structure.'.
 (b) CAFETERIA PLANS- Paragraph (2) of section 125(c) of such Code (relating
 to deferred compensation plans excluded) is amended by adding at the end
 thereof the following new subparagraph:
 `(D) EXCEPTION FOR LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE CONTRACTS- For purposes
 of subparagraph (A), amounts paid or incurred for any long-term care
 insurance contract shall not be treated as deferred compensation to the
 extent section 404(b)(2)(A) does not apply to such amounts by reason of
 section 404(b)(2)(B)(ii).'.
SEC. 304. LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE TAX CREDIT.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to refundable credits), as amended
 by section 101, is amended by redesignating section 35 as section 36 and
 by inserting after section 34A the following new section:
`SEC. 35. LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE CREDIT.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed
 as a credit against the tax imposed by this subtitle for the taxable year
 an amount equal to applicable percentage of the qualified long-term care
 premiums paid during such taxable year.
 `(b) APPLICABLE PERCENTAGE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this section, the term `applicable
 percentage' means 20 percent reduced (but not below zero) by 1 percentage
 point for each $1,000 (or fraction thereof) by which the taxpayer's adjusted
 gross income for the taxable year exceeds the base amount.
 `(2) BASE AMOUNT- For purposes of paragraph (1) the term `base amount'
 means--
 `(A) except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, $25,000,
 `(B) $40,000 in the case of joint return, and
 `(C) zero in the case of a taxpayer who--
 `(i) is married at the close of the taxable year (within the meaning of
 section 7703) but does not file a joint return for such taxable year, and
 `(ii) does not live apart from his spouse at all times during the taxable
 year.
 `(c) DOLLAR LIMITATION ON AMOUNT DEDUCTIBLE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The amount of the qualified long-term care premiums taken
 to account under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the
 limitation determined under the following table:
`In the case of an
--
 individual with an attained
--
 age before the close of the taxable
--The limitation
 year of:
--is:
40 or less
--$200
More than 40 but not more than 50
--375
More than 50 but not more than 60
--750
More than 60 but not more than 70
--1,600
More than 70
--2,000.
In the case of a joint return, the limitation of this paragraph shall be
applied separately with respect to each spouse.
 `(2) INDEXING-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- In the case of any taxable year beginning after December
 31, 1991, each dollar amount contained in paragraph (1) shall be increased
 by the medical care cost adjustment for such taxable year. If any increase
 determined under the preceding sentence is not a multiple of $10, such
 increase shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $10.
 `(B) MEDICAL CARE COST ADJUSTMENT- For purposes of clause (i), the medical
 care cost adjustment for any taxable year is the percentage (if any)
 by which--
 `(i) the medical care component of the Consumer Price Index (as defined
 in section 1(f)(5)) for August of the calendar year preceding the calendar
 year in which the taxable year begins, exceeds
 `(ii) such component for August of 1990.
 `(d) QUALIFIED LONG-TERM CARE PREMIUMS- For purposes of this section,
 the term `qualified long-term care premiums' means the amount paid by the
 taxpayer during the taxable year for any long-term care insurance contract
 covering the taxpayer, but only to the extent the amount so paid does not
 exceed the premiums which would have been payable under the contract for
 such taxable year under a level premium structure.
 `(e) COORDINATION WITH ADVANCE PAYMENTS OF CREDIT-
 `(1) RECAPTURE OF EXCESS ADVANCE PAYMENTS- If any payment is made to the
 individual under section 304(b) of the Comprehensive American Health Care
 Act during any calendar year, then the tax imposed by this chapter for
 the individual's last taxable year beginning in such calendar year shall
 be increased by the aggregate amount of such payments.
 `(2) Reconciliation of payments advanced and credit allowed- Any increase
 in tax under paragraph (1) shall not be treated as tax imposed by this
 chapter for purposes of determining the amount of any credit (other than
 the credit allowed by subsection (a)) allowable under this subpart.
 `(f) COORDINATION WITH MINIMUM TAX- Rules similar to the rules of subsection
 (h) of section 32 shall apply to any credit to which this section applies.
 `(g) REGULATIONS- The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may
 be necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.'.
 (b) ADVANCE PAYMENTS OF CREDIT FOR SOME INDIVIDUALS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, shall enter into an agreement
 with each State to provide for advance payments of the credit provided by
 section 35 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by this subtitle)
 to eligible individuals in the form of certificates usable for the purchase
 of long-term care insurance. The certificates shall be available at such
 locations as the Secretary determines will ensure the widest distribution.
 (2) ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- An individual shall be eligible for advance payments
 described in paragraph (1) if such individual--
 (i) has income for the taxable year which results in a poverty ratio of
 not more than 1.49, and
 (ii) has filed a certificate with the Secretary of the Treasury described
 in subparagraph (C).
 (B) POVERTY RATIO- For purposes of subparagraph (A)(i), the poverty ratio
 for any individual shall be determined by dividing such individual's family
 income for the taxable year (as determined for purposes of title XIX of
 the Social Security Act) by the income official poverty line for such year
 (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget, and revised annually
 in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
 Act of 1981) applicable to a family of the size involved.
 (C) CERTIFICATE OF ELIGIBILITY- A certificate described in this subparagraph
 is a statement furnished by the individual which--
 (i) certifies that the individual will be eligible to receive the credit
 provided by section 35 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 for the
 taxable year,
 (ii) certifies that the poverty ratio of the individual for such year will
 be not more than 1.49,
 (iii) certifies that the individual does not have another certificate with
 respect to such credit in effect for such year, and
 (iv) estimates the amount of qualified long-term care premiums (as defined
 in section 35(d) of such Code) for such year.
 (c) PROGRAM TO INCREASE PUBLIC AWARENESS- Not later than the first day of
 the first calendar year following the date of the enactment of this Act,
 the Secretary of the Treasury, or the Secretary's delegate, in consultation
 with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, shall establish a public
 awareness program to inform the public of the availability of the credit for
 long-term care insurance expenses allowed under section 35 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by this subtitle). Such public awareness
 program shall be designed to assure that individuals who may be eligible
 are informed of the availability of such credit and filing procedures.
 (d) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for subpart C of part IV
 of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item
 relating to section 35 and inserting the following:
`Sec. 35. Long-term care insurance credit.
`Sec. 36. Overpayments of tax.'.
SEC. 305. EXEMPTION FROM 10-PERCENT ADDITIONAL TAX; CERTAIN EXCHANGES NOT
TAXABLE.
 (a) EXEMPTION FROM ADDITIONAL TAX-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Paragraph (2) of section 72(t) of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986 (relating to additional tax not to apply to certain distributions)
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph:
 `(E) DISTRIBUTIONS USED TO PAY FOR LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE CONTRACTS-
 Any distribution made on or after the date on which the employee attains
 age 50 to the extent such distribution is used, not later than the day 60
 days after the day on which such distribution is made, to pay premiums on
 a long-term care insurance contract for such employee.'.
 (2) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- Subparagraph (B) of section 72(t)(2) of such Code
 is amended--
 (A) by striking `subparagraph (A) or (C)' and inserting `subparagraph (A),
 (C), or (E)',
 (B) by adding at the end thereof the following new sentence: `For purposes
 of the preceding sentence, any premiums paid on a long-term care insurance
 contract shall not be treated as paid for medical care to the extent such
 premiums are taken into account under subparagraph (E).'.
 (b) CERTAIN EXCHANGES NOT TAXABLE- Subsection (a) of section 1035 of such
 Code (relating to certain exchanges of insurance contracts) is amended
 by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3) and inserting `; or',
 and by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(4) in the case of an individual who has attained age 50, a contract of
 life insurance or an endowment or annuity contract for a long-term care
 insurance contract.'.
SEC. 306. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 The amendments made by this subtitle shall apply to taxable years beginning
 after December 31, 1990.
Subtitle B--Medicare Benefit Improvements
SEC. 311. MEDICARE COVERAGE OF SCREENING MAMMOGRAPHY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1861 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x),
 as revised by section 201(a)(1) of the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage
 Repeal Act of 1989 and as amended by the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
 Act of 1989, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (s)--
 (A) in paragraph (11), by striking all that follows `(bb))' and inserting
 a semicolon,
 (B) in paragraph (12)(C), by striking all that follows `area)' and inserting
 `; and', and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (12) the following new paragraph:
 `(13) screening mammography (as defined in subsection (jj));'; and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (ii) the following new subsection:
`Screening Mammography
 `(jj) The term `screening mammography' means a radiologic procedure provided
 to a woman for the purpose of early detection of breast cancer and includes
 a physician's interpretation of the results of the procedure.'.
 (b) PAYMENT AND COVERAGE- Section 1834 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m),
 as restored by section 201(a)(1) of the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage
 Repeal Act of 1989, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)(1)(B), by inserting `and subject to subsection
 (c)(1)(A)' after `conversion factors', and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection:
 `(c) PAYMENTS AND STANDARDS FOR SCREENING MAMMOGRAPHY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding any other provision of this part, with
 respect to expenses incurred for screening mammography (as defined in
 section 1861(jj))--
 `(A) payment may be made only for screening mammography conducted consistent
 with the frequency permitted under paragraph (2);
 `(B) payment may be made only if the screening mammography meets the
 quality standards established under paragraph (3); and
 `(C) the amount of the payment under this part shall, subject to the
 deductible established under section 1833(b), be equal to 80 percent of
 the least of--
 `(i) the actual charge for the screening,
 `(ii) the fee schedule established under subsection (b) or the fee schedule
 established under section 1848, whichever is applicable, with respect to both
 the professional and technical components of the screening mammography, or
 `(iii) the limit established under paragraph (4) for the screening
 mammography.
 `(2) FREQUENCY COVERED-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to revision by the Secretary under subparagraph
 (B)--
 `(i) No payment may be made under this part for screening mammography
 performed on a woman under 35 years of age.
 `(ii) Payment may be made under this part for only 1 screening mammography
 performed on a woman over 34 years of age, but under 40 years of age.
 `(iii) In the case of a woman over 39 years of age, but under 50 years of
 age, who--
 `(I) is at a high risk of developing breast cancer (as determined pursuant
 to factors identified by the Secretary), payment may not be made under
 this part for a screening mammography performed within the 11 months of
 a previous screening mammography, or
 `(II) is not at a high risk of developing breast cancer, payment may not
 be made under this part for a screening mammography performed within the
 23 months after a previous screening mammography.
 `(iv) In the case of a woman over 49 years of age, but under 65 years of
 age, payment may not be made under this part for screening mammography
 performed within 11 months after a previous screening mammography.
 `(v) In the case of a woman over 64 years of age, payment may not be made
 for screening mammography performed within 23 months after a previous
 screening mammography.
 `(B) REVISION OF FREQUENCY-
 `(i) REVIEW- The Secretary, in consultation with the Director of the National
 Cancer Institute, shall review periodically the appropriate frequency for
 performing screening mammography, based on age and such other factors as
 the Secretary believes to be pertinent.
 `(ii) REVISION OF FREQUENCY- The Secretary, taking into consideration the
 review made under clause (i), may revise from time to time the frequency
 with which screening mammography may be paid for under this subsection,
 but no such revision shall apply to screening mammography performed before
 January 1, 1993.
 `(3) QUALITY STANDARDS- The Secretary shall establish standards to assure
 the safety and accuracy of screening mammography performed under this
 part. Such standards shall include the requirements that--
 `(A) the equipment used to perform the mammography must be specifically
 designed for mammography and must meet radiologic standards established
 by the Secretary for mammography;
 `(B) the mammography must be performed by an individual who--
 `(i) is licensed by a State to perform radiological procedures, or
 `(ii) is certified as qualified to perform radiological procedures by such
 an appropriate organization as the Secretary specifies in regulations;
 `(C) the results of the mammography must be interpreted by a physician--
 `(i) who is certified as qualified to interpret radiological procedures
 by such an appropriate board as the Secretary specifies in regulations, or
 `(ii) who is certified as qualified to interpret screening mammography
 procedures by such a program as the Secretary recognizes in regulation
 as assuring the qualifications of the individual with respect to such
 interpretation; and
 `(D) with respect to the first screening mammography performed on a woman
 for which payment is made under this part, there are satisfactory assurances
 that the results of the mammography will be placed in permanent medical
 records maintained with respect to the woman.
 `(4) LIMIT-
 `(A) $50, INDEXED- Except as provided by the Secretary under subparagraph
 (B), the limit established under this paragraph--
 `(i) for screening mammography performed in 1991, is $50, and
 `(ii) for screening mammography performed in a subsequent year is the
 limit established under this paragraph for the preceding year increased
 by the percentage increase in the MEI for that subsequent year.
 `(B) REDUCTION OF LIMIT- The Secretary shall review from time to
 time the appropriateness of the amount of the limit established under
 this paragraph. The Secretary may, with respect to screening mammography
 performed in a year after 1992, reduce the amount of such limit as it applies
 nationally or in any area to the amount that the Secretary estimates is
 required to assure that screening mammography of an appropriate quality
 is readily and conveniently available during the year.
 `(C) APPLICATION OF LIMIT IN HOSPITAL OUTPATIENT SETTING- The Secretary
 shall provide for an appropriate allocation of the limit established under
 this paragraph between professional and technical components in the case
 of hospital outpatient screening mammography (and comparable situations)
 where there is a claim for professional services separate from the claim
 for the radiologic procedure.
 `(5) LIMITING CHARGES OF NONPARTICIPATING PHYSICIANS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- In the case of mammography screening performed on or
 after January 1, 1991, for which payment is made under this subsection,
 if a nonparticipating physician or supplier provides the screening to an
 individual entitled to benefits under this part, the physician or supplier
 may not charge the individual more than the limiting charge (as defined
 in subparagraph (B), or if less, as defined in subsection (b)(5)(B) or as
 defined in section 1848(g)(2)).
 `(B) LIMITING CHARGE DEFINED- In subparagraph (A), the term `limiting
 charge' means, with respect to screening mammography performed--
 `(i) in 1991, 125 percent of the limit established under paragraph (4),
 `(ii) in 1992, 120 percent of the limit established under paragraph (4), or
 `(iii) after 1992, 115 percent of the limit established under paragraph (4).
 `(C) ENFORCEMENT- If a physician or supplier knowing and willfully imposes
 a charge in violation of subparagraph (A), the Secretary may apply sanctions
 against such physician or supplier in accordance with section 1842(j)(2).'.
 (c) CERTIFICATION OF SCREENING MAMMOGRAPHY QUALITY STANDARDS-
 (1) Section 1863 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395z), as restored by section
 201(a)(1) of the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Repeal Act of 1989, is
 amended by inserting `or whether screening mammography meets the standards
 established under section 1834(c)(3),' after `1832(a)(2)(F)(i),'.
 (2) The first sentence of section 1864(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395aa(a)),
 as restored by section 201(a)(1) of the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage
 Repeal Act of 1989, is amended by inserting before the period the following:
 `, or whether screening mammography meets the standards established under
 section 1834(c)(3)'.
 (3) Section 1865(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395bb(a)), as restored by
 section 201(a)(1) of the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Repeal Act of 1989,
 is amended by inserting `1834(c)(3),' after `1832(a)(2)(F)(i),'.
 (d) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Section 1833(a)(2)(E) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(a)(2)(E)), as
 restored by section 201(a)(1) of the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Repeal
 Act of 1989, is amended by inserting `, but excluding screening mammography'
 after `imaging services'.
 (2) Section 1862(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y(a)), as restored by
 section 201(a)(1) of the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Repeal Act of 1989,
 is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by striking `subparagraph (B), (C), (D), or (E)'
 and inserting `a succeeding subparagraph',
 (ii) in subparagraph (D), by striking `and' at the end,
 (iii) in subparagraph (E), by striking the semicolon at the end and inserting
 `, and', and
 (iv) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 `(F) in the case of screening mammography, which is performed more frequently
 than is covered under section 1834(c)(2) or which does not meet the standards
 established under section 1834(c)(3), and, in the case of screening pap
 smear, which is performed more frequently than is provided under section
 1861(nn);'; and
 (B) in paragraph (7), by inserting `or under paragraph (1)(F)' after
 `(1)(B)'.
 (e) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 screening mammography performed on or after January 1, 1991.
SEC. 312. IN-HOME RESPITE CARE FOR CERTAIN CHRONICALLY DEPENDENT INDIVIDUALS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1832(a) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395k(a)), as restored by section 201(a)(1) of the Medicare
 Catastrophic Coverage Repeal Act of 1989, is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2)(A)--
 (A) by inserting `(i)' after `(A)', and
 (B) by inserting before the semicolon at the end the following: `, and
 (ii) in-home respite care for a chronically dependent individual for
 up to 80 hours in any 12-month period described in section 1861(kk)(4),
 but not to exceed 80 hours in any calendar year'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new sentence:
`In the case of in-home respite care (described in paragraph (2)(A)(ii))
provided to a chronically dependent individual on any day, such care provided
for 3 hours or less on the day shall be counted (for purposes of the limitation
in such paragraph) as 3 hours of such care.'.
 (b) IN-HOME RESPITE CARE FOR CHRONICALLY DEPENDENT INDIVIDUAL DEFINED-
 Section 1861 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x), as amended by section 2(a)(2)
 of this Act, is amended by inserting after subsection (jj) the following
 new subsection:
`In-Home Respite Care; Chronically Dependent Individual
 `(kk)(1) The term `in-home respite care' means the following items and
 services furnished, under the supervision of a registered professional
 nurse, to a chronically dependent individual (as defined in paragraph (2))
 during the period described in paragraph (4) by a home health agency or
 by others under arrangements with them made by such agency in a place of
 residence used as such individual's home:
 `(A) Services of a homemaker/home health aide (who has successfully
 completed a training program approved by the Secretary).
 `(B) Personal care services.
 `(C) Nursing care provided by a licensed professional nurse.
 `(2) The term `chronically dependent individual' means an individual who
 has been certified by a physician as--
 `(A) being unable to perform (without substantial assistance from another
 individual) at least 2 activities of daily living (as defined in paragraph
 (3)), or
 `(B) having a similar level of disability due to cognitive impairment.
 `(3) The `activities of daily living', referred to in paragraph (2),
 are as follows:
 `(i) Eating.
 `(ii) Bathing.
 `(iii) Dressing.
 `(iv) Toileting.
 `(v) Transferring in and out of a bed or in and out of a chair.
 `(4)(A) The 12-month period described in this paragraph is the 1-year period
 beginning on the date that the Secretary determines that a chronically
 dependent individual has incurred out-of-pocket part B cost sharing
 (as defined in paragraph (5)(A)) in an amount equal to the part B limit
 (as determined under paragraph (5)(B)) for the year.
 `(B) In the case of an individual who qualifies under subparagraph (A)
 within 12 months after previously qualifying, the subsequent qualification
 shall begin a new 12-month period under this paragraph.
 `(5) For purposes of this subsection:
 `(A) The term `out-of-pocket part B cost sharing' means, with respect
 to an individual covered under part B, the amounts of expenses that the
 individual incurs that are attributable to--
 `(i) the deductions established under section 1833(b), and
 `(ii) the difference between the payment amount provided under part B and
 the payment amount that would be provided under part B if `100 percent' and
 `0 percent' were substituted for `80 percent' and `20 percent', respectively,
 each place either appears in sections 1833(a), 1833(i)(2), 1834(c)(1)(C),
 1835(b)(2), 1866(a)(2)(A), 1881(b)(2), and 1881(b)(3).
 `(B)(i) The part B limit for 1991 is $1,780. The part B limit for any
 succeeding year shall be such an amount (rounded to the nearest multiple
 of $1) as the Secretary estimates, for that succeeding year, will reflect a
 level of out-of-pocket part B expenses that only 5.5 percent of the average
 number of individuals enrolled under part B (other than individuals enrolled
 with an eligible organization under section 1876 or an organization described
 in section 1833(a)(1)(A)) will equal or exceed in that succeeding year.
 `(ii) Not later than September 1 of each year (beginning with 1991), the
 Secretary shall promulgate the part B limit under this subparagraph for
 the succeeding year.'.
 (c) PAYMENT- Section 1833(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(a)), as restored
 by the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Repeal Act of 1989, is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2), by inserting `(A)(ii),' after `subparagraphs' the
 first place it appears,
 (2) in paragraph (3), by striking `(D)' and inserting `(A)(ii), (D),', and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
`Payment for in-home respite care for chronically dependent individuals
shall be paid on the basis of an hour of such care provided. In applying
paragraph (2) in the case of an organization receiving payment under clause
(A) of paragraph (1) or under a reasonable cost reimbursement contract under
section 1876 and providing coverage of in-home respite care, the Secretary
shall provide for an appropriate adjustment in the payment amounts otherwise
made to reflect the aggregate increase in payments that would otherwise be
made with respect to enrollees in the organization if payments were made
other than under such clause or such a contract if payments were to be made
on an individual-by-individual basis.'.
 (d) CERTIFICATION- Section 1835(a)(2) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395n(a)(2)),
 as restored by the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Repeal Act of 1989,
 is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (E), by striking `and' at the end;
 (2) in subparagraph (F), by striking the period at the end and inserting
 `; and'; and
 (3) by inserting after subparagraph (F) the following new subparagraph:
 `(G) in the case of in-home respite care provided to a chronically dependent
 individual during a 12-month period, the individual was a chronically
 dependent individual during the 3-month period immediately preceding the
 beginning of the 12-month period.'.
 (e) STANDARDS FOR UTILIZATION-
 (1) Section 1862(a) (42 U.S.C. 1395y(a)), as amended by section 2(d)(2)
 of this Act, is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in subparagraph (E), by striking `and' at the end,
 (ii) in subparagraph (F), by striking the semicolon at the end and inserting
 `, and', and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 `(G) in the case of in-home respite care for chronically dependent
 individuals, which is not reasonable and necessary to assure the health
 and condition of the individual is maintained in the individual's
 noninstitutional residence;'; and
 (B) in paragraph (6), by inserting `and except, in the case of in-home
 respite care, as is otherwise permitted under paragraph (1)(G)' after
 `paragraph (1)(C)'.
 (2) The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall take appropriate
 efforts to assure the quality, and provide for appropriate utilization
 of, in-home respite care for chronically dependent individuals under the
 amendments made by this section.
 (f) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 items and services furnished on or after January 1, 1991.
SEC. 313. EXTENDING HOME HEALTH SERVICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1861(m) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395x(m)), as restored by section 201(a)(1) of the Medicare
 Catastrophic Coverage Repeal Act of 1989, is amended by adding at the
 end the following new sentence: `For purposes of paragraphs (1) and
 (4) and sections 1814(a)(2)(C) and 1835(a)(2)(A), nursing care and home
 health aide services shall be considered to be provided or needed on an
 `intermittent' basis if they are provided or needed less than 7 days each
 week and, in the case they are provided or needed for 7 days each week,
 if they are provided or needed for a period of up to 38 consecutive days.'.
 (b) PAYMENT UNDER PART B- Section 1833(d) of the Social Security Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1395l(d)), as restored by section 201(a)(1) of the Medicare
 Catastrophic Coverage Repeal Act of 1989, is amended--
 (1) by striking `(d) No payment' and inserting `(d)(1) Except as provided
 in paragraph (2), no payment'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(2) In the case of home health services furnished to an individual
 enrolled under this part for which payment is made only as a result of the
 application of the last sentence of section 1861(m), payment shall be made
 under this part.'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 services furnished in cases of initial periods of home health services
 beginning on or after Janu- ary 1, 1991.
SEC. 314. EXPANSION OF HOSPICE BENEFIT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1812 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395d),
 as restored by section 101(a)(1) of the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage
 Repeal Act of 1989 and as amended by the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
 Act of 1989, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(4), by striking `90 days each' and all that follows
 through `with respect to' and inserting the following: `90 days each,
 a subsequent period of 30 days, and a subsequent extension period with
 respect to'; and
 (2) in subsection (d)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking `90 days each' and all that follows through
 `lifetime' and inserting the following: `90 days each, a subsequent period
 of 30 days, and a subsequent extension period during the individual's
 lifetime', and
 (B) in paragraph (2)(B), by striking `a 90- or 30-day period,' and inserting
 `a 90- or 30-day period or a subsequent extension period,'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 1814(a)(7)(A) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395f(a)(7)(A)), as restored by section 101(a)(1) of the Medicare
 Catastrophic Coverage Repeal Act of 1989, is amended--
 (1) in clause (i), by striking `and' at the end;
 (2) in clause (ii), by striking the semicolon at the end and inserting `,
 and'; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 `(iii) in a subsequent extension period, the medical director or physician
 described in clause (i)(II) recertifies at the beginning of the period
 that the individual is terminally ill;'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply with
 respect to care and services furnished on or after January 1, 1991.
SEC. 315. FINANCING THROUGH INCREASE IN MEDICARE PART B PREMIUM.
 (a) INCREASE IN PREMIUM- Section 1839 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395r), as
 restored by section 202(a) of the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Repeal
 Act of 1989, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(g)(1) Except as provided in subsection (f), the monthly premium for each
 individual enrolled under this part otherwise determined, without regard to
 this subsection, shall be increased (for months occurring in 1991 through
 1995) by the following additional premium or (for months after December 1995)
 by such an additional premium determined in accordance with paragraph (2):
 `(A) For months in 1991, $.80.
 `(B) For months in 1992, $1.00.
 `(C) For months in 1993, $1.00.
 `(D) For months in 1994, $1.20.
 `(E) For months in 1995, $1.30.
 `(2)(A) The Secretary shall, during September of 1995 and of each year
 thereafter, determine and promulgate the additional premium under this
 subsection for months in the succeeding year. Such premium amount shall be
 equal to the amount the Secretary estimates to be necessary so that the
 aggregate amount of premiums collected under this subsection for months
 in the year will equal the total of the benefits and administrative costs
 which the Secretary estimates will be payable in such year from the Federal
 Hospital Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance
 Trust Fund that are attributable to the amendments made by the Medicare
 Benefit Improvements Act of 1990. In calculating such additional premium,
 the Secretary shall include an appropriate amount for a contingency margin,
 and shall adjust such premium to take into account the amounts by which
 the additional premiums established under this subsection with respect to
 months in any year are greater or less than the amounts required to pay
 for benefits paid and such administrative costs incurred in such year that
 are attributable to the coverage of screening mammography, in-home respite
 care, hospice, and home health benefits under this part.
 `(B) If any premium increase for a month under this paragraph is not
 a multiple of 10 cents, the Secretary shall round the increase to the
 nearest multiple of 10 cents.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Section 1839 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395r), as restored by section
 202(a) of the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Repeal Act of 1989, is amended--
 (A) in the second sentence of subsections (a)(1) and (a)(4), by inserting
 `(other than costs relating to the amendments made by the Medicare Benefit
 Improvements Act of 1990)' before the period;
 (B) in subsection (a)(2), by striking `and (e)' and inserting `, (e), and
 (g)';
 (C) in subsection (a)(3), by striking `subsection (e)' and inserting
 `subsections (e) and (g)';
 (D) in subsection (b), by striking `determined under subsection (a) or (e)'
 and inserting `otherwise determined under this section (without regard to
 subsections (f) and (g))'; and
 (E) in subsection (e)(1), by inserting `except as provided in subsection
 (g),' after `subsection (a)'.
 (2) Section 1844(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w(a)), as restored by
 section 202(a) of the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Repeal Act of 1989,
 is amended by adding at the end the following:
`In computing the amount of aggregate premiums and premiums per enrollee under
paragraph (1), there shall not be taken into account premiums attributable
to section 1839(g).'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 monthly premiums for months beginning with January 1991.
Subtitle C--Senior Health Insurance Consumer Protection
SEC. 321. CERTIFICATION OF HEALTH INSURANCE POLICIES FOR THE ELDERLY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of Health and Human Services (hereinafter
 referred to as the `Secretary') shall no later than 90 days after the date
 of enactment of this Act establish a procedure whereby health insurance
 policies for the elderly may be certified by the Secretary as meeting
 minimum standards and requirements set forth in subsection (b). Such
 certification shall remain in effect if the insurer files a notarized
 statement with the Secretary no later than June 30 of each year stating
 that the policy continues to meet such standards and requirements and if
 the insurer submits such additional data as the Secretary finds necessary
 to verify independently the accuracy of such notarized statement. Where
 the Secretary determines such policy meets (or continues to meet)
 such standards and requirements, he shall authorize the insurer to have
 printed on such policy (but only in accordance with such requirements and
 conditions as the Secretary may require) an emblem which the Secretary
 shall cause to be designed for use as an indication that a policy has
 received the Secretary's certification. The Secretary shall provide each
 State commissioner or superintendent of insurance with a list of all the
 policies which have received his certification.
 (b) CERTIFICATION AND REQUIREMENTS- The Secretary shall certify under
 this section any health insurance policies for the elderly, or continue
 certification of such a policy, only if he or she finds that such policy--
 (1) meets or exceeds the National Association of Insurance Commissioners
 Model Act Standards;
 (2) is guaranteed to be renewable on the basis of the same premium rate
 (or, if a different rate, a rate that is adjusted on a class basis);
 (3) limits the exclusion of preexisting conditions in accordance with
 regulations prescribed by the Secretary;
 (4) allows purchasers 30 days to rescind their purchase of the policy;
 (5) provides that policies of such health insurance be written in simplified
 language which can be understood by purchasers, as specified in regulations
 prescribed by the Secretary; and
 (6) meets or exceeds such other requirements as the Secretary (in
 consultation with State commissioners or superintendents of insurance)
 shall by regulation prescribe.
 (c) STUDY AND REPORT- The Secretary shall 3 years after the date of
 enactment of this Act conduct a study and issue a report to Congress on
 health insurance policies for the elderly. Such study and report shall
 be conducted and issued no later than 6 months after the 3-year period
 commencing after the date of enactment of this Act.