HR 2919 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2919
To amend the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act to provide for
the restoration of New England stocks of groundfish, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
July 16, 1991
Mr. STUDDS introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the
Committees on Merchant Marine and Fisheries, Ways and Means, and Education
and Labor
A BILL
To amend the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act to provide for
the restoration of New England stocks of groundfish, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `New England Groundfish Restoration Act
 of 1991'.
SEC. 2. PURPOSE.
 The purposes of this Act are to--
 (1) meet the objectives of the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management
 Act by ensuring the long-term stability of major New England groundfish
 stocks and the consequent long-term viability of the New England fishing
 industry;
 (2) amend the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act to establish
 a direct action plan for ensuring the timely recovery of depleted species
 of New England groundfish;
 (3) establish clear lines of accountability between the New England
 Fisheries Management Council and the Secretary of Commerce for the purpose
 of doubling the spawning biomass of New England groundfish within 5 years
 after the date of the enactment of this Act;
 (4) authorize the use of innovative methods, including a vessel buyback
 program, for reducing fishing effort and thereby conserving New England
 groundfish;
 (5) encourage the full enforcement of New England fishery management plans
 by authorizing the reimbursement of appropriate State agencies for expenses
 incurred in enforcing those plans;
 (6) initiate negotiations with the Government of Canada for the purpose
 of improving the conservation of transboundary stocks of groundfish in
 the northwest Atlantic Ocean;
 (7) establish a program to encourage the development of commercial fisheries
 and markets for currently underutilized species of fish in the northwest
 Atlantic Ocean; and
 (8) provide for the retraining of fishermen dislocated or unemployed as
 a result of reduced fishing opportunities for New England groundfish.
TITLE I--NEW ENGLAND GROUNDFISH RESTORATION PROGRAM
SEC. 101. AMENDMENT TO NORTHEAST MULTISPECIES FISHERY MANAGEMENT PLAN.
 (a) AMENDMENT OF NORTHEAST MULTISPECIES FISHERY MANAGEMENT PLAN;
 ESTABLISHMENT OF MORATORIUM- Section 312 of the Magnuson Fishery Conservation
 and Management Act (16 U.S.C. 1857 note) is amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 312. NEW ENGLAND GROUNDFISH RESTORATION PROGRAM.
 `(a) AMENDMENT OF NORTHEAST MULTISPECIES FISHERY MANAGEMENT PLAN-
 `(1) PREPARATION BY COUNCIL-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Not later than 270 days after the date of the enactment of
 the New England Groundfish Restoration Act of 1991, the Council shall prepare
 and submit to the Secretary an amendment to the Northeast Multispecies
 Fishery Management Plan, that establishes conservation and management for New
 England groundfish for the purpose of doubling the spawning biomass of New
 England groundfish by not later than 5 years after that date of enactment.
 `(B) PROCEDURE FOR PREPARATION- In preparing and submitting an amendment
 under this subsection, the Council shall--
 `(i) comply with procedures otherwise applicable under this Act to the
 preparation of amendments to fishery management plans by the Council;
 `(ii) consult with the Technical Monitoring Group and the Groundfish
 Advisory Committee of the Council; and
 `(iii) consult with the Chief Scientist at the National Marine Fisheries
 Service Northeast Fisheries Center.
 `(C) RECOMMENDATION FOR SCHEDULE OF CIVIL PENALTIES- The Council shall
 submit to the Secretary with an amendment submitted under this paragraph a
 recommendation for a schedule of civil penalties for purposes of subsection
 (b), including a list of mandatory fishing permit sanctions to be applied
 under section 308(g).
 `(D) REVIEW BY SECRETARY- The Secretary shall give the review of an
 amendment submitted under this paragraph such priority consideration as
 may be necessary to ensure that, if approved, it may be implemented as
 soon as possible.
 `(2) PREPARATION BY SECRETARY-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- If the Council does not submit an amendment to the
 Secretary in accordance with paragraph (1), the Secretary shall prepare
 such an amendment by not later than 365 days after the date of the enactment
 of the New England Groundfish Restoration Act of 1991.
 `(B) PROCEDURE- In preparing an amendment under this subsection, the
 Secretary shall--
 `(i) comply with the procedures established under section 304(c) for the
 preparation of amendments to fishery management plans by the Secretary;
 `(ii) conduct public hearings on the amendment; and
 `(iii) actively seek comments from representatives of the commercial and
 recreational fishing industries.
 `(3) PREFERRED PROVISIONS- The Council and the Secretary are encouraged to
 include in any amendment under this subsection provisions which establish--
 `(A) fishing effort controls for commercial fishermen, including--
 `(i) a moratorium on the issuance of new permits authorizing fishing for
 New England groundfish, or
 `(ii) any other system for limiting access to the New England groundfish
 fishery;
 `(B) species-specific quotas for commercial fishermen, including fishing
 vessel trip limits;
 `(C) bag limits, fishing seasons, and other conservation and management
 for recreational fishermen;
 `(D) standards and procedures for the immediate closing to fishing, within
 5 days after receipt of a request from the Council, of--
 `(i) areas where New England groundfish are spawning; and
 `(ii) areas where there are high concentrations of undersized New England
 groundfish;
 `(E) a minimum mesh size for fishing nets that is large enough to allow
 undersized New England groundfish to escape;
 `(F) requirements for obtaining permits described in section 303(b)(1); and
 `(G) procedures for obtaining data necessary for the conservation and
 management of the New England groundfish fishery.
 `(b) SCHEDULE OF CIVIL PENALTIES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Simultaneously with the issuance of regulations implementing
 any amendment to the Northeast Multispecies Fishery Management Plan under
 this section, the Secretary shall issue a schedule of civil penalties
 which shall apply under section 308 for violations of this Act relating
 to the New England groundfish fishery.
 `(2) CONTENT- A schedule issued by the Secretary under this subsection
 shall--
 `(A) be based on the recommendation submitted by the Council under subsection
 (a)(1)(C); and
 `(B) specify violations of the Act for which permit sanctions under section
 308(g) shall be mandatory.
 `(3) EXPLANATION OF FAILURE TO ADOPT RECOMMENDATION OF COUNCIL- The Secretary
 shall publish in the Federal Register an explanation regarding why any part
 of the recommendation submitted by the Council under subsection (a)(1)(C)
 is not included in the schedule issued under this subsection.
 `(c) MORATORIUM ON ISSUING PERMITS FOR GROUNDFISH FISHING-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT BY COUNCIL.
 `(A) VOTE REQUIRED- Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of
 the New England Groundfish Restoration Act of 1991, the Council shall convene
 a meeting at which the Council shall conduct a vote on the establishment
 of a 5-year moratorium on the issuance of new permits which authorize
 fishing for New England groundfish.
 `(B) PUBLICATION OF NOTICE- Upon completing a vote under this paragraph
 approving the establishment of a moratorium, the Council shall--
 `(i) transmit to the Secretary a notice of the results of that vote, which
 the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register not later than 3 days
 after receipt; and
 `(ii) publish a notice of the results of that vote in newspapers of
 general circulation in the major fishing ports of the Council's region,
 and in major fishing ports in other regions affected by the moratorium,
 by not later than 3 days after the date of the vote.
 `(C) EFFECTIVE DATE- A moratorium established pursuant to this paragraph
 shall take effect on the last day of the 10-day period beginning on the date
 of publication of a notice under subparagraph (B)(ii), notwithstanding
 any further action or failure to act by the Council or the Secretary
 (including any approval or disapproval) with respect to any amendment
 under this section of which the moratorium is a part.
 `(2) DURATION, EXTENSION, AND TERMINATION- A moratorium established pursuant
 to a vote of the Council under paragraph (1) or otherwise by an amendment
 prepared by the Council or the Secretary under this section--
 `(A) may not be effective for more than 5 years, except pursuant to an
 extension under subparagraph (B);
 `(B) may only be extended upon the approval of the extension by the Council
 and the Secretary; and
 `(C) may be terminated before the end of 5 years only if the Council and
 the Secretary jointly find that the moratorium and any amendment which is
 submitted to or prepared by the Secretary pursuant to this section have
 succeeded in doubling the spawning biomass of New England groundfish.
 `(3) CERTAIN RENEWAL, REPLACEMENT, AND ISSUANCE NOT PROHIBITED- A
 moratorium established pursuant to a vote of the Council under paragraph
 (1) or otherwise by an amendment prepared by the Council or the Secretary
 under this section shall not prohibit--
 `(A) the renewal of any permit in effect on the day before the effective
 date of the moratorium;
 `(B) the replacement of any permit in effect on the day before the effective
 date of the moratorium that is damaged, lost, or destroyed;
 `(C) the issuance of a permit for a fishing vessel that is a replacement for
 a fishing vessel for which there is a permit in effect on the day before
 the effective date of the moratorium, if the replacement fishing vessel
 has a fishing capacity that is not greater than the fishing capacity of
 the fishing vessel it replaces;
 `(D) the issuance of a permit for a fishing vessel constructed or acquired
 after the effective date of the moratorium, if before the date of the
 enactment of the New England Groundfish Restoration Act of 1991--
 `(i) a contract is entered into for that construction or acquisition, and
 `(ii) the keel of the vessel is laid; or
 `(E) the issuance of a permit for a small fishing vessel to be used for
 fishing part-time, and the participation of which in the New England
 groundfish fishery will not affect achievement of the purpose stated in
 subsection (a)(1)(A), as determined by the Council.
 `(4) OTHER ESTABLISHMENT NOT PROHIBITED- This subsection shall not be
 considered to prohibit the Council or the Secretary from establishing,
 other than pursuant to this subsection, a moratorium on the issuance of
 permits which authorize fishing for New England groundfish.
 `(d) STATE CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT MEASURES- This section shall not be
 considered to prohibit a State from adopting conservation and management
 for waters of the State that are more stringent than measures established
 by an amendment under this section.
 `(e) DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this section--
 `(1) COUNCIL- The term `Council' means the New England Fishery Management
 Council established under section 302(a)(1).
 `(2) NEW ENGLAND GROUNDFISH- The term `New England groundfish' means any
 member of a species of cod, flounder, haddock, pollock, hake, or other fish
 managed under the Northeast Multispecies Fishery Management Plan approved
 by the Secretary in accordance with this Act, as in effect on the date of
 the enactment of the New England Groundfish Restoration Act of 1991.
 `(f) APPROPRIATIONS- Of amounts authorized to be appropriated to carry
 out this title for fiscal years 1992 through 1997, $3,000,000 may be
 appropriated each fiscal year to carry out this section.'.
 (b) RELATED MATTERS- Section 305(e) of the Magnuson Fishery Conservation
 and Management Act (16 U.S.C. 1855(e)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `subsection (c) or' and inserting `subsection (c),'; and
 (2) by inserting after `section 304 (a) and (b)' the following: `, or
 section 312,'.
 (c) TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) DEFINITIONS- Section 3(5) of the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and
 Management Act (16 U.S.C. 1802(5)) is amended by striking `The term'
 and inserting `Except as provided in section 312, the term'.
 (2) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management
 Act is amended in the table of contents in the first section by striking
 the item relating to section 312 and inserting the following:
`Sec. 312. New England groundfish restoration program.'.
SEC. 102. VESSEL PURCHASE PROGRAM.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title III of the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management
 Act (16 U.S.C. 1821-1827) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new section:
`SEC. 314. VESSEL PURCHASE PROGRAM.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Not later than 6 months after the effective date of this
 section, the Secretary shall establish a program for the use of amounts in
 the Sport Fish Restoration Account to purchase fishing vessels authorized
 by a permit under this Act to participate in fisheries covered by the Plan,
 for the purpose of reducing the number of fishing vessels and the fishing
 effort in those fisheries.
 `(b) ADMINISTRATION OF PROGRAM-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Program shall be established and administered by
 the Secretary--
 `(A) acting through the National Marine Fisheries Service Office of
 Financial Services Division, and
 `(B) in consultation with the Council.
 `(2) CONTRACTING- The Secretary, subject to the availability of
 appropriations, may enter into contracts for the performance of functions
 under the Program.
 `(c) VESSELS ELIGIBLE FOR PURCHASE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary, in consultation with fishing industry
 representatives from throughout the region covered by the Plan, shall
 establish criteria for determining types of vessels which are eligible
 for purchase under the Program.
 `(2) CRITERIA REQUIREMENTS- Criteria established under this subsection shall
 include requirements that to be eligible for purchase under the Program, a
 fishing vessel shall, on the day before the effective date of this section--
 `(A) be active in the fisheries covered by the Plan; and
 `(B) be of such a type, and engaged in such fishing, that purchase of the
 vessel by the Secretary will promote conservation and restoration of the
 New England groundfish fishery.
 `(d) TERMINATION- A permit issued under this Act for a vessel purchased under
 the Program shall not be effective after the effective date of that purchase.
 `(e) DISPOSAL OF VESSELS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall dispose of fishing vessels acquired
 under this section in such manner as will--
 `(A) ensure restoration and conservation of New England groundfish;
 `(B) promote the financial self-sufficiency of the Program; or
 `(C) promote the development of fisheries for underutilized species (as
 that term is defined in section 315(d)).
 `(2) DEPOSIT OF PROCEEDS- Amounts received by the United States as proceeds
 of vessels disposed of pursuant to this subsection shall be deposited in
 the Sport Fish Restoration Account.
 `(f) ADVISORY PANEL-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT AND FUNCTIONS- Not later than 6 months after the
 effective date of this section, the Secretary shall establish, for the
 period in which the Program is in effect, an advisory panel which shall--
 `(A) review each purchase of a vessel proposed by the Secretary under the
 Program; and
 `(B) advise the Secretary regarding the appropriate price to be paid for
 each such vessel.
 `(2) MEMBERSHIP- The Advisory Panel shall consist of 7 members appointed
 by the Secretary, including one appointee from among representatives of
 each of--
 `(A) fishing vessel owners;
 `(B) fishing vessel brokers;
 `(C) fishing vessel insurers; and
 `(D) other individuals with knowledge or experience regarding the value
 of fishing vessels.
 `(3) COMPENSATION- Members of the Advisory Panel shall receive no
 compensation for service on the panel, but may be reimbursed by the
 Secretary for any expenses incurred in carrying out official business of
 the Advisory Panel.
 `(g) DEFINITIONS- In this section--
 `(1) ADVISORY PANEL- The term `Advisory Panel' means the advisory panel
 established by the Secretary under this section.
 `(2) COUNCIL- The term `Council' means the New England Fishery Management
 Council established under section 302(a)(1).
 `(3) NEW ENGLAND GROUNDFISH- The term `New England groundfish' has the
 meaning that term has in section 312.
 `(4) PLAN- The term `Plan' means the Northeast Multispecies Fishery
 Management Plan.
 `(5) PROGRAM- The term `Program' means the vessel purchase program
 established by the Secretary under this section.
 `(6) SPORT FISH RESTORATION ACCOUNT- The term `Sport Fish Restoration
 Account' means that account in the Aquatic Resources Trust Fund established
 under section 9504 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 9504).'.
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management
 Act is amended in the table of contents in the first section by adding at
 the end the following new item:
`Sec. 314. Vessel purchase program.'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE AND REPEAL-
 (1) EFFECTIVE DATE- This section is effective on the effective date of any
 moratorium established for the New England groundfish fishery pursuant to a
 vote of the New England Fishery Management Council under section 312(c)(1)
 of the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act, as amended by
 section 101 of this Act.
 (2) REPEAL- This section and the amendments made by this section are
 repealed effective on the date of the termination of such moratorium.
 (3) CONTRACTS NOT AFFECTED- The repeal pursuant to paragraph (2) of
 the amendments made by this section shall not affect any fishing vessel
 purchase contract entered into under section 314 of the Magnuson Fishery
 Conservation and Management Act before the effective date of the repeal.
SEC. 103. ENFORCEMENT.
 Section 311 of the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act (16
 U.S.C. 1861) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (f) as subsection (g); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (e) the following new subsection:
 `(f) ENFORCEMENT OF NORTHEAST MULTISPECIES FISHERY MANAGEMENT PLAN-
 `(1) ENFORCEMENT AGREEMENTS- Not later than 12 months after the date of
 the enactment of the New England Groundfish Restoration Act of 1991, the
 Secretary shall enter into an agreement under subsection (a) with each
 of the States represented on the New England Fishery Management Council,
 which authorizes the marine law enforcement agency of that State to perform
 duties of the Secretary relating to enforcement of that plan.
 `(2) REIMBURSEMENT- An agreement with a State under this subsection shall
 provide for reimbursement of the State for expenses incurred in detection
 and prosecution of violations of any appropriate fishery management plan
 approved by the Secretary.'.
SEC. 104. SEA SAMPLER PROGRAM.
 Section 305 of the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act (16
 U.S.C. 1855) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(i) SEA SAMPLER PROGRAM-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary may establish a program, to be known as
 the Sea Sampler Program, for stationing individuals on board fishing vessels
 engaged in the New England groundfish fishery, who shall collect for the
 Secretary and the New England Fishery Management Council statistically
 reliable information necessary for the conservation and management of
 fisheries managed under the Northeast Multispecies Fishery Management Plan.
 `(2) VOLUNTARY PROGRAM- The Secretary may not require a vessel to have on
 board an individual under the Sea Sampler Program.
 `(3) RESTRICTION ON USE OF INFORMATION- Information collected under the
 Sea Sampler Program may not be used for enforcement of this Act.
 `(4) TREATMENT OF SEA SAMPLERS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- An individual stationed on a vessel under this section
 shall be considered to be an observer on a vessel under section 114(e)
 of the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 for purposes of paragraph (7)
 of that section.
 `(B) LIMITATION- This paragraph does not apply if the observer is engaged
 by the owner, master, or individual in charge of a vessel to perform any
 duties in service to the vessel.'.
SEC. 105. U.S.-CANADA FISHERY MANAGEMENT AGREEMENT.
 (a) NEGOTIATIONS- Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment
 of this Act, the Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretary of
 Commerce, is authorized and encouraged to initiate negotiations with the
 Government of Canada for the purpose of entering into an international
 fishery agreement with Canada for the conservation and management of
 fisheries of mutual concern in the Northwest Atlantic Ocean, with particular
 emphasis on transboundary stocks of groundfish and ensuring the success
 of New England groundfish restoration efforts pursuant to this Act.
 (b) CONTENTS OF AGREEMENT- An agreement entered into pursuant to this
 section shall--
 (1) provide for timely and periodic exchanges of scientific information
 relating to the conservation and management of fisheries stocks of mutual
 concern;
 (2) provide for routine meetings between the officials of the United States
 and Canada responsible for the conservation and management of fisheries;
 (3) establish procedures for the identification of conservation and
 management measures that would be mutually beneficial; and
 (4) identify procedures for the implementation within each country of
 conservation and management measures identified as mutually beneficial.
 (c) CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE-
 (1) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary of State, in consultation with the
 Secretary of Commerce, shall establish a consultative committee to assist
 in the development and implementation of a fishery agreement pursuant to
 this section.
 (2) MEMBERSHIP- The membership of the Committee shall include representatives
 from the New England Fishery Management Council, the States represented
 on that Council, the fishing industry, the seafood processing industry,
 and others knowledgeable and experienced in the conservation and management
 of fisheries.
 (d) APPLICATION OF EXISTING LAW- An agreement entered into pursuant to
 this section shall be subject to section 203 of the Magnuson Fishery
 Conservation and Management Act (16 U.S.C. 1823).
 (e) LETTER- Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this
 Act, and annually thereafter until the effective date of an agreement entered
 into pursuant to this section, the Secretary of State shall transmit to the
 Congress a letter describing activities of the Secretary under this section.
SEC. 106. DEVELOPMENT OF FISHERIES FOR UNDERUTILIZED SPECIES OF NORTHWEST
ATLANTIC OCEAN.
 (a) PROGRAM- Title III of the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management
 Act, as amended by this Act, is amended by adding at the end the following
 new section:
`SEC. 315. DEVELOPMENT OF FISHERIES FOR UNDERUTILIZED SPECIES OF NORTHWEST
ATLANTIC OCEAN.
 `(a) JOINT VENTURES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Not later than 12 months after the date of the enactment
 of the New England Groundfish Restoration Act of 1991, the Secretary,
 acting through the Director of the National Marine Fisheries Service,
 shall establish a program of joint ventures for the purpose of--
 `(A) promoting development and harvest of underutilized species,
 `(B) reducing fishing effort in the New England groundfish fishery, and
 `(C) providing financial assistance to United States fishermen and fish
 processors to make participation in joint ventures for underutilized
 species economically viable.
 `(2) ACTIVITIES UNDER PROGRAM- As part of a program under this section
 the Secretary may, subject to the availability of appropriations--
 `(A) award contracts, grants, and other financial assistance to persons
 who own or operate fishing vessels permitted under this Act to participate
 in the New England groundfish fishery, for activities which promote the
 purposes described in paragraph (1);
 `(B) award contracts, grants, and other financial assistance to United States
 fish processors, for activities which make participation in joint ventures
 under this subsection economically viable for United States fishermen; and
 `(C) award contracts, grants, and other financial assistance to citizens of
 the United States for the administration and management of joint ventures
 under this subsection.
 `(3) CONDITION FOR PARTICIPATION- As a condition of participating in
 any joint venture under this subsection, the Secretary shall require a
 person who owns or operates any fishing vessel permitted under this Act to
 participate in the New England groundfish fishery to temporarily surrender
 that permit to the Secretary during the period that the fishing vessel is
 participating in the joint venture.
 `(b) FISHERIES RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS- The Secretary shall use
 amounts available to the Secretary under section 2 of the Act of August
 11, 1939 (commonly referred to as the `Saltonstall-Kennedy Act') to fund
 grants for projects that promote development of fisheries for underutilized
 species in the Northwest Atlantic Ocean.
 `(c) ASSISTANCE OF OTHER AGENCIES- The Secretary shall actively seek the
 assistance of other Federal agencies in the development of fisheries
 for underutilized species, including assistance from the Secretary of
 Agriculture in including underutilized species as agricultural commodities
 in the programs of the Foreign Agricultural Service for which amounts are
 authorized under the Food, Agriculture, Conservation, and Trade Act of 1990.
 `(d) UNDERUTILIZED SPECIES DEFINED- For purposes of this section, the
 term `underutilized species' means mackerel, dogfish, skates, and any
 other species of fish identified by the Director of the National Marine
 Fisheries Service Northeast Fisheries Center.'.
 (b) PRIORITY FOR RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT REGARDING UNDERUTILIZED SPECIES
 IN NORTHWEST ATLANTIC OCEAN- Section 2 of the Act of August 11, 1939
 (15 U.S.C. 713c-3; commonly referred to as the `Saltonstall-Kennedy Act')
 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(f) PRIORITY FOR UNDERUTILIZED SPECIES IN NORTHWEST ATLANTIC OCEAN- In
 making grants for projects and carrying out other activities under this
 section, the Secretary shall give priority to projects and activities
 that promote development of fisheries for underutilized species (as that
 term is defined in section 315 of the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and
 Management Act).'.
SEC. 107. AMENDMENT TO NATIONAL FISHERIES RESEARCH PLAN.
 Section 304(e)(1) of the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act
 (16 U.S.C. 1854(e)(1)) is amended in the first sentence by inserting after
 `publication' the following: `, and specifically for the restoration of
 stocks of New England groundfish (as that term is defined in section 312).'.
TITLE II--LOAN GUARANTEES, DIESEL FUEL TAXES ON CERTAIN COMMERCIAL FISHING
BOATS, AND CAPITAL CONSTRUCTION FUND PROVISIONS
SEC. 201. LOAN GUARANTEES TO BE CONSISTENT WITH NORTHEAST MULTISPECIES
FISHERY MANAGEMENT PLAN.
 Subsection (d) of section 1104A of the Merchant Marine Act, 1936 (46
 App. U.S.C. 1274) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new paragraph:
 `(3)(A) No commitment to guarantee, or guarantee of, an obligation may be
 made by the Secretary under this title with respect to any fishing vessel or
 fishery facility if such commitment or guarantee is inconsistent with the
 purposes of the Northeast Multispecies Fishery Management Plan approved by
 the Secretary of Commerce (as that plan may be amended pursuant to section
 312 of the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act).
 `(B) The Secretary shall encourage the making of guarantees under this
 title with respect to fishing vessels and fishery facilities--
 `(i) which are consistent with the purposes referred to in subparagraph
 (A), or
 `(ii) which promote the development of fisheries for underutilized fish
 species in New England.'
SEC. 202. DIESEL FUEL TAXES ON CERTAIN COMMERCIAL FISHING VESSELS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subsection (l) of section 6427 of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (relating to nontaxable uses of diesel fuel and aviation
 fuel taxed under section 4091) is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following new paragraph:
 `(5) APPLICATION OF DIESEL FUEL TAX TO CERTAIN COMMERCIAL FISHING VESSELS
 FOR CERTAIN PERIODS- For purposes of this subsection, the term `nontaxable
 use' shall not include the use of diesel fuel (as defined in section 4092)
 as a fuel in a vessel if--
 `(A) such vessel holds a permit to harvest any species of fish conserved
 and managed under the Northeast Multispecies Fishery Management Plan, and
 `(B) such fuel is sold during the period a moratorium established pursuant
 to a vote of the New England Fishery Management Council under section
 312(c)(1) of the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act (16
 U.S.C. 1857 note) is in effect.
For purposes of section 4041(a)(1), a vessel described in subparagraph (A)
shall be treated as a vehicle referred to in such section with respect to
fuel sold during such period.'
 (b) REVENUES DEPOSITED INTO SPORT FISH RESTORATION ACCOUNT-
 (1) Subsection (c) of section 9503 of such Code is amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(6) TRANSFERS TO SPORT FISH RESTORATION ACCOUNT OF DIESEL FUEL TAXES ON
 COMMERCIAL FISHING VESSELS- The Secretary shall pay from time to time from
 the Highway Trust Fund to the Sport Fish Restoration Account in the Aquatic
 Resources Trust Fund amounts (as determined by him) equivalent to amounts
 deposited into the Highway Trust Fund by reason of section 6427(l)(5).'
 (2) The last sentence of section 9504(a)(2) of such Code is amended by
 striking `section 9503(c)(4), 9503(c)(5)' and inserting `paragraphs (4),
 (5), and (6) of section 9503(c),'.
 (c) EXPENDITURE OF REVENUES-
 (1) Paragraph (2) of section 9504(c) of such Code (relating to expenditures
 from Sport Fish Restoration Account) is amended by striking `and' at the
 end of subparagraph (A), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph
 (B) and inserting `, and', and by inserting after subparagraph (B) the
 following new subparagraph:
 `(C) to carry out sections 305(i), 311(e), 314, and 315(a) of the Magnuson
 Fishery Conservation and Management Act, except that not more than 20 percent
 of the amounts available from the account for a fiscal year may be used to
 carry out sections 311(e), 314, and 315(a) of that Act in that fiscal year.'.
 (2) Paragraph (2) of section 9405(c) of such Code is amended by adding
 at the end thereof the following new sentence: `Expenditures authorized
 by subparagraph (C) may be paid from such Account only to the extent of
 the amount in such Account which is attributable to amounts transferred
 to such Account under section 9503(c)(6), and the amounts so transferred
 under such section may be used only for making expenditures authorized by
 subparagraph (C).'
SEC. 203. WITHDRAWALS FROM CAPITAL CONSTRUCTION FUNDS PERMITTED FOR INSURANCE,
ETC. IN CERTAIN CASES.
 (a) MERCHANT MARINE ACT, 1936-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subsection (f) of section 607 of the Merchant Marine Act,
 1936 (46 App. U.S.C. 1177) is amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new paragraphs:
 `(3) In the case of a vessel holding a permit to harvest any species of fish
 conserved and managed under the Northeast Multispecies Fishery Management
 Plan which, for any period, is prohibited from harvesting fish pursuant
 to section 312 of the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act,
 the term `qualified withdrawal' includes withdrawals for--
 `(A) insurance costs related to such vessel which are allocable to such
 period,
 `(B) dock fees for such vessel which are allocable to such period,
 `(C) vessel maintenance costs incurred for maintenance performed during
 such period, and
 `(D) the payment of any amount that is due in that period for principal
 or interest on indebtedness on the vessel that is incurred before the date
 of the enactment of the New England Groundfish Restoration Act of 1991.
 `(4) For purposes of this section, the term `qualified withdrawal' does
 not include any withdrawal from a fund for--
 `(A) any construction, reconstruction, repair, or modernization of a
 vessel holding a permit to harvest any species of fish conserved and
 managed under the Northeast Multispecies Fishery Management Plan, that
 increases the fishing capacity of the vessel, or
 `(B) the acquisition or construction of a vessel that--
 `(i) replaces a vessel described in subparagraph (A), and
 `(ii) has a fishing capacity that is greater than the fishing capacity of
 the vessel it replaces.
 (2) REGULATIONS- Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment
 of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of Commerce,
 and the Secretary of Transportation shall jointly issue initial regulations
 to carry out the amendment made by paragraph (1).
 (b) INTERNAL REVENUE CODE- Subsection (e) of section 7518 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new paragraphs:
 `(3) In the case of a vessel holding a permit to harvest any species of fish
 conserved and managed under the Northeast Multispecies Fishery Management
 Plan which, for any period, is prohibited from harvesting fish pursuant
 to section 312 of the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act (16
 U.S.C. 1857 note), the term `qualified withdrawal' includes withdrawals for--
 `(A) insurance costs related to such vessel which are allocable to such
 period,
 `(B) dock fees for such vessel which are allocable to such period,
 `(C) vessel maintenance costs incurred for maintenance performed during
 such period, and
 `(D) the payment of any amount that is due in that period for principal
 or interest on indebtedness on the vessel that is incurred before the date
 of the enactment of the New England Groundfish Restoration Act of 1991.
 `(4) For purposes of this section, the term `qualified withdrawal' does
 not include any withdrawal from a fund for--
 `(A) any construction, reconstruction, repair, or modernization of a
 vessel holding a permit to harvest any species of fish conserved and
 managed under the Northeast Multispecies Fishery Management Plan, that
 increases the fishing capacity of the vessel, or
 `(B) the acquisition or construction of a vessel that--
 `(i) replaces a vessel described in subparagraph (A), and
 `(ii) has a fishing capacity that is greater than the fishing capacity of
 the vessel it replaces.'.
TITLE III--FISHERIES EMPLOYMENT ASSISTANCE
SEC. 301. AMENDMENT TO THE JOB TRAINING PARTNERSHIP ACT.
 (a) AMENDMENT- Part B of title III of the Job Training Partnership Act
 (29 U.S.C. 1662 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new section:
`FISHERIES RESTORATION TRANSITION ASSISTANCE
 `SEC. 326. (a) DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY-
 `(1) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section, the term `eligible
 individual' means an individual who--
 `(A) is an eligible dislocated worker, as that term is defined in section
 301(a), and
 `(B) has been terminated or laid off, has received a notice of termination
 or layoff, or in the case of a self-employed worker in the fisheries,
 has become unemployed, as a consequence of compliance with the Magnuson
 Fishery Conservation and Management Act.
 `(2) DETERMINATIONS- The determination of eligibility under paragraph
 (1)(B) of this subsection shall be made by the Secretary of Labor,
 pursuant to criteria established by the Secretary, in consultation with
 the Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
 `(b) GRANTS AUTHORIZED- In addition to the authority provided to the
 Secretary to make grants under other provisions of law, the Secretary may
 make grants to States, substate grantees (as defined in section 312(c)),
 fishing industry associations, and industry trade groups--
 `(1) to provide training, adjustment assistance, and employment services
 to eligible individuals adversely affected by compliance with the Magnuson
 Fishery Conservation and Management Act; and
 `(2) to make needs-related payments to such individuals in accordance with
 subsection (e).
 `(c) PRIORITY AND APPROVAL-
 `(1) PRIORITY- In reviewing applications for grants under subsection (b), the
 Secretary shall give priority to applications proposing to provide training,
 adjustment assistance, and services in coastal areas in New England and
 in other areas which have the greatest number of eligible individuals.
 `(2) NEEDS-RELATED PAYMENTS REQUIRED- The Secretary shall not approve
 an application for a grant under subsection (b) unless the application
 contains assurances that the applicant will use grant funds to provide
 needs-related payments in accordance with subsection (e).
 `(d) USE OF FUNDS- Subject to the requirements of subsection (f) of this
 section, grants under subsection (b) may be used for any purpose for which
 funds may be used under section 314, including job search and relocation
 allowances.
 `(e) NEEDS-RELATED PAYMENTS- The Secretary shall prescribe regulations
 with respect to the use of funds from grants under subsection (b) for
 needs related payments in order to enable eligible individuals to complete
 training or education programs under this section. Such regulations shall--
 `(1) require that such payments shall be provided to an eligible individual
 only if such individual--
 `(A) does not qualify or has ceased to qualify for unemployment compensation;
 `(B) has been enrolled in training by the end of the 13th week of the
 individual's initial unemployment compensation benefit period, or, if later,
 the end of the 8th week after an individual is informed that a short term
 layoff or suspension of fishing season will in fact exceed 6 months; and
 `(C) is participating in training or education programs under this
 section, except that such regulations shall protect an individual from
 being disqualified pursuant to this clause for a failure to participate
 that is not the fault of the individual;
 `(2) provide that to qualify for such payments the individual currently
 receives, or is a member of a family which currently receives, a total family
 income (exclusive of unemployment compensation, child support payments,
 and welfare payments) which, in relation to family size, is not in excess
 of the lower living standard income level;
 `(3) provide that the levels of such payments shall be equal to the
 higher of--
 `(A) the applicable level of unemployment compensation; or
 `(B) the poverty level determined in accordance with criteria established
 by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget;
 `(4) provide for the adjustment of payments to reflect changes in total
 family income; and
 `(5) provide that the grantee shall obtain information with respect to
 such income, and changes therein, from the eligible individual.
 `(f) ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES- The Secretary of Labor may reserve not
 more than 10 percent of the funds appropriated under this section for the
 administration of activities authorized under this section, including the
 provision of technical assistance for the preparation of grant applications.
 `(g) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- In addition to amounts authorized
 to be appropriated by section 3(c) of this Act, there are authorized to
 be appropriated $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1992, and such sums as may
 be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1993, 1994 and 1995 to carry
 out this section. Amounts appropriated pursuant to this subsection shall
 remain available until expended.
 `(h) REGULATIONS- The Secretary shall prescribe regulations to carry out
 this section not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this
 section.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- The table of contents of the Job Training
 Partnership Act is amended by inserting after the item pertaining to
 section 325 the following:
`Sec. 326. Fisheries restoration transition assistance.'.