HR 3445 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3445
To entitle employees to maternity leave in certain cases involving the birth
or adoption of a child, with protection of the employees' employment and
benefit rights, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
October 11, 1989
Mr. PENNY (for himself, Mr. OLIN, and Mr. PAYNE of New Jersey) introduced
the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Education and Labor
A BILL
To entitle employees to maternity leave in certain cases involving the birth
or adoption of a child, with protection of the employees' employment and
benefit rights, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Maternity Leave Act of 1989'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS-
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MATERNITY LEAVE
Sec. 101. Definitions.
Sec. 102. Maternity leave requirement.
Sec. 103. Employment and benefits protection.
Sec. 104. Employee's failure to return to work.
Sec. 105. Effect on existing maternity benefits.
Sec. 106. Effect on other laws.
TITLE II--ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 201. Enforcement provisions.
Sec. 202. Effective date; regulations.
TITLE I--GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MATERNITY LEAVE
SEC. 101. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this title, the following terms have the following means:
 (1) The term `eligible employee' means any employee as (defined in section
 3(e) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 203(e)) who has
 been employed by the employer from which leave is sought for at least--
 (A) 1,250 hours of service during the previous 12-month period, and
 (B) 12 consecutive months.
 (2)(A) The term `employer' means any person who employs 50 or more eligible
 employees and is engaged in commerce or any industry affecting commerce.
 (B) For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `person' includes, among
 other things--
 (i) any person who acts, directly or indirectly, in the interest of an
 employer to any of the employer's employees,
 (ii) any successor in interest of an employer; and
 (iii) any public agency, as defined in section 3(x) of the Fair Labor
 Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 203(x)).
 (C) For purposes of subparagraph (A), a public agency shall be deemed to
 be a person engaged in commerce or in an activity affecting commerce.
 (3) The term `employment benefits' means all benefits provided or made
 available to employees by an employer, and includes group life insurance,
 health insurance, disability insurance, sick leave, annual leave, educational
 benefits, and pensions, regardless of whether such benefits are provided
 by a policy or practice of an employer or through an employee benefit plan
 as defined in section 3(3) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act
 of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(1)).
 (4) The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Labor.
SEC. 102. MATERNITY LEAVE REQUIREMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- (1)(A) An eligible employee shall be entitled, subject to
 section 103, to 10 workweeks of unpaid leave during any 24-month period
 because of the placement of a son or daughter with the employee for adoption.
 (B) An eligible female employee shall be entitled to such workweeks of leave
 during such period because of the birth of a son or daughter of the employee.
 (2) An eligible employee must exhaust all accrued sick leave, vacation leave,
 or other paid leave before using the leave provided under paragraph (1).
 (3) The 10-week period of unpaid leave provided in this section shall be
 reduced by the amount of paid leave substituted pursuant to paragraph (2).
 (b) LEAVE SCHEDULE- The unpaid leave provided under this section must be
 taken in consecutive workweeks.
 (c) NOTIFICATION OF INTENT TO USE LEAVE- At least 30 days before the day
 on which the leave provided under this section is to commence, an eligible
 employee shall notify the employer in writing of--
 (1) the intent to take the leave,
 (2) the date upon which leave is to commence, and
 (3) the reason for taking leave.
 (d) NOTIFICATION OF INTENT TO RETURN- An employee must provide notice in
 writing of intent to return from the leave provided in this section at
 least 21 days before the intended date of return.
 (e) FAILURE TO NOTIFY OR INADEQUATE NOTIFICATION- (1) An employer may deny
 restoration under section 103 if an employee fails to provide the notice
 under subsections (c) and (d) or submits a false statement in such notice.
 (2) Good faith errors in the notices described in this section shall not
 constitute false statements.
SEC. 103. EMPLOYMENT AND BENEFITS PROTECTION.
 (a) RESTORATION TO POSITION- (1) Any eligible employee who takes leave
 under section 102 for its intended purpose shall be entitled, upon return
 from such leave--
 (A) to be restored by the employer to the position of employment held by
 the employee when the leave commenced, or
 (B) to be restored to an equivalent position with equivalent employment
 benefits, pay, and other terms and conditions of employment.
 (2) The taking of leave under this title shall not result in the loss of
 any employment benefit earned before the date on which the leave commenced.
 (3) Except as provided in subsection (c), nothing in this section shall
 be construed to entitle any restored employee to--
 (A) the accrual of any seniority or employment benefits during any period
 of leave, or
 (B) any right, benefit, or position of employment other than any right,
 benefit, or position to which the employee would have been entitled had
 the employee not taken the leave.
 (4) As a condition to restoration under paragraph (1), the employer may
 have a policy that requires each employee to receive certification from
 the employee's health care provided that the employee is able to resume work.
 (b) EXEMPTION CONCERNING CERTAIN HIGHLY COMPENSATED EMPLOYEES- (1)
 An employer may deny restoration under this subsection to any eligible
 employee described in paragraph (2), if--
 (A) such denial is necessary to prevent substantial and grievous economic
 injury to the employer's operations,
 (B) the employer notifies the employee of its intent to deny restoration
 on such basis at the time the employer determines that such injury would
 occur, and
 (C) in any case in which the leave has commenced, the employee elects not
 to return to employment after receiving such notice.
 (2) An eligible employee described in this paragraph is a salaried eligible
 employee who is among the--
 (A) highest paid 10 percent of employees, or
 (B) 5 highest paid employees,
whichever is greater, of the employees employed by the employer at the
facility at which the employee is employed.
 (c) MAINTENANCE OF HEALTH BENEFITS- Subject to section 104, during any period
 an eligible employee takes leave, the employer shall continue coverage for
 such employee under any group health plan (as defined in section 162(i)(2)
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (29 U.S.C. 162(i)(2)) for the duration
 of such leave at the level and under the conditions coverage would have
 been provided if the employee had continued in employment continuously from
 the date the employee commenced the leave until the date the employee is
 restored under subsection (a).
SEC. 104. EMPLOYEE'S FAILURE TO RETURN TO WORK.
 In the case of an employee who fails to return to an employment position
 described in section 103(a) after taking leave under section 102, the
 continuation of the employee's health care coverage as provided in--
 (1) section 4980B(f) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26
 U.S.C. 4980B(f)); or
 (2) title XXII of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300bb-1 et seq.),
shall be reduced by the length of such leave.
SEC. 105. EFFECT ON EXISTING MATERNITY BENEFITS.
 (a) MORE PROTECTIVE- Nothing in this Act shall be construed to diminish an
 employer's obligation to comply with any collective bargaining agreement
 or any employment benefit program or plan which provides greater maternity
 leave rights to employees than the rights provided under this Act.
 (b) LESS PROTECTIVE- The rights provided to employees under this Act may
 not be diminished by any such agreement, program, or plan.
SEC. 106. EFFECT ON OTHER LAWS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- This Act shall not preempt any provision of any State or
 local law that requires employers to offer more extensive maternity leave
 than provided for in the Act.
 (b) NO VIOLATION OF CERTAIN EXISTING DISCRIMINATION LAWS- An employer who
 complies with any provision of this Act shall not be considered to be in
 violation of title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended by the
 Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978.
TITLE II--ENFORCEMENT
SEC. 201. ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS.
 (a) CIVIL PENALTIES- (1) Subject to paragraph (2), any employer who
 violates any provision of this Act may be assessed a civil penalty of not
 more than $10,000.
 (2) In determining the amount of any penalty under paragraph (1),
 the Secretary of Labor (hereinafter in this title referred to as the
 `Secretary') shall take into account the previous record of the person in
 terms of compliance with this Act and the gravity of the violation.
 (3) Any civil penalty assessed under this subsection shall be collected in
 the same manner as is required by subsections (b) through (e) of section
 503 of the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (29
 U.S.C. 1853) with respect to civil penalties assessed under subsection
 (a) of such section.
 (b) INJUNCTIVE ACTIONS BY THE SECRETARY- The Secretary may bring an action
 under this section to restrain violations of this Act. The Solicitor of
 Labor may appear for and represent the Secretary in any litigation brought
 under this Act. In any action brought under this section, the district
 courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction, for cause shown, to
 issue temporary or permanent restraining orders and injunctions to require
 compliance with the Act, including such legal or equitable relief incident
 thereto as may be appropriate, including, but not limited to, employment,
 reinstatement, promotion, and the payment of lost wages and benefits.
 (c) PRIVATE CIVIL ACTIONS- (1) An employer who violates this Act shall be
 liable to the eligible employee affected by such violation. Such employer
 shall be liable for such legal or equitable relief as may be appropriate,
 including, but not limited to, employment, reinstatement, promotion,
 and the payment of lost wages and benefits.
 (2) An action to recover the liability prescribed in paragraph (1) may be
 maintained against the employer in any Federal or State court of competent
 jurisdiction by an employee or prospective employee for or on behalf of
 such employee, prospective employee, and other employees or prospective
 employees similarly situated. No such action may be commenced more than
 3 years after the date of the alleged violation.
 (3) The court, in its discretion, may allow the prevailing party (other
 than the United States) reasonable costs, including attorney's fees.
 (d) WAIVER OF RIGHTS PROHIBITED- The rights and procedures provided by
 this Act may not be waived by contract or otherwise, unless such waiver
 is part of a written settlement agreed to and signed by the parties to
 the pending action or complaint under this Act.
SEC. 202. EFFECTIVE DATE; REGULATIONS.
 (a) EFFECTIVE DATE- Except as provided in subsection (b), this Act shall
 become effective 6 months after the date of its enactment.
 (b) REGULATIONS- Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment
 of this Act, the Secretary shall issue such rules and regulations as may
 be necessary to carry out this Act.