[Congressional Bills 108th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 1586 Introduced in House (IH)]

108th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 1586

 To provide for the fair and efficient judicial consideration of 
 personal injury and wrongful death claims arising out of asbestos 
 exposure, to ensure that individuals who suffer impairment, now or in 
 the future, from illnesses caused by exposure to asbestos receive 
 compensation for their injuries, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 April 3, 2003

 Mr. Cannon introduced the following bill; which was referred to the 
 Committee on the Judiciary

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To provide for the fair and efficient judicial consideration of 
 personal injury and wrongful death claims arising out of asbestos 
 exposure, to ensure that individuals who suffer impairment, now or in 
 the future, from illnesses caused by exposure to asbestos receive 
 compensation for their injuries, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Asbestos 
Compensation Fairness Act of 2003''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2 Findings and purposes.
Sec. 3. Physical impairment.
Sec. 4. Procedures; removal.
Sec. 5. Statute of limitations; two-disease rule.
Sec. 6. Scope of liability; damages.
Sec. 7. Liability rules applicable to product sellers, renters, and 
 lessors.
Sec. 8. Definitions.
Sec. 9. Miscellaneous provisions.
Sec. 10. Effective date.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.

 (a) Findings.--The Congress finds that--
 (1) asbestos is a mineral that was widely used prior to the 
 1980s for insulation, fire-proofing, and other purposes;
 (2) millions of American workers and others were exposed to 
 asbestos, especially during and after World War II and prior to 
 the advent of regulation by the Occupational Safety and Health 
 Administration in the early 1970s;
 (3) long-term exposure to asbestos has been associated with 
 various types of cancer, including mesothelioma and lung 
 cancer, as well as such nonmalignant conditions as asbestosis, 
 pleural plaques, and diffuse pleural thickening;
 (4) the diseases caused by asbestos often have long latency 
 periods;
 (5) although the use of asbestos has dramatically declined 
 since 1980 and workplace exposures have been regulated since 
 1971 by the Occupational Safety & Health Administration, past 
 exposures will continue to result in significant claims of 
 death and disability as a result of such exposure;
 (6) exposure to asbestos has created a flood of litigation 
 in state and Federal courts that the United States Supreme 
 Court has characterized as ``an elephantine mass'' of cases 
 that ``defies customary judicial administration and calls for 
 national legislation,'' Ortiz v. Fibreboard Corporation, 119 S. 
 Ct. 2295, 2302 (1999);
 (7) asbestos personal injury litigation can be unfair and 
 inefficient, imposing a severe burden on litigants and 
 taxpayers alike;
 (8) the extraordinary volume of nonmalignant asbestos cases 
 continues to strain state and Federal courts, with over 200,000 
 cases currently pending and over 50,000 new cases filed each 
 year;
 (9) asbestos personal injury litigation has already 
 contributed to the bankruptcy of more than 60 companies, 
 including nearly all manufacturers of asbestos textile and 
 insulation products, and the rate of asbestos-driven 
 bankruptcies is accelerating;
 (10) the vast majority of asbestos claims are filed by 
 individuals who allege they have been exposed to asbestos and 
 who may have some physical sign of exposure, but who suffer no 
 present asbestos-related impairment;
 (11) the cost of compensating exposed individuals who are 
 not sick jeopardizes the ability of defendants to compensate 
 people with cancer and other serious asbestos-related diseases, 
 now and in the future; threatens the savings, retirement 
 benefits, and jobs of defendants' current and retired 
 employees; adversely affects the communities in which these 
 defendants operate; and impairs the national economy and 
 interstate commerce;
 (12) the several thousand asbestos-related cancer cases 
 that are filed each year are manageable by the courts and the 
 litigants;
 (13) concerns about statutes of limitations can force 
 claimants who have been exposed to asbestos but who have no 
 current injury to bring premature lawsuits in order to protect 
 against losing their rights to future compensation should they 
 become impaired;
 (14) consolidations, joinder, and similar procedures, to 
 which some courts have resorted in order to deal with the mass 
 of asbestos cases, can undermine the appropriate functioning of 
 the judicial process and encourage the filing of thousands of 
 cases by exposed individuals who are not yet sick and who may 
 never become sick;
 (15) similarly, the availability of sympathetic forums in 
 states with no connection to the plaintiff or to the exposures 
 that form the basis of the lawsuit has encouraged the filing of 
 thousands of cases on behalf of exposed individuals who are not 
 yet sick and may never become sick;
 (16) excessive, unpredictable, and often arbitrary damage 
 awards and unfair allocations of liability jeopardize the 
 financial well-being of many individuals, businesses, and 
 entire industries, particularly the nation's small businesses;
 (17) punitive damage awards unfairly divert the resources 
 of defendants from compensating genuinely impaired claimants 
 and, given the lengthy history of asbestos litigation and the 
 regulatory restrictions on the use of asbestos-containing 
 products in the workplace, the legal justification for such 
 awards--punishment and deterrence--is either inapplicable or 
 inappropriate; and
 (18) the public interest and the interest of interstate 
 commerce requires deferring the claims of exposed individuals 
 who are not sick in order to preserve, now and for the future, 
 defendants' ability to compensate people who develop cancer and 
 other serious asbestos-related injuries and to safeguard the 
 jobs, benefits and savings of American workers and the well-
 being of the national economy.
 (b) Purposes.--It is the purpose of this Act to--
 (1) give priority to those asbestos claimants who can 
 demonstrate actual physical harm or illness caused by exposure 
 to asbestos;
 (2) fully preserve the rights of claimants who were exposed 
 to asbestos to pursue compensation should they become impaired 
 in the future as a result of such exposure;
 (3) enhance the ability of the State and Federal judicial 
 systems to supervise and control asbestos litigation and 
 asbestos-related bankruptcy proceedings; and
 (4) conserve the scarce resources of the defendants, and 
 marshal assets in bankruptcy, to allow compensation of cancer 
 victims and others who are physically impaired by exposure to 
 asbestos while securing the right to similar compensation for 
 those who may suffer physical impairment in the future.

SEC. 3. PHYSICAL IMPAIRMENT.

 (a) Impairment Essential Element of Claim.--Physical impairment of 
the exposed person, to which asbestos exposure was a substantial 
contributing factor, shall be an essential element of an asbestos 
claim.
 (b) Prima Facie Evidence of Physical Impairment for Nonmalignant 
Asbestos Claims.--No person shall bring or maintain a civil action 
alleging a nonmalignant asbestos claim in the absence of a prima facie 
showing of physical impairment as a result of a medical condition to 
which exposure to asbestos was a substantial contributing factor. Such 
a prima facie showing shall include all of the following minimum 
requirements:
 (1) Evidence verifying that a qualified physician has taken 
 a detailed occupational and exposure history of the exposed 
 person or, if such person is deceased, from the person who is 
 the most knowledgeable about the exposures that form the basis 
 of the nonmalignant asbestos claim, including--
 (A) all of the exposed person's principal places of 
 employment and exposures to airborne contaminants; and
 (B) whether each place of employment involved 
 exposures to airborne contaminants (including but not 
 limited to asbestos fibers or other disease causing 
 dusts) that can cause pulmonary impairment and the 
 nature, duration and level of any such exposure.
 (2) Evidence verifying that a qualified physician has taken 
 detailed medical and smoking history, including a thorough 
 review of the exposed person's past and present medical 
 problems, and their most probable cause.
 (3) A determination by a qualified physician, on the basis 
 of a medical examination and pulmonary function testing, that 
 the exposed person has a permanent respiratory impairment 
 rating of at least Class 2 as defined by and evaluated pursuant 
 to the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment.
 (4) A diagnosis by a qualified physician of asbestosis or 
 diffuse pleural thickening, based at a minimum on radiological 
 or pathological evidence of asbestosis or radiological evidence 
 of diffuse pleural thickening.
 (5) A determination by a qualified physician that 
 asbestosis or diffuse pleural thickening (rather than solely 
 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) is a substantial 
 contributing factor to the exposed person's physical 
 impairment, based at a minimum on a determination that the 
 exposed person has--
 (A) total lung capacity, by plethysmography or 
 timed gas dilution, below the predicted lower limit of 
 normal;
 (B) forced vital capacity below the lower limit of 
 normal and a ratio of FEV1 to FVC that is equal to or 
 greater than the predicted lower limit of normal; or
 (C) a chest x-ray showing small, irregular 
 opacities (s,t) graded by a certified B-reader at least 
 2/1 on the ILO scale.
 (c) Prima Facie Evidence of Asbestos-Related Lung Cancer.--No 
person shall bring or maintain a civil action alleging an asbestos 
claim which is based upon lung cancer, in the absence of a prima facie 
showing which shall include the following minimum requirements:
 (1) Diagnosis by a Board-certified pathologist, pulmonary 
 specialist, or oncologist of a primary lung cancer and that 
 exposure to asbestos was a substantial contributing factor to 
 the condition.
 (2) Evidence sufficient to demonstrate that at least 10 
 years have elapsed between the date of first exposure to 
 asbestos and the date of diagnosis of the lung cancer.
 (3) Depending on whether the exposed person has a history 
 of smoking, the requirements of either (A) or (B) below--
 (A) in the case of an exposed person who is a 
 nonsmoker, either--
 (i) radiological or pathological evidence 
 of asbestosis or radiological evidence of 
 diffuse pleural thickening; or
 (ii) evidence of occupational exposure to 
 asbestos for the following minimum exposure 
 periods in the specified occupations:
 (I) 5 exposure years for 
 insulators, shipyard workers, workers 
 in manufacturing plants handling raw 
 asbestos, boilermakers, shipfitters, 
 steamfitters, or other trades 
 performing similar functions;
 (II) 10 exposure years for utility 
 and power house workers, secondary 
 manufacturing workers, or other trades 
 performing similar functions; or
 (III) 15 exposure years for general 
 construction, maintenance workers, 
 chemical and refinery workers, marine 
 engine room personnel and other 
 personnel on vessels, stationary 
 engineers and firemen, railroad engine 
 repair workers, or other trades perform 
 in similar functions;
 (B) in the case of an exposed person who is a 
 smoker, the criteria contained in both (A)(i) and 
 (A)(ii) must be met.
 (d) Prima Facie Evidence of Asbestos-Related Other Cancer.--No 
person shall bring or maintain a civil action alleging an asbestos 
claim which is based upon cancer of the colon, rectum, larynx, pharynx, 
esophagus, or stomach, in the absence of a prima facie showing which 
shall include the following minimum requirements:
 (1) A diagnosis by a Board-certified pathologist, Board-
 certified pulmonary specialist, or Board-certified oncologist 
 (as appropriate for the type of cancer claimed) of primary 
 cancer of the colon, rectum, larynx, pharynx, esophagus, or 
 stomach, and that exposure to asbestos was a substantial 
 contributing factor to the condition.
 (2) Evidence sufficient to demonstrate that at least 10 
 years have elapsed between the date of first exposure to 
 asbestos and the date of diagnosis of the cancer.
 (3) The requirements of either (A) or (B) below--
 (A) radiological or pathological evidence of 
 asbestosis or radiological evidence of diffuse pleural 
 thickening;
 (B) evidence of occupational exposure to asbestos 
 for the following minimum exposure periods in the 
 specified occupations:
 (i) 5 exposure years for insulators, 
 shipyard workers, workers in manufacturing 
 plants handling raw asbestos, boilermakers, 
 shipfitters, steamfitters, or other trades 
 performing similar functions;
 (ii) 10 exposure years for utility and 
 power house workers, secondary manufacturing 
 workers, or other trades performing similar 
 functions; or
 (iii) 15 exposure years for general 
 construction, maintenance workers, chemical and 
 refinery workers, marine engine room personnel 
 and other personnel on vessels, stationary 
 engineers and firemen, railroad engine repair 
 workers, or other trades performing similar 
 functions.
 (e) No Prima Facie Requirement for Mesothelioma.--In a civil action 
alleging an asbestos claim based upon mesothelioma, no prima facie 
showing is required.
 (f) Compliance With Technical Standards.--Evidence relating to 
physical impairment under this section, including pulmonary function 
testing and diffusing studies, shall comply with the technical 
recommendations for examinations, testing procedures, quality 
assurance/quality control, and equipment of the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment or, where the AMA Guides are silent, 
other authoritative standards. No adjustments with respect to pulmonary 
function testing shall be made on the basis of race.
 (g) No Presumption at Trial.--Presentation of prima facie evidence 
meeting the requirements of subsection (b), (c), or (d) of this section 
shall not--
 (1) result in any presumption at trial that the exposed 
 person is impaired by an asbestos-related condition;
 (2) be conclusive as to the liability of any defendant; and
 (3) be admissible at trial.

SEC. 4. PROCEDURES; REMOVAL.

 (a) Consolidation.--A court may consolidate for trial any number 
and type of asbestos claims with consent of all the parties. In the 
absence of such consent, the court may consolidate for trial only 
asbestos claims relating to the same exposed person and members of his 
or her household.
 (b) Venue.--A civil action alleging an asbestos claim may only be 
brought in the State of plaintiff's domicile or a State in which there 
occurred exposure to asbestos that is a substantial contributing factor 
to the physical impairment on which the claim is based.
 (c) Preliminary Proceedings.--The plaintiff in any civil action 
alleging an asbestos claim shall file together with the complaint or 
other initial pleading a written report and supporting test results 
constituting prima facie evidence of the exposed person's asbestos-
related impairment meeting the requirements of subsection (b), (c), or 
(d) of section 3. For any asbestos claim pending on the effective date 
of this Act, the plaintiff shall file such a written report and 
supporting test results no later than 60 days following the effective 
date, or no later than 30 days prior to trial. The defendant shall be 
afforded a reasonable opportunity to challenge the adequacy of the 
proffered prima facie evidence of asbestos-related impairment. The 
plaintiff's claim shall be dismissed without prejudice upon a finding 
of failure to make the required prima facie showing.
 (d) Removal.--
 (1) In the event that a State court refuses or fails to 
 apply subsections (a), (b), or (c) of this section, any party 
 in a civil action for an asbestos claim may remove such action 
 to a district court of the United States in accordance with 
 chapter 89 of title 28, United States Code. The district courts 
 of the United States shall have jurisdiction of all civil 
 actions removed pursuant to this subsection, without regard to 
 the amount in controversy and without regard to the citizenship 
 or residence of the parties. Any defendant without the consent 
 of all defendants may remove a civil action to the district 
 court of the United States in accordance with this subsection.
 (2) The district court shall remand any civil action 
 removed solely under subsection (c) unless it finds that the 
 State court failed to comply with procedures prescribed by law 
 or that its failure to dismiss lacked substantial support in 
 the record before it.

SEC. 5. STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS; TWO-DISEASE RULE.

 (a) Statute of Limitations.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
law, with respect to any asbestos claim not barred as of the effective 
date of this Act, the limitations period shall not begin to run until 
the exposed person discovers, or through the exercise of reasonable 
diligence should have discovered, that the he or she is physically 
impaired by an asbestos-related condition.
 (b) Two-Disease Rule.--An asbestos claim arising out of a 
nonmalignant condition shall be a distinct cause of action from an 
asbestos claim relating to the same exposed person arising out of 
asbestos-related cancer. No damages shall be awarded for fear or risk 
of cancer in any civil action asserting an asbestos claim.
 (c) General Releases From Liability Prohibited.--No settlement of a 
nonmalignant asbestos claim concluded after the date of enactment shall 
require, as a condition of settlement, release of any future claim for 
asbestos-related cancer.

SEC. 6. SCOPE OF LIABILITY; DAMAGES.

 (a) Proportional Liability.--A defendant against whom a final 
judgment is entered in a civil action alleging an asbestos claim shall 
be liable only for that portion of the judgment that corresponds to the 
percentage of responsibility of such defendant. For the purposes of 
determining the percentage of responsibility of a defendant, the trier-
of-fact shall determine that percentage as a percentage of the total 
fault of all persons (including the plaintiff and those who have filed 
for bankruptcy protection) who are responsible for the harm to the 
plaintiff, regardless of whether or not such person is a party to the 
action. This provision shall apply only to a defendant that is found to 
be less than 50 percent responsible for the harm to the plaintiff. The 
court shall render a separate judgment against each defendant in an 
amount determined pursuant to this subsection.
 (b) Noneconomic Loss.--In any civil action alleging an asbestos 
claim, the total amount of damages that may be awarded for noneconomic 
loss shall not exceed $250,000 or three times economic loss, whichever 
is greater, regardless of the number of parties against whom the action 
is brought. However, in actions involving an asbestos claim based upon 
mesothelioma the total amount of damages that may be awarded for 
noneconomic loss shall not exceed $500,000 or three times economic 
loss, whichever is greater.
 (c) Punitive Damages.--No punitive damages shall be awarded in any 
civil action alleging an asbestos claim.
 (d) Collateral Source Payments.--At the time a complaint is filed 
in a civil action alleging an asbestos claim, the plaintiff must file a 
written report with the court that discloses the total amount of any 
collateral source payments received, including payments which the 
plaintiff will receive in the future, as a result of settlements or 
judgments based upon the same claim. For any asbestos claim pending on 
the date of enactment of this Act, the plaintiff shall file such 
written report no later than 60 days after the date of enactment, or no 
later than 30 days prior to trial. Further, the plaintiff shall be 
required to update this report on a regular basis during the course of 
the proceeding until a final judgment is entered in the case. The court 
shall ensure that the information contained in the initial and updated 
reports is treated as privileged and confidential and that the contents 
of the written reports shall not be disclosed to anyone except the 
other parties to the action.

SEC. 7. LIABILITY RULES APPLICABLE TO PRODUCT SELLERS, RENTERS, AND 
 LESSORS.

 (a)(1) In General.--In any civil action alleging an asbestos claim, 
a product seller other than a manufacturer shall be liable to a 
plaintiff only if the plaintiff establishes that--
 (A)(i) the product that allegedly caused the harm that is 
 the subject of the complaint was sold, rented, or leased by the 
 product seller;
 (ii) the product seller failed to exercise reasonable care 
 with respect to the product; and
 (iii) the failure to exercise reasonable care was a 
 proximate cause of the harm to the exposed person;
 (B)(i) the product seller made an express warranty 
 applicable to the product that allegedly caused the harm that 
 is the subject of the complaint, independent of any express 
 warranty made by the manufacturer as to the same product;
 (ii) the product failed to conform to the warranty; and
 (iii) the failure of the product to conform to the warranty 
 caused the harm to the exposed person; or
 (C)(i) the product seller engaged in intentional 
 wrongdoing, as determined under applicable State law; and
 (ii) the intentional wrongdoing caused the harm that is the 
 subject of the complaint.
 (2) Reasonable Opportunity for Inspection.--For the purposes of 
paragraph (1)(A)(i), a product seller shall not be considered to have 
failed to exercise reasonable care with respect to a product based upon 
an alleged failure to inspect the product, if--
 (A) the failure occurred because there was no reasonable 
 opportunity to inspect the product; or
 (B) the inspection, in the exercise of reasonable care, 
 would not have revealed the aspect of the product that 
 allegedly caused the exposed person's impairment.
 (b) Rented or Leased Products.--In any civil action alleging an 
asbestos claim, a person engaged in the business of renting or leasing 
a product shall not be liable for the tortious act of another solely by 
reason of ownership of that product.

SEC. 8. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act:
 (1) Ama guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment.--
 The term ``AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
 Impairment'' means the American Medical Association's Guides to 
 the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment (Fifth Edition 2000) as 
 may be modified from time to time by the American Medical 
 Association.
 (2) Asbestos.--The term ``asbestos'' includes all minerals 
 defined as ``asbestos'' in 29 CFR 1910 as amended from time to 
 time.
 (3) Asbestos claim.--The term ``asbestos claim'' means any 
 claim for damages or other relief presented in a civil action 
 or bankruptcy proceeding, arising out of, based on, or related 
 to the health effects of exposure to asbestos, including loss 
 of consortium and any other derivative claim made by or on 
 behalf of any exposed person or any representative, spouse, 
 parent, child or other relative of any exposed person. The term 
 does not include claims for benefits under a workers' 
 compensation law or veterans' benefits program, or claims 
 brought by any person as a subrogee by virtue of the payment of 
 benefits under a workers' compensation law.
 (4) Asbestosis.--The term ``asbestosis'' means bilateral 
 diffuse interstitial fibrosis of the lungs caused by inhalation 
 of asbestos fibers.
 (5) Bankruptcy proceeding.--The term ``bankruptcy 
 proceeding'' means a case brought under title 11, United State 
 Code, or any related proceeding as provided in section 157 of 
 title 28, United States Code.
 (6) Certified b-reader.--The term ``certified B-reader'' 
 means an individual qualified as a ``final'' or ``B-reader'' 
 under 42 CFR 37.51(b) as amended.
 (7) Civil action.--The term ``civil action'' means all 
 suits or claims of a civil nature in State or Federal court, 
 whether cognizable as cases at law or in equity or in 
 admiralty, including an asbestos claim in a bankruptcy 
 proceeding. The term does not include an action relating to any 
 workers' compensation law, or a proceeding for benefits under 
 any veterans' benefits program.
 (8) Economic loss.--The term ``economic loss'' means any 
 pecuniary loss resulting from physical impairment, including 
 the loss of earnings or other benefits related to employment, 
 medical expense loss, replacement services loss, loss due to 
 death, burial costs, and loss of business or employment 
 opportunities.
 (9) Exposed person.--The term ``exposed person'' means any 
 person whose exposure to asbestos or to asbestos-containing 
 products is the basis for an asbestos claim.
 (10) Exposure years.--The term ``exposure years'' means--
 (A) each single year of exposure prior to 1972 will 
 be counted as one year;
 (B) each single year of exposure from 1972 through 
 1979 will be counted as one-half year;
 (C) exposure after 1979 will not be counted, except 
 that each year from 1972 forward for which the 
 plaintiff can establish exposure exceeding the OSHA 
 limit for 8-hour time-weighted average airborne 
 concentration for a substantial portion of the year 
 will count as one year.
 (11) FEV1.--The term ``FEV1'' means forced expiratory 
 volume in the first second, which is the maximal volume of air 
 expelled in one second during performance of simple spirometric 
 tests.
 (12) FVC.--The term ``FVC'' means forced vital capacity 
 which is the maximal volume of air expired with maximum effort 
 from a position of full inspiration.
 (13) ILO scale.--The term ``ILO Scale'' means the system 
 for the classification of chest x-rays set forth in the 
 International Labour Office's Guidelines for the Use of ILO 
 International Classification of Radiographs of Pneumoconioses 
 (1980) as amended from time to time by the International Labour 
 Office.
 (14) Lung cancer.--The term ``lung cancer'' means a 
 malignant tumor located inside of the lungs, but such term does 
 not include an asbestos claim based upon mesothelioma.
 (15) Mesothelioma.--The term ``mesothelioma'' means a 
 malignant tumor with a primary site in the pleura or the 
 peritoneum, which has been diagnosed by a Board-certified 
 pathologist, using standardized and accepted criteria of 
 microscopic morphology and/or appropriate staining techniques.
 (16) Noneconomic loss.--The term ``noneconomic loss'' means 
 subjective, nonmonetary loss resulting from physical 
 impairment, including pain, suffering, inconvenience, mental 
 anguish, emotional distress, disfigurement, loss of society and 
 companionship, loss of consortium, injury to reputation, or any 
 other nonpecuniary loss of any kind or nature.
 (17) Nonmalignant condition.--The term ``nonmalignant 
 condition'' means any condition that is caused or may be caused 
 by asbestos other than a diagnosed cancer.
 (18) Nonsmoker.--The term ``nonsmoker'' means the exposed 
 person has not smoked cigarettes or used any other tobacco 
 products within the last 15 years.
 (19) Pathological evidence of asbestosis.--The term 
 ``pathological evidence of asbestosis'' means a statement by a 
 Board-certified pathologist that more than one representative 
 section of lung tissue uninvolved with any other disease 
 process demonstrates a pattern of peribronchiolar 
or parenchymal scarring in the presence of characteristic asbestos 
bodies and that there is no other more likely explanation for the 
presence of the fibrosis.
 (20) Predicted lower limit of normal.--The term ``predicted 
 lower limit of normal'' for any test means the fifth percentile 
 of healthy populations based on age, height, and gender, as 
 referenced in the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
 Impairment.
 (21) Punitive damages.--The term ``punitive damages'' means 
 damages awarded against a defendant in order to punish or deter 
 such defendant or others from engaging in similar behavior in 
 the future.
 (22) Qualified physician.--The term ``qualified physician'' 
 means a medical doctor, who--
 (A) is a Board-certified internist, oncologist, 
 pathologist, pulmonary specialist, radiologist, or 
 specialist in occupational and environmental medicine;
 (B) is actually treating or treated the exposed 
 person, and has or had a doctor-patient relationship 
 with such person;
 (C) spends no more than 10 percent of his/her 
 professional practice time in providing consulting or 
 expert services in connection with actual or potential 
 civil actions, and whose medical group, professional 
 corporation, clinic, or other affiliated group earns 
 not more than 20 percent of their revenues from 
 providing such services;
 (D) is currently licensed to practice and actively 
 practices in the State where the plaintiff resides or 
 where the plaintiff's civil action was filed; and
 (E) receives or received payment for the treatment 
 of the exposed person from that person's health 
 maintenance organization or other medical provider.
 (23) Radiological evidence of asbestosis.--The term 
 ``radiological evidence of asbestosis'' means a chest x-ray 
 showing small, irregular opacities (s,t) graded by a certified 
 B-reader as at least 1/1 on the ILO scale.
 (24) Radiological evidence of diffuse pleural thickening.--
 The term ``radiological evidence of diffuse pleural 
 thickening'' means a chest x-ray showing bilateral pleural 
 thickening of at least B2 on the ILO scale and blunting of at 
 least one costophrenic angle.
 (25) Smoker.--The term ``smoker'' means a person who has 
 smoked cigarettes or used other tobacco products within the 
 last 15 years.
 (26) State.--The term ``State'' means any State of the 
 United States, the District of Columbia, Commonwealth of Puerto 
 Rico, the Northern Mariana Islands, the Virgin Islands, Guam, 
 American Samoa, and any other territory or possession of the 
 United States or any political subdivision of any of the 
 foregoing.
 (27) Substantial contributing factor.--The term 
 ``substantial contributing factor'' means--
 (A) exposure to asbestos is the predominate cause 
 of the physical impairment alleged in the asbestos 
 claim;
 (B) the exposure to asbestos took place on a 
 regular basis over an extended period of time and in 
 close proximity to the exposed person; and
 (C) a qualified physician has determined with a 
 reasonable degree of medical certainly that the 
 physical impairment of the exposed person would not 
 have occurred but for the asbestos exposures.
 (28) Veterans' benefits program.--The term ``veterans' 
 benefits program'' means any program for benefits in connection 
 with military service administered by the Veterans' 
 Administration under title 38, United States Code.
 (29) Workers' compensation law.--The term ``workers' 
 compensation law'' means a law respecting a program 
 administered by a State or the United States to provide 
 benefits, funded by a responsible employer or its insurance 
 carrier, for occupational diseases or injuries or for 
 disability or death caused by occupational diseases or 
 injuries. The term includes the Longshore and Harbor Workers' 
 Compensation Act (33 U.S.C. 901-944, 948-950), and chapter 81 
 of title 5, United States Code (known as the Federal Employees 
 Compensation Act), but does not include the Act of April 22, 
 1908 (45 U.S.C. 51 et seq.) (popularly referred to as the 
 ``Federal Employers' Liability Act'').

SEC. 9. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.

 (a) Construction With Other Laws.--This Act shall not be construed 
to affect the scope or operation of any workers' compensation law or 
veterans' benefit program, to affect the exclusive remedy or 
subrogation provisions of any such law, or to authorize any lawsuit 
which is barred by any such provision of law.
 (b) Constitutional Authority.--The Constitutional authority for 
this Act is contained in article I, section 8, clause 3 of the 
Constitution of the United States and in article lII, section 1 of the 
Constitution of the United States.

SEC. 10. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 This Act shall be effective on the date of the enactment of this 
Act and apply to any civil action asserting an asbestos claim in which 
trial has not commenced as of the date of the enactment of this Act.
 <all>