Calendar No. 420
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2325
A BILL
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to make miscellaneous changes in
the tax laws, and for other purposes.
March 6 (legislative day, JANUARY 30), 1992
Reported under the authority of the Senate of March 5 (legislative day,
January 30), 1992
S 2325 PCS
Calendar No. 420
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2325
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to make miscellaneous changes in
the tax laws, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
March 6 (legislative day, JANUARY 30), 1992
Mr. BENTSEN, from the Committee on Finance, reported under the authority
of the Senate of March 5 (legislative day, January 30), 1992 the following
original bill; which was read twice and placed on the calendar
A BILL
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to make miscellaneous changes in
the tax laws, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Family Security Initiatives
 Act of 1992'.
 (b) AMENDMENT OF 1986 CODE- Except as otherwise expressly provided,
 whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an
 amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference
 shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (c) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents for this Act is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--TAX PROVISIONS
Sec. 101. Simplification and expansion of earned income tax credit.
Sec. 102. Increased base tax rate on ozone-depleting chemicals and expansion
of list of taxed chemicals.
Sec. 103. Disallowance of deduction for certain employee remuneration in
excess of $1,000,000.
TITLE II--MEDICARE PROVISIONS
Sec. 201. Coverage of certain immunizations.
Sec. 202. Coverage of well-child care.
Sec. 203. Financing of additional benefits.
TITLE III--HEALTH CARE OF COAL MINERS
Sec. 301. Short title.
Sec. 302. Findings and declaration of policy.
Sec. 303. Coal industry health benefits program.
TITLE I--TAX PROVISIONS
SEC. 101. SIMPLIFICATION AND EXPANSION OF EARNED INCOME TAX CREDIT.
 (a) EARNED INCOME TAX CREDIT INCREASED- Subparagraph (C) of section 32(b)(1)
 (relating to basic earned income credit) is amended to read as follows:
 `(C) PERCENTAGES- For purposes of this paragraph--
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in clause (ii), the percentages shall
 be determined as follows:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 `In the case of an eligible individual with: The credit percentage is:
 The phaseout percentage is:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 1 qualifying child 23
 16.43
 2 or more qualifying children 26.75
 19.10
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 `(ii) TRANSITION PERCENTAGES-
 `(I) For taxable years beginning in 1992, the percentages are:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 `In the case of an eligible individual with: The credit percentage is:
 The phaseout percentage is:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 1 qualifying child 17.6
 12.57
 2 or more qualifying children 20.15
 14.39
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 `(II) For taxable years beginning in 1993:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 `In the case of an eligible individual with: The credit percentage is:
 The phaseout percentage is:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 1 qualifying child 18.5
 13.21
 2 qualifying children 21.25
 15.17.'
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 (b) REPEAL OF INTERACTION WITH MEDICAL EXPENSE DEDUCTION- Section 213
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to medical, dental, etc.,
 expenses) is amended by striking subsection (f).
 (c) REPEAL OF INTERACTION WITH DEDUCTION FOR HEALTH INSURANCE COSTS OF
 SELF-EMPLOYED- Paragraph (3) of section 162(l) of such Code is amended to
 read as follows:
 `(3) COORDINATION WITH MEDICAL DEDUCTION- Any amount paid by a taxpayer for
 insurance to which paragraph (1) applies shall not be taken into account
 in computing the amount allowable to the taxpayer as a deduction under
 section 213(a).'
 (d) TERMINATION OF SUPPLEMENTAL YOUNG CHILD CREDIT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 32(b)(1) (relating to supplemental young child
 credit) is amended by striking subparagraph (D).
 (2) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Clause (i) of section 3507(C)(2)(B) (relating
 to advance amount tables) is amended by striking `(without regard to
 subparagraph (D) thereof)'.
 (e) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1991.
SEC. 102. INCREASED BASE TAX RATE ON OZONE-DEPLETING CHEMICALS AND EXPANSION
OF LIST OF TAXED CHEMICALS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Paragraph (1) of section 4681(b) (relating to amount of tax)
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(B) BASE TAX AMOUNT- The base tax amount for purposes of subparagraph (A)
 with respect to any sale or use during a calendar year before 1996 with
 respect to any ozone-depleting chemical is the amount determined under
 the following table for such calendar year:
Calendar year:
Base Tax Amount:
1992
$1.85
1993
 2.75
1994
 3.65
1995
 4.55.'
 (b) Conforming Amendments-
 (1) RATES RETAINED FOR CHEMICAL USED IN RIGID FOAM INSULATION- The table
 in subparagraph (B) of section 4682(g)(2) (relating to chemicals used in
 rigid foam insulation) is amended--
 (A) by striking `15' and inserting `13.5', and
 (B) by striking `10' and inserting `9.6'.
 (2) FLOOR STOCK TAXES-
 (A) Subparagraph (C) of section 4682(h)(2) (relating to other tax-increase
 dates) is amended by striking `1993, and 1994' and inserting `1993, 1994,
 and 1995, and July 1, 1992'.
 (B) Paragraph (3) of section 4682(h) (relating to due date) is amended--
 (i) by inserting `or July 1' after `January 1', and
 (ii) by inserting `or December 31, respectively,' after `June 30'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable chemicals sold or used on or after July 1, 1992.
SEC. 103. DISALLOWANCE OF DEDUCTION FOR CERTAIN EMPLOYEE REMUNERATION IN
EXCESS OF $1,000,000.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Section 162 (relating to trade or business expenses) is
 amended by redesignating subsection (m) as subsection (n) and by inserting
 after subsection (l) the following new subsection:
 `(m) CERTAIN EXCESSIVE EMPLOYEE REMUNERATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- No deduction shall be allowed under this chapter for
 employee remuneration with respect to any covered employee to the extent
 that the amount of such remuneration for the taxable year with respect to
 such employee exceeds $1,000,000.
 `(2) COVERED EMPLOYEE- For purposes of this subsection--
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the term
 `covered employee' means any employee of the taxpayer who is an officer
 of the taxpayer.
 `(B) EXCEPTION FOR EMPLOYEE-OWNERS OF PERSONAL SERVICE CORPORATIONS- The
 term `covered employee' shall not include any employee-owner (as defined
 in section 269A(b)) of a personal service corporation (as defined in
 section 269A(b)).
 `(C) FORMER EMPLOYEES- The term `covered employee' includes any former
 employee who had been a covered employee at any time while performing
 services for the taxpayer.
 `(3) EMPLOYEE REMUNERATION- For purposes of this subsection--
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `employee remuneration' means, with respect to
 any covered employee for any taxable year, the aggregate amount allowable
 as a deduction under this chapter for such taxable year (determined without
 regard to this subsection) for remuneration for services performed by such
 employee (whether or not during the taxable year).
 `(B) REMUNERATION- For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `remuneration'
 includes any remuneration (including benefits) in any medium other than
 cash, but shall not include--
 `(i) any payment referred to in so much of section 3121(a)(5) as precedes
 subparagraph (E) thereof,
 `(ii) amounts referred to in section 3121(a)(19), and
 `(iii) any benefit provided to or on behalf of an employee if at the time
 such benefit is provided it is reasonable to believe that the employee
 will be able to exclude such benefit from gross income under section 132.
 `(4) TREATMENT OF CERTAIN EMPLOYERS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- All employers treated as a single employer under subsection
 (a) or (b) of section 52 or subsection (m) or (n) of section 414 shall be
 treated as a single employer for purposes of this subsection.
 `(B) CLARIFICATION OF OFFICER DEFINITION- Any officer of any of the
 employers treated as a single employer under subparagraph (A) shall be
 treated as an officer of such single employer.'
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1991.
TITLE II--MEDICARE PROVISIONS
SEC. 201. COVERAGE OF CERTAIN IMMUNIZATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1861(s)(10) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395x(s)(10)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking `and, subject to section 4071 of
 the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987, influenza vaccine and its
 administration; and' and inserting a comma; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraphs:
 `(C) influenza vaccine and its administration, and
 `(D) tetanus-diphtheria booster and its administration;'.
 (b) LIMITATION ON FREQUENCY- Section 1862(a)(1) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395y(a)(1)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (E), by striking `and' at the end;
 (2) in subparagraph (F), by striking the semicolon at the end and inserting
 `, and'; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 `(G) in the case of an influenza vaccine, which is administered within
 the 11 months after a previous influenza vaccine, and, in the case of a
 tetanus-diphtheria booster, which is administered within the 119 months
 after a previous tetanus-diphtheria booster;'.
 (c) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 1862(a)(7) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395y(a)(7)) is amended by striking `and paragraph (1)(B) or under
 paragraph (1)(F)' and inserting `or under subparagraph (B), (F), or (G)
 of paragraph (1)'.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply
 to influenza vaccines administered on or after October 1, 1992, and
 tetanus-diphtheria boosters administered on or after January 1, 1993.
SEC. 202. COVERAGE OF WELL-CHILD CARE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1861(s)(2) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395x(s)(2)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of subparagraph (O);
 (2) by striking the semicolon at the end of subparagraph (P) and inserting
 `; and'; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 `(Q) well-child services (as defined in subsection (ll)(1)) provided to
 an individual entitled to benefits under this title who is under 7 years
 of age;'.
 (b) SERVICES DEFINED- Section 1861 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating the subsection (jj) added by section 4163(a)(2)
 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 as subsection (kk); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (kk) (as so redesignated) the following
 new subsection:
`WELL-CHILD SERVICES
 `(ll)(1) The term `well-child services' means well-child care, including
 routine office visits, routine immunizations (including the vaccine
 itself), routine laboratory tests, and preventive dental care, provided
 in accordance with the periodicity schedule established with respect to
 the services under paragraph (2).
 `(2) The Secretary, in consultation with the American Academy of Pediatrics,
 the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, and other entities
 considered appropriate by the Secretary, shall establish a schedule of
 periodicity which reflects the appropriate frequency with which the services
 referred to in paragraph (1) should be provided to healthy children.'.
 (c) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- (1) Section 1862(a)(1) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395y(a)(1)), as amended by section 201(b), is amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (F), by striking `and' at the end;
 (B) in subparagraph (G), by striking the semicolon at the end and inserting
 `, and'; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 `(H) in the case of well-child services, which are provided more frequently
 than is provided under the schedule of periodicity established by the
 Secretary under section 1861(ll)(2) for such services;'.
 (2) Section 1862(a)(7) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y(a)(7)), as amended by
 section 201(c), is amended by striking `or (G)' and inserting `(G), or (H)'.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 well-child services provided on or after January 1, 1993.
SEC. 203. FINANCING OF ADDITIONAL BENEFITS.
 (a) PREMIUMS FOR 1993-1995- Section 1839(e)(1)(B) of the Social Security
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395r(e)(1)(B)) is amended--
 (1) in clause (iii) by striking `$36.60' and inserting `$36.70',
 (2) in clause (iv) by striking `$41.10' and inserting `$41.20', and
 (3) in clause (v) by striking `$46.10' and inserting `$46.20'.
 (b) PREMIUMS FOR 1996-1997- (1) Section 1839 of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395r) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(g) Except as provided in subsections (b) and (f), the monthly premium
 otherwise determined, without regard to this subsection, for each individual
 enrolled under this part shall be increased by 10 cents for each month in
 1996 and 1997.'.
 (2) Section 1839 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395r) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)(2), by striking `(b) and (e)' and inserting `(b),
 (e), and (g)',
 (B) in subsection (a)(3), by striking `subsection (e)' and inserting
 `subsections (e) and (g)', and
 (C) in subsection (b), by striking `determined under subsection (a) or (e)'
 and inserting `otherwise determined under this section (without regard to
 subsection (f))'.
TITLE III--HEALTH CARE OF COAL MINERS
SEC. 301. SHORT TITLE.
 This title may be cited as the `Coal Industry Retiree Health Benefit Act
 of 1991'.
SEC. 302. FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF POLICY.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) coal provides a significant portion of the energy used in the United
 States;
 (2) the production, transportation and use of coal affects interstate and
 foreign commerce and the national public interest;
 (3) a significant portion of the national work force has been employed
 in the production of coal for interstate and foreign commerce and in the
 national interest;
 (4) the Government of the United States has regulated the coal industry,
 employment in the industry, and the provision of retirement benefits within
 the industry;
 (5) the continued well-being and security of employees, retirees and their
 dependents within the coal industry are directly affected by the provision
 of health benefits to retirees and their dependents;
 (6) for many decades, the provision of adequate health care for retirees
 has been an essential element in maintaining a stable and strong coal
 industry as an important component in a strong United States economy;
 (7) an important element in the privately maintained benefit plans now
 experiencing financial difficulty has been the provision of health benefits
 for retirees of companies no longer in business; and
 (8) withdrawals of contributing employers from privately maintained benefit
 plans under collective bargaining agreements derived from an agreement
 with the United States, covering retirees within the coal industry, result
 in substantially increased funding burdens for employers that continue to
 contribute to such plans, adversely affect labor-management relations and
 the stability and strength of the coal industry, and impair the provision
 of health care to retirees.
 (b) ADDITIONAL FINDINGS- The Congress further finds that--
 (1) it is necessary to modify and reform the current private benefit plan
 structure for retirees within the coal industry in order to stabilize the
 provision of health care benefits to such retirees; and
 (2) it is necessary to supplement the current private benefit plan structure
 with a benefit protection program that will assure continued funding and
 contain program costs.
 (c) DECLARATION OF POLICY- It is hereby declared to be the policy of
 this title--
 (1) to remedy problems that discourage the provision, funding, and delivery
 of health care to coal industry retirees;
 (2) to provide reasonable protection for the health benefits of coal
 industry retirees;
 (3) to require use of state-of-the-art cost containment and managed
 care measures as part of the overall package of health care delivery and
 financing; and
 (4) to provide a financially self-sufficient program for the provision of
 retiree health benefits in the coal industry.
SEC. 303. COAL INDUSTRY HEALTH BENEFITS PROGRAM.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new subtitle:
`Subtitle J--Coal Industry Health Benefits
`CHAPTER 99. Coal industry health benefits.
`CHAPTER 99--COAL INDUSTRY HEALTH BENEFITS
`SUBCHAPTER A. Coal Industry Retiree Health Benefits Corporation.
`SUBCHAPTER B. Eligibility for and payment of benefits.
`SUBCHAPTER C. Other provisions.
`Subchapter A--Coal Industry Retiree Health Benefit Corporation
`Sec. 9701. Establishment of the Corporation.
`Sec. 9702. Directors of Corporation.
`Sec. 9703. Powers; tax status.
`Sec. 9704. Operation of Corporation.
`SEC. 9701. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE CORPORATION.
 `There is hereby created the Coal Industry Retiree Health Benefit
 Corporation (hereafter in this chapter referred to as the `Corporation'),
 which shall be a governmental body corporate under the direction of a board
 of directors. Within the limitations of law and regulation, the board of
 directors shall determine the general policies that govern the operations
 of the Corporation. The principal office of the Corporation shall be in
 the District of Columbia or at any other place determined by the Corporation.
`SEC. 9702. DIRECTORS OF CORPORATION.
 `(a) APPOINTMENT- The board of directors of the Corporation shall consist
 of 5 persons, who shall be appointed by the Secretary of Labor. The board
 shall at all times have the following as members:
 `(1) 2 persons from employers in the coal-mining industry (only 1 of whom
 shall be from an entity that is or was a settlor of a plan described in
 section 404(c));
 `(2) 1 person from an organization that represents coal industry employees
 (and that is or was a settlor of a plan described in section 404(c));
 `(3) 1 person from another labor organization representing employees
 (whether or not in the coal industry); and
 `(4) 1 other person who shall serve as the chairman.
 `(b) TERMS OF OFFICE, SUCCESSORS- Each director shall be appointed for
 a term of 3 years, except for the initial term. The initial terms of the
 directors shall be as follows:
`Coal industry employee representative
--4 years
 (section 404(c) settlor)
`Coal-mining industry employer
--3 years
 (section 404(c) settlor)
Other employee representative
--3 years
Other coal-mining industry employer
--2 years
Chairman
--1 year.
A vacancy on the board shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointment was made. Any director appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior
to the expiration of the term for which the predecessor was appointed shall
be appointed for the remainder of such term. A director may serve after the
expiration of a term until a successor has taken office.
 `(c) QUORUMS- Vacancies on the board shall not impair the powers of the
 board to execute the functions of the Corporation so long as there are
 3 members in office. The presence of 3 members shall constitute a quorum
 for the transaction of the business of the board.
 `(d) INDEPENDENT AUDIT- The Corporation shall annually employ an independent
 certified or licensed public accountant who shall examine and audit the
 books and financial transactions of the Corporation. The Corporation shall,
 not later than June 30 of each year, submit to the Congress a report
 describing the activities of the Corporation under this chapter.
 `(e) ADOPTION OF BYLAWS; AMENDMENT; ALTERATION; PUBLICATION IN THE FEDERAL
 REGISTER- As soon as practicable, but not later than 180 days after the date
 of the enactment of this chapter, the board shall adopt initial bylaws and
 rules relating to the conduct of the business of the Corporation. Thereafter,
 the board may alter, supplement or repeal any existing bylaw or rule,
 and may adopt additional bylaws and rules from time to time as may be
 necessary. Any bylaw or rule relating to the conduct or business of the
 Corporation shall be adopted in compliance with the Administrative Procedure
 Act, including the notice and comment provisions thereof.
`SEC. 9703. POWERS; TAX STATUS.
 `(a) POWERS OF CORPORATION- The Corporation shall have power--
 `(1) to adopt, alter, and use a corporate seal;
 `(2) to have succession until dissolved by Act of Congress;
 `(3) to make and enforce such bylaws, rules, and regulations as may be
 necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes or provisions of this
 chapter;
 `(4) to make and perform contracts, agreements, and commitments;
 `(5) to prescribe and impose fees and charges for services by the
 Corporation;
 `(6) to settle, adjust, and compromise, and with or without consideration
 or benefit to the Corporation, to release or waive in whole or in part,
 in advance or otherwise, any claim, demand, or right of, by, or against
 the Corporation;
 `(7) to sue and be sued, complain and defend, in any State, Federal,
 or other court;
 `(8) to acquire, take, hold, and own, and to deal with and dispose of
 any property;
 `(9) to determine its necessary expenditures and the manner in which the
 same shall be incurred, allowed, and paid, and to appoint, employ, and
 fix and provide for the compensation and benefits of officers, employees,
 attorneys, and agents;
 `(10) to borrow funds from the United States Treasury for startup and
 operating costs;
 `(11) to collect delinquent accounts; and
 `(12) to execute instruments, to incur liabilities, and to do any and all
 other acts and things as may be necessary or incidental to the conduct of
 its business and the exercise of all other rights and powers granted to
 the Corporation by this chapter.
 `(b) EXEMPTION FROM TAXATION- The Corporation, its property, its franchise,
 capital, reserves, surplus, and its income (including but not limited to,
 any income of any fund established under section 9704(f)), shall be exempt
 from all taxation now or hereafter imposed by the United States (other
 than taxes imposed under chapter 21, relating to the Federal Insurance
 Contributions Act and chapter 23, relating to the Federal Unemployment Tax
 Act) or by any State or local taxing authority, except that any real property
 and any tangible personal property (other than cash and securities) of the
 Corporation shall be subject to State and local taxation to the same extent
 according to its value as other real and tangible personal property is taxed.
 `(c) CORPORATION AS AGENCY- Notwithstanding section 1349 of title 28 or
 any other provision of law--
 `(1) the Corporation shall be deemed to be an agency included in sections
 1345 and 1442 of such title 28;
 `(2) all civil actions to which the Corporation is a party shall be deemed
 to arise under the laws of the United States, and the district courts of
 the United States shall have original jurisdiction of all such actions,
 without regard to amount or value; and
 `(3) any civil or other action, case or controversy in a court of a State,
 or any court other than a district court of the United States, to which the
 Corporation is a party may at any time before the trial thereof be removed
 by the Corporation to the United States district court for the district
 and division embracing the place where the same is pending, or if there
 is no such district court, to the district court of the United States for
 the district in which the principal office of the Corporation is located,
 by following any procedure for removal of causes in effect at the time
 of such removal. No attachment or execution shall be issued against the
 Corporation or any of its property before final judgment in any State,
 Federal, or other court.
 `(d) REPORT TO CONGRESS- No later than 5 years after the effective date
 of this chapter, the Corporation shall present a report to Congress on its
 activities, including an evaluation of the effectiveness of the Corporation
 in achieving its goals, and recommending any changes to this chapter as it
 considers beneficial. At such time, Congress shall review the activities
 and operations of the Corporation.
`SEC. 9704. OPERATION OF CORPORATION.
 `(a) Investigatory Authority-
 `(1) The Corporation may make such investigations as it deems necessary to
 enforce any provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation thereunder,
 and may require or permit any person to file with it a statement in writing,
 under oath or otherwise as the Corporation shall determine, as to all the
 facts and circumstances concerning the matter to be investigated.
 `(2) The Corporation shall keep strictly confidential all information
 received relating to--
 `(A) trade secrets or financial or commercial information pertaining
 specifically to a given person, the disclosure of which could cause
 competitive injury to such person, or
 `(B) personnel or medical data or similar data, the disclosure of which
 would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy,
unless the portions containing such matters, information, or data have been
excised, but may use such information to the extent necessary to enforce
the premium obligation imposed under subsection (g).
 `(b) DISCOVERY POWERS VESTED IN BOARD OR DESIGNATED OFFICERS- For the
 purpose of any investigation described in subsection (a), or any other
 proceeding under this chapter, the board or any officer designated by the
 board, may administer oaths and affirmations, subpoena witnesses, compel
 their attendance, take evidence and require the production of any books,
 papers, correspondence, memoranda or other records which the Corporation
 deems relevant or material to the inquiry.
 `(c) CONTEMPT- In case of contumacy by, or refusal to obey, a subpoena issued
 to any person, the Corporation may invoke the aid of any court of the United
 States within the jurisdiction of which such investigation or proceeding
 is carried on (or where such person resides or carries on business) in
 requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
 books, papers, correspondence, memoranda and other records. The court may
 issue an order requiring such person to appear before the Corporation,
 and to produce records or to give testimony related to the matter under
 investigation or in question. Any failure to obey such order of the court
 may be punished by the court as a contempt thereof. All process in any
 such case may be served in the judicial district in which such person is
 an inhabitant or may be found.
 `(d) COOPERATION WITH GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES- In order to avoid unnecessary
 expense and duplication of functions among government agencies, the
 Corporation may make such arrangements or agreements for cooperation or
 mutual assistance in the performance of its functions under this chapter
 as is practicable and consistent with law. The Corporation may utilize
 the facilities or services of any department, agency or establishment of
 the United States or of any State or political subdivision of a State,
 including the services of any of its employees, with the lawful consent
 of such department, agency or establishment. The head of each department,
 agency or establishment of the United States shall cooperate with the
 Corporation and, to the extent permitted by law, provide such information
 and facilities as it may request for its assistance in the performance of
 its functions under this chapter.
 `(e) Civil Actions-
 `(1) Civil actions may be brought by the Corporation for appropriate relief,
 legal or equitable or both, to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
 `(2) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, if an action is brought
 in a district court of the United States, it may be brought in the district
 where the Corporation is administered, where the violation took place,
 or where a defendant resides or may be found, and process may be served
 in any other district where a defendant resides or may be found.
 `(3) The district courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction of
 actions brought by the Corporation under this chapter without regard to
 the amount in controversy in any such action.
 `(4)(A) An action under this subsection may not be brought after the
 later of--
 `(i) 6 years after the date on which the cause of action arose; or
 `(ii) 3 years after the applicable date specified in subparagraph (B).
 `(B) The applicable date specified in this subparagraph is the earliest
 date on which the Corporation acquired or should have acquired actual
 knowledge of the existence of such cause of action.
 `(C) For purposes of this paragraph, in an action by the Corporation to
 collect premiums due under this chapter, the cause of action shall be treated
 as having arisen no earlier than the date on which the premium was due.
 `(5) In any action brought under this chapter, whether to collect premiums,
 penalties (in the amount determined by the Corporation, which shall be no
 greater than the greater of interest on the unpaid premium or 20 percent
 of the amount of the unpaid premium), or interest (at the rate determined
 by the Corporation) or for any other purpose, in which a judgment in favor
 of the Corporation is awarded, the court shall award the Corporation its
 costs and reasonable counsel fees.
 `(f) Establishment of Coal Industry Retiree Benefit Fund-
 `(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the Corporation shall establish
 a Coal Industry Retiree Benefit Fund (hereafter in this chapter referred to
 as the `Fund'). All amounts received by the Corporation shall be deposited
 in the Fund, and all expenditures made by the Corporation shall be made
 out of the Fund.
 `(2) The Corporation shall transfer to the Secretary of the Treasury
 for deposit in the general fund of the Treasury of the United States any
 portion of the premiums received under subsection (g) which are allocable
 to the portion of such premiums which are imposed to offset Federal revenue
 losses by reason of deductions being allowed under chapter 1 with respect
 to such premiums.
 `(3) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the balance of the Fund
 shall at any time consist of the aggregate at such time of the following
 items:
 `(A) Cash on hand or on deposit.
 `(B) Amounts invested in United States Government or agency securities.
 `(g) Imposition of Premium Payment Obligation-
 `(1)(A) There is hereby imposed on each person that produces bituminous
 coal for use or for sale the obligation to pay to the Corporation an hourly
 premium equal to--
 `(i) in the case of bituminous coal produced in an eastern State, 99 cents
 on each hour worked in coal production work by such person's employees, or
 `(ii) in the case of bituminous coal produced in a western State, 15 cents
 on each hour worked in coal production work by such person's employees.
 `(B)(i) There is hereby imposed on bituminous coal imported to the United
 States, for use or for sale, a per-ton premium obligation to be paid to
 the Corporation. Such premium is intended to be equivalent to the premium
 imposed on domestically produced bituminous coal.
 `(ii) The amount of the per-ton premium shall be the tonnage equivalent
 of the hourly premium imposed pursuant to subparagraph (A). The initial
 amount of the per-ton premium shall be 25 cents per ton of coal imported
 to the United States for use or sale.
 `(iii) For purposes of this subparagraph, the `tonnage equivalent' shall mean
 a premium rate assessed upon each ton of coal imported to the United States
 that is equivalent to the hourly premium, based upon typical productivity
 as determined under rules established by the Corporation. Prior to the
 establishment of such rules, the tonnage equivalent to the hourly premium
 shall be the percentage of the hourly premium specified by the Corporation.
 `(iv) In the event an importer of bituminous coal has reason to believe that
 the amount of the tonnage equivalent determined pursuant to the preceding
 clauses does not accurately reflect the actual productivity involved in
 producing coal, such importer may provide evidence to the Corporation
 demonstrating such inaccuracies. The Corporation shall reevaluate the
 tonnage equivalent premium amount for the complaining importer, and shall
 take such evidence into account.
 `(v) For purposes of this subparagraph, the term `ton' means 2,000 pounds,
 and the term `United States' means any State of the United States, the
 District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa,
 Guam, Wake Island, the Canal Zone, and the Outer Continental Shelf lands
 defined in the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1331-1343).
 `(C)(i) In addition to the amounts specified in subparagraphs (A) and
 (B), each last signatory operator and each other employer referred to in
 this subparagraph shall pay to the Corporation an annual per beneficiary
 premium. The amount of the annual per beneficiary premium shall be product of
 the total number of orphan miners, spouses, surviving spouses, and dependents
 (determined under section 9711) attributable to such last signatory operator
 or employer and the per beneficiary premium as calculated in clause (iii).
 `(ii) For purposes of this subparagraph, an orphan miner (and his spouse,
 surviving spouse and dependents) shall be attributable--
 `(I) to an employer if his employment with such employer resulted in his
 eligibility under section 9711(b)(1)(E); or
 `(II) to a last signatory operator meeting the conditions described in
 section 9723(6) with respect to such orphan miner.
 `(iii)(I) The Corporation shall establish the amount of the per beneficiary
 premium each year, which shall be equal to the quotient of the projected
 cost of operating the Corporation during the succeeding year divided
 by the total number of orphan miners, spouses, surviving spouses, and
 dependents receiving benefits during the current year. In projecting the
 cost of operating the Corporation, the anticipated benefit experience and
 administrative expenses as a whole, and amounts needed to eliminate any
 accumulated deficit, shall be taken into account.
 `(II) The Corporation shall have the power to adjust the amount of the annual
 per beneficiary premium where necessary to take into account unanticipated
 changes in the cost of operating the Corporation, unanticipated changes
 in the number of orphan miners, spouses, surviving spouses, and dependents
 attributable to the last signatory operator or employer, or both.
 `(III) As of the date any per beneficiary premium obligation is due under
 this subparagraph, the persons described in section 9723(5) (B) and (C)
 with respect to any last signatory operator or employer shall be treated
 as such last signatory operator or employer, and shall be jointly and
 severally liable for such obligation.
 `(iv) A last signatory operator shall have no liability under this
 subparagraph if--
 `(I) as of November 5, 1990, and for all periods thereafter, such last
 signatory operator, and the persons described in section 9723(5) (B) and (C)
 with respect to such last signatory operator, have ceased all involvement
 in the mining, production, preparation, marketing, sale, distribution,
 transportation, leasing or licensing of coal; and
 `(II) such last signatory operator, and the persons described in section
 9723(5) (B) and (C) with respect to such last signatory operator, were,
 in the aggregate, involved in the production of fewer than 50,000 tons
 of coal during each of the 3 years immediately preceding the cessation of
 such involvement.
The limitation of liability set forth in the preceding sentence shall cease
to apply at any time that a last signatory operator, or any persons described
in section 9723(5) (B) and (C) with respect to such last signatory operator,
ceases to meet the conditions described in subclause (I).
 `(v) The annual per beneficiary premium shall be payable in equal monthly
 installments, due by the tenth day of each month. In no event shall a last
 signatory operator be obligated to pay a per beneficiary premium for an
 individual for any month for which the last signatory operator has paid
 its required assessment for such individual under section 9713(d).
 `(vi) A last signatory operator shall have no liability under this
 subparagraph if as of January 1, 1992, and for all periods thereafter,
 such last signatory operator and the persons described in section 9723(5)
 (B) and (C) with respect to such last signatory operator, have ceased
 all involvement in the production, sale, distribution, transportation, or
 use in processes for producing products of the operator and such persons,
 of bituminous or sub-bituminous coal (other than the sale or leasing of
 any interest in coal reserves).
 `(2)(A) In the event that a person required to make payments under paragraph
 (1) fails to do so, the Corporation shall assess liability against the
 person, based upon the Corporation's estimate of the person's liability.
 `(B) No later than 90 days after the assessment of liability by
 the Corporation, the person may request administrative review of the
 Corporation's assessment, in accordance with procedures adopted by the
 Corporation.
 `(C) Notwithstanding the pendency of administrative review of any assessment
 of liability, the person shall, no later than 30 days after the assessment
 of such liability, pay all amounts required by the assessment in accordance
 with any payment schedule applied by the Corporation. In the event a person
 fails to make such payments, all amounts owed by the person shall become
 immediately due and payable.
 `(D) In the event the person that has made payments in accordance with
 subparagraph (C) is ultimately determined, in accordance with subparagraph
 (B), to have paid in excess of the amounts actually due, the person shall
 receive a refund of such excess amounts, with interest.
 `(3) The Corporation shall have the power to adjust the amount of the
 premiums imposed under subparagraphs (A)(i) and (B) of paragraph (1) where
 necessary to enable the provision of benefits under section 9712. Any such
 adjustment shall reflect the reduction in Federal revenues by reason of
 deductions being allowed under chapter 1 with respect to such premiums.
 `(4) Premiums owed under subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) shall
 be due on the tenth day of each calendar month immediately following the
 month in which the coal is produced or imported, and shall be paid to
 the Corporation in accordance with forms and schedules promulgated by
 the Corporation.
 `(5) The premium obligation imposed under this section shall take effect
 on the date of the enactment of this chapter. Premiums paid under this
 section shall be deemed to be fully deductible under this title without
 regard to any limitation on deductibility set forth in this title.
 `(6) For purposes of this subsection--
 `(A) the term `bituminous coal' means coal classified as bituminous coal
 according to the publication of the American Society for Testing and
 Materials under the title `Standard Classification of Coals by Rank' (ASTM
 D 388--91a), as in effect on the date of the enactment of this chapter, and
 `(B) the term `Eastern States' includes Alabama, Connecticut, Delaware,
 the District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky,
 Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Mississippi, New Hampshire, New
 Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South
 Carolina, Tennessee, Vermont, Virginia, West Virginia, and Wisconsin; and
 `(C) the term `Western States' includes Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas,
 California, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Minnesota,
 Missouri, Nebraska, Nevada, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon,
 South Dakota, Texas, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming.
`Subchapter B--Eligibility for and Payment of Benefits
`Sec. 9711. Eligibility; orphan miners.
`Sec. 9712. Payment of benefits.
`Sec. 9713. Establishment of Coal Industry 1991 Benefit Fund.
`Sec. 9714. Obligation of last signatory operator to provide benefits to
retirees.
`Sec. 9715. Transition benefits; premium nonpayment; transfers between 1991
Fund and Corporation.
`SEC. 9711. ELIGIBILITY; ORPHAN MINERS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Any person who is an orphan miner, as defined in subsection
 (b), or who meets the conditions set forth in subsection (c), shall be
 eligible to receive benefits provided by the Corporation pursuant to
 section 9712, except that no person shall be eligible to receive benefits
 from the Corporation because of a failure to receive benefits resulting
 from a temporary labor dispute.
 `(b) ORPHAN MINER STATUS- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) An orphan miner is any person who--
 `(A)(i) as of the date of enactment of this chapter, was eligible to
 receive benefits as a retiree from a plan described in section 9721(d)
 (or, but for the enactment of this chapter, would be eligible to receive
 benefits as a retiree from the plan described in section 9721(d)(2)(A)), and
 `(ii) is not receiving benefits as a retiree from a plan described in
 section 9721(d) or from the plan established pursuant to section 9713;
 `(B) is not described in subparagraph (A), but was eligible to receive
 benefits as a retiree from the plan established pursuant to section 9713
 and is not receiving benefits from such plan;
 `(C)(i) is receiving a pension from the defined benefit pension plan
 maintained pursuant to the agreement described in section 9723(7) (other
 than the plan described in section 9721(c)),
 `(ii) but for the enactment of this chapter, would be eligible to receive
 medical benefits as a retiree as of February 1, 1993, from the plan
 described in section 9721(d)(2)(B), and
 `(iii) is not receiving medical benefits as a retiree from the plan
 described in section 9721(d)(2)(B) or from any other plan;
 `(D)(i) is receiving a pension from the defined benefit pension plan
 maintained pursuant to the agreement described in section 9723(7) (other
 than the plan described in section 9721(c));
 `(ii) as of February 1, 1993, had earned 20 years of credited service
 under such plan;
 `(iii) is at any time after beginning to receive such pension not receiving
 retiree medical benefits equal to the benefits in effect as that time
 under the plans described in section 9712(b)(3); and
 `(iv) meets the eligibility requirements for retiree medical benefits then
 in effect under such plans; or
 `(E)(i) was eligible as a result of coal production work performed in the
 bituminous, sub-bituminous or lignite coal industry to receive retiree
 medical benefits from a health care plan that met the requirements of
 subparagraphs (D) and (E) of paragraph (2);
 `(ii) initially ceased to receive retiree medical benefits on or after the
 date of enactment of this chapter, despite continued eligibility therefore;
 `(iii) had been receiving such benefits from a plan that had been in
 existence for at least 3 years prior to the cessation of benefits; and
 `(iv) was included in a category of retirees that had been eligible to
 receive benefits for at least 3 years prior to the cessation of benefits.
 `(2) For purposes of paragraph (1)(E), the following rules shall apply:
 `(A) Eligibility is continuing where benefits ceased incident to an
 employer's cessation of operations, but is not continuing where benefits
 ceased pursuant to a lawful termination or modification of a plan (under
 circumstances other than a cessation of operations).
 `(B) In the case of any individual who has 20 years of credited service
 under a defined benefit pension plan maintained pursuant to the agreement
 described in section 9723(7), or who was otherwise eligible to receive
 retiree medical benefits from a single employer health care plan pursuant
 to a coal wage agreement, all health care plans in which such individual
 was a participant during a period of such credited service or during such
 period of eligibility shall be taken into account in determining whether
 the 3-year tests have been met.
 `(C) In the case of an employer that established a new health care plan
 as a replacement for a prior plan, such prior plan shall be taken into
 account in determining whether the 3-year tests have been met.
 `(D) A health care plan meets the requirements of this subparagraph if
 the employer maintaining the plan, a labor organization representing the
 employees of the employer, or an employee of the employer submits a copy
 of the plan to the Corporation within 180 days from the later of--
 `(i) the date of establishment of the plan; or
 `(ii) the date of enactment of this chapter.
 `(E) A health care plan meets the requirements of this subparagraph if
 the employer maintaining the plan, a labor organization representing the
 employees of the employer, or an employee of the employer submits a copy
 of any amendment or modification to the plan to the Corporation within
 180 days from the later of--
 `(i) the date of such amendment or modification; or
 `(ii) the date of enactment of this chapter.
 `(c) ELIGIBILITY OF SPOUSES AND DEPENDENTS-
 `(1) A spouse, surviving spouse or dependent of an orphan miner or a
 deceased coal miner meets the conditions of this section if such individual
 was eligible to receive benefits from a plan described in section 9721(d)
 as of the date of enactment of this chapter, and is not receiving benefits
 from that plan or from the plan established pursuant to section 9713.
 `(2) A spouse, surviving spouse or dependent of an orphan miner or a deceased
 coal miner meets the conditions of this section if such individual is not
 described in paragraph (1), but was eligible to receive benefits from the
 plan established pursuant to section 9713 and is not receiving benefits
 from such plan.
 `(3) In the case of any spouse, surviving spouse or dependent of an orphan
 miner described in subsection (b)(1)(A) or (b)(1)(C) of this section,
 eligibility shall be based upon the rules set forth in the plans described
 in section 9721(d) as of the date of enactment of this chapter. In the case
 of any spouse, surviving spouse or dependent of an orphan miner described
 in subsection (b)(1)(D), eligibility shall be based upon the rules set
 forth in individual employer plans maintained pursuant to the agreement
 described in section 9723(7) on the date that the orphan miner first
 became eligible for benefits from the Corporation. In all other cases,
 eligibility shall be based upon the rules of the plan that was or would
 have been applicable to the orphan miner or deceased coal miner for the
 3-year period preceding eligibility for benefits from the Corporation. The
 Corporation is authorized to promulgate regulations consistent with this
 paragraph establishing the eligibility of other spouses, surviving spouses
 and dependents of orphan miners or deceased coal miners for health benefits.
 `(d) REENROLLMENT OF ORPHAN MINERS AND BENEFICIARIES- The Corporation and
 the joint board of trustees of the plan established pursuant to section
 9713 shall cooperate to review the eligibility of individuals under
 this section. Pending such review, any individual receiving benefits
 from a plan described in section 9721(d) as of the date of enactment of
 this chapter shall be presumed to meet the first part of the eligibility
 tests of subsections (b)(1)(A) and (c)(1). However, no individual shall be
 considered eligible to receive benefits provided by the Corporation unless
 a determination is made that such individual in fact met or meets all
 eligibility requirements necessary to receive benefits as required under
 subsection (b) or (c). No individual shall be eligible under subsection
 (b)(1)(A) or (c)(1) if such individual was finally determined to be
 ineligible to receive benefits from a plan described in section 9721(d)
 prior to the date of enactment of this chapter.
`SEC. 9712. PAYMENT OF BENEFITS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Corporation shall provide medical benefits to orphan
 miners, their spouses, surviving spouses and dependents, who meet the
 eligibility requirements of section 9711, and shall provide coverage for
 death benefits to orphan miners eligible for such benefits. The board shall
 establish schedules of benefits applicable to classes of orphan miners,
 their spouses, surviving spouses and dependents, in accordance with this
 section. All benefit obligations of the Corporation shall be contingent
 upon the continued imposition of an hourly premium payment obligation as
 specified in section 9704(g)(1)(A).
 `(b) BENEFIT LEVELS-
 `(1) An orphan miner eligible for benefits pursuant to section 9711(b)(1)(A)
 or 9711(b)(1)(C) shall be entitled to benefit coverage that is substantially
 the same as (but not exceeding) the coverage provided by the plans described
 in section 9721(d) as of the date of enactment of this chapter, and shall
 be subject to all limitations of such coverage. Such orphan miner shall
 also be eligible for death benefits, which shall be equal to the death
 benefits provided as of the date of enactment of this chapter under the
 plan described in section 9721(c).
 `(2) An orphan miner eligible for benefits pursuant to section 9711(b)(1)(B)
 or 9711(b)(1)(E) shall be entitled to a level of benefits and benefit
 coverage that is substantially the same as (but not exceeding) the retiree
 benefit coverage applicable to him immediately preceding his eligibility
 for benefits from the Corporation, and shall be subject to all limitations
 of such coverage. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following rules
 shall apply:
 `(A) The level of benefits and benefit coverage provided under this
 paragraph shall not exceed that which is provided under paragraph (1)
 of this subsection.
 `(B) In determining the retiree benefit coverage applicable to an orphan
 miner for purposes of this paragraph, the Corporation shall disregard
 any increases or decreases in benefits or benefit coverage that were in
 effect for fewer than 3 years preceding the orphan miner's eligibility
 for benefits from the Corporation, except that--
 `(i) any death benefit applicable to an orphan miner as a result of 1991
 amendments to the agreement described in section 9723(7) shall not be
 disregarded; and
 `(ii) increases or decreases in benefits or benefit coverage that were
 the subject of a collective bargaining agreement shall not be disregarded.
 `(3) An orphan miner eligible for benefits pursuant to section 9711(b)(1)(D)
 shall be entitled to a level of benefits and benefit coverage equivalent
 to the level of benefits and benefit coverage, if any, provided under
 individual employer plans maintained pursuant to the agreement described
 in section 9723(7) on the date that the orphan miner first became eligible
 for benefits from the Corporation, and shall be subject to all limitations
 of such coverage.
 `(4) An individual eligible for benefits pursuant to section 9711(c) shall
 be entitled to medical benefit coverage that does not exceed the medical
 benefit coverage that is or would have been applicable to the coal miner
 through whom the individual claims eligibility, and the individual shall
 be subject to all limitations of such coverage.
 `(5) The Corporation may make increases to its schedules of benefits that
 are desirable for efficiency of administration, except that such adjustments
 to benefits may not result in an increase in cost to the Corporation or
 an increase in any premium under section 9704(g).
 `(6) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, to the extent a participant
 or beneficiary who is eligible for benefits from the Corporation is also
 eligible for benefits under title XVIII or XIX of the Social Security Act,
 or under any other plan maintained by a State or the Federal Government or
 any agency or subdivision thereof, or pursuant to any State or Federal law
 in existence on the date of enactment of this chapter or thereafter enacted,
 benefits under such titles or under such other plan shall be considered to
 be primary to benefits provided by the Corporation, and shall be provided
 without regard to any benefits provided by the Corporation. In such case,
 the benefits provided by the Corporation shall be reduced so that the
 total benefits paid from all sources shall not exceed the total allowable
 expense for the covered good or service.
 `(c) MANDATORY MANAGED CARE- The Corporation shall develop managed care
 rules which shall be applicable to the payment of benefits under this
 section. The rules shall preserve freedom of choice while reinforcing
 managed care network use by allowing a point of service decision as to
 whether a network medical provider will be used. Major elements of such
 rules shall include, but not be limited to--
 `(1) implementing formulary for drugs and subjecting the prescription
 program to a rigorous review of appropriate use;
 `(2) obtaining a unit price discount in exchange for patient volume and
 preferred provider status, with the amount of the potential discount
 varying by geographic region;
 `(3) limiting benefit payments to physicians to the medicare allowable
 charge, while protecting beneficiaries from balance billing by providers;
 `(4) utilizing Medicare's `appropriateness of service' protocols in the
 claims payment function where they are more stringent;
 `(5) creating mandatory utilization review (UR) procedures, but placing
 the responsibility to follow such procedures on the physician or hospital,
 not the beneficiaries;
 `(6) selecting the most efficient physicians and state-of-the-art utilization
 management techniques, including ambulatory care techniques, for medical
 services delivered by the managed care network; and
 `(7) utilizing a managed care network provider system as practiced
 in the health care industry at the time medical services are needed
 (point-of-service) in order to receive maximum benefits available under
 this section.
Any managed care or cost containment program shall have as its primary goal
the provision of quality medical care. In no event shall any such program
result in the reduction of the quality of care provided to participants and
beneficiaries consistent with sound medical practice.
 `(d) EFFECTIVE DATE- Benefits shall be payable under this section as of
 January 1, 1992. Pursuant to section 9715, the Corporation shall pay the
 trustees of the plans described in section 9721(d) and the plan established
 pursuant to section 9713 for all benefit and administrative costs expended
 with respect to eligible orphan miners, spouses, surviving spouses and
 dependents, from the effective date to the date that such individuals are
 transferred to the Corporation.
 `(e) ELECTIVE COVERAGE-
 `(1) An employer may elect to provide retirement health coverage to its
 employees by meeting the following conditions:
 `(A) The employer must employ workers in the coal industry.
 `(B) The employer agrees to pay an annual premium, as determined by the
 Corporation, sufficient to provide retirement health coverage to all of
 its employees who perform classified work as determined under the agreement
 described in section 9723(7), or any successor agreement, who have worked
 a total of 20 years, including both service with that employer, service
 for any other employer described in this subsection, and service for any
 other employer that is credited for purposes of eligibility by a plan
 described in section 404(c).
 `(C) The employer is not currently obligated by a collective bargaining
 agreement to make contributions to the plan established pursuant to
 section 9713.
 `(D) The employer's election, once made, is irrevocable.
 `(2) Upon the retirement of an employee of an employer described in paragraph
 (1), with 20 or more years of service, upon such terms and conditions as
 established by the Corporation, such employee and his or her dependents
 shall receive benefits, upon such terms and conditions as determined by
 the Corporation.
`SEC. 9713. ESTABLISHMENT OF UNITED MINE WORKERS OF AMERICA 1991 BENEFIT FUND.
 `(a) MERGER OF RETIREE BENEFIT PLANS-
 `(1) As soon as practicable after the enactment of this chapter, and in no
 event later than 60 days, the settlors of the plans described in section
 9721(d) shall cause such plans to be merged, and shall appoint a joint
 board of trustees to manage the operation and administration of the merged
 plan. The merged plan shall be known as the United Mine Workers of America
 1991 Benefit Fund (hereinafter referred to as the `1991 Fund'). The 1991 Fund
 shall be an employee welfare benefit plan within the meaning of section 3(1)
 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(1))
 and a multiemployer plan within the meaning of section 3(37) of such Act
 (29 U.S.C. 1002(37)).
 `(2) The settlors shall design the structure and administration of the 1991
 Fund. The settlors may at any time and for any reason change the number and
 identity of the members comprising the board of trustees of the 1991 Fund.
 `(b) ELIGIBILITY-
 `(1) The following individuals shall be eligible to receive benefits from
 the 1991 Fund:
 `(A) Any individual who, as of the date of enactment of this chapter, was
 eligible to receive benefits from the plan described in section 9721(d)(2)(A)
 (or who, but for the enactment of this chapter, would be eligible for
 benefits from such plan), and with respect to whom the last signatory
 operator is and remains signatory to an agreement that is described in
 section 9723(7) or that contains provisions relating to pension and health
 care benefits that are the same as those contained in such agreement.
 `(B) Any individual who retired from classified employment under an agreement
 that is described in section 9723(7) or that contains provisions relating to
 pension and health care benefits that are the same as those contained in such
 agreement, and any spouse, surviving spouse or dependent of such retiree,
 with respect to whom the last signatory operator makes an election prior to
 February 1, 1993, to pay premiums to the 1991 Fund for such benefits and is
 and remains signatory to an agreement that is described in section 9723(7)
 or that contains provisions relating to pension and health care benefits
 that are the same as those contained in such agreement. Any election made
 pursuant to this subparagraph must cover, at a minimum, all of the last
 signatory operator's retirees who retired from classified employment as
 of February 1, 1993.
 `(2) No individual shall be eligible under subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1)
 unless the joint board of trustees of the 1991 Fund determines that such
 individual in fact met all eligibility requirements of the plan described
 in section 9721(d)(2)(A) as of the date of enactment of this chapter. Any
 individual who was finally determined to have been ineligible for benefits
 from a plan described in section 9721(d)(2)(A) prior to such date of
 enactment shall be ineligible under subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1).
 `(c) BENEFITS-
 `(1) Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, health care benefits
 provided under the 1991 Fund shall be identical to the benefits provided
 under the plans described in section 9721(d). The 1991 Fund shall provide
 coverage for death benefits to retirees, equal to the death benefits
 provided under the plan described in section 9721(c).
 `(2) The joint board of trustees of the 1991 Fund shall develop managed care
 rules, subject to section 9714(b), which shall be applicable to the payment
 of benefits under this section. The rules shall preserve freedom of choice
 while reinforcing managed care network use by allowing a point of service
 decision as to whether a network medical provider will be used. The board
 of trustees shall permit any last signatory operator subject to section
 9714 to utilize the managed care and cost containment rules and programs
 developed pursuant to this paragraph, at the election of such last signatory
 operator. Major elements of such rules shall include, but not be limited to--
 `(A) implementing formulary for drugs and subjecting the prescription
 program to a rigorous review of appropriate use;
 `(B) obtaining a unit price discount in exchange for patient volume and
 preferred provider status, with the amount of the potential discount
 varying by geographic region;
 `(C) limiting benefit payments to physicians to the Medicare allowable
 charge, while protecting beneficiaries from balance billing by providers;
 `(D) utilizing Medicare's `appropriateness of service' protocols in the
 claims payment function where they are more stringent;
 `(E) creating mandatory utilization review (UR) procedures, but placing
 the responsibility to follow such procedures on the physician or hospital,
 not the beneficiaries;
 `(F) selecting the most efficient physicians and state-of-the-art utilization
 management techniques, including ambulatory care techniques, for medical
 services delivered by the managed care network; and
 `(G) utilizing a managed care network provider system as practiced
 in the health care industry at the time medical services are needed
 (point-of-service) in order to receive maximum benefits available under
 this section.
Any managed care or cost containment program shall have as its primary goal
the provision of quality medical care. In no event shall any such program
result in the reduction of the quality of care provided to participants and
beneficiaries consistent with sound medical practice.
 `(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, to the extent a participant
 or beneficiary who is eligible for benefits from the 1991 Fund is also
 eligible for benefits under title XVIII or XIX of the Social Security Act,
 or under any other plan maintained by a State or the Federal Government or
 any agency or subdivision thereof, or pursuant to any State or Federal law
 in existence on the date of enactment of this chapter or thereafter enacted,
 benefits under such titles or under such other plan shall be considered
 to be primary to benefits provided by the 1991 Fund and shall be provided
 without regard to any benefits provided by the 1991 Fund. In such case,
 the benefits provided by the 1991 Fund shall be reduced so that the total
 benefits paid from all sources shall not exceed the total allowable expense
 for the covered good or service.
 `(d) ASSESSMENTS-
 `(1) As of November 30 of each plan year, the joint board of trustees of
 the 1991 Fund shall set a monthly assessment for each person required to
 pay assessments pursuant to paragraph (2). The monthly assessment for each
 such person shall be equal to 1/12 of the product of--
 `(A) the projected cost of operating the 1991 Fund during the succeeding
 plan year (less any assets received from a plan described in section 9721(c)
 and any other surplus assets) divided by the number of participants and
 beneficiaries for the current plan year; and
 `(B) the projected number of the 1991 Funds' eligible participants and
 beneficiaries attributable to such person, determined as of the nearest
 November 1.
In projecting the cost of operating the 1991 Fund, the board of trustees
shall take into account the anticipated benefit experience and administrative
expenses of the 1991 Fund as a whole, and amounts needed to eliminate any
accumulated deficit. The monthly assessment determined under this paragraph
shall be verified by an independent auditor, and shall continue in effect
for each month of the succeeding plan year, except that the joint board
of trustees shall determine a monthly assessment for any new contributor
or other person for whom a monthly assessment has not been established,
and a revised monthly assessment for any last signatory operator that
makes the election described in subsection (b)(1)(B) and with respect to
which new participants and beneficiaries become eligible for benefits. Any
new monthly assessment or revised monthly assessment shall be based upon
the number of projected participants and beneficiaries attributable to the
contributor as of the date the new or revised assessment is made. Each person
required to pay assessments pursuant to paragraph (2) shall continue to pay
to the plans described in section 9721(d) the contributions required under
the applicable coal wage agreement, until the first month for which the
assessment described in this paragraph is set. In no event shall a person
required to pay assessments pursuant to paragraph (2) be required to make
any payment to the 1991 Fund for the same period for which a contribution
to a plan described in section 9721(d) is required.
 `(2) Each last signatory operator with respect to any person described in
 subsection (b)(1)(A), and each last signatory operator with respect to
 any person described in subsection (b)(1)(B) that has agreed to provide
 benefits coverage through the 1991 Fund, shall pay to the 1991 Fund for each
 month the assessment determined by the joint board of trustees pursuant
 to paragraph (1). The assessments paid under this section shall be deemed
 to be fully deductible under this title without regard to any limitation
 on deductibility set forth in this title.
 `(3) Either of the settlors shall have the right to audit the accounts,
 books and records, and operation of the 1991 Fund, at any time and for any
 reason, upon reasonable notice to the joint board of trustees. The joint
 board of trustees shall cooperate fully with the settlors in connection
 with any such audit and shall make available appropriate personnel and
 records deemed necessary by the auditors for inspection and copying at
 reasonable times and places.
 `(4) Each last signatory operator obligated to pay assessments to the 1991
 Fund pursuant to paragraph (2) shall be bound by all of the provisions of
 the plan and trust documents establishing and governing the 1991 Fund.
 `(5) As of the date any assessment owed under this subsection is due,
 the persons described in section 9723(5) (B) or (C) with respect to any
 last signatory operator shall be treated as such last signatory operator
 and shall be jointly and severally liable for such assessment.
 `(e) EXCLUSIVE OBLIGATION- Except as provided in this chapter, no employer
 that was a signatory to the 1978 or any subsequent coal wage agreement
 and that had an obligation to provide health care benefits to coal mine
 retirees shall be obligated to provide benefits to individuals covered by
 the plans described in section 9721(d), or to make contributions to any
 plan described in section 9721(d), or to the 1991 Fund, with respect to
 work performed or coal mined after the date of enactment of this chapter,
 or to pay withdrawal liability to a plan described in section 9721(d) as a
 result of the change in the contribution obligation required by this chapter.
`SEC. 9714. OBLIGATION OF LAST SIGNATORY OPERATOR TO PROVIDE BENEFITS TO
RETIREES.
 `(a) DURATION OF OBLIGATION- The last signatory operator of any individual
 receiving retiree health care benefits as of February 1, 1993 (including
 retiree, spouse, surviving spouse and dependent benefits) from an
 individual employer plan maintained pursuant to a coal wage agreement
 (or who has applied for such benefits as of February 1, 1993, and has
 met every eligibility requirement for such benefits as of such date)
 shall provide retiree health care benefits to such individual equal to
 the benefits required to be provided by such last signatory operator's
 individual employer plan as of January 1, 1992, as limited by any managed
 care or cost containment rules of the type described in sections 9712(c)
 and 9713(c)(2), and subject to subsection (b), for as long as the last
 signatory operator remains in business. The existence, level and duration of
 benefits provided to a last signatory operator's former employees (and their
 spouses, surviving spouses and dependents), other than those described in
 this subsection, who are or were covered by a coal wage agreement, shall
 only be as determined by and subject to collective bargaining or lawful
 unilateral action, except that this subsection shall not be construed to
 impair the eligibility of any individual described in section 9711(b)(1)(D)
 for the benefit coverage described in section 9712(b)(3).
 `(b) MANAGED CARE PROVIDER SYSTEM QUALITY CONTROL- Any managed care provider
 system adopted by a last signatory operator as permitted under subsection
 (a), or by the joint board of trustees of the 1991 Fund, pursuant to
 section 9713(c)(2), shall be subject to the following requirements of
 this subsection:
 `(1) The settlors shall establish a medical peer review panel, which shall
 determine standards of quality for managed care provider systems. Standards
 of quality shall include accessibility to medical care, taking into account
 that accessibility requirements may differ depending upon the nature of
 the medical need. Each settlor shall have the power to appoint and remove
 2 individuals who shall serve on the panel. A panel member shall be either
 a medical practitioner knowledgeable in managed care, or an individual
 who is expert in managed care.
 `(2) Each last signatory operator and the joint board of trustees of the
 1991 Fund shall submit a description of any managed care provider system
 to the panel prior to implementation of the system, and shall, on the
 same date or prior to such submission, provide notice of the submission
 to the participants of the affected employee benefit plan or plans. The
 last signatory employer or the joint board of trustees may implement the
 proposed system on a provisional basis on or after the 120th day after the
 submission to the panel, unless the panel issues a preliminary determination
 that the system has not been shown to meet the requisite standards. The
 requirements of this paragraph shall not apply to a last signatory operator
 electing to utilize the managed care provider system established by the
 1991 Fund if the panel has issued a favorable determination for such system.
 `(3)(A) Upon receipt of a submission by a last signatory operator or by the
 joint board of trustees, the panel shall conduct a preliminary examination
 of the managed care provider system. In the event that the preliminary
 review reveals a failure to show compliance with established standards
 such that provisional implementation by a last signatory operator or by
 the joint board of trustees may be detrimental to participants subject to
 the system, the panel shall, within 120 days of the submission, issue a
 preliminary determination that the system has not been shown to meet the
 requisite standards.
 `(B) Within 240 days from the date of any submission, the panel shall issue
 a final determination of whether the system has been shown to meet the
 established standards of quality. In the event of a negative determination,
 the panel shall list specific steps that may be taken by the last signatory
 operator or by the joint board of trustees to qualify the system under
 the established standards.
 `(C) The first-named settlor in section 9723(8) shall have the authority
 to review submissions made under paragraph (2), and to designate the order
 in which such submissions shall be considered by the panel.
 `(D) In the event that the members of the panel deadlock on a determination
 to be made under this paragraph, they shall, by majority vote, appoint
 a neutral person, who would be qualified to serve as a panel member,
 to break such deadlock.
 `(4) In the event of a negative determination by the panel, the last
 signatory operator shall have the options described in subparagraph (A),
 (B), or (C), and the joint board of trustees shall have the options
 described in subparagraphs (A) and (B):
 `(A) implementing the specific steps outlined by the panel pursuant to
 paragraph (3);
 `(B) consistent with the requirements of this subsection, establishing a
 new managed care provider system that meets the requisite standards; or
 `(C) electing to utilize the managed care provider system established by the
 1991 Fund if the panel has issued a favorable determination for such system.
 `(5) The panel shall develop rules for the periodic review of determinations
 made, except that reviews shall be no more frequent than once every 3 years;
 and for the reconsideration of any prior determination upon a showing
 that the managed care provider system does not or has ceased to meet the
 established standards. The panel may take into account written complaints
 received from affected participants and beneficiaries, but the authority of
 the panel shall be limited to determining the continued qualification of
 a managed care provider system under the established standards, and shall
 not extend to resolving claims of medical malpractice or any other issue.
 `(6) The panel shall withhold from all persons not connected with the
 conduct of a reconsideration or review described in paragraph (5) (other
 than the first-named settlor in section 9723(8) all information relating to
 the subject of any written complaint received by an affected participant or
 beneficiary; and may not be compelled in any Federal, State, or local civil,
 criminal, administrative, legislative, or other proceedings to identify
 such information. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the panel shall provide
 the last signatory operator or the joint board of trustees of the 1991 Fund
 with a copy of any written complaint relating to a managed care provider
 system maintained by such last signatory operator or joint board of trustees.
 `(7)(A) The panel, any person acting as a member or staff to the panel,
 any person under a contract or other formal agreement with the panel,
 and any person who participates with or assists the panel with respect
 to any action taken pursuant to this subsection, shall not be liable in
 damages under any law of the United States or of any State (or political
 subdivision thereof) with respect to the action. The preceding sentence
 shall not apply to damages under any law of the United States or any State
 relating to the civil rights of any person or persons, including the Civil
 Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.) and the Civil Rights Acts
 (42 U.S.C. 1981 et seq.). Nothing in this subparagraph shall prevent the
 United States or any attorney general of a State from bringing an action,
 where such an action is otherwise authorized.
 `(B) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person (whether as
 a witness or otherwise) providing information to the panel regarding the
 competence or professional conduct of a physician shall be held, by reason
 of having provided such information, to be liable in damages under any law
 of the United States or of any State (or political subdivision thereof)
 unless such information is false and the person providing it knew that
 such information was false.
 `(8) The joint board of trustees of the 1991 Fund and each last signatory
 operator that makes a submission pursuant to subsection (b)(2) shall be
 liable for reasonable fees assessed by the panel in connection with the
 review of managed care provider systems.
 `(c) SATISFACTION OF OBLIGATIONS- Subject to the provisions of sections
 9711 and 9713, the obligations of a last signatory operator under this
 section may be satisfied for any period with respect to any individual by
 payment of the required assessment under section 9713(d) or the premium
 under section 9704(g)(1)(C), or by the provision of the required benefits
 under an individual employer plan.
 `(d) CONTROL GROUP LIABILITY- As of the date that any benefit obligation owed
 pursuant to this section is due, the persons described in section 9723(5)
 (B) and (C) with respect to any last signatory operator shall be treated
 as such last signatory operator, and shall be jointly and severally liable
 for such benefit obligation.
`SEC. 9715. TRANSITION BENEFITS; PREMIUM NONPAYMENT; TRANSFERS BETWEEN 1991
FUND AND CORPORATION.
 `(a) PAYMENT OF BENEFITS TO ORPHAN MINERS- The plans described in section
 9721(d) and the 1991 Fund shall continue to provide benefits to orphan
 miners, spouses, surviving spouses and dependents described in section 9711
 (b) and (c), until the end of the second month beginning after the effective
 date of section 9712(d). Such orphan miners, spouses, surviving spouses
 and dependents shall be transferred to the Corporation as of the first day
 of the third month following the effective date of section 9712(d). The
 defined benefit pension plans maintained pursuant to the agreement described
 in section 9723(7) shall, on behalf of the Corporation and the 1991 Fund,
 continue to provide death benefits to orphan miners described in section
 9711(b) and to retirees described in section 9713(b)(1) until the end of the
 second month beginning after the effective date of section 9712(d). Such
 pension plans shall have no liability for death benefits for the orphan
 miners described in section 9711(b), or for the retirees described in
 section 9713(b)(1), as of the first day of the third month following the
 effective date of section 9712(d). The Corporation may elect to pay the
 plans described in section 9721(d), the 1991 Fund, or the defined benefit
 pension plans maintained pursuant to the agreement described in section
 9723(7) to continue to provide transition benefits after the end of the
 second month beginning after the effective date of section 9712(d), and for
 a period not to exceed 6 months. If the Corporation so elects, it shall
 pay such plans all amounts necessary to enable the provision of benefits
 and to cover all costs of administration associated with the provision of
 benefits. The schedule for such payments shall be determined by the boards
 of trustees of the plans, and may require advance payments. Amounts paid
 pursuant to this subsection shall not be included in the amounts to be
 reimbursed pursuant to subsection (b).
 `(b) REIMBURSEMENT OF COST FOR TRANSITION BENEFITS- No later than the
 first day of the fourth month after the effective date of section 9712(d),
 the Corporation shall reimburse the plans described in section 9721(d)
 and the 1991 Fund, with interest, for the amounts of benefits paid and
 administrative expenses incurred pursuant to subsection (a). No later than
 the first day of the fourth month after the effective date of section
 9712(d), the Corporation and the 1991 Fund shall reimburse the defined
 benefit pension plans maintained pursuant to the agreement described in
 section 9723(7), with interest, for the amount of death benefits paid and
 administrative expenses incurred pursuant to subsection (a).
 `(c) ACCESS TO RECORDS- The joint boards of trustees of the plans described
 in section 9721(d) and the 1991 Fund shall share with the Corporation
 all records, files and documents related to the orphan miners, spouses,
 surviving spouses and dependents transferred to the Corporation, to the
 extent necessary for the Corporation to administer the payment of benefits
 to such individuals.
 `(d) PREMIUM NONPAYMENT-
 `(1) No individual shall be eligible for benefits from the 1991 Fund during
 any month for which the assessments required under section 9713(d) have
 not been paid by such individual's last signatory operator. Such individual
 shall be immediately eligible to receive benefits from the Corporation and
 the Corporation shall have a cause of action against such individual's
 last signatory operator for the per beneficiary premium imposed under
 section 9704(g)(1)(C).
 `(2) The 1991 Fund shall continue to treat an individual described in
 paragraph (1) as if he or she were eligible for benefits until the end
 of the third month for which an assessment due has not been paid. If the
 last signatory operator with respect to such individual has not paid
 its assessments due by the end of such month (with such interest and
 liquidated damages imposed by the board of trustees in their discretion,
 up to the amounts provided in section 9722(d)(2) (B) and (C)), the 1991
 Fund shall notify the Corporation that the individual is transferred to the
 Corporation pursuant to paragraph (1), and the Corporation shall reimburse
 the 1991 Fund, with interest, for any benefits paid to or on behalf of
 such individual for all months for which assessments have not been paid.
`Subchapter C--Other Provisions
`Sec. 9721. Determination and disposition of excess assets.
`Sec. 9722. Civil enforcement.
`Sec. 9723. Definitions.
`Sec. 9724. Sham transactions.
`SEC. 9721. DETERMINATION AND DISPOSITION OF EXCESS PENSION ASSETS.
 `(a) DETERMINATION OF EXCESS PENSION ASSETS-
 `(1) Within 30 days after the enactment of this chapter, the joint board
 of trustees of the plan described in subsection (c) shall, through the
 independent actuaries of the plan, calculate the amount of the excess
 pension assets. The trustees of the plan described in subsection (c) shall
 recalculate the excess pension assets at any time that they are directed
 to do so by the settlors.
 `(2) Immediately following the calculation (or recalculation) of the
 excess pension assets, the trustees of the plan described in subsection (c)
 shall segregate the excess pension assets from the remaining assets of such
 plan. The segregated excess pension assets (including all earnings thereon)
 shall be held in the plan until disbursed pursuant to subsection (b).
 `(b) DISPOSITION OF EXCESS PENSION ASSETS- Notwithstanding any other
 provision of law, the excess pension assets (including all earnings thereon)
 shall be expended in the following order:
 `(1) Fifty million dollars shall be added to the general assets of the
 Corporation.
 `(2) The deficits in the plans described in subsection (d) as of the date
 of enactment of this chapter shall be reduced to zero.
 `(3) Fifty million dollars shall be added to the general assets of the
 1991 Fund.
 `(4) The remainder of the excess pension assets, if any, shall be added
 to the general assets of the 1991 Fund, at such times and in such amounts
 as may be directed by the settlors.
 `(c) PLAN CONTAINING EXCESS PENSION ASSETS- A plan is described in this
 subsection if it is a pension plan and--
 `(1) it is a plan described in section 404(c) or a continuation thereof; and
 `(2) participation in the plan is substantially limited to individuals
 who retired prior to January 1, 1976.
 `(d) RELATED WELFARE PLANS- A plan is described in this subsection if--
 `(1) it is a plan described in section 404(c) or a continuation thereof; and
 `(2) it provides health benefits to retirees and beneficiaries of the
 industry which maintained the plan described in subsection (c); and
 `(A) participation in the plan is substantially limited to individuals
 who retired prior to January 1, 1976; or
 `(B) participation in the plan is substantially limited to individuals
 who retired on or after January 1, 1976.
 `(e) Tax Treatment, Validity of Transfer of Excess Pension Assets-
 `(1) No deduction shall be allowed under this title with respect to the
 expenditure of excess pension assets pursuant to subsection (a), but such
 transfer shall not adversely affect the deductibility (under applicable
 provisions of this title) of contributions previously made by employers
 or amounts hereafter contributed by employers to the plans described in
 subsection (c) or (d), or to the 1991 Fund.
 `(2) The expenditure of excess pension assets pursuant to subsection (b)--
 `(A) shall not be treated as an employer reversion from a qualified plan
 for purposes of section 4980, and
 `(B) shall not be includible in the gross income of any employer maintaining
 a plan described in subsection (c).
 `(3) Neither the segregation of excess pension assets pursuant to subsection
 (a)(2), the expenditure of excess pension assets pursuant to subsection
 (b), nor any direction made by the settlors pursuant to subsection (a)(1)
 or (b)(4) shall be deemed to violate or be prohibited by any provision
 of law, or to cause the settlors, joint board of trustees, employers or
 any related person to incur or be subject to taxes, fines, or penalties
 of any kind whatsoever.
`SEC. 9722. CIVIL ENFORCEMENT.
 `(a) Civil actions may be brought by the 1991 Fund for appropriate relief,
 legal or equitable or both, to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
 `(b) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, where such an action
 is brought in a district court of the United States, it may be brought in
 the district where the 1991 Fund is administered, in the district where
 the violation took place, or where a defendant resides or may be found,
 and process may be served in any other district where a defendant resides
 or may be found.
 `(c) The district courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction of
 actions brought by the 1991 Fund under this chapter without regard to the
 amount in controversy in any such action.
 `(d)(1) In any action brought under subsection (a) (other than an action
 described in paragraph (2)), the court in its discretion may award to the
 1991 Fund all or a portion of the costs of litigation, including reasonable
 attorneys' fees, incurred by the 1991 Fund in connection with such action.
 `(2) In any action by the 1991 Fund to enforce section 9713(d)(2), in
 which a judgment in favor of the 1991 Fund is awarded, the court shall
 award the 1991 Fund--
 `(A) the unpaid assessments;
 `(B) interest on the unpaid assessments;
 `(C) an amount equal to the greater of--
 `(i) interest on the unpaid assessments; or
 `(ii) liquidated damages in the amount of 20 percent of the amount determined
 by the court under subparagraph (A);
 `(D) reasonable attorneys' fees and costs of the action, to be paid by
 the defendant; and
 `(E) such other legal or equitable relief as the court deems appropriate.
For purposes of this paragraph, interest on unpaid assessments shall be
determined by using the rate provided under the rules of the 1991 Fund, or,
if none, the rate prescribed under section 6621.
 `(e)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), an action under this subsection
 may not be brought after the later of--
 `(A) 6 years after the date on which the cause of action arose; or
 `(B) 3 years after the earliest date on which the 1991 Fund acquired
 or should have acquired actual knowledge of the existence of such cause
 of action.
 `(2) In the case of fraud or concealment, the period described in paragraph
 (1)(b) shall be extended to 6 years after the applicable date.
 `(f) Any person who is an employer, a last signatory operator, a person
 described in section 9723(5) (B) or (C) with respect to an employer or
 last signatory operator, a bituminous coal industry retiree, or any spouse,
 surviving spouse or dependent of a bituminous coal industry retiree, and is
 adversely affected by any act or omission of any party under this chapter,
 or who is an employee organization of which such a coal industry retiree is a
 member, or an employer association of which such an employer is a member, may
 bring an action for appropriate equitable relief in the appropriate court.
 `(1) During the pendency of any proceeding under this subsection by an
 employer, employer association, last signatory operator, or person described
 in section 9723(5) (B) or (C) with respect to an employer or last signatory
 operator, all potentially affected retirees, spouses, surviving spouses and
 dependents eligible for benefits from the 1991 Fund shall be transferred
 to the Corporation, which shall--
 `(A) provide such benefits as would have been provided from the 1991
 Fund, and
 `(B) have and exercise all of the rights and obligations of the 1991 Fund
 with respect to--
 `(i) the collection of assessments relating to such retirees and spouses,
 surviving spouses and dependents, and
 `(ii) the defense of the proceeding.
 `(2) In the event that a last signatory operator or other person pays to
 the 1991 Fund the assessments required pursuant to section 9713(d) for
 any month during the pendency of a proceeding described in paragraph (1),
 the 1991 Fund, and not the Corporation, shall be responsible for providing
 any benefits required to be paid for that month to eligible individuals
 under section 9713(b).
 `(g) In any action brought under subsection (f), the court may award all
 or a portion of the costs and expenses, including reasonable attorneys'
 fees, incurred in connection with such action to any party that prevails
 or substantially prevails in such action.
 `(h) This subsection shall be the exclusive means for bringing actions
 against the Corporation or the 1991 Fund under this chapter.
 `(i)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), an action under this subsection
 may not be brought after the later of--
 `(A) 6 years after the date on which the cause of action arose; or
 `(B) 3 years after the earliest date on which the plaintiff acquired
 or should have acquired actual knowledge of the existence of such cause
 of action.
 `(2) In the case of fraud or concealment, the period described in paragraph
 (1)(B) shall be extended to 6 years after the applicable date.
 `(j) The district courts of the United States have jurisdiction of actions
 brought under this subsection without regard to the amount in controversy.
 `(k) In any suit, action or proceeding in which the 1991 Fund is a party,
 in any State court, the 1991 Fund may, without bond or security, remove
 such suit, action, or proceeding from the State court to the United States
 district court for the district or division in which such suit, action
 or proceeding is pending by following any procedure for removal now or
 hereafter in effect.
`SEC. 9723. DEFINITIONS.
 `For purposes of this chapter--
 `(1) The term `coal production work' shall mean work in which an individual
 engages in physical operations consisting of the mining, preparation,
 handling, processing, cleaning and loading of coal, including removal of
 overburden and coal waste, the transportation of coal (except by waterway
 or rail not owned by an employer engaged in the production of coal), repair
 and maintenance work normally performed at a mine site or central shop of
 an employer engaged in the production of coal, maintenance of gob piles and
 mine roads, construction of mine or mine-related facilities including the
 erection of mine tipples and sinking of mine shafts or slopes performed by
 employees of the employer engaged in the production of coal, and work of
 the type customarily related to the foregoing; except that the term shall
 not mean managerial, supervisory, warehouse, clerical or technical work,
 unless such work is performed subject to a coal wage agreement binding
 the employer engaged in the production of coal.
 `(2) The term `coal wage agreement' shall mean--
 `(A) the National Bituminous Coal Wage Agreement;
 `(B) any agreement substantially identical or substantially similar to
 such agreement, but only if, as of the date of enactment of this chapter,
 such agreement provided for contributions to be made to the plans described
 in section 9721(d); or
 `(C) any other agreement entered into between an employer in the bituminous
 coal industry and the United Mine Workers of America that requires the
 provision of health benefits to retirees of such employer, eligibility for
 which is based on years of service credited under a plan established by
 the settlors and described in section 404(c) or a continuation of such plan.
 `(3) The term `credited service' shall have the same meaning as determined
 under the applicable defined benefit pension plan, but only if such service
 was of the type used to determine eligibility under the plan described in
 section 9721(d)(2)(B).
 `(4) The term `excess pension assets' shall mean the excess of the current
 value of plan assets (as defined in section 3(26) of the Employee Retirement
 Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(26)) of the plan described in
 section 9721(c) over the actuarial present value of all benefits for all
 plan participants under such plan, determined as of the date of enactment,
 in accordance with the actuarial assumptions and methods which reflect the
 plan actuary's best estimate of anticipated experience under such plan,
 except that where excess pension assets are recalculated as required under
 section 9721(a)(1), the amount of excess pension assets shall be determined
 as of the July 1 next preceding the date of the recalculation.
 `(5) A last signatory operator shall be considered to be in business
 for purposes of this chapter if any of the following conducts or derives
 revenue from any business, whether or not within the coal industry--
 `(A) such last signatory operator;
 `(B) any member of the controlled group of corporations (within the meaning
 of section 414(b)) of such last signatory operator; or
 `(C) any trade or business which is under common control (as determined
 under section 414(c)) with such last signatory operator.
If a last signatory operator is no longer in business and there is no
successor, the relationships described in paragraphs (2) and (3) shall be
determined at the time it ceased to be in business.
 `(6)(A) The term `last signatory operator' shall mean, with respect to any
 orphan miner or other coal industry retiree eligible for medical benefits,
 a person that meets or at one time met the following conditions:
 `(i) A person meets the conditions of this clause if such person is--
 `(I) an owner, lessee or other person who operates, controls or supervises
 a coal mine;
 `(II) an independent contractor who operates, controls or supervises a
 coal mine; or
 `(III) in the event a person described in (I) or (II) is no longer in
 business, any successor to such person, except that a purchaser shall not
 be considered to be a successor with respect to any orphan miner or other
 coal industry retiree eligible for medical benefits, if responsibility for
 the medical benefits of such orphan miner or other coal industry retiree
 was retained by the seller in the purchase and sale transaction.
 `(ii) A person meets the conditions of this clause if such person or, in the
 case of a person described in clause (i)(III), such person's predecessor--
 `(I) was a signatory to a 1978 coal wage agreement, or any subsequent coal
 wage agreement; and
 `(II) was the last coal industry employer of such orphan miner or other
 retiree.
 `(B) Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), if, as of the date of enactment of
 this chapter, a person has assumed or retained responsibility for retiree
 medical benefit obligations for individuals who retired from employment
 under a coal wage agreement, then such person shall be treated as the last
 signatory operator with respect to such individuals for purposes of this
 chapter, and any person from whom such responsibility was assumed shall
 not be treated as the last signatory operator.
 `(C) For purposes of this chapter, the last signatory operator of any
 orphan miner or other coal industry retiree shall be considered to be the
 last signatory operator with respect to such orphan miner's or other coal
 industry retiree's spouse, surviving spouse and dependents, if any.
 `(7) The term `National Bituminous Coal Wage Agreement' shall mean the
 collective bargaining agreement negotiated by the settlors.
 `(8) The term `settlors' means the United Mine Workers of America and the
 Bituminous Coal Operators' Association, Inc. (hereinafter referred to as
 the `BCOA'), except that if the BCOA ceases to exist, members of the BCOA
 representing more than 50 percent of the tonnage membership of BCOA on
 the date of enactment of this Act shall collectively be considered a settlor.
`SEC. 9724. SHAM TRANSACTIONS.
 `If a principal purpose of any transaction is to evade or avoid liability
 under this chapter, this chapter shall be applied (and liability shall be
 imposed) without regard to such transaction. A bona fide, arm's-length sale
 of an entity subject to liability under this chapter to an unrelated party
 (within the meaning of section 4204(d) of the Employee Retirement Income
 Security Act of 1974, as amended), shall not by itself be sufficient
 to establish a principal purpose to evade or avoid liability within the
 meaning of this section.'
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- The table of subtitles for the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new
 subtitle:
`Subtitle J. Coal Industry health benefits.'
S 2325 PCS----2
S 2325 PCS----3
S 2325 PCS----4
S 2325 PCS----5
S 2325 PCS----6
S 2325 PCS----7
S 2325 PCS----8
S 2325 PCS----9
S 2325 PCS----10
S 2325 PCS----11
S 2325 PCS----12